全世界无产者，联合起来！WORKERS OF ALL COUNTRIES,UNITE!QUOTATIONS FROMCHAIRMANMAO TSE-TUNG（汉英对照）★东方红出版社网站编辑制作再 版 前 言毛泽东同志是当代最伟大的马克思列宁主义者。
毛泽东同志天才地、创造性地、全面地继承、捍卫和发展了马克思列宁主义，把马克思列宁主义提高到一个崭新的阶段。
毛泽东思想是在帝国主义走向全面崩溃，社会主义走向全世界胜利的时代的马克思列宁主义。
毛泽东思想是反对帝国主义的强大的思想武器，是反对修正主义和教条主义的强大的思想武器。
毛泽东思想是全党、全军和全国一切工作的指导方针。
因此，永远高举毛泽东思想伟大红FOREWORD TO THESECOND EDITIONComrade Mao Tse-tung is the greatestMarxist-Leninist of our era. He has inherited,defended and developed Marxism-Leninismwith genius, creatively and comprehensivelyand has brought it to a higher andcompletely new stage.Tse-tung'sthoughtisMaoMarxism-Leninism of the era in whichimperialism is heading for total collapse andsocialism is advancing to world-wide victory.It is a powerful ideological weapon foropposing imperialism and for opposingrevisionism and dogmatism. Mao Tse-tung'sthought is the guiding principle for all thework of the Party, the army and the country.Therefore, the most fundamental task inour Party's political and ideological work isat all times to hold high the great red bannerof Mao Tse-tung's thought, to arm the mindsof the people throughout the country with it旗，用毛泽东思想武装全国人民的头脑，坚持在一切工作中用毛泽东思想挂帅，是我党政治思想工作最根本的任务。
广大工农兵群众、广大革命干部和广大知识分子，都必须把毛泽东思想真正学到手，做到人人读毛主席的书，听毛主席的话，照毛主席的指示办事，做毛主席的好战士。
学习毛主席著作，要带着问题学，活学活用，学用结合，急用先学，立竿见影，在“用”字上狠下功夫。
为了把毛泽东思想真正学到手，要反复学习毛主席的许多基本观点，有些警句最好要背熟，反复学习，反复运用。
在报纸上，要经常结合实际，刊登毛主席的语录，供大家学习和运用。
几年来广大群众活学活用毛主席著作的经验，证明带着问题选学毛主席的语录，and to persist in using it to and soldiers andthe broad ranks of the revolutionary cadresand the intellectuals should really masterMao Tse-tung's thought; they should allstudy Chairman Mao's writings, follow histeachings, act according to his instructionsand be his good fighters.In studying the works of Chairman Mao,one should have specific problems in mind,study and apply his works in a creative way,combine study with application, first studywhat must be urgently applied so as to getquick results, and strive hard to apply whatone is studying. In order really to masterMao Tse-tung's thought, it is essential tostudy many of Chairman Mao's basicconcepts over and over again, and it is bestto memorize important statements and studyand apply them repeatedly.The newspapersshould regularly carry quotations fromChairman Mao relevant to current issues forreaders to study and apply. The experienceof the broad masses in their creative study是一种学习毛泽东思想的好方法，容易收到立竿见影的效果。
为了帮助广大群众更好地学习毛泽东思想，我们选编了这本《毛主席语录》。
各单位在组织学习的时候，应当结合形势、任务、群众的思想情况和工作情况，选学有关的内容。
现在我们伟大的祖国， 正在出现一个工农兵掌握马克思列宁主义、 毛泽东思想的新时代。
 毛泽东思想为广大群众所掌握，就会变成无穷无尽的力量，变成威力无比的精神原子弹。
《毛主席语录》的大量出版，对广大群众掌握毛泽东思想，推动我国人民思想革命化，是一个极为重要的措施。
希望每个同志认真地、刻苦地学习,在全国范围内，掀起活学活用and application of Chairman Mao's works inthe last few years has proved that to studyselected quotations from Chairman Maowith specific problems in mind is a goodway to learn Mao Tse-tung's thought, amethod conducive to quick results.We have compiled Quotations fromChairman Mao Tse-tung in order to helpthe broad masses learn Mao Tse-tung'sthought more effectively. In organizing theirstudy, units should select passages that arerelevant to the situation, their tasks, thecurrent thinking of their personnel, and thestate of their work.In our great motherland, a new era isemerging in which the workers, peasantsand soldiers are grasping Marxism-Leninism,Mao Tse-tung's thought. Once MaoTse-tung's thought is grasped by the broadmasses, itbecomes an inexhaustible sourceof strength and a spiritual atom bomb ofinfinite power. The large-scale publicationof Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung毛主席著作的新高潮，在毛泽东思想的伟大红旗下，为把我国建设成为一个具有现代农业,现代工业,现代科学文化和现代国防的伟大社会主义国家而奋斗！林彪一九六六年十二月十六日is a vital measure for enabling the broadmasses to grasp Mao Tse-tung's thought andfor promoting the revolutionization of ourpeople's thinking. It is our hope that allcomrades will learn earnestly and diligently,bring about a new nation-wide high tide inthe creative study and application ofChairman Mao's works and, under the greatred banner of Mao Tse-tung's thought, striveto build our country into a great socialiststate with modern agriculture, modernindustry, modern science and culture andmodern national defence!Lin PiaoDecember 26,1966目录一、共产党……………………………… 2二、阶级和阶级斗争……………………16三、社会主义和共产主义………………44四、正确处理人民内部矛盾……………88五、战争与和平……………………… 114六、帝国主义和一切反动派都是纸老虎………………………140七、敢于斗争，敢于胜利………………158八、人民战争………………………… 170九、人民军队………………………… 192十、党委领导………………………… 200十一、群众路线……………………… 226十二、政治工作……………………… 256十三、官兵关系………………………282CONTENTS1.The Communist Party……………………… 32.Classes and Class Struggle……………173.Socialism and Communism……………… 454.The Correct Handling of Con-tradictions Among the People…………895.War and Peace……………………………1156.Imperialism and All Reaction-aries Are Paper Tigers…………………1417.Dare to Struggle and Dare toWin…………………………………………1598.People's War………………………………1719.The People's Aray……………………… 19310.Leadership of Party Committees………20111.The Mass Line…………………………… 22712.Political Work……………………………25713.Relations Between Officersand Men……………………………………283十四、军民关系………………………290十五、三大民主………………………298十六、教育和训练……………………312十七、为人民服务……………………320十八、爱国主义和国际主义…………328十九、革命英雄主义…………………340二十、勤俭建国………………………350二十一、自力更生、艰苦奋斗…………364二十二、思想方法和工作方法………380二十三、调查研究……………………430二十四、纠正错误思想………………444二十五、团结…………………………470二十六、纪律…………………………476二十七、批评和自我批评……………484二十八、共产党员……………………502二十九、干部…………………………51814.Relations Between The Armyand The People………………………… 29115.Democracy in The Three MainFields……………………………………29916.Education and The Training ofTroops……………………………………31317.Serving The People……………………32118.Patriotism and Internationalism… 23919.Revolutionary Heroism……………… 34120.Building Our Country ThroughDiligence and Frugality…………… 35121.Self-Reliance and ArduousStruggle…………………………………36522.Methods of Thinkingand Methods of Work……………………38123.Investigation and Study………………43124.Ccrrecting Mistaken Ideas……………44525.Unity…………………………………… 47126.Discipline………………………………47727.Criticism and Self-Criticism………48528.Communists………………………………50329.Cadres……………………………………519三十、青年……………………………542三十一、妇女…………………………552三十二、文化艺术……………………562三十三、学习…………………………57230.Youth………………………………………54331.Women………………………………………55232.Culture and Art…………………………56333.Study………………………………………573Unless otherwise stated，the Pagenumber given for the source of aquotation refers to the first Englishedition of the book or pamphletcited as Dublished by the ForeignLanguages Press， Peking．In cases where a word or phraselinked to the preceding text has beenomitted in the opening sentence ofthe quotation，an asterisk is placeda ft e r t h e so u r c e． Th i s i s a l s o d o n ein a number of places where theEnglish rendering has been rewordedto make up for omission of contextor to improve the translation．Translator毛 主 席 语 录QUOTATIONS FROMCHAIRMAN MAO TSE-TUNG一、共 产 党领导我们事业的核心力量是中国共产党。
指导我们思想的理论基础是马克思列宁主义。
中华人民共和国第一届全国人民代表大会第一次会议开幕词（一九五四年九月十五日），一九五四年九月十六日《人民日报》既要革命，就要有一个革命党。
没有一个革命的党， 没有一个按照马克思列宁主义的革命理论和革命风格建立起来的革命党， 就不可能领导工人阶级和广大人民群众战胜帝国主义及其走狗。
《全世界革命力量团结起来，反对帝国主义的侵略》（一九四八年十一月），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三六零页1. THECOMMUNISTPARTYThe force at the core leading our causeforward is the Chinese Communist Party.The theoretical basis guiding our thinkingis Marxism-Leninism.Opening address at the First Session of theFirst National People's Congress of thePeople's Republic of China (September 15,1954).If there is to be revolution, there must bearevolutionaryparty.Withoutarevolutionary party, without a party built onthe Marxist-Leninist revolutionary theoryand in the Marxist-Leninist revolutionarystyle, it is impossible to lead the workingclass and the broad masses of the people indefeating imperialism and its running dogs."Revolutionary Forces of the World Unite,Fight Against Imperialist Aggression!"(Nov-ember 1948), Selected Works,Vol. IV, p. 284.*没有中国共产党的努力，没有中国共产党人做中国人民的中流砥柱，中国的独立和解放是不可能的，中国的工业化和农业近代化也是不可能的。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九八-一零九九页中国共产党是全中国人民的领导核心。
没有这样一个核心，社会主义事业就不能胜利。
在接见出席中国新民主主义青年团第三次全国代表大会的全体代表时的讲话(一九五七年五月二十五日)，《新华半月刊》一九五七年第十二号第五七页一个有纪律的，有马克思列宁主义的理论武装的，采取自我批评方法的，联系人民群众的党。
一个由这样的党领导的军队。
一个由这样的党领导的各革命阶级各革命派别的统一战线。
这三件是我们战胜Without the efforts of the Chinese Com-munist Party, without the Chinese Com-munists as the mainstay of the Chinesepeople, China can never achieve independ-ence and liberation, or industrialization andthe modernization of her agriculture."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 318.*The Chinese Communist Party is the coreof leadership of the whole Chinese people.Without this core, the cause of socialismcannot be victorious."Talk at the general reception for thedelegates to the Third National Congress ofthe New Democratic Youth League ofChina" (May 25, 1957).A well-disciplined Party armed with thetheory of Marxism-Leninism, using themethod of self-criticism and linked with themasses of the people; an army under theleadership of such a Party; a united front ofallrevolutionaryclassesandallrevolutionary groups under the leadership ofsuch a Party - these are the three main敌人的主要武器。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八四页。
我们应当相信群众，我们应当相信党，这是两条根本的原理。
如果怀疑这两条原理，那就什么事情也做不成了。
《关于农业合作化问题》（一九五五年七月三十一日）， 人民出版社第九页。
以马克思列宁主义的理论思想武装起来的中国共产党，在中国人民中产生了新的工作作风，这主要的就是理论和实践相结合的作风，和人民群众紧密地联系在一起的作风以及自我批评的作风。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九四—一零九五页。
指导一个伟大的革命运动的政党，如果没有革命理论，没有历史知识，没有对weapons with which we have defeated theenemy."On the People's Democratic Dictatorship"(June 30, 1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV,p. 422.We must have faith in the masses and wemust have faith in the Party. These are twocardinal principles. If we doubt theseprinciples, we shall accomplish nothing."O n t h e Q u e s t i o n o f A g r i c u l t u r a lCo-operation" (July 31, 1955), 3rd ed., p. 7.*Armed with Marxist-Leninist theory andideology, the Communist Party of China hasbrought a new style of work to the Chinesepeople, a style of work which essentiallyentails integrating theory with practice,forging close links with the masses andpractising self-criticism."On Coalition Government" (April 24, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 314.*No political party can possibly lead agreat revolutionary movement to victoryunless it possesses revolutionary theory and于实际运动的深刻的了解，要取得胜利是不可能的。
《中国共产党在 民 族 战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五二一页。
我们过去说过，整风运动是一个“ 普遍的马克思主义的教育运动 ”。
整风就是全党通过批评和自我批评来学习马克思主义。
在整风中间，我们一定可以更多地学到一些马克思主义。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一一页。
要使几亿人口的中国人生活得好，要把我们这个经济落后、文化落后的国家，建设成为富裕的、强盛的、具有高度文化的国家，这是一个很艰巨的任务。
我们所a knowledge of history and has a profoundgrasp of the practical movement."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 208.As we used to say, the rectificationmovement is "a widespread movement ofMarxist education". Rectification means thewhole Party studying Marxism throughcriticism and self-criticism. We can certainlylearn more about Marxism in the course ofthe rectification movement.Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty's National Conference onPropaganda Work (March 12, l957),1st pocket ed., p. 14.It is an arduous task to ensure a better lifefor the several hundred million people ofChina and to build our economically andculturally backward country into aprosperous and powerful one with a highlevel of culture. And it is precisely in orderto be able to shoulder this task morecompetently and work better together withall non-Party people who are actuated by以要整风，现在要整风，将来还要整风，要不断地把我们身上的错误东西整掉 ，就是为了使我们能够更好地担负起这项任务，更好地同党外的一切立志改革的志士仁人共同工作。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一二页。
政策是革命政党一切实际行动的出发点，并且表现于行动的过程和归宿。
一个革命政党的任何行动都是实行政策。
不是实行正确的政策，就是实行错误的政策；不是自觉地，就是盲目地实行某种政策。
所谓经验，就是实行政策的过程和归宿。
政策必须在人民实践中，也就是经验中，才能证明其正确与否，才能确定其正确和错误的程度。
但是，人们的实践，特别是革命政党和革命群众的实践，没有不high ideals and determined to institutereforms that we must conduct rectificationmovements both now and in the future, andconstantly rid ourselves of whatever iswrong.Ibid., pp. 15-16.*Policy is the starting-point of all thepractical actions of a revolutionary party andmanifests itself in the process and theend-result of that party's actions. Arevolutionary party is carrying out a policywhenever it takes any action. If it is notcarrying out a correct policy, it is carryingout a wrong policy; if it is not carrying out agiven policy consciously, it is doing soblindly. What we call experience is theprocess and the end-result of carrying out apolicy. Only through the practice of thepeople, that is, through experience, can weverify whether a policy is correct or wrongand determine to what extent it is correct orwrong. But people's practice, especially thepractice of a revolutionary party and therevolutionary masses, cannot but be bound同这种或那种政策相联系的。
因此，在每一行动之前，必须向党员和群众讲明我们按情况规定的政策。
否则，党员和群众就会脱离我们政策的领导而盲目行动，执行错误的政策。
《关于工商业政策》（一九四八年二月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二八四页。
我党规定了中国革命的总路线和总政策，又规定了各项具体的工作路线和各项具体的政策。
但是，许多同志往往记住了我党的具体的个别的工作路线和政策，忘记了我党的总路线和总政策。
而如果真正忘记了我党的总路线和总政策，我们就将是一个盲目的不完全的不清醒的革命者，在我们执行具体工作路线和具体政策的时候，就会迷失方向，就会左右摇摆，up with one policy or another. Therefore,before any action is taken, we must explainthe policy, which we have formulated in thelight of the given circumstances, to Partymembers and to the masses. Otherwise,Party members and the masses will departfrom the guidance of our policy, act blindlyand carry out a wrong policy."On the Policy Concerning Industryand Commerce" (February 27, 1948),Selected Works, Vol. IV. pp. 204-05.*Our Party has laid down the general lineand general policy of the Chinese revolutionas well as various specific lines for workand specific policies. However, while manycomrades remember our Party's specificlines for work and specific policies, theyoften forget its general line and generalpolicy. If we actually forget the Party'sgeneral line and general policy, then weshall be blind, half-baked, muddle-headedrevolutionaries, and when we carry out aspecific line for work and a specific policy,就会贻误我们的工作。
《在晋绥干部会议上的讲话》（一九四八年四月一日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一四页。
政策和策略是党的生命，各级领导同志务必充分注意，万万不可粗心大意。
《关于情况的通报》（一九四八年三月二十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二九六页。
we shall lose our bearings and vacillatenow to the left and now to the right, and thework will suffer."Speech at a Conference of Cadres inthe Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area" (April1, 1948), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 238.*Policy and tactics are the life of the Party;leading comrades at all levels must givethem full attention and must never on anyaccount be negligent."A Circular on the Situation" (March 20,1948), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 220.二、阶级和阶级斗争阶级斗争，一些阶级胜利了，一些阶级消灭了。
这就是历史，这就是几千年的文明史。
拿这个观点解释历史的就叫做历史的唯物主义，站在这个观点的反面的是历史的唯心主义。
《丢掉幻想，准备斗争》（一九四九年八月十四日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四九一页在阶级社会中，每一个人都在一定的阶级地位中生活，各种思想无不打上阶级的烙印。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二七二页社会的变化，主要地是由于社会内部矛盾的发展， 即生产力和生产关系的矛II. CLASSES ANDCLASS STRUGGLEClasses struggle, some classes triumph,others are eliminated. Such is history, suchis the history of civilization for thousands ofyears. To interpret history from thisviewpoint is historical materialism; standingin opposition to this viewpoint is historicalidealism."Cast Away Illusions, Prepare forStruggle" (August 14, 1949), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 428.In class society everyone lives as amember of a particular class, and every kindof thinking, without exception, is stampedwith the brand of a class."On Practice" (July 1937), Selected Works,Vol. I, p. 296.Changes in society are due chiefly to thedevelopment of the internal contradictionsin society, that is, the contradiction betweenthe productive forces and the relations of盾，阶级之间的矛盾，新旧之间的矛盾，由于这些矛盾的发展，推动了社会的前进，推动了新旧社会的代谢。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二九零页地主阶级对于农民的残酷的经济剥削和政治压迫，迫使农民多次地举行起义，以反抗地主阶级的统治。
……在中国封建社会里，只有这种农民的阶级斗争、农民的起义和农民的战争，才是历史发展的真正动力。
《中国革命和中国共产党》（一九三九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六一九页民族斗争，说到底，是一个阶级斗争问题。
在美国压迫黑人的，只是白色人种production, the contradiction betweenclasses and the contradiction between theold and the new; it is the development ofthese contradictions that pushes societyforward and gives the impetus for thesupersession of the old society by the new."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, P. 314.The ruthless economic exploitation andpolitical oppression of the peasants by thelandlord class forced them into numerousuprisings against its rule.… It was the classstruggles of the peasants, the peasantuprisings and peasant wars that constitutedthe real motive force of historicaldevelopment in Chinese feudal society."The Chinese Revolution and the ChineseCommunist Party" (December 1939),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 308.*In the final analysis, national struggle is amatter of class struggle. Among the whitesin the United States it is only the reactionaryruling circles who oppress the black people.中的反动统治集团。
他们绝不能代表白色人种中占绝大多数的工人、农民、革命的知识分子和其他开明人士。
《支持美国黑人反对美帝国主义种族歧视的正义斗争的声明》（一九六三年八月八日），《全世界人民团结起来打败美国侵略者及其一切走狗》人民出版社版第四页人民靠我们去组织。
中国的反动分子，靠我们组织起人民去反他打倒。
凡是反动的东西，你不打，他就不倒。
这也和扫地一样，扫帚不到，灰尘照例不会自己跑掉。
《抗日战争胜利后的时局和我们 的方针》（一九四五年八月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一三一页They can in no way represent the workers,farmers, revolutionary intellectuals andother enlightened persons who comprise theoverwhelming majority of the white people."Statement Supporting the AmericanNegroes in Their Just Struggle AgainstRacialDiscriminationbyU.S.Imperialism" (August 8, 1963), People ofthe World, Unite and Defeat the U.S.Aggressors and All Their Lackeys, 2nd ed.,pp. 3-4.*It is up to us to organize the people. As forthe reactionaries in China, it is up to us toorganize the people to overthrow them.Everything reactionary is the same; if youdon't hit it, it won't fall. This is also likesweeping the floor; as a rule, where thebroom does not reach, the dust will notvanish of itself."The Situation and Our Policy After theVictory in the War of Resistance AgainstJapan" (August 13, 1945), Selected Works,Vol. IV, p. 19.敌人是不会自行消灭的。
无论是中国的反动派，或是美国帝国主义在中国的侵略势力，都不会自行退出历史舞台。
《将革命进行到底》（一九四八年十二月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三七九页革命不是请客吃饭,不是做文章，不是绘画绣花，不能那样雅致，那样从容不迫，文质彬彬，那样温良恭俭让。
革命是暴动，是一个阶级推翻一个阶级的暴烈的行动。
《湖南农民运动考察报告》（一九二七年三月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一八页蒋介石对于人民是寸权必夺，寸利必得。
我们呢？我们的方针是针锋相对，寸土必争。
我们是按照蒋介石的办法办事。
蒋介石总是要强迫人民接受战争，他左手拿着刀，右手也拿着刀。
我们就按照他的The enemy will not perish of himself.Neither the Chinese reactionaries nor theaggressive forces of U.S. imperialism inChina will step down from the stage ofhistory of their own accord."Carry the Revolution Through to theEnd" (December 30, 1948), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 301.A revolution is not a dinner party, orwriting an essay, or painting a picture, ordoing embroidery; it cannot be so refined, soleisurely and gentle, so temperate, kind,courteous, restrained and magnanimous. Arevolution is an insurrection, an act ofviolence by which one class overthrowsanother."Report on an Investigation of the PeasantMovement in Hunan" (March 1927),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 28.*Chiang Kai-shek always tries to wrestevery ounce of power and every ounce ofgain from the people. And we? Our policy isto give him tit for tat and to fight for everyinch of land. We act after his fashion. Healways tries to impose war on the people,one sword in his left hand and another in his办法，也拿起刀来。
……现在蒋介石已经在磨刀了，因此，我们也要磨刀。
《抗日战争胜利后的时局和我们的方针》（一九四五年八月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一二六——一一二七页谁是我们的敌人？谁是我们的朋友？这个问题是革命的首要问题。
中国过去一切革命斗争成效甚少，其基本原因就是因为不能团结真正的朋友，以攻击真正的敌人。
革命党是群众的向导，在革命中未有革命党领错了路而革命不失败的。
我们的革命要有不领错路和一定成功的把握，不可不注意团结我们的真正的朋友，以攻击我们的真正的敌人。
我们要分辨真正的敌友，不可不将中国社会各阶级的经济地位及其对于革命的态度，作一个大概right. We take up swords, too, followinghis example.… As Chiang Kai-shek is nowsharpening his swords, we must sharpenours too."The Situation and Our Policy After theVictory in the War of Resistance AgainstJapan" (August 13, 1945), Selected Works,Vol. IV, pp. 14-l5.Who are our enemies? Who are ourfriends? This is a question of the firstimportance for the revolution. The basicreason why all previous revolutionarystruggles in China achieved so little wastheir failure to unite with real friends inorder to attack real enemies. A revolutionaryparty is the guide of the masses, and nore vo lu tion e ve r suc c eed s wh en th erevolutionary party leads them astray. Toensure that we will definitely achievesuccess in our revolution and will not leadthe masses astray, we must pay attention touniting with our real friends in order toattack our real enemies. To distinguish realfriends from real enemies, we must make ageneral analysis of the economic status of的分析。
《中国社会各阶级的分析》（一九二六年三月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三页一切勾结帝国主义的军阀、官僚、买办阶级、大地主阶级以及附属于他们的一部分反动知识界，是我们的敌人。
工业无产阶级是我们革命的领导力量。
一切半无产阶级、小资产阶级，是我们最接近的朋友。
那动摇不定的中产阶级，其右翼可能是我们的敌人，其左翼可能是我们的朋友——但我们要时常提防他们，不要让他们扰乱了我们的阵线。
《中国社会各阶级的分析》（一九二六年三月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第八——第九页什么人站在革命人民方面，他就是革命派，什么人站在帝国主义封建主义官僚资本主义方面，他就是反革命派。
什么人只是口头上站在革命人民方面而在行动the various classes in Chinese society andof their respective attitudes towards therevolution."Analysis of the Classes in ChineseSociety" (March 1926), Selected Works,Vol. I, p. 13.Our enemies are all those in league withimperialism - the warlords, the bureaucrats,the comprador class, the big Landlord classand the reactionary section of theintelligentsia attached to them. The leadingforce in our revolution is the industrialproletariat. Our closest friends are the entiresemi-proletariat and petty bourgeoisie. Asfor the vacillating middle bourgeoisie, theirright-wing may become our enemy and theirleft-wing may become our friend - but wemust be constantly on our guard and not letthem create confusion within our ranks.Ibid., p. 19.*Whoever sides with the revolutionarypeople is a revolutionary. Whoever sideswith imperialism, feudalism andb u re au c ra t-c a p ita lism is a co un te r-revolutionary. Whoever sides with the上则另是一样，他就是一个口头革命派，如果不但在口头上而且在行动上也站在革命人民方面，他就是一个完全的革命派。
在中国人民政治协商会议第一届全国委员会第二次会议上的闭幕词（一九五零年六月二十三日），一九五零年六月二十四日《人民日报》我认为，对我们来说，一个人，一个党，一个军队，或者一个学校，如若不被敌人反对，那就不好了那一定是同敌人同流合污了。
如若被敌人反对，那就好了，那就证明我们同敌人划清界线了。
如若敌人起劲地反对我们，把我们说得一塌糊涂，一无是处，那就更好了，那就证明我们不但同敌人划清了界线，而且证明我们的工作是很有成绩的了。
《被敌人反对是好事而不是坏事》（一九三九年五月二十六日），人民出版社版第二页revolutionary. Whoever sides with therevolutionary people in words only but actsotherwise is a revolutionary in speech.Whoever sides with the revolutionarypeople in deed as well as in word is arevolutionary in the full sense."Closing speech at the Second Session ofthe First National Committee of theChinese People's Political ConsultativeConference" (June 23, 1950).I hold that it is bad as far as we areconcerned if a person, a political party, anarmy or a school is not attacked by theenemy, for in that case it would definitelymean that we have sunk to the level of theenemy. It is good if we are attacked by theenemy, since it proves that we have drawn aclear line of demarcation between the enemyand ourselves. It is still better if the enemyattacks us wildly and paints us as utterlyblack and without a single virtue; itdemonstrates that we have not only drawn aclear line of demarcation between the enemyand ourselves but achieved a great deal inour work.."To Be Attacked by the Enemy Is Not aBad Thing but a Good Thing" (May 26,1939), 1st pocket ed., p. 2.*凡是敌人反对的，我们就要拥护；凡是敌人拥护的，我们就要反对。
《和中央社、扫荡报、新民报三记者的谈话》（一九三九年九月十六日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五八零页我们是站在无产阶级的和人民大众的立场。
对于共产党员来说，也就是要站在党的立场，站在党性和党的政策的立场。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话（一九四二年五月），〈毛泽东选集〉第三卷第八五零页在拿枪的敌人被消灭以后，不拿枪的敌人依然存在，他们必然地要和我们作拚死的斗争 ，我们决不可以轻视这些敌人。
如果我们现在不是这样地提出问题和认识问题，我们就要犯极大的错误。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四二八页We should support whatever the enemyopposes and oppose whatever the enemysupports."Interview with Three Correspondentsfrom the Central News Agency, the SaoTang Pao and the Hsin Min Pao"(September 16, 1939), Selected Works,Vol. II, p. 272.Our stand is that of the proletariat and ofthe masses. For members of the CommunistParty, this means keeping to the stand of theParty, keeping to Party spirit and Partypolicy."Talks at the Yen'an Forum onLiterature and Art" (May 1942), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 70.After the enemies with guns have beenwiped out, there will still be enemieswithout guns; they are bound to struggledesperately against us, and we must neverregard these enemies lightly. If we do nornow raise and understand the problem inthis way, we shall commit the gravestmistakes."Report to the Second Plenary Session ofthe Seventh Central Committee of theCommunist Party of China" (March 5,1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 364.帝国主义者和国内反动派决不甘心于他们的失败，他们还要作最后的挣扎。
在全国平定以后，他们也还会以各种方式从事破坏和捣乱，他们将每日每时企图在中国复辟。
这是必然的，毫无疑义的，我们务必不要松懈自己的警惕性。
在中国人民政治协商会议第一届全体会议上的开幕词（一九四九年九月二十一日），一九四九年九月二十二日《人民日报》在我国，虽然社会主义改造，在所有制方面说来，已经基本完成，革命时期的大规模的急风暴雨式的群众阶级斗争已经基本结束，但是，被推翻的地主买办阶级的残余还是存在，资产阶级还是存在，小资产阶级刚刚在改造。
阶级斗争并没有结束。
无产阶级和资产阶级之间的阶级斗The imperialists and domestic reactionarieswill certainly not take their defeat lyingdown and they will struggle to the last ditch.After there is peace and order throughout thecountry, they will still engage in sabotageand create disturbances in various ways andwill try every day and every minute to stagea come-back. This is inevitable and beyondall doubt, and under no circumstances mustwe relax our vigilance."Opening address at the First PlenarySession of the Chinese People'sPolitical Consultative Conference"(September 21, 1949).In China, although in the main socialisttransformation has been completed withrespect to the system of ownership, andalthough the large-scale and turbulent classstruggles of the masses characteristic of theprevious revolutionary periods have in themain come to an end, there are still remnantsof the overthrown landlord and compradorclasses, there is still a bourgeoisie, and theremoulding of the petty bourgeoisie has onlyjust started. The class struggle is by no阶级和资产阶级之间在意识形态方面的阶级斗争，还是长时期的，曲折的，有时甚至是很激烈的。
无产阶级要按照自己的世界观改造世界，资产阶级也要按照自己的世界观改造世界。
在这一方面，社会主义和资本主义之间谁胜谁负的问题还没有真正解决。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二六——二七页我国社会主义和资本主义之间在意识形态方面的谁胜谁负的斗争，还需要一个相当长的时间才能解决。
这是因为资产阶级和从旧社会来的知识分子的影响还要在我国长期存在，作为阶级的意识形态，还要在我国长期存在。
如果对于这种means over. The class struggle between theproletariat and the bourgeoisie, the classstruggle between the different politicalforces, and the class struggle in theideological held between the proletariat andthe bourgeoisie will continue to be long andtortuous and at times will even become veryacute. The proletariat seeks to transform theworld according to its own world outlook,and so does the bourgeoisie. In this respect,the question of which will win out,socialism or capitalism, is still not reallysettled."On the Correct Handling of Contra-dictions Among the People" (February 27,1957), 1st pocket ed., pp. 51-52.It will take a fairly long period of time todecide the issue in the ideological strugglebetween socialism and capitalism in ourcountry. The reason is that the influence ofthe bourgeoisie and of the intellectuals whocome from the old society will remain in ourcountry for a long time to come, and so willtheir class ideology. If this is not sufficiently形势认识不足，或者根本不认识,那就要犯绝大的错误，就会忽视必要的思想斗争。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二七页在我国，资产阶级和小资产阶级的思想，反马克思主义的思想，还会长期存在。
社会主义制度在我国已经基本建立。
我们已经在生产资料所有制的改造方面，取得了基本胜利，但是在政治战线和思想战线方面，我们还没有完全取得胜利。
无产阶级和资产阶级之间在意识形态方面的谁胜谁负问题，还没有真正解决。
我们同资产阶级和小资产阶级的思想还要进行长期的斗争。
不了解这种情况，放弃思想斗争，那就是错误的。
凡是错误的思想，凡是毒草，凡是牛鬼蛇神，都应该进行批判，决不能让它们自由泛滥。
但是，这种批判，understood, or is not understood at all,the gravest mistakes will be made and thenecessity of waging the struggle in theideological field will be ignored.Ibid., pp. 52-53.In our country bourgeois and petty-bourgeois ideology, anti-Marxist ideology,will continue to exist for a long time.Basically, the socialist system has beenestablished in our country. We have won thebasic victory in transforming the ownershipof the means of production, but we have notyet won complete victory on the politicaland ideological fronts. In the ideologicalfield, the question of who will win in thestruggle between the proletariat and thebourgeoisie has not been really settled yet.We still have to wage a protracted struggleagainst bourgeois and petty-bourgeoisideology. It is wrong not to understand thisand to give up ideological struggle. Allerroneous ideas, all poisonous weeds, allghosts and monsters, must be subjected tocriticism; in no circumstance should they be应该是充分说理的，有分析的，有说服力的，而不应该是粗暴的、官僚主义的，或者是形而上学的、教条主义的。
《在中国共产党铨国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一九——二零页教条主义和修正主义都是违反马克思主义的。
马克思主义一定要向前发展，要随着实践的发展而发展，不能停滞不前。
停止了，老是那么一套，它就没有生命了。
但是，马克思主义的基本原则又是不能违背的，违背了就要犯错误。
用形而上学的观点来看待马克思主义，把它看成僵死的东西，这是教条主义。
否定马克思主义的基本原则，否定马克思主义的普遍真理，这就是修正主义。
修正主义是一种资产阶级思想。
修正主义者抹杀社会主义和资本主义的区别，抹杀无产阶级专政和allowed to spread unchecked. However, thecriticism should be fully reasoned, analyticaland convincing, and not rough, bureaucratic,metaphysical or dogmatic."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty'sNationalConferenceonPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957), 1stpocket ed., pp. 26-27.*Both dogmatism and revisionism runcounter to Marxism. Marxism must certainlyadvance; it must develop along with thedevelopment of practice and cannot standstill. It would become lifeless if it remainedstagnant and stereotyped. However, thebasic principles of Marxism must never beviolated, or otherwise mistakes will be made.It is dogmatism to approach Marxism from ametaphysical point of view and to regard itas something rigid. It is revisionism tonegate the basic principles of Marxism andto negate its universal truth. Revisionism isone form of bourgeois ideology. Therevisionists deny the differences betweensocialism and capitalism, between the资产阶级专政的区别。
他们所主张的，在实际上并不是社会主义路线，而是资本主义路线。
在现在的情况下，修正主义的比教条主义更有害的东西。
我们现在思想战线上的一个重要任务，就是要开展对于修正主义的批判。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第二零——二十一页修正主义，或者右倾机会主义，是一种资产阶级思潮，它比教条主义有更大的危险性。
修正主义者，右倾机会主义者，口头上也挂着马克思主义，他们也在那里攻击“教条主义”。
但是他们所攻击的正是马克思主义的最根本的东西。
他们反对或者歪曲唯物论和辩证法，反对或者企图削弱人民民主专政和共产党的领导，反对或者企图削弱社会主义改造和社会主义dictatorship of the proletariat and thedictatorship of the bourgeoisie. What theyadvocate is in fact not the socialist line butthe capitalist line. In present circumstances,revisionism is more pernicious thandogmatism. One of our current importanttasks on the ideological front is to unfoldcriticism of revisionism.Ibid., pp. 27-28.Revisionism, or Right opportunism, is abourgeois trend of thought that is even moredangerous than dogmatism. The revisionists,the Right opportunists, pay lipservice toMarxism; they too attack "dogmatism". Butwhat they are really attacking is thequintessence of Marxism. They oppose ordistort materialism and dialectics, oppose ortry to weaken the people's democraticdictatorship and the leading role of theCommunist Party, and oppose or try toweaken socialist transformation and socialistconstruction. After the basic victory of the建设。
在我国社会主义革命取得基本胜利以后，社会上还有一部分人梦想恢复资本主义制度，他们要从各个方面向工人阶级进行斗争，包括思想方面的斗争。
而在这个斗争中，修正主义者就是他们最好的助手。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二九——三零页socialist revolution in our country, there arestill a number of people who vainly hope torestore the capitalist system and fight theworking class on every front, including theideological one. And their right-hand men inthis struggle are the revisionists."On the Correct Handling of Contra-dictions Among the People" (February 27,1957), 1st pocket ed., pp. 56-57.三、社会主义和共产主义共产主义是无产阶级的整个思想体系，同时又是一种新的社会制度。
这种思想体系和社会制度，是区别于任何别的思想体系和任何别的社会制度的，是自有人类历史以来，最完全最进步最革命最合理的。
封建主义的思想体系和社会制度，是进了历史博物馆的东西了。
资本主义的思想体系和社会制度，已有一部分进了博物馆（在苏联）；其余部分，也已“日薄西山，气息奄奄，人命危浅，朝不虑夕”，快进博物馆了。
惟独共产主义的思想体系和社会制度，正以排山倒海之势，雷霆万钧之力，磅礴于全世界，而葆其美妙之青春。
《新民主主义论》（一九四零年一月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六七九页3. SOCIALISM ANDCOMMUNISMCommunism is at once a complete systemof proletarian ideology and a new socialsystem. It is different from any otherideological and social system, and is themost complete, progressive, revolutionaryand rational system in human history. Theideological and social system of feudalismhas a place only in the museum of history.The ideological and social system ofcapitalism has also become a museum piecein one part of the world (in the SovietUnion), while in other countries it resembles"a dying person who is sinking fast, like thesun setting beyond the western hills", andwill soon be relegated to the museum. Thecommunist ideological and social systemalone is full of youth and vitality, sweepingthe world with the momentum of anavalanche and the force of a thunderbolt."On New Democracy" (January 1940),Selected Works, Vol. II, pp. 360-61.*社会主义制度终究要代替资本主义制度，这是一个不以人们自己的意志为转移的客观规律。
不管反动派怎样企图阻止历史车轮的前进，革命或迟或早总会发生，并且将必然取得胜利。
《在苏联最高苏维埃庆祝伟大的十月社会主义革命四十周年会议上的讲话》（一九五七年十一月六日），人民出版社版第五页我们共产党人从来不隐瞒自己的政治主张。
我们的将来纲领或最高纲领，是要将中国推进到社会主义社会和共产主义社会去的，这是确定的和毫无疑义的。
我们的党的名称和我们的马克思主义的宇宙观，明确地指明了这个将来的、无限光明的、无限美妙的最高理想。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零五九页The socialist system will eventuallyreplace the capitalist system; this is anobjective law independent of man's will.However much the reactionaries try to holdback the wheel of history, sooner or laterrevolution will take place and will inevitablytriumph."Speech at the Meeting of the SupremeSoviet of the U.S.S.R. in Celebration ofthe 40th Anniversary of the GreatOctoberSocialistRevolution"(November 6, 1957).We Communists never conceal ourpolitical views. Definitely and beyond alldoubt, our future or maximum programme isto carry China forward to socialism andcommunism. Both the name of our Partyand our Marxist world outlook unequivo-cally point to this supreme ideal of thefuture, a future of incomparable brightnessand splendour."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 282.*中国共产党领导的整个中国革命运动，是包括民主主义革命和社会主义革命两个阶段在内的全部革命运动；这是两个性质不同的革命过程，只有完成了前一个革命过程才有可能去完成后一个革命过程。
民主主义革命是社会主义革命的必要准备，社会主义革命是民主主义革命的必然趋势。
而一切共产主义者的最后目的，则是在于力争社会主义社会和共产主义社会的最后的完成。
《中国革命和中国共产党》（一九三九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六四六页社会主义革命的目的是为了解放生产力。
农业和手工业由个体所有制变为社会主义的集体所有制，私营工商业由资本主义所有制变为社会主义所有制，必然使生产力大大地获得解放。
这样就为大大地Taken as a whole, the Chinese revolu-tionary movement led by the CommunistParty embraces the two stages, i.e., thedemocratic and the socialist revolutions,which are two essentially differentrevolutionary processes, and the secondprocess can be carried through only after thefirst has been completed. The democraticrevolution is the necessary preparation forthe socialist revolution, and the socialistrevolution is the inevitable sequel to thedemocratic revolution. The ultimate aim forwhich all communists strive is to bringabout a socialist and communist society.《 "The Chinese Revolution and theChinese Communist Party" (December1939), Selected Works, Vol. II, pp.330-31.*Socialist revolution aims at liberating theproductive forces. The change-over fromindividual to socialist, collective ownershipin agriculture and handicrafts and fromcapitalist to socialist ownership in privateindustry and commerce is bound to bringabout a tremendous liberation of theproductive forces. Thus the social conditions发展工业和农业的生产创造了社会条件。
在最高国务会议上的讲话（一九五六年一月二十五日），一九五六年一月二十六日《人民日报》我们现在不但正在进行关于社会制度方面的由私有制到公有制的革命，而且正在进行技术方面的由手工业生产到大规模现代化机器生产的革命，而这两种革命是结合在一起的。
在农业方面，在我国的条件下（资本主义国家内是使农业资本主义化），则必须先有合作化，然后才能使用大机器。
由此可见，我们对于工业和农业、社会主义的工业化和社会主义的农业改造这样两件事，决不可以分割起来和互相孤立起来去看，决不可以只强调一方面，减弱另一方面。
《关于农业合作化问题》（一九五五年七月三十一日），人民出版社版第二三——二四页are being created for a tremendousexpansion of industrial and agriculturalproduction."Speech at the SupremeConference" (January 25, 1956).StateWe are now carrying out a revolution notonly in the social system, the change fromprivate to public ownership, but also intechnology, the change from handicraft tolarge-scale modern machine production, andthe two revolutions are interconnected. Inagriculture, with conditions as they are inour country co-operation must precede theuse of big machinery (in capitalist countriesagriculture develops in a capitalist way).Therefore we must on no account regardindustry and agriculture, socialist industria-lization and the socialist transformation ofagriculture as two separate and isolatedthings, and on no account must weemphasize the one and play down the other."On the Question of AgriculturalCo-operation" (July 51, 1955), 3rd ed.,pp. 19-20.新的社会制度还刚刚建立，还需要有一个巩固的时间。
不能认为新制度一旦建立起来就完全巩固了，那是不可能的。
需要逐步地巩固。
要使它最后巩固起来，必须实现国家的社会主义工业化，坚持经济战线上的社会主义革命，还必须在政治战线和思想战线上，进行经常的、艰苦的社会主义革命斗争和社会主义教育。
除了这些以外，还要有各种国际条件的配合。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第二页在我国，巩固社会主义制度的斗争，社会主义和资本主义谁战胜谁的斗争，还要经过一个很长的历史时期。
但是，我们大家都应该看到，这个社会主义的新制度是一定会巩固起来的。
我们一定会建设一The new social system has only just beenestablished and requires time for itsconsolidation. It must not be assumed thatthe new system can be completelyconsolidated the moment it is established,for that is impossible. It has to beconsolidated step by step. To achieve itsultimate consolidation, it is necessary notonly to bring about the socialistindustrialization of the country andpersevere in the socialist revolution on theeconomic front, but to carry on constant andarduous socialist revolutionary struggles andsocialist education on the political andideological fronts. Moreover, variouscontributory international factors arerequired."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty's National Conference onPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957),1st pocket ed., p. 2.*In China the struggle to consolidate thesocialist system, the struggle to decidewhether socialism or capitalism will prevail,个具有现代工业、现代农业和现代科学文化的社会主义国家。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第二页对于我们的国家抱着敌对情绪的知识分子，是极少数。
这种人不喜欢我们这个无产阶级专政的国家，他们留恋旧社会。
一遇机会，他们就会兴风作浪，想要推翻共产党，恢复旧中国。
这是在无产阶级和资产阶级两条路线、社会主义和资本主义两条路线中间，顽固地要走后一条路线的人。
这后一条路线，在实际上是不能实现的，所以他们实际上是准备投降帝国主义、封建主义和官僚资本主义的人。
这种人在政治界、工商界、文化教育界、科学技术界、宗教界里都有，这是一些极端will still take a long historical period. Butwe should all realize that the new systemofsocialismwillunquestionablybeconsolidated. We can assuredly build asocialist state with modern industry, modernagriculture, and modern science and culture.Ibid., pp. 2-3.The number of intellectuals who arehostile to our state is very small. They donot like our state, i.e., the dictatorship of theproletariat, and yearn for the old society.Whenever there is an opportunity they willstir up trouble and attempt to overthrow theCommunist Party and restore the old China.As between the proletarian and thebourgeois roads, as between the socialist andthe capitalist roads, these people stubbornlychoose to follow the latter. In fact this roadis impossible, and in fact, therefore, they areready to capitulate to imperialism, feudalismand bureaucrat-capitalism. Such people areto be found in political circles and inindustrial and commercial, cultural andeducational, scientific and technological and反动的人。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第三页严重的问题是教育农民。
农民的经济是分散的，根据苏联的经验，需要很长的时间和细心的工作，才能做到农业社会化。
没有农业社会化，就没有全部的巩固的社会主义。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八二页我们必须相信：（1）广大农民是愿意在党的领导下逐步地走上社会主义道路的；（2）党是能够领导农民走上社会主义道路的。
这两点是事物的本质和主流。
《关于农业合作化问题》（一九五五年七月三十一日），人民出版社版第二一页religious circles, and they are extremelyreactionary.Ibid., pp. 3-4.The serious problem is the education ofthe peasantry. The peasant economy isscattered, and the socialization of agriculture,judging by the Soviet Union's experience,will require a long time and painstakingwork. Without socialization of agriculture,there can be no complete, consolidatedsocialism.On the People's Democratic Dictatorship(June 30, 1949), Selected Works, Vol.IV, p. 419.We must have faith, first, that the peasantmasses are ready to advance step by stepalong the road of socialism under theleadership of the Party, and second, that theParty is capable of leading the peasantsalong this road. These two points are theessence of the matter, the main current."On the Question of AgriculturalCo-operation" (July 31, 1955), 3rd ed.,p. 18.*合作社的领导机关必须建立现有贫农和新下中农在领导机关中的优势，而以老下中农和新老两部分上中农作为辅助力量，才能按照党的政策实现贫农和中农的团结，巩固合作社，发展生产，正确地完成整个农村的社会主义改造。
没有这个条件，中农和贫农就不能团结，合作社就不能巩固，生产就不能发展，整个农村的社会主义改造就不能实现。
《长沙县高山乡武塘农业生产合作社是行政机关从中农占优势转变为贫农占优势的》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》中册第八五七页中农是必须团结，不团结中农是错误的。
但是工人阶级和共产党，在农村中，The leading bodies in co-operatives mustestablish the dominant position of the poorpeasants and the new lower middle peasantsin these bodies, with the old lower middlepeasants and the upper middle peasants -whether old or new - as the supplementaryforce. Only thus can unity between the poorand middle peasants be attained, theco-operatives be consolidated, production beexpanded and the socialist transformation ofthe entire countryside be correctlyaccomplished in accordance with the Party'spolicy. Otherwise, unity between the middleand poor peasants cannot be attained, theco-operatives cannot be consolidated,production cannot be expanded, and thesocialist transformation of the entirecountryside cannot be achieved.Introductory note to "How Control ofthe Wutang Co-operative Shifted fromthe Middle to the Poor Peasants" (1955),The Socialist Upsurge in China'sCountryside, Chinese ed., Vol. II.It is essential to unite with the middlepeasants, and it is wrong not to do so. Buton whom must the working class and the依靠什么人去团结中农，实现整个农村的社会主义改造呢？当然只有贫农。
在过去向地主作斗争、实行土地改革的时候是这样，在现在向富农和其他资本主义因素作斗争实行农业的社会主义改造的时候，也是这样。
在两个革命时期，中农在开始阶段都是动摇的。
等到看清了大势，革命将要胜利的时候，中农才会参加到革命方面来。
贫农必须向中农做工作，把中农团结到自己方面来，使革命一天一天地扩大，直到取得最后的胜利。
《福安县发生“中农社”和“贫农社”的教训》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》中册第七零一页Communist Party rely in the countrysidein order to unite with the middle peasantsand realize the socialist transformation ofthe entire countryside? Surely on none otherthan the poor peasants. That was the casewhen the struggle against the landlords wasbeing waged and the land reform was beingcarried out, and that is the case today whenthe struggle against the rich peasants andother capitalist elements is being waged toachieve the socialist transformation ofagriculture. In both these revolutionaryperiods, the middle peasants wavered in theinitial stages. It is only after they clearly seethe general trend of events and theapproaching triumph of the revolution thatthe middle peasants will come in on the sideof the revolution. The poor peasants mustwork on the middle peasants and win themover, so that the revolution will broadenfrom day to day until final victory.Introductory note to "The Lesson of the'Middle-Peasant Cooperative' and the'Poor-Peasant Co-operative' in FuanCounty" (1955), The Socialist Upsurgein China's Countryside, Chinese ed.,Vol. II.富裕农民中的资本主义倾向是严重的。
只要我们在合作化运动中，乃至以后一个很长的时期内，稍微放松了对于农民的政治工作，资本主义倾向就会泛滥起来。
《必须对资本主义倾向作坚决的斗争》一文按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第三五三页农业合作化运动，从一开始，就是一种严重的思想的和政治的斗争。
每一个合作社，不经过这样的一场斗争，就不能创立。
一个崭新的社会制度要从旧制度的基地上建立起来，它就必须清除这个基地。
反映旧制度的旧思想的残余，总是长期地留在人们的头脑里，不愿意轻易地退走的。
合作社建立以后，还必须经过许多的There is a serious tendency towardscapitalism among the well-to-do peasants.This tendency will become rampant if we inthe slightest way neglect political workamong the peasants during the co-operativemovement and for a very long period after.Introductory note to "A ResoluteStruggle Must Be Waged Against theTendency Towards Capitalism" (1955),The Socialist Upsurge in China'sCountryside, Chinese ed., Vol. I.The agricultural co-operative movementhas been a severe ideological and politicalstruggle from the very beginning. Nocooperative can be established withoutgoing through such a struggle. Before abrand-new social system can be built on thesite of the old, the site must be swept clean.Invariably, remnants of old ideas reflectingthe old system remain in people's minds fora long time, and they do not easily give way.After a co-operative is established, it mustgo through many more struggles before it斗争，才能使自己巩固起来。
巩固了以后，只要一松劲，又可能垮台。
《严重的教训》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第一二三页在最近几年中间，农村中的资本主义自发势力一天一天地在发展，新富农已经到处出现，许多富裕中农力求把自己变为富农。
许多贫农，则因为生产资料不足，仍然处于贫困地位，有些人欠了债，有些人出卖土地，或者出租土地。
这种情况如果让它发展下去，农村中向两极分化的现象必然一天一天地严重起来。
失去土地的农民和继续处于贫困地位的农民将要埋怨我们，他们将说我们见死不救，不去帮助他们解决困难。
向资本主义方向发展的那些富裕中农也将对我们不满，因为我们如果不想走资本主义的道路的话，就永远can be consolidated. Even then, the momentit relaxes its efforts it may collapse.Introductory note to "A Serious Lesson"(1955), The Socialist Upsurge inChina's Countryside, Chinese ed., Vol.I.The spontaneous forces of capitalismhave been steadily growing in thecountryside in recent years, with new richpeasants springing up everywhere and manywell-to-do middle peasants striving tobecome rich peasants. On the other hand,many poor peasants are still living inpoverty for lack of sufficient means ofproduction, with some in debt and othersselling or renting out their land. If thistendency goes unchecked, the polarizationin the countryside will inevitably beaggravated day by day. Those peasants wholose their land and those who remain inpoverty will complain that we are doingnothing to save them from ruin or to helpthem overcome their difficulties. Nor willthe well-to-do middle peasants who areheading in the capitalist direction be pleased不能满足这些农民的要求。
在这种情况之下，工人和农民的同盟能够继续巩固下去吗？显然是不能够的。
这个问题，只有在新的基础之上才能获得解决。
这就是在逐步地实现社会主义工业化和逐步地实现对于手工业、对于资本主义工商业的社会主义改造的同时，逐步地实现对于整个农业的社会主义的改造，即实行合作化，在农村中消灭富农经济制度和个体经济制度，使全体农村人民共同富裕起来。
我们认为只有这样，工人和农民的联盟才能获得巩固。
《关于农业合作化问题》（一九五五年七月三十一日），人民出版社版第三一——三二页……统筹兼顾，是指对于六亿人口的统筹兼顾。
我们作计划、办事、想问题，with us, for we shall never be able to satisfytheir demands unless we intend to take thecapitalist road. Can the worker-peasantalliance continue to stand firm in thesecircumstances ? Obviously not. There is nosolution to this problem except on a newbasis. And that means to bring about, step bystep, the socialist transformation of thewhole of agriculture simultaneously with thegradualrealizationofsocialistindustrializationandthesocialisttransformation of handicrafts and capitalistindustry and commerce; in other words, itmeans to carry out co-operation andeliminate the rich-peasant economy and theindividual economy in the countryside sothat all the rural people will becomeincreasingly well off together. We maintainthat this is the only way to consolidate theworker-peasant alliance."On the Question of AgriculturalCo-operation" (July 31, 1955), 3rd ed.,pp. 26-27.*By over-all planning we mean planningwhich takes into consideration the interests都要从我国有六亿人口这一点出发，千万不要忘记这一点。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二四页除了党的领导之外，六亿人口是一个决定的因素。
人多议论多，热气高，干劲大。
从来也没有看见人民群众像现在这样精神振奋，斗志昂扬，意气风发。
《介绍一个合作社》（一九五作年四月十五日），人民出版社版第一页除了别的特点之外，中国六亿人口的显著特点是一穷二白。
这些看起来是坏事，其实是好事。
穷则思变，要干，要革of the 600 million people of our country. Indrawing up plans, handling affairs orthinking over problems, we must proceedfrom the fact that China has a population of600 million people, and we must neverforget this fact."On the Correct Handling of Contradic-tions Among the People" (February 27,1957), 1st pocket ed. p. 47.In addition to the leadership of the Party, adecisive factor is our population of 600million. More people mean a greater fermentof ideas, more enthusiasm and more energy.Never before have the masses of the peoplebeen so inspired, so militant and so daringas at present."Introducing a Co-operative" (April 15,1958).Apart from their other characteristics, theoutstanding thing about China's 600 millionpeople is that they are "poor and blank".This may seem a bad thing, but in reality itis a good thing. Poverty gives rise to thedesire for change, the desire for action andthe desire for revolution. On a blank sheet ofpaper free from any mark, the freshest and命。
一张白纸，没有负担，好写最新最美的文字，好画最新最美的画图。
《介绍一个合作社》（一九五作年四月十五日），人民出版社版第一——二页中国革命在全国胜利，并且解决了土地问题以后，中国还存在着两种基本的矛盾。
第一种是国内的，即工人阶级和资产阶级的矛盾。
第二种是国外的，即中国和帝国主义国家的矛盾。
因为这样，工人阶级领导的人民共和国的国家政权，在人民民主革命胜利以后，不是可以削弱，而是必须强化。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四三四页“你们不是要消灭国家权力吗？”我们要，但是我们现在还不要，我们现在还most beautiful characters can be written, thefreshest and most beautiful pictures can bepainted.Ibid.After the country-wide victory of theChinese revolution and the solution of theland problem, two basic contradictions willstill exist in China. The first is internal, thatis, the contradiction between the workingclass and the bourgeoisie. The second isexternal, that is, the contradiction betweenChina and the imperialist countries.Consequently, after the victory of thepeople's democratic revolution, the statepower of the people's republic under theleadership of the working class must not beweakened but must be strengthened."Report to the Second Plenary Session ofthe Seventh Central Committee of theCommunist Party of China" (March 5,1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 369."Don't you want to abolish state power?"Yes, we do, but not right now; we cannot doit yet. Why? Because imperialism still不能要。
为什么？帝国主义还存在，国内反动派还存在，国内阶级还存在。
我们现在的任务是要强化人民的国家机器，这主要地是指人民的军队、人民的警察和人民的法庭，借以巩固国防和保护人民利益。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八零页我们的国家是工人阶级领导的以工农联盟为基础的人民民主专政的国家。
这个专政是干什么的呢？专政的第一个作用，就是压迫国家内部的反动阶级、反动派和反抗社会主义革命的剥削者，压迫那些对于社会主义建设的破坏者，就是为了解决国内敌我之间的矛盾。
例如逮捕某些反革命分子并且将他们判罪，在一个时期内不给地主阶级分子和官僚资产阶级分exists, because domestic reaction still exists,because classes still exist in our country.Our present task is to strengthen the people'sstate apparatus - mainly the people's army,the people's police and the people's courts -in order to consolidate national defence andprotect the people's interests."OnthePeople'sDemocraticDictatorship" (June 30, 1949), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 418.Our state is a people's democraticdictatorship led by the working class andbased on the worker-peasant alliance. Whatis this dictatorship for? Its first function is tosuppress the reactionary classes andelements and those exploiters in our countrywho resist the socialist revolution, tosuppress those who try to wreck oursocialist construction, or in other words, toresolve the internal contradictions betweenourselves and the enemy. For instance, toarrest,tryandsentencecertaincounterrevolutionaries, and to deprivelandlords and bureaucrat-capitalists of theirright to vote and their freedom of speech for子以选举权，不给他们发表言论的自由权利，都是属于专政的范围。
为了维护社会秩序和广大人民的利益，对于那些盗窃犯、诈骗犯、杀人放火犯、流氓集团和各种严重破坏社会秩序的坏分子，也必须实行专政。
专政还有第二个作用，就是防御国家外部敌人的颠覆活动和可能的侵略。
在这种情况出现的时候，专政就担负着对外解决敌我之间的矛盾的任务。
专政的目的是为了保卫全体人民进行和平劳动，将我国建设成为一个具有现代工业、现代农业和现代科学文化的社会主义国家。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三——第四页人民民主专政需要工人阶级的领导。
a specified period of time - all this comeswithin the scope of our dictatorship. Tomaintain public order and safeguard theinterests of the people, it is likewisenecessary to exercise dictatorship overembezzlers, swindlers, arsonists, murderers,criminal gangs and other scoundrels whoseriously disrupt public order. The secondfunction of this dictatorship is to protect ourcountry from subversion and possibleaggression by external enemies. In thatevent, it is the task of this dictatorship toresolve the external contradiction betweenourselves and the enemy. The aim of thisdictatorship is to protect all our people sothat they can devote themselves to peacefullabour and build China into a socialistcountry with a modern industry, agriculture,science and culture."On the Correct Handling of Contra-dictions Among the People" (February 27,1957), 1st pocket ed., pp. 6-7.The people's democratic dictatorshipneeds the leadership of the working class.For it is only the working class that is most因为只有工人阶级最有远见，大公无私，最富于革命的彻底性。
整个革命历史证明，没有工人阶级的领导，革命就要失败，有了工人阶级的领导，革命就胜利了。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八三页人民民主专政的基础是工人阶级、农民阶级和城市小资产阶级的联盟，而主要是工人和农民的联盟，因为这两个阶级占了中国人口的百分之八十到九十。
推翻帝国主义和国民党反动派，主要是这两个阶级的力量。
由新民主主义到社会主义，主要依靠这两个阶级的联盟。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八三页阶级斗争、生产斗争和科学实验，是far-sighted, most selfless and mostthoroughly revolutionary. The entire historyof revolution proves that without theleadership of the working class revolutionfails and that with the leadership of theworking class revolution triumphs."OnthePeople'sDemocraticDictatorship" (June 30, 1949), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 421.The people's democratic dictatorship isbased on the alliance of the working class,the peasantry and the urban pettybourgeoisie, and mainly on the alliance ofthe workers and the peasants, because thesetwo classes comprise 80 to go per cent ofChina's population. These two classes arethe main force in overthrowing imperialismand the Kuomintang reactionaries. Thetransition from New Democracy tosocialism also depends mainly upon theiralliance.Ibid.Class struggle, the struggle for productionand scientific experiment are the three great建设社会主义强大国家的三项伟大革命运动，是使共产党人免除官僚主义、避免修正主义和教条主义，永远立于不败之地的确实保证，是使无产阶级能够和广大劳动群众联合起来，实行民主专政的可靠保证。
不然的话，让地、富、反、坏、牛鬼蛇神一齐跑了出来，而我们的干部则不闻不问，有许多人甚至敌我不分，互相勾结，被敌人腐蚀侵袭，分化瓦解，拉出去，打进来，许多工人、农民和知识分子也被敌人软硬兼施，照此办理，那就不要很多时间，少则几年、十几年，多则几十年，就不可避免地要出现全国性的反革命复辟，revolutionary movements for building amighty socialist country. These movementsare a sure guarantee that Communists willbe free from bureaucracy and immuneagainst revisionism and dogmatism, and willfor ever remain invincible. They are areliable guarantee that the proletariat will beable to unite with the broad working massesand realize a democratic dictatorship. If, inthe absence of these movements, thelandlords,richpeasants,counterrevolutionaries, bad elements andmonsters were all allowed to crawl out,while our cadres were to shut their eyes toall this and in many cases fail even todifferentiate between the enemy andourselves but were to collaborate with theenemy and were corrupted, divided anddemoralized by him, if our cadres were thuspulled out or the enemy were able to sneakin, and if many of our workers, peasants,and intellectuals were left defencelessagainst both the soft and the hard tactics ofthe enemy, then it would not take long,perhaps only several years or a decade, or马列主义的党就一定会变成修正主义的党，变成法西斯党，整个中国就要改变颜色了。
《浙江省七个关于干部参加劳动的好材料》的批语（一九六三年五月九日），《关于赫鲁晓夫的假共产主义及其在世界历史上的教训》一文的引语，一九六四年七月十四日《人民日报》人民民主专政有两个方法。
对敌人说来是用专政的方法，就是说在必要的时期内，不让他们参与政治活动，强迫他们服从人民政府的法律，强迫他们从事劳动并在劳动中改造他们成为新人。
对人民说来则与此相反，不是用强迫的方法，而是用民主的方法，就是说必须让他们参与政治several decades at most, before acounterrevolutionary restoration on anational scale inevitably occurred, theMarxist-Leninist party would undoubtedlybecome a revisionist party or a fascist party,and the hole of China would change itscolour.Note on "The Seven Well-WrittenDocuments of Chekiang ProvinceConcerning Cadres' Participation inPhysical Labour" (May 9, 1963),quoted in On Khrushchov's PhoneyCommunism and Its Historical Lessonsfor the World, pp. 7l-72.*The people's democratic dictatorship usestwo methods. Towards the enemy, it uses themethod of dictatorship, that is, for as long aperiod of time as is necessary it does not letthem take part in political activities andcompels them to obey the law of thePeople's Government and to engage inlabour and, through labour, transformthemselves into new men. Towards thepeople, on the contrary, it uses the methodnot of compulsion but of democracy, that is,活动，不是强迫他们做这样做那样，而是用民主的方法向他们进行教育和说服的工作。
在中国人民政治协商会议第一届全国委员会第二次会议上的闭幕词（一九五零年六月二十三日），一九五零后六月二十四日《人民日报》为了在更加巩固的基础上迅速发展中国的社会主义事业，中国人民正在共产党的领导之下进行一个生气勃勃的整风运动。
这就是在城市和农村中对于社会主义和资本主义两条道路、国家的根本制度和重大政策、党政工作人员的工作作风、人民的生活福利等项问题，用摆事实讲道理的方法，有领导地自由地展开全民性的大辩论，用以正确地解决在人民内部实际it must necessarily let them take part inpolitical activities and does not compel themto do this or that, but uses the method ofdemocracy in educating and persuadingthem."Closing speech at the Second Session ofthe First National Committee of theChinese People's Political ConsultativeConference" (June 23, 1950).Under the leadership of the CommunistParty, the Chinese people are carrying out avigorous rectification movement in order tobring about the rapid development ofsocialism in China on a firmer basis. It is amovement for carrying out a nation-widedebate which is both guided and free, adebate in the city and the countryside onsuch questions as the socialist road versusthe capitalist road, the basic system of thestate and its major policies, the workingstyle of Party and government functionaries,and the question of the welfare of the people,a debate which is conducted by setting forthfacts and reasoning things out, so as存在而为当前所必需解决的各项矛盾问题。
这是一个社会主义的人民自我教育、自我改造的运动。
《在苏联最高苏维埃庆祝伟大的十月社会主义革命四十周年会议上的讲话》（一九五七年十一月六日），人民出版社版第八页为了进行伟大的建设工作，在我们的面前，摆着极为繁重的任务。
虽然我们有一千多万党员，但是在全国人口中仍然只占极少数。
在我们的各个国家机关和各项社会事业中，大量的工作要依靠党外的人员来做。
如果我们不善于依靠人民群众，不善于同党外的人员合作，那就无法把工作做好。
在我们继续加强全党的团结的时候，我们还必须继续加强各民族、各民主阶级、各民主党派、各人民团体的团结，correctlytoresolvethoseactualcontradictions among the people whichdemand immediate solution. This is asocialist movement for the self-educationand selfremoulding of the people."Speech at the Meeting of the SupremeSoviet of the U.S.S.R. in Celebration ofthe 40th Anniversary of the GreatOctoberSocialistRevolution"(November 6, 1957)Most arduous tasks lie ahead of us in thegreat work of construction. Although thereare over I0 million members in our Party,they still constitute a very small minority ofthe country's population. In governmentdepartments and public organizations andenterprises much work has to be done bynon-Party people. It is impossible to get thiswork well done unless we are good atrelying on the masses and co-operating withnon-Party people. While continuing tostrengthen the unity of the whole Party, wemust also continue to strengthen the unity ofall our nationalities, democratic classes,继续巩固和扩大我们的人民民主统一战线，必须认真地纠正在任何工作环节上的任何一种妨害党同人民团结的不良现象。
《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会开幕词》（一九五六年九月十五日），《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会文献》人民出版社版第八页democraticpartiesandpeople'sorganizations, and to consolidate andexpand the people's democratic united front,and we must conscientiously get rid of everyunhealthy manifestation in any link in ourwork that is detrimental to the unity betweenthe Party and the people."Opening Address at the Eighth NationalCongress of the Communist Party ofChina" (September 15, 1956).四、正确处理人民内部矛盾在我们的面前有两类社会矛盾，这就是敌我之间的矛盾和人民内部的矛盾。
这是性质完全不同的两类矛盾。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第一页为了正确地认识敌我之间和人民内部这两类不同的矛盾，应该首先弄清楚什么是人民，什么是敌人。
……在现阶段，在建设社会主义的时期，一切赞成、拥护和参加社会主义建设事业的阶级、阶层和4. THE CORRECTHANDLING OFCONTRADICTIONSAMONG THE PEOPLEWe are confronted by two types of socialcontradictions - those between ourselves andthe enemy and those among the peoplethemselves. The two are totally different intheir nature.。
"On the Correct Handling of Contradic-tions Among the People" (February 27,1957), 1st pocket ed.. p. 2.To understand these two different typesof contradictions correctly, we must first beclear on what is meant by "the people" andwhat is meant by "the enemy". … At thepresent stage, the period of buildingsocialism, the classes, strata and socialgroups which favour, support and work for社会集团，都属于人民的范围；一切反抗社会主义革命和敌视、破坏社会主义建设的社会势力和社会集团，都是人民的敌人。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第一——二页在我国现在的条件下，所谓人民内部的矛盾，包括工人阶级内部的矛盾，农民阶级内部的矛盾，知识分子内部的矛盾，工农两个阶级之间的矛盾，工人、农民同知识分子之间的矛盾，工人阶级和其他劳动人民同民族资产阶级之间的矛盾，民族资产阶级内部的矛盾，等等。
我们的人民政府是真正代表人民利益的政府，是为人民服务的政府，但是它同人民群众之间也有一定的矛盾。
这种矛盾包括国家利益、the cause of socialist construction all comewithin the category of the people, while thesocial forces and groups which resist thesocialist revolution and are hostile to orsabotage socialist construction are allenemies of the people.Ibid., pp. 2-3.In the conditions prevailing in Chinatoday, the contradictions among the peoplecomprise the contradictions within theworking class, the contradictions within thepeasantry, the contradictions within theintelligentsia, the contradictions between theworking class and the peasantry, thecontradictions between the workers andpeasants on the one hand and theintellectuals on the other, the contradictionsbetween the working class and othersections of the working people on the onehand and the national bourgeoisie on theother, the contradictions within the nationalbourgeoisie, and so on. Our People'sGovernment is one that genuinely representsthe people's interests, it is a government thatserves the people. Nevertheless, there are集体利益同个人利益之间的矛盾，民主同集中的矛盾，领导同被领导之间的矛盾，国家机关某些工作人员的官僚主义作风同群众之间的矛盾。
这种矛盾也是人民内部的一个矛盾。
一般说来，人民内部的矛盾，是在人民利益根本一致的基础上的矛盾。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二页敌我之间的矛盾是对抗性的矛盾。
人民内部的矛盾，在劳动人民之间说来，是非对抗性的；在被剥削阶级和剥削阶级之间说来，除了对抗性的一面以外，还有非对抗性的一面。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二页在我国人民的政治生活中，应当怎样来判断我们的言论和行动的是非呢？我still certain contradictions between thegovernment and the people. These includecontradictions among the interests of thestate, the interests of the collective and theinterests of the individual; betweendemocracy and centralism; between theleadership and the led; and the contradictionarising from the bureaucratic style of workof certain government workers in theirrelations with the masses. All these are alsocontradictions among the people. Generallyspeaking, the people's basic identity ofinterests underlies the contradictions amongthe people.Ibid., pp. 3-4.The contradictions between ourselves andthe enemy are antagonistic contradictions.Within the ranks of the people, thecontradictions among the working peopleare non-antagonistic, while those betweenthe exploited and the exploiting classes havea non-antagonistic aspect in addition to anantagonistic aspect.Ibid., p. 3.In the political life of our people, howshould right be distinguished from wrong in们以为，根据我国的宪法的原则，根据我国最大多数人民的意志和我国各党派历次宣布的共同的政治主张，这种标准可以大致规定如下：（一）有利于团结全国各族人民，而不是分裂人民；（二）有利于社会主义改造和社会主义建设，而不是不利于社会主义改造和社会主义建设；（三）有利于巩固人民民主专政，而不是破坏或者削弱这个专政；（四）有利于巩固民主集中制，而不是破坏或者削弱这个制度；（五）有利于巩固共产党的领导，而不是摆脱或者削弱这种领导；（六）有利于社会主义的国际团结和全世界爱好和平人民的国际团结，而不是有损于这些团结。
这六条标准中，最重要的是社会主义道路one's words and actions? On the basis of theprinciples of our Constitution, the will of theoverwhelming majority of our people andthe common political positions which havebeen proclaimed on various occasions byour political parties and groups, we considerthat, broadly speaking, the criteria should beas follows:(1) Words and actions should help to unite,and not divide, the people of our variousnationalities.(2) They should be beneficial, and notharmful, to socialist transformation andsocialist construction.(3) They should help to consolidate, and notundermine or weaken, the people'sdemocratic dictatorship.(4) They should help to consolidate, and notundermineorweaken,democraticcentralism.(5) They should help to strengthen, and notdiscard or weaken, the leadership of theCommunist Party.(6) They should be beneficial, and notharmful, to international socialist unity and和党的领导两条。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三零页肃清反革命分子的问题是敌我矛盾的斗争问题。
在人民内部，有些人对于肃反问题的看法，也有一些不同。
有两种人的意见，和我们的意见不相同。
有右倾思想的人不分敌我，认敌为我。
广大群众认为是敌人的人，他们却认为是朋友。
有“左”倾思想的人则把敌我矛盾扩大化，以至把某些人民内部的矛盾也看做敌我矛盾，把某些本来不是反革命的人也看作反革命。
这两种看法都是错误的，都不能正确地处理肃反问题，也不能正确地估计the unity of the peace-loving people of theworld.Of these six criteria, the mostimportant are the socialist path and theleadership of the Party.Ibid., pp. 57-58.The question of suppressing counter-revolutionaries is one of a struggle betweenourselves and the enemy, a contradictionbetween ourselves and the enemy. Amongthe people, there are some who see thisquestion in a somewhat different light. Twokinds of persons hold views different fromours. Those with a Rightist way of thinkingmake no distinction between ourselves andthe enemy and take the enemy for our ownpeople. They regard as friends the verypersons whom the broad masses regard asenemies. Those with a "Left" way ofthinking magnify contradictions betweenourselves and the enemy to such an extentthat they take certain contradictions amongthe people for contradictions with the enemyand regard as counter-revolutionary personswho are actually not counter-revolutionaries.Both these views are wrong. Neither can我们的肃反工作。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第一三页不同质的矛盾，只有用不同质的方法才能解决。
例如，无产阶级和资产阶级的矛盾，用社会主义革命的方法去解决；人民大众和封建制度的矛盾，用民主革命的方法去解决；殖民地和帝国主义的矛盾，用民族革命战争的方法去解决；在社会主义社会中工人阶级和农民阶级的矛盾，用农业集体化和农业机械化的方法去解决；共产党内部的矛盾，用批评和自我批评的方法去解决；社会和自然的矛盾，用发展生产力的方法去解决。
……用不同的方法去解决不同的矛盾，这是马克思列宁主义lead to the correct handling of the questionof suppressing counter-revolutionaries or toa correct assessment of this work.Ibid., p. 25.Qualitatively different contradictions canonly be resolved by qualitatively differentmethods. For instance, the contradictionbetween the proletariat and the bourgeoisieis resolved by the method of socialistrevolution; the contradiction between thegreat masses of the people and the feudalsystem is resolved by the method ofdemocratic revolution; the contradictionbetween the colonies and imperialism isresolved by the method of nationalrevolutionary war; the contradictionbetween the working class and the peasantclass in socialist society is resolved by themethodofcollectivizationandmechanization in agriculture; contradictionwithin the Communist Party is resolved bythe method of criticism and self-criticism;the contradiction between society and natureis resolved by the method of developing the者必须严格地遵守的一个原则。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二九九页敌我之间和人民内部这两类矛盾的性质不同，解决的方法也不同，简单地说起来，前者是分清敌我的问题，后者是分清是非的问题。
当然，敌我问题也是一种是非问题。
比如我们同帝国主义、封建主义、官僚资本主义这些内外反动派，究竟谁是谁非，也是是非问题，但是这是和人民内部问题性质不同的另一类是非问题。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的总是》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三页productive forces. … The principle ofusing different methods to resolve differentcontradictions is one which Marxist-Leninists must strictly observe."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, pp. 321-22.Since they are different in nature, thecontradictions between ourselves and theenemy and the contradictions among thepeople must be resolved by differentmethods. To put it briefly, the former are amatter of drawing a clear distinctionbetween ourselves and the enemy, and thelatter a matter of drawing a clear distinctionbetween right and wrong. It is, of course,true that the distinction between ourselvesand the enemy is also a matter of right andwrong. For example, the question of who isin the right, we or the domestic and foreignreactionaries, the imperialists, the feudalistsand bureaucrat-capitalists, is also a matter ofright and wrong, but it is in a differentcategory from questions of right and wrongamong the people."On the Correct Handling of Contra-dictions Among the People" (February 27,1957), 1st pocket ed., pp. 5-6.凡属于思想性质的问题，凡属于人民内部的争论问题，只能用民主的方法去解决，只能用讨论的方法、批评的方法、说服教育的方法去解决，而不能用强制的、压服的方法去解决。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第六页人民为了有效地进行生产、进行学习和有秩序地过生活，要求自己的政府、生产的领导者、文化教育机关的领导者发布各种适当的带强制性的行政命令。
没有这种行政命令，社会秩序就无法维持，这是人们的常识所了解的。
这同用说服教育的方法去解决人民内部的矛盾，是相辅相成的两个方面。
为着维持社会秩序的目的而发布的行政命令，也要伴之以说服教育，单靠行政命令，在许多情况下就行不通。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第六页The only way to settle questions of anideological nature or controversial issuesamong the people is by the democraticmethod, the method of discussion, ofcriticism, of persuasion and education, andnot by the method of coercion or repression.Ibid. p11To be able to carry on their productionand studies effectively and to arrange theirlives properly, the people want theirgovernment and those in charge ofproduction and of cultural and educationalorganizations to issue appropriate orders ofan obligatory nature. It is common sensethat the maintenance of public order wouldbe impossible without such administrativeregulations. Administrative orders and themethod of persuasion and educationcomplement each other in resolvingcontradictions among the people. Evenadministrativeregulationsforthemaintenance of public order must beaccompanied by persuasion and education,for in many cases regulations alone will notwork.Ibid., pp. 11-12.资产阶级、小资产阶级，他们的思想意识是一定要反映出来的。
一定要在政治问题和思想问题上，用各种办法顽强地表现他们自己。
要他们不反映不表现，是不可能的。
我们不应当用压制的办法不让他们表现，而应当让他们表现，同时在他们表现的时候，和他们辩论，进行适当的批评。
毫无疑问，我们应当批评各种各样的错误思想。
不加批评，看着错误思想到处泛滥，任凭它们去占领市场，当然不行。
有错误就得批判，有毒草就得进行斗争。
但是这种批评不应当是教条主义的，不应当用形而上学方法，应当力求用辩证方法。
要有科学的分析，要有充分的说服力。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二九页Inevitably, the bourgeoisie and pettybourgeoisie will give expression to theirown ideologies. Inevitably, they willstubbornly express themselves on politicaland ideological questions by every possiblemeans. You cannot expect them to dootherwise. We should not use the method ofsuppression and prevent them fromexpressing themselves, but should allowthem to do so and at the same time arguewith them and direct appropriate criticism atthem. We must undoubtedly criticize wrongideas of every description. It certainly wouldnot be right to refrain from criticism, lookon while wrong ideas spread unchecked andallow them to monopolize the field.Mistakes must be criticized and poisonousweeds fought wherever they crop up.However, such criticism should not bedogmatic, and the metaphysical methodshould not be used, but efforts should bemade to apply the dialectical method. Whatis needed is scientific analysis andconvincing argument.Ibid., pp. 55-56.对于人民的缺点是需要批评的，……但必须是真正站在人民的立场上，用保护人民、教育人民的满腔热情来说话。
如果把同志当作敌人来对待，就是使自己站在敌人的立场上去了。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话》（一九四二年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八七四页矛盾和斗争是普遍的、绝对的，但是解决矛盾的方法，即斗争的形式，则因矛盾的性质不同而不相同。
有些矛盾具有公开的对抗性，有些矛盾则不是这样。
根据事物的具体发展，有些矛盾是由原来还非对抗性的，而发展成为对抗性的；也有些矛盾则由原来是对抗性的，而发展成为非对抗性的。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三二三页To criticize the people's shortcomings isnecessary, … but in doing so we must trulytake the stand of the people and speak out ofwhole-hearted eagerness to protect andeducate them. To treat comrades likeenemies is to go over to the stand of theenemy."Talks at the Yen'an Forum onLiterature and Art" (May 1942),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 92.Contradiction and struggle are universaland absolute, but the methods of resolvingcontradictions, that is, the forms of struggle,differ according to the differences in thenature of the contradictions. Somecontradictions are characterized by openantagonism, others are not. In accordancewith the concrete development of things,some contradictions which were originallynon-antagonistic develop into antagonisticones, while others which were originallyantagonistic develop into non-antagonisticones."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, p 344.在一般情况下，人民内部的矛盾不是对抗性的。
但是如果处理得不适当，或者失去警觉，麻痹大意，也可能发生对抗。
这种情况，在社会主义国家通常只是局部的暂时的现象。
这是因为社会主义国家消灭了人剥削人的制度，人民的利益在根本上是一致的。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第八页在我们国家里，工人阶级同民族资产阶级的矛盾属于人民内部的矛盾。
工人阶级和民族资产阶级的阶级斗争一般地属于人民内部的阶级斗争，这是因为我国的民族资产阶级有两面性。
在资产阶级民主革命时期，它有革命性的一面，又有妥协In ordinary circumstances, contradictionsamong the people are not antagonistic. Butif they are not handled properly, or if werelax our vigilance and lower our guard,antagonism may arise. In a socialist country,a development of this kind is usually only alocalized and temporary phenomenon. Thereason is that the system of exploitation ofman by man has been abolished and theinterests of the people are basically thesame."On the Correct Handling of Contra-dictions Among the People" (February 27,1957), 1st pocket ed., p. 14.In our country, the contradiction betweenthe working class and the nationalbourgeoisie belongs to the category ofcontradictions among the people. By andlarge, the class struggle between the two is aclass struggle within the ranks of the people,because the Chinese national bourgeoisiehas a dual character. In the period of thebourgeois-democratic revolution, it had botha revolutionary and a conciliationist side toits character. In the period of the socialist性的一面。
在社会主义革命时期，它有剥削工人阶级取得利润的一面，又有拥护宪法、愿意接受社会主义改造的一面。
民族资产阶级和帝国主义、地主阶级、官僚资产阶级不同。
工人阶级和民族资产阶级之间存在着剥削和被剥削的矛盾，这本来是对抗性的矛盾。
但是在我国的具体条件下，这两个阶级的对抗性的矛盾如果处理得当，可以转变为非对抗性的矛盾，可以用和平的方法解决这个矛盾。
如果我们处理不当，不是对民族资产阶级采取团结、批评、教育的政策，或者民族资产阶级不接受我们的这个政策，那末工人阶级同民族资产阶级之间的矛盾就会变成敌我之间的矛盾。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二——三页revolution, exploitation of the working classfor profit constitutes one side of thecharacter of the national bourgeoisie, whileits support of the Constitution and itswillingnesstoacceptsocialisttransformation constitute the other. Thenational bourgeoisie differs from theimperialists, the landlords and thebureaucrat-capitalists. The contradictionbetween the national bourgeoisie and theworking class is one between the exploiterand the exploited, and is by natureantagonistic. But in the concrete conditionsof China, this antagonistic class contra-diction can, if properly handled, betransformed into a non-antagonistic one andbe resolved by peaceful methods. However,it will change into a contradiction betweenourselves and the enemy if we do not handleit properly and do not follow the policy ofuniting with, criticizing and educating thenational bourgeoisie, or if the nationalbourgeoisie does not accept this policy ofours.Ibid., p. 4-5.社会主义国家内部的反动派同帝国主义者互相勾结，利用人民内部的矛盾，挑拨离间，兴风作浪，企图实现他们的阴谋。
匈牙利事件的这种教训，值得大家注意。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第八页It [the counter-revolutionary rebellion inHungary in 1956] was a case ofreactionaries inside a socialist country, inleague with the imperialists, attempting toachieve their conspiratorial aims by takingadvantage of contradictions among thepeople to foment dissension and stir updisorder. This lesson of the Hungarianevents merits attention.Ibid., p. 15.五、战争与和平战争——从有私有财产和有阶级以来就开始了的、用以解决阶级和阶级、民族和民族、国家和国家、政治集团和政治集团之间、在一定发展阶段上的矛盾的一种最高的斗争形式。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一六四页“战争是政治的继续”，在这点上说，战争就是政治、战争本身就是政治性质的行动，从古以来没有不带政治性的战争。
……但是战争有其特殊性，在这点上说，战争不即等于一般的政治。
“战争是政治的特殊手段的继续”。
政治发展到一定的阶段，再也不能照旧前进，于是爆发了战5. WAR AND PEACEWar is the highest form of struggle forresolving contradictions, when they havedeveloped to a certain stage, between classes,nations, states, or political groups, and it hasexisted ever since the emergence of privateproperty and of classes."Problems of Strategy in China'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 180."War is the continuation of politics." Inthis sense war is politics and war itself is apolitical action; since ancient times there hasnever been a war that did not have a politicalcharacter.…But war has its own particular character-istics and in this sense it cannot be equatedbeyond which it cannot proceed by the usualmeans, war breaks out to sweep theobstaclesfrom the way. … When the obstacle iscontinuation of politics by other.… means."When politics develops to a certain stage争，用以扫除政治道路上的障碍。
……障碍既除，政治的目的达到，战争结束。
障碍没有扫除得干净，战争仍须继续进行，以求贯彻。
……因此可以说，政治是不流血的战争，战争是流血的政治。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第四六八——四六九页历史上的战争分为两类，一类是正义的，一类是非正义的。
一切进步的战争都是正义的，一切阻碍进步的战争都是非正义的。
我们共产党人反对一切阻碍进步的非正义的战争，但是不反对进步的正义的战争。
对于后一类战争，我们共产党人不但不反对，而且积极地参加。
前一类战争，例如第一次世界大战，双方都是为着帝国主义利益而战，所以全世界的共产党人坚决地反对那一次战争。
反对的方法，在战with politics in general. "War is theremoved and our political aim attained thewar will stop. But if the obstacle is notcompletely swept away, the war will have tocontinuetilltheaimisfullyaccomplished.… It can therefore be saidthat politics is war without bloodshed whilewar is politics with bloodshed."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, pp. 152-53 *History shows that wars are divided intotwo kinds, just and unjust. All wars that areprogressive are just, and all wars thatimpede progress are unjust. We Communistsoppose all unjust wars that impede progress,but we do not oppose progressive, just wars.Not only do we Communists not oppose justwars, we actively participate in them. As forunjust wars, World War I is an instance inwhich both sides fought for imperialistinterests; therefore the Communists of thewhole world firmly opposed that war. Theway to oppose a war of this kind is to do争未爆发前，极力阻止其爆发；既爆发后，只要有可能，就用战争反对战争，用正义战争反对非正义战争。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第四六五——四六六页在阶级社会中，革命和革命战争是不可避免的，舍此不能完成社会发展的飞跃，不能推翻反动的统治阶级，而使人民获得政权。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三二二页革命战争是一种抗毒素，它不但将排除敌人的毒焰，也将清洗自己的污浊。
凡属正义的革命的战争，其力量是很大的，它能改造很多事物，或为改造事物开辟道路。
中日战争将改造中日两国；只要中国坚持抗战和坚持统一战线，就一定能把旧everything possible to prevent it before itbreaks out and, once it breaks out, to opposewar with war, to oppose unjust war with justwar, whenever possible.Ibid., p. 150.Revolutions and revolutionary wars areinevitable in class society, and without themit is impossible to accomplish any leap insocial development and to overthrow thereactionary ruling classes and thereforeimpossible for the people to win politicalpower."On Contradiction" (August1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 344.*Revolutionary war is an antitoxin whichnot only eliminates the enemy's poison butalso purges us of our own filth. Every just,revolutionary war is endowed withtremendous power and can transform manythings or clear the way for theirtransformation. The Sino-Japanese war willtransform both China and Japan; providedChina perseveres in the War of Resistanceand in the united front,the old Japan will日本化为新日本，把旧中国化为新中国，中日两国的人和物都将在这次战争中和战争后获得改造。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第四四七页每个共产党员都应懂得这个真理：“枪杆子里面出政权”。
《战争和战略问题》（一九三八年十一月六日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五三五页革命的中心任务和最高形式是武装夺取政权，战争解决问题。
这个马克思列宁主义的革命原则是普遍地对的，不论在中国在外国，一概都是对的。
《战争和战略问题》（一九三八年十一月六日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五二九页在中国，离开了武装斗争，就没有无产阶级的地位，就没有人民的地位，就没有共产党的地位，就没有革命的胜利。
十surely be transformed into a new Japan andthe old China into a new China, and peopleand everything else in both China and Japanwill be transformed during and after the war."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 131.*Every Communist must grasp the truth,"Political power grows out of the barrel of agun.""Problems of War and Strategy"(November 6, 1938), Selected Works,Vol. II, p. 224.The seizure of power by armed force, thesettlement of the issue by war, is the centraltask and the highest form of revolution. ThisMarxist-Leninist principle of revolutionholds good universally, for China and for allother countries.Ibid., p. 219.Without armed struggle neither theproletariat, nor the people, nor theCommunist Party would have any standingat all in China and it would be impossible八年来，我们党的发展、巩固和布尔塞维克化，是在革命战争中进行的，没有武装斗争，就不会有今天的共产党。
这个拿血换来的经验，全党同志都不要忘记。
《“共产党人”发刊词》（一九三九年十月四日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六零零——六零一页从马克思主义关于国家学说的观点看来，军队是国家政权的主要成分。
谁想夺取国家政权，并想保持它，谁就应有强大的军队。
有人笑我们是“战争万能论”，对，我们是革命战争万能论者，这不是坏的，是好的，是马克思主义的。
俄国共产党的枪杆子造了一个社会主义。
我们要造一个民主共和国。
帝国主义时代的阶级斗争的经验告诉我们：工人阶级和劳动群众，只有用枪杆子的力量才能战胜武装的for the revolution to triumph. In these years[the eighteen years since the founding of theParty] the development, consolidation andbolshevization of our Party have proceededin the midst of revolutionary wars; withoutarmed struggle the Communist Party wouldassuredly not be what it is today. Comradesthroughout the Party must never forget thisexperience for which we have paid in blood."Introducing The Communist" (October4, 1939), Selected Works, Vol. II, p.292.*According to the Marxist theory of thestate, the army is the chief component ofstate power. Whoever wants to seize andretain state power must have a strong army.Some people ridicule us as advocates of the"omnipotence of war". Yes, we areadvocates of the omnipotence ofrevolutionary war; that is good, not bad, it isMarxist. The guns of the RussianCommunist Party created socialism. Weshall create a democratic republic.Experience in the class struggle in the era ofimperialism teaches us that it is only by thepower of the gun that the working class and资产阶级和地主；在这个意义上，我们可以说，整个世界只有用枪杆子才可能改造。
《战争和战略问题》（一九三八年十一月六日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五三五页我们是战争消灭论者，我们是不要战争的；但是只能经过战争去消灭战争，不要枪杆子必须拿起枪杆子。
《战争和战略问题》（一九三八年十一月六日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五三五页战争——这个人类互相残杀的怪物，人类社会的发展终久要把它消灭的，而且就在不远的将来会要把它消灭的。
但是消灭它的方法只有一个，就是用战争反对战争，用革命战争反对反革命战争，用民族革命战争反对民族反革命战争，用阶级革命战争反对阶级反革命战争。
……人类社会进步到消灭了阶级，消灭了国家，到了the labouring masses can defeat the armedbourgeoisie and landlords; in this sense wemay say that only with guns can the wholeworld be transformed."Problems of War and Strategy"(November 6, 1938), Selected Works,Vol. II, p. 225.We are advocates of the abolition of war,we do not want war; but war can only beabolished through war, and in order to getrid of the gun it is necessary to take up thegun.Ibid.War, this monster of mutual slaughteramong men, will be finally eliminated bythe progress of human society, and in the nottoo distant future too. But there is only oneway to eliminate it and that is to oppose warwith war, to oppose counterrevolutionarywar with revolutionary war, to opposenational counter-revolutionary war withnational revolutionary war, and to opposecounter-revolutionary class war withrevolutionary class war.… When humansociety advances to the point where那时，什么战争也没有了，反革命战争没有了，革命战争也没有了，非正义战争没有了，正义战争也没有了，这就是人类的永久和平的时代。
我们研究革命战争的规律，出发于我们要求消灭一切战争的志愿，这是区别我们共产党人和一切剥削阶级的界线。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一六七——一六八页我国和各社会主义国家都需要和平，世界各国的人民也都需要和平。
渴望战争，不要和平的，仅仅是少数帝国主义国家中的某些依靠侵略发财的垄断资本集团。
《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会开幕词》（一九五六年九月十五日），《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会文献》第八页为了争取世界的持久和平，我们必须进一步地发展同社会主义阵营中各个兄Classes and states are eliminated, there willbe no more wars, counter-revolutionary orrevolutionary, unjust or just; that will be theera of perpetual peace for mankind. Ourstudy of the laws of revolutionary warsprings from the desire to eliminate all wars;herein lies the distinction between usCommunists and all the exploiting classes."Problems of Strategy in China'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I, pp. 182-83.Our country and all the other socialistcountries want peace; so do the peoples ofall the countries of the world. The only oneswho crave war and do not want peace arecertain monopoly capitalist groups in ahandful of imperialist countries whichdepend on aggression for their profits."Opening Address at the Eighth NationalCongress of the Communist Party ofChina" (September 15, 1956).To achieve a lasting world peace, we mustfurther develop our friendship and co-弟国家的友好合作，并且同一切爱好和平的国家加强团结。
我们必须争取同一切愿意和我们和平相处的国家，在互相尊重领土主权和平等互利的基础上，建立正常的外交关系。
亚洲、非洲和拉丁美洲各国的民族独立解放运动，以及世界上一切国家的和平运动和正义斗争，我们都必须给以积极的支持。
《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会开幕词》（一九五六年九月十五日），《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会文献》第八页至于帝国主义国家，我们也要团结那里的人民，并且争取同那些国家和平共处，做些生意，制止可能发生的战争，但是决不可以对他们怀抱一些不切实际的想法。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一娥五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三八页operation with the fraternal countries in thesocialist camp and strengthen our solidaritywith all peace-loving countries. We mustendeavour to establish normal diplomaticrelations, on the basis of mutual respect forterritorial integrity and sovereignty and ofequality and mutual benefit, with allcountries willing to live together with us inpeace. We must give active support to thenational independence and liberationmovement in countries in Asia, Africa andLatin America as well as to the peacemovement and to just struggles in all thecountries of the world.Ibid.As for the imperialist countries, weshould unite with their peoples and strive tocoexist peacefully with those countries, dobusiness with them and prevent any possiblewar, but under no circumstances should weharbour any unrealistic notions about them."On the Correct Handling of Contr-adictions Among the People" (February27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p. 75.我们希望和平。
但是如果帝国主义硬要打仗，我们也只好横下一条心，打了仗再建设。
每天怕战争，战争来了你有什么办法呢？我先是说东风压倒西风，战争打不起来，现在再就如果发生了战争的情况，作了这些补充的说明，这样两种可能性都估计到了。
在各国共产党和工人党莫斯科会议上的讲话（一九五七年十一月十八日），一九六三年九月一日《人民日报》《中国政府发言人声明》中的引语现在世界各国的人们都在谈论着会不会打第三次世界大战。
对于这个问题，我们也要有精神准备，也要有分析。
我们是坚持和平反对战争的。
但是，如果帝国We desire peace. However, if imperialisminsists on fighting a war, we will have noalternative but to take the firm resolution tofight to the finish before going ahead withour construction. If you are afraid of warday in day out, what will you do if wareventually comes? First I said that the EastWind is prevailing over the West Wind andwar will not break out, and now I haveadded these explanations about the situationin case war should break out. Bothpossibilities have thus been taken intoaccount.Parties" (November 18, 1957), quotedin "Statement by the Spokesman of theChinese Government" (September 1,1963).*People all over the world are nowdiscussing whether or not a third world warwill break out. On this question, too, wemust be mentally prepared and do someanalysis. We stand firmly for peace andagainst war. But if the imperialists insist onunleashing another war, we should not be主义一定要发动战争，我们也不要害怕。
我们对待这个问题的态度，同对待一切“乱子”的态度一样，第一条，反对；第二条，不怕。
第一次世界大战以后，出了一个苏联，两亿人口。
第二次世界大战以后，出了一个社会主义阵营，一共九亿人口。
如果帝国主义者一定要发动第三次世界大战，可以断定，其结果必定又要有多少亿人口转到社会主义方面，帝国主义剩下的地盘就不多了，也有可能整个帝国主义制度全部崩溃。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三五页捣乱，失败，再捣乱，再失败，直至灭亡——这就是帝国主义和世界上一切afraid of it. Our attitude on this question isthe same as our attitude towards anydisturbance: first, we are against it; second,we are not afraid of it. The First World Warwas followed by the birth of the SovietUnion with a population of 200 million. TheSecond World War was followed by theemergence of the socialist camp with acombined population of 900 million. If theimperialists insist on launching a third worldwar, it is certain that several hundred millionmore will turn to socialism, and then therewill not be much room left on earth for theimperialists; it is also likely that the wholestructure of imperialism will utterlycollapse."On the Correct Handling of Contra-dictions Among the People" (February27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., pp. 67-68.Make trouble, fail, make trouble again,fail again... till their doom- that is the logicof the imperialists and all reactionaries the反动派对待人民事业的逻辑，他们决不会违背这个逻辑的。
这是一条马克思主义的定律。
我们说“帝国主义是很凶恶的”，就是说它的本性是不能改变的，帝国主义分子决不肯放下屠刀，他们也决不能成佛，直至他们的灭亡。
斗争，失败，再斗争，再失败，再斗争，直至胜利——这就是人民的逻辑，他们也是决不会违背这个逻辑的。
这是马克思主义的又一条定律。
俄国人民的革命曾经是依照了这条定律，中国人民的革命也是依照这条定律。
《丢掉幻想，准备斗争》（一九四九年八月十四日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四九零——一四九一页我们决不可因为胜利，而放松对于帝国主义分子及其走狗们的疯狂的报复阴谋的警惕性，谁要是放松这一项警惕性，谁就将在政治上解除武装，而使自己处于world over in dealing with the people'scause, and they will never go against thislogic. This is a Marxist law. When we say"imperialism is ferocious", we mean that itsnature will never change, that theimperialists will never lay down theirbutcher knives, that they will never becomeBuddhas, till their doom.Fight, fail, fight again, fail again, fightagain... till their victory; that is the logic ofthe people, and they too will never goagainst this logic. This is another Marxistlaw. The Russian people's revolutionfollowed this law, and so has the Chinesepeople's revolution."Cast Away Illusions, Prepare forStruggle" (August 14, 1949), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 428.Just because we have won victory, wemust never relax our vigilance against thefrenzied plots for revenge by the imperialistsand their running dogs. Whoever relaxesvigilance will disarm himself politically and被动的地位。
《在新政治协商会议筹备会上的讲话》（一九四九年六月十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四六九页帝国主义者及其走狗中国反动派对于他们在中国这块土地上的失败，是不会甘心的。
他们还会要互相勾结在一起，用各种可能的方法，反对中国人民。
例如，派谴他们的走狗钻进中国内部来进行分化工作和捣乱工作。
这是必然的，他们决不会忘记这一项工作。
例如，唆使中国反动派甚至加上他们自己的力量，封锁中国的海港。
只要还有可能，他们就会这样做，再则，假如他们还想冒险的话，派出一部分兵力侵扰中国的边境，也不是不可能的。
所有这些，我们都必须充分地估计到。
《在新政治协商会议筹备会上的讲话》（一九四九年六月十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四六九页land himself in a passive position."Address to the Preparatory Committeeof the New Political ConsultativeConference" (June 15, 1949), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 407.The imperialists and their running dogs,the Chinese reactionaries, will not resignthemselves to defeat in this land of China.They will continue to gang up against theChinese people in every possible way. Forexample, they will smuggle their agents intoChina to sow dissension and make trouble.That is certain; they will never neglect theseactivities. To take another example, theimperialists will incite the Chinesereactionaries, and even throw in their ownforces, to blockade China's ports. They willdo this as long as it is possible. Furthermore,if they still hanker after adventures, theywill send some of their troops to invade andharass China's frontiers; this, too, is notimpossible. All this we must take fully intoaccount.Ibid.*世界是在进步的，前途是光明的，这个历史的总趋势任何人也改变不了。
我们应当把世界进步的情况和光明的前途，常常向人民宣传，使人民建立起胜利的信心。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一六二页人民解放军的全体指挥员、战斗员，绝对不可以稍微松懈自己的战斗意志，任何松懈战斗意志的思想和轻敌的思想，都是错误的。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四二五页The world is progressing, the future isbright and no one can change this generaltrend of history. We should carry on constantpropaganda among the people on the facts ofworld progress and the bright future aheadso that they will build their confidence invictory."On the Chungking Negotiations"(October 17, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.IV. p. 59.The commanders and fighters of theentire Chinese People's Liberation Armyabsolutely must not relax in the least theirwill to fight; any thinking that relaxes thewill to fight and belittles the enemy iswrong."Report to the Second Plenary Sessionof the Seventh Central Committee ofthe Communist Party of China" (March5, 1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p.361.六、帝国主义和一切反动派都是纸老虎一切反动派都是纸老虎。
看起来，反动派的样子是可怕的，但是实际上并没有什么了不起的力量。
从长远的观点看问题，真正强大的力量不是属于反动派，而是属于人民。
《和美国记者安娜•路易斯•斯特朗的谈话》（一九四六年八月），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一九三页同世界上一切事物无不具有两重性（即对立统一规律）一样，帝国主义和一切反动派也有两重性，它们是真老虎又是6. IMPERIALISM ANDALL REACTIONARIESARE PAPER TIGERSAll reactionaries are paper tigers. Inappearance, the reactionaries are terrifying,but in reality they are not so powerful. Froma long-term point of view, it is not thereactionaries but the people who are reallypowerful."Talk with the American CorrespondentAnna Louise Strong" (August 1946),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 100.Just as there is not a single thing in theworld without a dual nature (this is the lawof the unity of opposites), so imperialismand all reactionaries have a dual nature -they are real tigers and paper tigers at thesame time. In past history, before they wonstate power and for some time afterwards,the slave-owning class, the feudal landlord纸老虎。
历史上奴隶主阶级、封建地主阶级和资产阶级，在它们取得统治权力以前和取得统治权力以后的一段时间内，它们是生气勃勃的，是革命者，是先进者，是真老虎。
在随后的一段时间，由于它们的对立面，奴隶阶级、农民阶级和无产阶级，逐步壮大，并同它们进行斗争，越来越厉害，它们就逐步向反面转化，化为反动派，化为落后的人们，化为纸老虎，终究被或者将被人民所推翻。
反动的、落后的、腐朽的阶级，在面临人民的决死斗争的时候，也还有这样的两重性。
一面，真老虎，吃人，成百万人成千万人地吃。
人民斗争事业处在艰难困苦的时代，出现许多弯弯曲曲的道路。
中国人民为了消灭帝国主义、封建主义和官僚资本主义在中国的统class and the bourgeoisie were vigorous,revolutionary and progressive; they werereal tigers. But with the lapse of time,because their opposites - the slave class, thepeasant class and the proletariat - grew instrength step by step, struggled against themmore and more fiercely, these ruling classeschanged step by step into the reverse,changed into reactionaries, changed intobackward people, changed into paper tigers.And eventually they were overthrown, orwill be overthrown, by the people. Thereactionary, backward, decaying classesretained this dual nature even in their lastlife-and-death struggles against the people.On the one hand, they were real tigers; theydevoured people, devoured people by themillions and tens of millions. The cause ofthe people's struggle went through a periodof difficulties and hardships, and along thepath there were many twists and turns. Todestroy the rule of imperialism, feudalismand bureaucrat-capitalism in China took theChinese people more than a hundred yearsand cost them tens of millions of lives治，花了一百多年时间，死了大概几千万人之多，才取得一九四九年的胜利。
你看，这不是活老虎，铁老虎，真老虎吗？但是，它们终究转化成了纸老虎，死老虎，豆腐老虎。
这是历史的事实。
人们难道没有看见听见过这些吗？真是成千成万！成千成万！所以，从本质上看，从长期上看，从战略上看，必须如实地把帝国主义和一切反动派，都看成纸老虎。
从这点上，建立我们的战略思想。
另一方面，它们又是活的铁的真的老虎，它们会吃人的。
从这点上，建立我们的策略思想和战术思想。
在中共中央政治局武昌会议上的讲话（一九五八年十二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一九零页《和美国记者安那•路易斯•斯特朗的谈话》一文的题解before the victory in 1949. Look! Were thesenot living tigers, iron tigers, real tigers? Butin the end they changed into paper tigers,dead tigers, bean-curd tigers. These arehistorical facts. Have people not seen orheard about these facts? There have indeedbeen thousands and tens of thousands ofthem ! Thousands and tens of thousands !Hence, imperialism and all reactionaries,looked at in essence, from a long-term pointof view, from a strategic point of view, mustbe seen for what they are - paper tigers. Onthis we should build our strategic thinking.On the other hand, they are also living tigers,iron tigers, real tigers which can devourpeople. On this we should build our tacticalthinking."Speech at the Wuchang Meeting of thePolitical Bureau of the CentralCommittee of the Communist Party ofChina" (December 1, 1958), quoted inthe explanatory note to "Talk with theAmerican Correspondent Anna LouiseStrong", Selected Works, Vol. IV, pp.98-99.*我说一切所有号称强大的反动派统统不过是纸老虎。
原因是他们脱离人民。
你看，希特勒是不是纸老虎？希特勒不是被打倒了吗？我也谈到沙皇是纸老虎，中国皇帝是纸老虎，日本帝国主义是纸老虎，你看，都倒了。
美帝国主义没有倒，还有原子弹，我看也是要倒的，也是纸老虎。
在各国共产党和工人党莫斯科会议上的讲话（一九五七年十一月十八日），《毛泽东同志论帝国主义和一切反动派都是纸老虎》人民出版社版第二四页“搬起石头打自己的脚”，这是中国人形容某些蠢人的行为的一名俗话。
各国反动派也就是这样的一批蠢人。
他们对于革命人民所作的种种迫害，归根结底，只能促进人民的更广泛更剧烈的革命。
难道沙皇和蒋介石对于革命人民的种种迫害，I have said that all the reputedly powerfulreactionaries are merely paper tigers. Thereason is that they are divorced from thepeople. Look! Was not Hitler a paper tiger?Was Hitler not overthrown? I also said thatthe tsar of Russia, the emperor of China andJapanese imperialism were all paper tigers.As we know, they were all overthrown. U.S.imperialism has not yet been overthrownand it has the atom bomb. I believe it alsowill be overthrown. It, too, is a paper tiger."Speech at the Moscow Meeting ofCommunist and Workers' Parties"(November 18, 1957)."Lifting a rock only to drop it on one'sown feet" is a Chinese folk saying todescribe the behaviour of certain fools. Thereactionaries in all countries are fools of thiskind. In the final analysis, their persecutionof the revolutionary people only serves toaccelerate the people's revolutions on abroader and more intense scale. Did not thepersecution of the revolutionary people bythe tsar of Russia and by Chiang Kai-shek不就是对于伟大的俄国革命和伟大的中国革命起了这样的促进作用吗？《在苏联最高苏维埃庆祝伟大的十月社会主义革命四十周年会议上的讲话》（一九五七年十一月六日），人民出版社版第五页美帝国主义九年来侵占了我国领土台湾，不久以前又派遣它的武装部队侵占了黎巴嫩。
美国在全世界许多国家建立了几百个军事基地。
中国领土台湾、黎巴嫩以及所有美国在外国的军事基地，都是套在美帝国主义脖子上的绞索。
不是别人而是美国人自己制造这种绞索，并把它套在自己的脖子上，而把绞索的另一端交给了中国人民、阿拉伯各国人民和全世界一切爱和平反侵略的人民。
美国侵略者在这些地方停留得越久，套在它的头上的绞索就perform this function in the great Russianand Chinese revolutions?"Speech at the Meeting of the SupremeSoviet of the U.S.S.R. in Celebration ofthe 40th Anniversary of the GreatOctoberSocialistRevolution"(November 6, 1957).U.S. imperialism invaded China's territoryof Taiwan and has occupied it for the pastnine years. A short while ago it sent itsarmed forces to invade and occupy Lebanon.The United States has set up hundreds ofmilitary bases in many countries all over theworld. China's territory of Taiwan, Lebanonand all military bases of the United States onforeign soil are so many nooses round theneck of U.S. imperialism. The nooses havebeen fashioned by the Americansthemselves and by nobody else, and it isthey themselves who have put these noosesround their own necks, handing the ends ofthe ropes to the Chinese people, the peoplesof the Arab countries and all the peoples ofthe world who love peace and opposeaggression. The longer the U.S. aggressors将越紧。
在最高国务会议上的讲话（一九五八年九月八日），一九五八年九月九日《人民日报》帝国主义者的寿命不会很长了，因为他们尽做坏事，专门扶植各国反人民的反动派，霸占大量的殖民地、半殖民地和军事基地，以原子战争威胁和平。
这样，他们就迫使全世界百分之九十以上的人正在或者将要对他们群起而攻之。
但是帝国主义者目前还是在活着，他们依然在向亚洲、非洲、拉丁美洲横行霸道。
他们在西方世界也依然在压迫他们本国的人民群众。
这种局面必需改变。
结束帝国主义主要是美帝国主义的侵略和压迫，是全世界人民的任务。
对新华社记者的谈话（一九五八年九月二十九日），《毛泽东同志论帝国主义和一切反动派都是纸老虎》人民出版社版第三一页remain in those places, the tighter the noosesround their necks will become."Speech at the Supreme StateConference" (September 8, 1958).Imperialism will not last long because italways does evil things. It persists ingrooming and supporting reactionaries in allcountries who are against the people, it hasforcibly seized many colonies andsemi-colonies and many military bases, andit threatens the peace with atomic war. Thus,forced by imperialism to do so, more than90 per cent of the people of the world arerising or will rise up in struggle against it.Yet imperialism is still alive, still runningamuck in Asia, Africa and Latin America. Inthe West imperialism is still oppressing thepeople at home. This situation must change.It is the task of the people of the wholeworld to put an end to the aggression andoppression perpetrated by imperialism, andchiefly by U.S. imperialism."Interview with a Hsinhua News Agencycorrespondent" (September 29, 1958).美帝国主义到处横行霸道，把它自己放在同全世界人民为敌的地位，使它自己越来越陷于孤立。
美帝国主义手里的原子弹、氢弹，是吓不倒一切不愿意做奴隶的人们的。
全世界人民反对美国侵略者的怒潮是不可阻挡的。
全世界人民对美帝国主义及其走狗的斗争一定会取得更加伟大的胜利。
《支持巴拿马人民反美爱国正义斗争的谈话》（一九六四年一月十二日），《全世界人民团结起来打败美国侵略者及其一切走狗》人民出版社版第九——一零页美国垄断资本集团如果坚持推行它的侵略政策和战争政策，势必有一天要被全世界人民处以绞刑。
其他美国帮凶也将是这样。
在最高国务会议上的讲话（一九五八年九月八日），一九五八年九月九日《人民日报》Riding roughshod everywhere, U.S.imperialism has made itself the enemy ofthe people of the world and has increasinglyisolated itself. Those who refuse to beenslaved will never be cowed by the atombombs and hydrogen bombs in the hands ofthe U.S. imperialists. The raging tide of thepeople of the world against the U.S.aggressors is irresistible. Their struggleagainst U.S. imperialism and its lackeys willassuredly win still greater victories."Statement Supporting the PanamanianPeople's Just Patriotic Struggle AgainstU.S. Imperialism" (January 12, 1964),People of the World, Unite and Defeatthe U.S. Aggressors and All TheirLackeys, 2nd ed., pp. 9-10.If the U.S. monopoly capitalist groupspersist in pushing their policies ofaggression and war, the day is bound tocome when they will be hanged by thepeople of the whole world. The same fateawaits the accomplices of the United States."Speech at the Supreme StateConference" (September 8, 1958).为了同敌人作斗争，我们在一个长时间内形成了一个概念，就是说，在战略上我们要藐视一切敌人，在战术上我们要重视一切敌人。
也就是说在整体上我们一定要藐视它，在一个一个的具体问题上我们一定要重视它。
如果不是在整体上藐视敌人，我们就要犯机会主义的错误。
马克思、恩格思只有两个人，那时他们就说全世界资本主义要被打倒。
但是在具体问题上，在一个一个敌人的问题上，如果我们不重视它，我们就要犯冒险主义的错误。
打仗只能一仗一仗地打，敌人只能一部分一部分地消灭。
工厂只能一个一个地盖，农民犁地只能一块一块的犁，就是吃饭也是如此。
我们在战略上藐视吃饭：这顿饭我们能够吃下去。
但是具体地吃，却是一口口Over a long period we have developedthis concept for the struggle against theenemy: strategically we should despise allour enemies, but tactically we should takethem all seriously. This also means that wemust despise the enemy with respect to thewhole, but that we must take him seriouslywith respect to each and every concretequestion. If we do not despise the enemywith respect to the whole, we shall becommitting the error of opportunism. Marxand Engels were only two individuals, andyet in those early days they already declaredthat capitalism would be overthrownthroughout the world. But in dealing withconcrete problems and particular enemieswe shall be committing the error ofadventurism unless we take them seriously.In war, battles can only be fought one byone and the enemy forces can only bedestroyed one by one. Factories can only bebuilt one by one. The peasants can onlyplough the land plot by plot. The same iseven true of eating a meal. Strategically, wetake the eating of a meal lightly - we know地吃的，你不可能把一桌酒席一口吞下去。
这叫做各个解决，军事书上叫做各个击破。
在各国共产党和工人党莫斯科会议上的讲话（一九五七年十一月十八日），《毛泽东同志论帝国主义和一切反动派都是纸老虎》人民出版社版第二五页我认为现在国际形势到了一个新的转折点。
世界上现在有两股风：东风，西风。
中国有句成语：“不是东风压倒西风，就是西风压倒东风。
”我认为目前形势的特点是东风压倒西风，也就是说，社会主义的力量对于帝国主义的力量占了压倒的优势。
在各国共产党和工人党莫斯科会议上的讲话（一九五七年十一月十八日），《毛泽东同志论帝国主义和一切反动派都是纸老虎》人民出版社版第二六页we can finish it. But actually we eat itmouthful by mouthful. It is impossible toswallow an entire banquet in one gulp. Thisis known as a piecemeal solution. In militaryparlance, it is called wiping out the enemyforces one by one."Speech at the Moscow Meeting ofCommunist and Workers' Parties"(November 18, 1957).It is my opinion that the internationalsituation has now reached a new turningpoint. There are two winds in the worldtoday, the East Wind and the West Wind.There is a Chinese saying, "Either the EastWind prevails over the West Wind or theWest Wind prevails over the East Wind." Ibelieve it is characteristic of the situationtoday that the East Wind is prevailing overthe West Wind. That is to say, the forces ofsocialism have become overwhelminglysuperior to the forces of imperialism.Ibid.七、敢于斗争，敢于胜利全世界人民团结起来，打败美国侵略者及其一切走狗！全世界人民要有勇气，敢于战斗，不怕困难，前赴后继，那末，全世界就一定是人民的。
一切魔鬼通通都会被消灭。
《支持刚果（利）人民反对美国侵略的声明》（一九六四年十一月二十八日），《全世界人民团结起来打败美国侵略者及其一切走狗》人民出版社版第一四页中国共产党依据马克思列宁主义的科学，清醒地估计了国际和国内的形势，知道一切内外反动派的进攻，不但是必须7. DARE TO STRUGGLEAND DARE TO WINPeople of the world, unite and defeat theU.S. aggressors and all their running dogs!People of the world, be courageous, dare tofight, defy difficulties and advance waveupon wave. Then the whole world willbelong to the people. Monsters of all kindsshall be destroyed."Statement Supporting the People of theCongo (L.) Against U.S. Aggression"(November 28, 1964), People of theWorld, Unite and Defeat the U.S.Aggressors and All Their Lackeys, 2nded., p. 14.The Communist Party of China, havingmade a clear-headed appraisal of theinternational and domestic situation on thebasis of the science of Marxism-Leninism,recognized that all attacks by thereactionaries at home and abroad had to bedefeated and could be defeated. When dark打败的，而且是能够打败的。
当着天空中出现乌云的时候，我们就指出：这不过是暂时的现象，黑暗即将过去，曙光即在前头。
《目前形势和我们的任务》（一九四七年十二月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二四五——一二四六页在人类历史上，凡属将要灭亡的反动势力，总是要向革命势力进行最后挣扎的，而有些革命的人们也往往在一个期间内被这种外强中干的现象所迷惑，看不出敌人快要消灭，自己快要胜利的实质。
《第二次世界大战的转折点》（一九四二年十月十二日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八八五页如果他们要打，就把他们彻底消灭。
事情就是这样，他来进攻，我们把他消灭了，他就舒服了。
消灭一点，舒服一点；clouds appeared in the sky, we pointed outthat they were only temporary, that thedarkness would soon pass and the sun breakthrough."The Present Situation and Our Tasks"(December 25, 1947), Selected MilitaryWritings, 2nd ed., p. 347.Historically, all reactionary forces on theverge of extinction invariably conduct a lastdesperate struggle against the revolutionaryforces, and some revolutionaries are apt tobe deluded for a time by this phenomenon ofoutward strength but inner weakness failingto grasp the essential fact that the enemy isnearing extinction while they themselves areapproaching victory."The Turning Point in World War II"(October 12, 1942), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 103.If they [the Kuomintang] fight, we willwipe them out completely. This is the waythings are: if they attack and we wipe themout, they will have that satisfaction; wipe消灭得多，舒服得多；彻底消灭，彻底舒服。
中国的问题是复杂的，我们的脑子也要复杂一点。
人家打来了，我们就打，打是为了争取和平。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一五八页有来犯者，只要好打，我党必定站在自卫立场上坚决彻底干净全部消灭之（不要轻易打，打则必胜），绝对不要被反动派的其势汹汹所吓倒。
《中共中央关于同国民党进行和平谈判的通知》（一九四五年八月二十六日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一五三页就我们自己的愿望说，我们连一天也不愿意打。
但是如果形势迫使我们不得不out some, some satisfaction; wipe out more,more satisfaction; wipe out the whole lot,complete satisfaction. China's problems arecomplicated, and our brains must also be alittle complicated. If they start fighting, wefight back, fight to win peace."On the Chungking Negotiations"(October 17, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.IV, p. 56.If anyone attacks us and if the conditionsare favourable for battle, we will certainlyact in self-defence to wipe him outresolutely,thoroughly,whollyandcompletely (we do not strike rashly, butwhen we do strike, we must win). We mustnever be cowed by the bluster ofreactionaries."On Peace Negotiations with theKuomintang - Circular of the CentralCommittee of the Communist Party ofChina" (August 26, 1945), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 49*As far as our own desire is concerned, wedon't want to fight even for a single day. But打的话，我们是能够一直打到底的。
《和美国记者安那•路易斯•斯特朗的谈话》（一九四六年八月），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一八九——一一九零页我们是要和平的，但是，只要美帝国主义一天不放弃它那种横蛮无理的要求和扩大侵略的阴谋，中国人民的决心就是只有同朝鲜人民一起，一直战斗下去。
这不是因为我们好战，我们愿意立即停战，剩下的问题待将来去解决。
但美帝国主义不愿意这样做，那么好罢，就打下去，美帝国主义愿意打多少年，我们也就准备跟他打多少年，一直打到美帝国主义愿意罢手的时候为止，一直打到中朝人民完全胜利的时候为止。
在中国人民政治协商会议第一届全国委员会第四次会议上的讲话（一九五三年二月七日），一九五三年二月八日《人民日报》if circumstances force us to fight, we canfight to the finish."Talk with the American CorrespondentAnna Louise Strong" (August 1946),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 97.We are for peace. But so long as U.S.imperialism refuses to give up its arrogantand unreasonable demands and its scheme toextend aggression, the only course for theChinese people is to remain determined togo on fighting side by side with the Koreanpeople. Not that we are warlike. We arewilling to stop the war at once and leave theremaining questions for later settlement. ButU.S. imperialism is not willing to do so. Allright then, let the fighting go on. Howevermany years U.S. imperialism wants to fight,we are ready to fight right up to the momentwhen it is willing to stop, right up to themoment of complete victory for the Chineseand Korean peoples."Speech at the Fourth Session of theFirst National Committee of theChinese People's Political ConsultativeConference" (February 7, 1953).我们应当在自己内部肃清一切软弱无能的思想。
一切过高地估计敌人力量和过低地估计人民力量的观点，都是错误的。
《目前形势和我们的任务》（一九四七年十二月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二五九页被压迫人民和被压迫民族，决不能把自己的解放寄托在帝国主义及其走狗的“明智”上面，而只有通过加强团结、坚持斗争，才能取得胜利。
《反对美国——吴庭艳集团侵略和屠杀越南南方人民的声明》（一九六三年八月二十九日），《全世界人民团结起来打败美国侵略者及其一切走狗》人民出版社版第六页全国性的内战不论哪一天爆发，我们都要准备好。
早一点，明天早上就打吧，我们也在准备着。
这是第一条。
现在的国We should rid our ranks of all impotentthinking. All views that overestimate thestrength of the enemy and underestimate thestrength of the people are wrong."The Present Situation and Our Tasks"(December 25, 1947), Selected Works,Vol. IV, p. 173.The oppressed peoples and nations mustnot pin their hopes for liberation on the"sensibleness" of imperialism and itslackeys. They will only triumph bystrengthening their unity and persevering intheir struggle."StatementOpposingAggressionAgainstSouthern Vietnam andSlaughter of Its People by the U.S.-NgoDinh Diem Clique" (August 29, 1963),People of the World, Unite and Defeatthe U.S. Aggressors and All TheirLackeys, 2nd ed., p. 6.No matter when this country-wide civilwar breaks out, we must be well prepared. Ifit comes early, say, tomorrow morning, weshould also be prepared. That is point one.际国内形势，有可能把内战暂时限制在局部范围，内战可能暂是若干地方性的战争。
这是第二条。
第一条我们准备着，第二条是早已如此。
总而言之，我们要有准备。
有了准备，就能恰当地应付各种复杂的局面。
《抗日战争胜利后的时局和我们的方针》（一九四五年八月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一——三页In the present international and domesticsituation it is possible that for a time thecivil war may be kept restricted in scale andlocalized. That is point two. Point one iswhat we should prepare for, point two iswhat has existed for a long time. In short,we must be prepared. Being prepared, weshall be able to deal properly with all kindsof complicated situations."The Situation and Our Policy After theVictory in the War of ResistanceAgainst Japan" (August 13, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 22.八、人民战争革命战争是群众的战争，只有动员群众才能进行战争，只有依靠群众才能进行战争。
《关心群众生活，注意工作方法》（一九三四年一月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一三一页真正的铜墙铁壁是什么？是群众，是千百万真心实意地拥护革命的群众。
这是真正的铜墙铁壁，什么力量也打不破的，完全打不破的。
反革命打不破我们，我们却要打破反革命。
在革命政府的周围团结起千百万群众来，发展我们的革命战争，我们就能消灭一切反革命，我们就能夺取全中国。
《关心群众生活，注意工作方法》（一九三四年一月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一三四页VIII. PEOPLE'S WARThe revolutionary war is a war of themasses; it can be waged only by mobilizingthe masses and relying on them."Be Concerned with the Well-Being ofthe Masses, Pay Attention to Methodsof Work" (January 27, 1934), SelectedWorks, Vol. I. p. 147.*What is a true bastion of iron? It is themasses, the millions upon millions of peoplewho genuinely and sincerely support therevolution. That is the real iron bastionwhich it is impossible, and absolutelyimpossible, for any force on earth to smash.The counter-revolution cannot smash us; onthe contrary, we shall smash it. Rallyingmillions upon millions of people round therevolutionary government and expandingour revolutionary war, we shall wipe out allcounter-revolution and take over the wholeof China.Ibid., p. 150.*战争的伟力之最深厚的根源，存在于民众之中。
日本敢于欺负我们，主要的原因在于中国民众的无组织状态。
克服了这一缺点，就把日本侵略者置于我们数万万站起来了的人民之前，使它像一匹野牛冲入火阵，我们一声唤也要把它吓一大跳，这匹野牛就非烧死不可。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五零一页帝国主义者如此欺负我们，这是需要认真对付的。
我们不但要有强大的正规军，我们还要大办民兵师。
这样，在帝国主义侵略我国的时候，就会使他们寸步难行。
对新华社记者的谈话（一九五八年九月二十九日），一九五八年十月一日《人民日报》The richest source of power to wage warlies in the masses of the people. It is mainlybecause of the unorganized state of theChinese masses that Japan dares to bully us.When this defect is remedied, then theJapanese aggressor, like a mad bull crashinginto a ring of flames, will be surrounded byhundreds of millions of our people standingupright, the mere sound of their voices willstrike terror into him, and he will be burnedto death."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 186.The imperialists are bullying us in such away that we will have to deal with themseriously. Not only must we have a powerfulregular army, we must also organizecontingents of the people's militia on a bigscale. This will make it difficult for theimperialists to move a single inch in ourcountry in the event of invasion."Interview with a Hsinhua NewsAgency Correspondent" (September 29,1958).人民的游击战争，从整个革命战争的观点看来，和主力红军是互为左右手，只有主力红军而无人民的游击战争，就像一个独臂将军。
根据地的人民条件，具体地说来，特别是对于作战说来，就是有武装起来了的人民。
敌人视为畏途，主要地也在这一点。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二二一页战争胜负，主要地决定于作战双方的军事、政治、经济、自然诸条件，这是没有问题的。
然而不仅仅如此，还决定于作战双方主观指导的能力。
军事家不能超过物质条件许可的范围外企图战争的胜利，Considering the revolutionary war as awhole, the operations of the people'sguerrillas and those of the main forces of theRed Army complement each other like aman's right arm and left arm, and if we hadonly the main forces of the Red Armywithout the people's guerrillas, we would belike a warrior with only one arm. In concreteterms, and especially with regard to militaryoperations, when we talk of the people inthe base area as a factor, we mean that wehave an armed people. That is the mainreason why the enemy is afraid to approachour base area."Problems of Strategy in China'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 238.Unquestionably, victory or defeat in waris determined mainly by the military,political, economic and natural conditionson both sides. But not by these alone. It isalso determined by each side's subjectiveability in directing the war. In his endeavour然而军事家可以而且必须在物质条件许可的范围内争取战争的胜利。
军事家活动的舞台建筑在客观物质条件的上面，然而军事家凭着这个舞台，却可以导演出许多有声有色威武雄壮的活剧来。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一七五页战争的目的不是别的，就是“保存自己，消灭敌人”（消灭敌人，就是解除敌人的武装，也就是所谓“剥夺敌人的抵抗力”，不是要完全消灭其肉体）。
古代战争，用矛用盾：矛是进攻的，为了消灭敌人；盾是防御的，为了保存自己。
直到今天的武器，还是这二者的继续。
轰炸机、机关枪、远射程炮、毒气，是矛的发展；防空to win a war, a military strategist cannotoverstep the limitations imposed by thematerial conditions; within these limitations,however, he can and must strive for victory.The stage of action for a military strategist isbuilt upon objective material conditions, buton that stage he can direct the performanceof many a drama, full of sound and colour,power and grandeur.Ibid., pp. 190-91.*The object of war is specifically "topreserve oneself and destroy the enemy" (todestroy the enemy means to disarm him or"deprive him of the power to resist", anddoes not mean to destroy every member ofhis forces physically). In ancient warfare,the spear and the shield were used, the spearto attack and destroy the enemy, and theshield to defend and preserve oneself. To thepresent day, all weapons are still anextension of the spear and the shield. Thebomber, the machine-gun, the longrange gunand poison gas are developments of thehelmet, the concrete fortification and the gas掩蔽部、钢盔、水泥工事、防毒面具，是盾的发展。
坦克，是矛盾二者结合为一的新式武器。
进攻，是消灭敌人的主要手段，但防御也是不能废的。
进攻，是直接为了消灭敌人的，同时也是为了保存自己，因为如不消灭敌人，则自己将被消灭。
防御，是直接为了保存自己的，但同时也是辅助进攻或准备转入进攻的一种手段。
退却，属于防御一类，是防御的继续；而追击，则是进攻的继续。
应该指出：战争目的中，消灭敌人是主要的，保存自己是第二位的，因为只有大量地消灭敌人，才能有效地保存自己。
因此，作为消灭敌人之主要手段的进攻是主要的，而作为消灭敌人之辅助手段和作为保存自己之一种手段的防御，是第二位的。
战争实际中，虽有许多时候以防御为主，而在其余时候以进攻spear, while the air-raid shelter, the steelmask are developrnents of the shield. Thetank is a new weapon combining thefunctions of both spear and shield. Attack isthe chief means of destroying the enemy, butdefence cannot be dispensed with. In attackthe immediate object is to destroy the enemy,but at the same time it is self-preservation,because if the enemy is not destroyed, youwill be destroyed. In defence the immediateobject is to preserve yourself, but at thesame time defence is a means ofsupplementing attack or preparing to goover to the attack. Retreat is in the categoryof defence and is a continuation of defence,while pursuit is a continuation of attack. Itshould be pointed out that destruction of theenemy is the primary object of war andself-preservation the secondary, becauseonly by destroying the enemy in largenumbers can one effectively preserveoneself. Therefore attack, the chief means ofdestroying the enemy, is primary, whiledefence, a supplementary means ofdestroying the enemy and a means ofself-preservation, is secondary. In actualwarfare the chief role is played by defencemuch of the time and by attack for the rest为主，然而通战争的全体来看，进攻仍然是主要的。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第四七一——四七二页一切军事行动的指导原则，都根据于一个基本的原则，就是：尽可能地保存自己的力量，消灭敌人的力量。
……何以解释战争中提倡勇敢牺牲呢？每一战争都须支付代价，有时是极大的代价，岂非和“保存自己”相矛盾？其实一点也不矛盾，正确点说，是相反相成的。
因为这种牺牲，不但是为了消灭敌人的必要，也是为了保存自己的必要——部分的暂时的“不保存”（牺牲或支付），是为了全体的永久的保存所必需的。
在这个基本的原则上，发生了指导整个军事行动的一系列的of the time, but if war is taken as a whole,attack remains primary."On Protracted War" (MaySelected Works, Vol. II, p. 156.1938).All the guiding principles of militaryoperations grow out of the one basicprinciple: to strive to the utmost to preserveone's own strength and destroy that of theenemy. … How then do we justify theencouragement of heroic sacrifice in war?Every war exacts a price, sometimes anextremely high one. Is this not incontradiction with "preserving oneself"? Infact, there is no contradiction at all; to put itmore exactly, sacrifice and self-preservationare both opposite and complementary toeach other. For such sacrifice is essential notonly for destroying the enemy but also forpreserving oneself - partial and temporary"non-preservation" (sacrifice, or paying theprice) is necessary for the sake of generaland permanent preservation. From this basicprinciple stems the series of principlesfrom the principles of shooting (taking coverpreserve oneself, and making full use of所谓原则，从射击原则（荫蔽身体，发扬火力，前者为了保存自己，后者为了消灭敌人）起，到战略原则止，都贯彻这个基本原则的精神。
一切技术的、战术的、战役的、战略的原则，都是执行这个基本原则时的条件。
保存自己消灭敌人的原则，是一切军事原则的根据。
《抗日游击战争的战略问题》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三九七——三九八页我们的军事原则是：（1）先打分散和孤立之敌，后打集中和强大之敌。
（2）先取小城市、中等城市和广大乡村，后取大城市。
（3）以歼灭敌人有生力量为主要目标，不以保守或夺取城市和地方为主要目标。
保守或夺取城市和地方，是歼灭敌人guiding military operations, all of which - tofire-power to destroy the enemy) to theprinciples of strategy - are permeated withthe spirit of this basic principle. Alltechnical principles and all principlesconcerning tactics, campaigns and strategyrepresent applications of this basic principle.The principle of preserving oneself anddestroying the enemy is the basis of allmilitary principles."Problems of Strategy in Guerrilla WarAgainst Japan" (May 1938), SelectedWorks, Vol. II, pp. 81-82.*Our principles of operation are:(1) Attack dispersed, isolated enemyforces first; attack concentrated, strongenemy forces later.(2) Take small and medium cities andextensive rural areas first; take big citieslater.(3) Make wiping out the enemy's effectivestrength our main objective; do not makeholding or seizing a city or place our main有生力量的结果，往往需要反复多次才能最后地保守或夺取之。
（4）每战集中绝对优势兵力（两倍、三倍、四倍、有时甚至是五倍或六倍于敌之兵力），四面包围敌人，力求全歼，不使漏网。
在特殊情况下则采用给敌以歼灭性打击的方法，即集中全力打敌正面及其一翼或两翼，求达歼灭其一部、击溃其另一部的目的，以便我军能够迅速转移兵力歼击他部敌军。
力求避免打那种得不偿失的、或得失相当的消耗战。
这样，在全体上，我们是劣势（就数量来说），但在每一个局部上，在每一个objective. Holding or seizing a city or placeis the outcome of wiping out the enemy'seffective strength, and often a city or placecan be held or seized for good only after ithas changed hands a number of times.(4) In every battle, concentrate anabsolutely superior force (two, three, fourand sometimes even five or six times theenemy's strength), encircle the enemy forcescompletely, strive to wipe them outthoroughly and do not let any escape fromthe net. In special circumstances, use themethod of dealing the enemy crushingblows, that is, concentrate all our strength tomake a frontal attack and an attack on one orboth of his flanks, with the aim of wipingout one part and routing another so that ourarmy can swiftly move its troops to smashother enemy forces. Strive to avoid battlesof attrition in which we lose more than wegain or only break even. In this way,although inferior as a whole (in terms ofnumbers), we shall be absolutely superior inevery part and every specific campaign, and具体战役上，我们是绝对的优势，这就保证了战役的胜利。
随着时间的推移，我们就将在全体上转变为优势，直到歼灭一切敌人。
（5）不打无准备之仗，不打无把握之仗，每战都应力求有准备，力求在敌我条件对比下有胜利的把握。
（6）发扬勇敢战斗、不怕牺牲、不怕疲劳和连续作战（即在短期内不休息地接连打几仗）的作风。
（7）力求在运动中歼灭敌人。
同时，注重阵地攻击战术，夺取敌人的据点和城市。
（8）在攻城问题上，一切敌人守备薄弱的据点和城市，坚决夺取之。
一切敌人有中等程度的守备、而环境又许可加以夺this ensures victory in the campaign. Astime goes on, we shall become superior as awhole and eventually wipe out all theenemy.(5) Fight no battle unprepared, fight nobattle you are not sure of winning; makeevery effort to be well prepared for eachbattle, make every effort to ensure victory inthe given set of conditions as between theenemy and ourselves.(6) Give full play to our style of fighting -courage in battle, no fear of sacrifice, nofear of fatigue, and continuous fighting (thatis, fighting successive battles in a short timewithout rest).(7) Strive to wipe out the enemy when heis on the move. At the same time, payattention to the tactics of positional attackand capture enemy fortified points andcities.(8) With regard to attacking cities,resolutely seize all enemy fortified pointsand cities which are weakly defended. Atopportune moments, seize allenemyfortified points取的据点和城市，相机夺取之。
一切敌人守备强固的据点和城市，则等候条件成熟时然后夺取之。
（9）以俘获敌人的全部武器和大部人员，补充自己。
我军人力物力的来源，主要在前线。
（10）善于利用两个战役之间的间隙，休息和整训部队。
休整的时间，一般地不要过长，尽可能不使敌人获得喘息的时间。
以上这些，就是人民解放军打败蒋介石的主要的方法。
这些方法，是人民解放军在和国内外敌人长期作战的锻炼中产生出来，并完全适合我们目前的情况的。
……我们的战略战术是建立在人民战争这个基础上的，任何反人民and cities defended with moderate strength,provided circumstances permit. As for allstrongly defended enemy fortified pointsand cities, wait till conditions are ripe andthen take them.(9) Replenish our strength with all thearms and most of the personnel capturedfrom the enemy. Our army's main sources ofmanpower and materiel are at the front.(10) Make good use of the intervalsbetween campaigns to rest, train andconsolidate our troops. Periods of rest,training and consolidation should not ingeneral be very long, and the enemy shouldso far as possible be permitted no breathingspace.These are the main methods the People'sLiberation Army has employed in defeatingChiang Kai-shek. They are the result of thetempering of the People's Liberation Armyin long years of fighting against domesticand foreign enemies and are completelysuited to our present situation.…our strategyand tactics are based on a people's war;的军队都不能利用我们的战略战术。
《目前形势和我们的任务》（一九四七年十二月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二四七——一二四八页优势而无准备，不是真正的优势，也没有主动。
懂得这一点，劣势而有准备之军，常可对敌举行不意的攻势，把优势者打败。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第四八一页army opposed to the people can use ourstrategy and tactics."The Present Situation and Our Tasks"(December 25, 1947), Selected MilitaryWritings, 2nd ed., pp. 349-50.*Without preparedness superiority is notreal superiority and there can be no initiativeeither. Having grasped this point, a forcewhich is inferior but prepared can oftendefeat a superior enemy by surprise attack."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, pp. 165-66..九、人民军队没有一个人民的军队，便没有人民的一切。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零七四页这个军队之所以有力量，是因为所有参加这个军队的人，都具有自觉的纪律；他们不是为着少数人的或狭隘集团的私利，而是为着广大人民群众的利益，为着全民族的利益，而结合，而战斗的。
紧紧地和中国人民站在一起，全心全意地为中国人民服务，就是这个军队的唯一的宗旨。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零三九页中国红军是一个执行革命的政治任务的武装集团。
特别是现在，红军决不是单纯地打仗的，它除了打仗消灭敌人军事9. THE PEOPLE'S ARMYWithout a people's army the peoplehave nothing."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, pp.296-97.This army is powerful because all itsmembers have a conscious discipline; theyhave come together and they fight not forthe private interests of a few individuals or anarrow clique, but for the interests of thebroad masses and of the whole nation. Thesole purpose of this army is to stand firmlywith the Chinese people and to serve themwhole-heartedly.Ibid., p. 264.*The Chinese Red Army is an armed bodyfor carrying out the political tasks of therevolution. Especially at present, the RedArmy should certainly not confine itself tofighting; besides fighting to destroy theenemy's military strength, it should shouldersuch important tasks as doing propagandaamong the masses, organizing the masses,力量之外，还要负担宣传群众、组织群众、武装群众、帮助群众建立革命政权以至于建立共产党的组织等项重大的任务。
红军的打仗，不是单纯地为了打仗而打仗，而是为了宣传群众、组织群众、武装群众，并帮助群众建设革命政权才去打仗的，离了对群众的宣传、组织、武装和建设革命政权等项目标，就是失去了打仗的意义，也就是失去了红军存在的意义。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第八八页人民解放军永远是一个战斗队。
就是在全国胜利以后，在国内没有消灭阶级和世界上存在着帝国主义制度的历史时期内，我们的军队还是一个战斗队。
对于这一点不能有任何的误解和动摇。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四二七页arming them, helping them to establishrevolutionary political power and setting upParty organizations. The Red Army fightsnot merely for the sake of fighting but inorder to conduct propaganda among themasses, organize them, arm them, and helpthem to establish revolutionary politicalpower. Without these objectives, fightingloses its meaning and the Red Army losesthe reason for its existence."On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in theParty" (December 1929), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 106.*The People's Liberation Army is always afighting force. Even after country-widevictory, our army will remain a fightingforce during the historical period in whichclasses have not been abolished in ourcountry and the imperialist system stillexists in the world. On this point thereshould be no misunderstanding or wavering."Report to the Second Plenary Sessionof the Seventh Central Committee ofthe Communist Party of China" (March5, 1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p.362.我们有打仗的军队，又有劳动的军队。
打仗的军队，我们有八路军新四军；这支军队也要当两支用，一方面打仗，一方面生产。
我们有了这两支军队，我们的军队有了这两套本领，再加上做群众工作一项本领，那末，我们就可以克服困难，把日本帝国主义打垮。
《组织起来》（一九四三年十一月二十九日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九三一页我们的国防将获得巩固，不允许任何帝国主义者再来侵略我们的国土。
在英勇的经过了考验的人民解放军的基础上，我们的人民武装力量必须保存和发展起来。
我们将不但有一个强大的陆军，而且有一个强大的空军和一个强大的海军。
在中国人民政治协商会议第一届全体会议上的开幕词（一九四九年九月二十一日），一九四九年九月二十二日《人民日报》We have an army for fighting as well asan army for labour. For fighting we have theEighth Route and New Fourth Armies buteven they do a dual job, warfare andproduction. With these two kinds of armies,and with a fighting army skilled in these twotasks and in mass work, we can overcomeour difficulties and defeat Japaneseimperialism."Get Organized!" (November 29, ),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 153.Our national defence will be consolidatedand no imperialist will be allowed to invadeour territory again. Our people's armedforces must be maintained and developedwith the brave and steeled People'sLiberation Army as their foundation. Wewill have not only a powerful army but alsoa powerful air force and a powerful navy."Opening address at the First PlenarySession of the Chinese People'sPolitical Consultative Conference"(September 21, 1949).我们的原则是党指挥枪，而决不容许枪指挥党。
《战争和战略问题》（一九三八年十一月六日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五三五页我全军将士必须时刻牢记，我们是伟大的人民解放军，是伟大的中国共产党领导的队伍。
只要我们时刻遵守党的指示，我们就一定胜利。
《中国人民解放军宣言》（一九四七年十月），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二三九页Our principle is that the Party commandsthe gun, and the gun must never be allowedto command the Party."Problems of War and Strategy"(November 6, 1938), Selected Works,Vol. II, p. 224.All our officers and fighters must alwaysbear in mind that we are the great People'sLiberation Army, we are the troops led bythe great Communist Party of China.Provided we constantly observe thedirectives of the Party, we are sure to win."Manifesto of the Chinese People'sLiberation Army" (October 1947),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 152.十、党委领导党委制是保证集体领导、防止个人包办的党的重要制度。
近查有些（当然不是一切）领导机关，个人包办和个人解决重要问题的习气甚为浓厚。
重要问题的解决，不是由党委会议做决定，而是由个人做决定，党委委员等于虚设。
委员间意见分歧的事亦无由解决，并且听任这些分歧长期地不加解决。
党委委员间所保持的只是形式上的一致，而不是实质上的一致。
10. LEADERSHIP OFPARTY COMMITTEESThe Party committee system is animportant Party institution for ensuringcollective leadership and preventing anyindividual from monopolizing the conductof affairs. It has recently been found that insome (of course not all) leading bodies it isthe habitual practice for one individual tomonopolize the conduct of affairs anddecide important problems. Solutions toimportant problems are decided not by Partycommittee meetings but by one individual,and membership in the Party committee hasbecome nominal. Differences of opinionamong committee members cannot beresolved and are left unresolved for a longtime. Members of the Party committeemaintain only formal, not real, unity amongthemselves. This situation must be changed.From now on, a sound system of Partycommittee meetings must be instituted in allleading bodies, from the regional bureaus of此种情形必须加以改变。
今后从中央局至地委，从前委至旅委以及军区（军分会或领导小组）、政府党组、民众团体党组、通讯社和报社党组，都必须建立健全的党委会议制度，一切重要问题（当然不是无关重要的小问题或者已经会议讨论解决只待执行的问题）均须交委员会讨论，由到会委员充分发表意见，做出明确决定，然后分别执行。
……委员会又须分别为常委会和全体会两种，不可混在一起。
此外，还须注意，集体领导和个人负责，二者不可偏废。
军队在作战时和情况需要时，首the Central Committee to the prefecturalParty committees; from the Partycommittees of the fronts to the Partycommittees of brigades and military areas(sub-commissions of the RevolutionaryMilitary Commission or leading groups);and the leading Party members' groups ingovernment bodies, people's organizationsthe news agency and the newspaper offices.All important problems (of course, not theunimportant, trivial problems, or problemswhose solutions have already been decidedafter discussion at meetings and need onlybe carried out) must be submitted to thecommittee for discussion, and the committeemembers present should express their viewsfully and reach definite decisions whichshould then be carried out by the membersconcerned. … Party committee meetingsmust be divided into two categories,standing committee meetings and plenarysessions, and the two should not be confused.Furthermore, we must take care that neithercollectiveleadershipnorpersonalresponsibility is overemphasized to the长有临机处置之权。
《关于健全党委制》（一九四八年九月二十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三四三——一三四四页党委书记要善于当“班长”。
党的委员会有一二十个人，像军队的一个班，书记好比是“班长”。
要把这个班带好，的确不容易。
目前各中央局、分局都领导很大的地区，担负很繁重的任务。
领导工作不仅要决定方针政策，还要制定正确的工作方法。
有了正确的方针政策，如果在工作方法上疏忽了，还是要发生问题。
党委要完成自己的领导任务，就必须依靠党委neglect of the other. In the army, the personin command has the right to makeemergency decisions during battle and whencircumstances require."On Strengthening the Party CommitteeSystem" (September 20, 1948),Selected Works, Vol. IV, pp. 267-68.*The secretary of a Party committee mustbe good at being a "squad leader". A Partycommittee has ten to twenty members; it islike a squad in the army, and the secretary islike the "squad leader". It is indeed not easyto lead this squad well. Each regional bureauor sub-regional bureau of the CentralCommittee now leads a vast area andshoulders very heavy responsibilities. Tolead means not only to decide general andspecific policies but also to devise correctmethods of work. Even with correct generaland specific policies, troubles may still ariseif methods of work are neglected. To fulfillits task of exercising leadership, a Partycommittee must rely on its "squadmembers" and enable them to play their这“一班人”，充分发挥他们的作用。
书记要当好“班长”，就应该很好地学习和研究。
书记、副书记如果不注意向自己的“一班人”作宣传工作和组织工作，不善于研究怎样把会议开好，就很难把这“一班人”指挥好。
如果这“一班人”动作不整齐，就休想带领千百万人去作战，去建设。
当然，书记和委员之间的关系是少数服从多数，这同班长和战士之间的关系是不一样的。
这里不过是一个比方。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四一页要把问题摆到桌面上来。
不仅“班长”parts to the full. To be a good "squadleader",the secretary should study hard andinvestigate thoroughly. A secretary or deputysecretary will find it difficult to direct his"squad" well if he does not take care to dopropaganda and organizational work amonghis own "squad members'', is not good athandling his relations with committeemembers or does not study how to runmeetings successfully. If the "squadmembers" do not march in step, they cannever expect to lead tens of millions ofpeople in fighting and construction. Ofcourse, the relation between the secretaryand the committee members is one in whichthe minority must obey the majority, so it isdifferent from the relation between a squadleader and his men. Here we speak only byway of analogy."MethodsofWorkofPartyCommittees" (March 13, 1949),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 377.*Place problems on the table. This shouldbe done not only by the "squad leader" but要把问题摆到桌面上来。
不仅“班长”要这样做，委员也要这样做。
不要在背后议论。
有了问题就开会，摆到桌面上来讨论，规定它几条，问题就解决了。
有问题而不摆到桌面上来，就会长期不得解决，甚至一拖几年。
“班长”和委员还要能互相谅解。
书记和委员，中央和各中央局，各中央局和区党委之间的谅解、支援和友谊，比什么都重要。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四一——一四四二页“互通情报”。
就是说，党委各委员之间要把彼此知道的情况互相通知、互相交流。
这对于取得共同的语言是很重要的。
有些人不是这样做，而是像老子说的by the committee members too. Do not talkbehind people's backs. Whenever problemsarise, call a meeting, place the problems onthe table for discussion, take some decisionsand the problems will be solved. If problemsexist and are not placed on the table, theywill remain unsolved for a long time andeven drag on for years. The "squad leader"and the committee members should showunderstanding in their relations with eachother. Nothing is more important thanmutualunderstanding,supportandfriendship between the secretary and thecommittee members, between the CentralCommittee and its regional bureaus andbetween the regional bureaus and the areaParty committees.Ibid., pp. 377-78."Exchange information." This means thatmembers of a Party committee should keepeach other informed and exchange views onmatters that have come to their attention.This is of great importance in achieving acommon language. Some fail to do so and,like the people described by Lao Tzu, "do“鸡犬之声相闻，老死不相往来”，结果彼此之间就缺乏共同的语言。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第四四二页不懂得和不了解的东西要问下级，不要轻易表示赞成或反对。
……我们切不可强不知以为知，要“不耻下问”，要善于倾听下面干部的意见。
先做学生，然后再做先生；先向下面干部请教，然后再下命令。
……下面干部的话，有正确的，也有不正确的，听了以后要加以分析。
对正确的意见，必须听，并且照它做。
……对下面来的错误意见也要听，根本不听是不对的；不过听了而不照它做，并且要给以批评。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第一四四二——一四四三页not visit each other all their lives, though thecrowing of their cocks and the barking oftheir dogs are within hearing of each other".The result is that they lack a commonlanguage.Ibid., p. 378.Ask your subordinates about matters youdon't understand or don't know, and do notlightlyexpressyourapprovalordisapproval.… We should never pretend toknow what we don't know, we should "notfeel ashamed to ask and learn from peoplebelow" and we should listen carefully to theviews of the cadres at the lower levels. Be apupil before you become a teacher; learnfrom the cadres at the lower levels beforeyou issue orders.… What the cadres at thelower levels say may or may not be correct,after hearing it, we must analyse it. We mustheed the correct views and act upon them.…Listen also to the mistaken views frombelow, it is wrong not to listen to them at all.Such views, however, are not to be actedupon but to be criticized.Ibid., pp. 378-79*学会“弹钢琴”。
弹钢琴要十个指头都动作，不能有的动，有的不动。
但是，十个指头同时都按下去，那也不成调子。
要产生好的音乐，十个指头的动作要有节奏，要互相配合。
党委要抓紧中心工作，又要围绕中心工作而同时开展其他方面的工作。
我们现在管的方面很多，各地、各军、各部门的工作，都要照顾到，不能只注意一部分问题而把别的丢掉。
凡是有问题的地方都要点一下，这个方法我们一定要学会。
钢琴有人弹得好，有人弹得不好，这两种人弹出来的调子差别很大。
党委的同志必须学好“弹钢琴”。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四三页要“抓紧”。
就是说，党委对主要工Learn to "play the piano". In playing thepiano all ten fingers are in motion; it won'tdo to move some fingers only and not others.But if all ten fingers press down at once,there is no melody. To produce good music,the ten fingers should move rhythmicallyand in co-ordination. A Party committeeshould keep a firm grasp on its central taskand at the same time, around the central task,it should unfold the work in other fields. Atpresent, we have to take care of many fields;we must look after the work in all the areas,armed units and departments, and not giveall our attention to a few problems, to theexclusion of others. Wherever there is aproblem, we must put our finger on it, andthis is a method we must master. Some playthe piano well and some badly, and there is agreat difference in the melodies theyproduce. Members of Party committeesmust learn to "play the piano" well.Ibid., p. 379."Grasp firmly." That is to say, the Partycommittee must not merely "grasp", but作不但一定要“抓”，而且一定要“抓紧”。
什么东西只有抓得很紧，毫不放松，才能抓住。
抓而不紧，等于不抓。
伸着巴掌，当然什么也抓不住。
就是把手握起来，但是不握紧，样子像抓，还是抓不住东西。
我们有些同志，也抓主要工作，但是抓而不紧，所以工作还是不能做好。
不抓不行，抓而不紧也不行。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四三页胸中有“数”。
这是说，对情况和问题一定要注意到它们的数量方面，要有基本的数量的分析。
任何质量都表现为一定的数量，没有数量也就没有质量。
我们有许多同志至今不懂得注意事物的数量方面，不懂得注意基本的统计、主要的百分比，不懂得注意决定事物质量的数量界must "grasp firmly", its main tasks. One canget a grip on something only when it isgrasped firmly, without the slightestslackening. Not to grasp firmly is not tograsp at all. Naturally, one cannot get a gripon something with an open hand. When thehand is clenched as if grasping somethingbut is not clenched tightly, there is still nogrip. Some of our comrades do grasp themain tasks, but their grasp is not firm and sothey cannot make a success of their work. Itwill not do to have no grasp at all, nor will itdo if the grasp is not firm.Ibid."Have a head for figures." That is to say, wemust attend to the quantitative aspect of asituation or problem and make a basicquantitativeanalysis.Everyqualitymanifests itself in a certain quantity, andwithout quantity there can be no quality. Tothis day many of our comrades still do notunderstand that they must attend to thequantitative aspect of things - the basicstatistics, the main percentages and thequantitative limits that determine the限，一切都是胸中无“数”，结果就不能不犯错误。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四三页“安民告示”。
开会要事先通知，像出安民告示一样，让大家要知道讨论什么问题，解决什么问题，并且早作准备。
有些地方开干部会，事前不准备好报告和决议草案，等开会的人到了才临时凑合，好像“兵马已到，粮草未备”，这是不好的。
如果没有准备，就不要急于开会。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四四页“精兵简政”。
讲话、演说、写文章和写决议案，都应当简明扼要。
会议也不qualities of things. They have no "figures" intheir heads and as a result cannot helpmaking mistakes.Ibid., pp. 379-80."Notice to Reassure the Public." Notice ofmeetings should be given beforehand; this islike issuing a "Notice to Reassure thePublic", so that everybody will know what isgoing to be discussed and what problems areto be solved and can make timelypreparations. In some places, meetings ofcadres are called without first preparingreports and draft resolutions, and only whenpeople have arrived for the meeting aremakeshifts improvised; this is just like thesaying, "Troops and horses have arrived, butfood and fodder are not ready", and that isno good. Don't call a meeting in a hurry ifthe preparations are not completed.Ibid., p. 380."Fewer and better troops and simpleradministration." Talks, speeches, articles andresolutions should all be concise and to the要开得太长。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四四页注意团结那些和自己意见不同的同志一道工作。
不论在地方上或部队里，都应该注意这一条。
对党外人士也是一样。
我们都是从五湖四海汇集拢来的，我们不仅要善于团结和自己意见相同的同志，而且要善于团结和自己意见不同的同志一道工作。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四四页力戒骄傲。
这对领导者是一个原则问题，也是保持团结的一个重要条件。
就是没有犯过大错误，而且工作有了很大成绩的人，也不要骄傲。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四四页划清两种界限。
首先，是革命还是反革命？ 是延安还是西安？有些人不懂得point. Meetings also should not go on toolong.IbidPay attention to uniting and working withcomrades who differ with you. This shouldbe borne in mind both in the localities and inthe army. It also applies to relations withpeople outside the Party. We have cometogether from every corner of the countryand should be good at uniting in our worknot only with comrades who hold the sameviews as we but also with those who holddifferent views.Ibid.Guard against arrogance. For anyone in aleading position, this is a matter of principleand an important condition for maintainingunity. Even those who have made no seriousmistakes and have achieved very greatsuccess in their work should not be arrogant.Ibid.Draw two lines of distinction. First,between revolution and counter-revolution,between Yen'an and Si'an. [1] Some do not要划清这种界限。
例如，他们反对官僚主义，就把延安说得好似“一无是处”，而没有把延安的官僚主义同西安的官僚主义比较一下，区别一下。
这就从根本上犯了错误。
其次，在革命的队伍中，要划清正确和错误、成绩和缺点的界限，还要弄清它们中间什么是主要的，什么是次要的。
例如，成绩究竟是三分还是七分？说少了不行，说多了也不行。
一个人的工作，究竟是三分成绩七分错误，还是七分成绩三分错误，必须有个根本的估计。
如果是七分成绩，那末就应该对他的工作基本上加以肯定。
把成绩为主说成错误为主，那understand that they must draw this line ofdistinction. For example, when they combatbureaucracy, they speak of Yen'an as though"nothing is right" there and fail to make acomparison and distinguish between thebureaucracy in Yen'an and the bureaucracyin Si'an. This is fundamentally wrong.Secondly, within the revolutionary ranks, itis necessary to make a clear distinctionbetween right and wrong, betweenachievements and shortcomings and to makeclear which of the two is primary and whichsecondary.Forinstance,dotheachievements amount to 30 per cent or to 70per cent of the whole? It will not do either tounderstate or to overstate. We must have afundamental evaluation of a person's workand establish whether his achievementsamount to 30 per cent and his mistakes to 70per cent, or vice versa. If his achievementsamount to 70 per cent of the whole, then hiswork should in the main be approved. Itwould be entirely wrong to describe work inwhich the achievements are primary as workin which the mistakes are primary. In our就完全错了。
我们看问题一定不要忘记划清这两种界限：革命和反革命的界限，成绩和缺点的界限。
记着这两条界限，事情就好办，否则就会把问题的性质弄混淆了。
自然，要把界限划好，必须经过细致的研究和分析。
我们对于每一个人和每一件事，都应该采取分析研究的态度。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四四——一四四五页在组织上，厉行集中指导下的民主生活。
其路线是：1 党的领导机关要有正确的指导路线，遇事要拿出办法，以建立领导的中枢。
2 上级机关要明了下级机关的情况和群众生活的情况，成为正确指导的客观approach to problems we must not forget todraw these two lines of distinction, betweenrevolution and counter-revolution andbetween achievements and shortcomings.We shall be able to handle things well if webear these two distinctions in mind;otherwise we shall confuse the nature of theproblems. To draw these distinctions well,careful study and analysis are of coursenecessary. Our attitude towards every personand every matter should be one of analysisand study.Ibid., p. 381.In the sphere of organization, ensuredemocracy under centralized guidance. Itshould be done on the following lines:(1) The leading bodies of the Party mustgive a correct line of guidance and findsolutions when problems arise, in order toestablish themselves as centres ofleadership.(2) The higher bodies must be familiarwith the situation in the lower bodies andwith the life of the masses so as to have an基础。
3 党的各级机关解决问题，不要太随便。
一成决议，就须坚决执行。
4 上级机关的决议，凡属重要一点的，必须迅速地传达到下级机关和党员群众中去。
……5 党的下级机关和党员群众对于上级机关的指示，要经过详尽的讨论，以求彻底地了解指示的意义，并决定对它的执行方法。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第九一页objective basis for correct guidance.(3) No Party organization at any levelshould make casual decisions in solvingproblems. Once a decision is reached, itmust be firmly carried out.(4) All decisions of any importance madeby the Party's higher bodies must bepromptly transmitted to the lower bodiesand the Party rank and file....(5) The lower bodies of the Party and theParty rank and file must discuss the higherbodies' directives in detail in order tounderstand their meaning thoroughly anddecide on the methods of carrying them out."On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in theParty" (December 1929), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 109.*十一、群众路线人民、只有人民，才是创造世界历史的动力。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零三一页群众是真正的英雄，而我们自己则往往是幼稚可笑的，不了解这一点，就不能得到起码的知识。
《“农村调查”的序言和跋》（一九四一年三月、四月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第七九零页人民群众有无限的创造力。
他们可以组织起来，向一切可以发挥自己力量的地方和部门进军，向生产的深度和广度进11. THE MASS LINEThe people, and the people alone, are themotive force in the making of world history."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 257.*childish and ignorant, and without thisunderstanding it is impossible to acquireeven the most rudimentary knowledge."Preface and Postscript to RuralSurveys" (March and April 1941),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 12.*The masses have boundless creativepower. They can organize themselves andconcentrate on places and branches of workwhere they can give full play to their energy;they can concentrate on production inbreadth and depth and create more and more军，替自己创造日益增多的福利事业。
《多余劳动力找到了出路》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》中册第五七八页目前农民运动的兴起是一个极大的问题。
很短的时间内，将有几万万农民从中国中部、南部和北部各省起来，其势如暴风骤雨，迅猛异常，无论什么大的力量都将压抑不住。
他们将冲决一切束缚他们的罗网，朝着解放的路上迅跑。
一切帝国主义、军阀、贪官污吏、土豪劣绅，都将被他们葬入坟墓。
一切革命的党派、革命的同志，都将在他们面前受他们的检验而决定弃取。
站在他们的前头领导他们呢？还是站在他们的后头指手画脚地批评他们呢？还是站在他们的对面反对他们呢？每个中国人对于这三项都有选择的undertakings for their own well-being.Introductory note to "Surplus LabourHas Found a Way Out" (1955), TheSocialistUpsurgeinChina'sCountryside, Chinese ed., Vol. II.The present upsurge of the peasantmovement is a colossal event. In a veryshort time, in China's central, southern andnorthern provinces, several hundred millionpeasants will rise like a mighty storm, like ahurricane, a force so swift and violent thatno power, however great, will be able tohold it back. They will smash all thetrammels that bind them and rush forwardalong the road to liberation. They will sweepall the imperialists, warlords, corruptofficials, local tyrants and evil gentry intotheir graves. Every revolutionary party andevery revolutionary comrade will be put tothe test, to be accepted or rejected as theydecide. There are three alternatives. Tomarch at their head and lead them? To trailbehind them, gesticulating and criticizing?Or to stand in their way and oppose them?自由，不过时局将强迫你迅速地选择罢了。
《湖南农民运动考察报告》（一九二七年三月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一三——一四页目前农村中合作化的社会改革的高潮，有些地方已经到来，全国也即将到来。
这是五亿多农村人口的大规模的社会主义的革命运动，带有极其伟大的世界意义。
我们应当积极地热情地有计划地去领导这个运动，而不是用各种办法去拉它向后退。
运动中免不了要出些偏差，这是可以理解的，也是不难纠正的。
干部中和农民中存在的缺点或错误，只要我们积极地去帮助他们，就会克服或纠正。
《关于农业合作化问题》（一九五五年七月三十日），人民出版社 版第一——第二页Every Chinese is free to choose, but eventswill force you to make the choice quickly."Report on an Investigation of thePeasant Movement in Hunan" (March1927), Selected Works, Vol. I, pp.23-24.*The high tide of social transformation inthe countryside, the high tide ofco-operation, has already reached someplaces and will soon sweep over the wholecountry. It is a vast socialist revolutionarymovement involving a rural population ofmore than 500 million, and it has extremelygreat and world-wide significance. Weshould give this movement active,enthusiastic and systematic leadership, andnot drag it back by one means or another.Some errors are unavoidable in the process;this is understandable, and they will not behard to correct. Shortcomings or mistakesfound among the cadres and the peasantscan be remedied or overcome provided wegive them positive help."On the Question of AgriculturalCo-operation" (July 31, 1955), 3rded., p. 1.*群众中蕴藏了一种极大的社会主义的积极性。
那些在革命时期还只会按照常规走路的人们，对于这种积极性一概看不见。
他们是瞎子，在他们面前出现的只是一片黑暗。
他们有时简直要闹到颠倒是非、混淆黑白的程度。
这种人难道我们遇见得还少吗？这些只会循着常规走路的人们，老是对于人民的积极性估计过低。
一种新事物出现，他们总是不赞成，首先反对一气。
随后就是认输，做一点自我批评。
第二种新事物出现，他们又按照这两种态度循环一遍。
以后各种新事物出现，都按照这个格式处理。
这种人老是被动，在紧要的关头老是止步不前，老是需要别人在他的背上击一猛掌，才肯向前跨进一步。
《这个乡两年就合作化了》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》中册第五八七——五八八页The masses have a potentiallyinexhaustible enthusiasm for socialism.Those who can only follow the old routinein a revolutionary period are utterlyincapable of seeing this enthusiasm. Theyare blind and all is dark ahead of them. Attimes they go so far as to confound right andwrong and turn things upside down. Haven'twe come across enough persons of this type?Those who simply follow the old routineinvariably underestimate the people'senthusiasm. Let something new appear andthey always disapprove and rush to opposeit. Afterwards, they have to admit defeat anddo a little self-criticism. But the next timesomething new appears, they go through thesame process all over again. This is theirpattern of behaviour in regard to anythingand everything new. Such people are alwayspassive, always fail to move forward at thecritical moment, and always have to begiven a shove in the back before they movea step.《Introductory note to "This TownshipWent Co-operative in Two Years"(1955), The Socialist Upsurge inChina's Countryside, Chinese ed., Vol.II.我党二十几年来，天天做群众工作，近十几年来，天天讲群众路线。
我们历来主张革命要依靠人民群众，大家动手，反对只依靠少数人发号施令。
但是在有些同志的工作中间，群众路线仍然不能贯彻，他们还是只靠少数人冷冷清清地做工作。
其原因之一，就是他们做一件事情，总不愿意向被领导的人讲清楚，不懂得发挥被领导者的积极性和创造力。
他们主观上也要大家动手动脚去做，但是不让大家知道要做的是怎么一回事，应当怎样做法，这样，大家怎么能动起来，事情怎么能够办好？要解决这个问题，根本上当然要从思想上进行群众路线的教育，同时也要教给For over twenty years our Party hascarried on mass work every day, and for thepast dozen years it has talked about the massline every day. We have always maintainedthat the revolution must rely on the massesof the people, on everybody's taking a hand,and have opposed relying merely on a fewpersons issuing orders. The mass line,however, is still not being thoroughlycarried out in the work of some comrades;they still rely solely on a handful of peopleworking in solitude. One reason is that,whatever they do, they are always reluctantto explain it to the people they lead and thatthey do not understand why or how to giveplay to the initiative and creative energy ofthose they lead. Subjectively, they too wanteveryone to take a hand in the work, butthey do not let other people know what is tobe done or how to do it. That being the case,how can everyone be expected to getmoving and how can anything be done well?To solve this problem the basic thing is, ofcourse, to carry out ideological education onthe mass line, but at the same time we must同志们许多具体办法。
《对晋绥日报编辑人员的谈话》（一九四八年四月二日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一七——一三一八页二十四年的经验告诉我们，凡属正确的任务、政策和工作作风，都是和当时当地的群众要求相适合，都是联系群众的；凡属错误的任务、政策和工作作风，都是和当时当地的群众要求不相适合，都是脱离群众的。
教条主义、经验主义、命令主义、尾巴主义、宗派主义、官僚主义、骄傲自大的工作态度等项弊病之所以一定不好，一定要不得，如果什么人有了这类弊病一定要改正，就是因为它们脱离群众。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九六页要联系群众，就要按照群众的需要和teach these comradesmethods of work.manyconcrete"A Talk to the Editorial Staff of theShansi-Suiyuan Daily" (April 2, 1948),Selected Works, Vol. IV, pp. 241-42.*Twenty-four years of experience tell usthat the right task, policy and style of workinvariably conform with the demands of themasses at a given time and place andinvariably strengthen our ties with themasses, and the wrong task, policy and styleof work invariably disagree with thedemands of the masses at a given time andplace and invariably alienate us from themasses. The reason why such evils asdogmatism, empiricism, commandism,tailism, sectarianism, bureaucracy and anarrogant attitude in work are definitelyharmful and intolerable, and why anyonesuffering from these maladies mustovercome them, is that they alienate us fromthe masses."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 315.To link oneself with the masses, one mustact in accordance with the needs and wishes自愿。
一切为群众的工作都要从群众的需要出发，而不是从任何良好的个人愿望出发。
有许多时候，群众在客观上虽然有了某种改革的需要，但在他们的主观上还没有这种觉悟，群众还没有决心，还不愿实行改革，我们就要耐心地等待；直到经过我们的工作，群众的多数有了觉悟，有了决心，自愿实行改革，才去实行这种改革，否则就会脱离群众。
凡是需要群众参加的工作，如果没有群众的自觉和自愿，就会流于徒有形式而失败。
……这里是两条原则：一条是群众的实际上的需要，而不是我们脑子里头幻想出来的需要；一条是群众的自愿，由群众自己下决心，而不是由我们代替群众下决心。
《文化工作中的统一战线》（一九四四年十月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零一零——一零一一页of the masses. All work done for the massesmust start from their needs and not from thedesire of any individual, howeverwell-intentioned. It often happens thatobjectively the masses need a certain change,but subjectively they are not yet consciousof the need, not yet willing or determined tomake the change. In such cases, we shouldwait patiently. We should not make thechange until, through our work, most of themasses have become conscious of the needand are willing and determined to carry itout. Otherwise we shall isolate ourselvesfrom the masses. Unless they are consciousand willing, any kind of work that requirestheir participation will turn out to be a mereformality and will fail.… There are twoprinciples here: one is the actual needs ofthe masses rather than what we fancy theyneed, and the other is the wishes of themasses, who must make up their own mindsinstead of our making up their minds forthem."The United Front in Cultural Work"(October 30, 1944), Selected Works, Vol.III, pp. 236-37.*我们的代表大会应该号召全党提起警觉，注意每一个工作环节上的每一个同志，不要让他脱离群众。
教育每一个同志热爱人民群众，细心地倾听群众的呼声；每到一地，就和那里的群众打成一片，不是高踞于群众之上，而是深入于群众之中；根据群众的觉悟程度，去启发和提高群众的觉悟，在群众出于内心自愿的原则之下，帮助群众逐步地组织起来，逐步地展开为当时当地内外环境所许可的一切必要的斗争。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九六页当着群众还不觉悟的时候，我们要进攻，那是冒险主义。
群众不愿干的事，我们硬要领导他们去干，其结果必然失败。
当着群众要求前进的时候，我们不前进，Our congress should call upon the wholeParty to be vigilant and to see that nocomrade at any post is divorced from themasses. It should teach every comrade tolove the people and listen attentively to thevoice of the masses; to identify himself withthe masses wherever he goes and, instead ofstanding above them, to immerse himselfamong them; and, according to their presentlevel, to awaken them or raise their politicalconsciousness and help them gradually toorganize themselves voluntarily and to setgoing all essential struggles permitted by theinternal and external circumstances of thegiven time and place."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, pp.315-I6.If we tried to go on the offensive whenthe masses are not yet awakened, that wouldbe adventurism. If we insisted on leading themasses to do anything against their will, wewould certainly fail. If we did not advancewhen the masses demand advance, that那是右倾机会主义。
《对晋绥日报编辑人员的谈话》（一九四八年四月二日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一九页在一切工作中，命令主义是错误的，因为它超过群众的觉悟程度，违反了群众的自愿原则，害了急性病。
我们的同志不要以为自己了解了的东西，广大群众也和自己一样都了解了。
群众是否已经了解并且是否愿意行动起来，要到群众中去考察才会知道。
如果我们这样做，就可以避免命令主义。
在一切工作中，尾巴主义也是错误的，因为它落后于群众的觉悟程度，违反了领导群众前进一步的原则，害了慢性病。
我们的同志不要以为自己还不了解的东西，群众也一概不了解。
许多时候，广大群众跑到我们的前头去了，迫切地需would be Right opportunism."A Talk to the Editorial Staff of theShansi-Suiyuan Daily" (April 2, I948),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 243.Commandism is wrong in any type ofwork, because in overstepping the level ofpolitical consciousness of the masses andviolating the principle of voluntary massaction it reflects the disease of impetuosity.Our comrades must not assume thateverything they themselves understand isunderstood by the masses. Whether themasses understand it and are ready to takeaction can be discovered only by going intotheir midst and making investigations. If wedo so, we can avoid commandism. Tailismin any type of work is also wrong, becausein falling below the level of politicalconsciousness of the masses and violatingthe principle of leading the masses forwardit reflects the disease of dilatoriness. Ourcomrades must not assume that the masseshave no understanding of what theythemselves do not yet understand. It often要前进一步了，我们的同志不能做广大群众的领导者，却反映了一部分落后分子的意见，并且将这种落后分子的意见误认为广大群众的意见，做了落后分子的尾巴。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九六——一零九七页从群众中集中起来又到群众中坚持下去，以形成正确的领导意见，这是基本的领导方法。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零二页在我党的一切实际工作中，凡属正确的领导，必须是从群众中来，到群众中去。
这就是说，将群众的意见（分散的无系统的意见）集中起来（经过研究，化为集中happens that the masses outstrip us and areeager to advance a step and that neverthelessour comrades fail to act as leaders of themasses and tail behind certain backwardelements, reflecting their views and,moreover, mistaking them for those of thebroad masses."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 316.*Take the ideas of the masses andconcentrate them, then go to the masses,persevere in the ideas and carry themthrough, so as to form correct ideas ofleadership - such is the basic method ofleadership."Some Questions Concerning Methodsof Leadership" (June 1, 1943), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 120.In all the practical work of our Party, allcorrect leadership is necessarily "from themasses, to the masses". This means: take theideas of the masses (scattered andunsystematic ideas) and concentrate them(through study turn them into concentrated的系统的意见），又到群众中去作宣传解释，化为群众的意见，使群众坚持下去，见之于行动，并在群众行动中考验这些意见是否正确。
然后再从群众中集中起来，再到群众中坚持下去。
如此无限循环，一次比一次的更正确、更生动、更丰富。
这就是马克思主义的认识论。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零一页我们应该走到群众中间去，向群众学习，把他们的经验综合起来，成为更好的有条理的道理和办法，然后再告诉群众（宣传），并号召群众实行起来，解决群众的问题，使群众得到解放和幸福。
《组织起来》（一九四三年十一月二十九日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九三六页and systematic ideas), then go to themasses and propagate and explain theseideas until the masses embrace them as theirown, hold fast to them and translate theminto action, and test the correctness of theseideas in such action. Then once againconcentrate ideas from the masses and onceagain go to the masses so that the ideas arepersevered in and carried through. And soon, over and over again in an endless spiral,with the ideas becoming more correct, morevital and richer each time. Such is theMarxist theory of knowledge.Ibid., p. 119.We should go to the masses and learnfrom them, synthesize their experience intobetter, articulated principles and methods,then do propaganda among the masses, andcall upon them to put these principles andmethods into practice so as to solve theirproblems and help them achieve liberationand happiness.。
"Get Organized!" (November 29, 1943),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 158.在我们一些地方的领导机关中，有的人认为，党的政策只要领导人知道就行，不需要让群众知道。
这是我们的有些工作不能做好的基本原因之一。
《对晋绥日报编辑人员的谈话》（一九四八年四月二日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一七页在任何群众运动中，群众积极拥护的有多少，反对的有多少，处于中间状态的有多少，这些都必须有个基本的调查，基本的分析，不可无根据地、主观地决定问题。
《党委会的工作方法》（一九四九年三月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四四页任何有群众的地方，大致都有比较积极的、中间状态的和比较落后的三部分人。
故领导者必须善于团结少数积极分子There are people in our leading organs insome places who think that it is enough forthe leaders alone to know the Party'spolicies and that there is no need to let themasses know them. This is one of the basicreasons why some of our work cannot bedone well."A Talk to the Editorial Staff of theShansi-Suiyuan Daily" (April 2, 1948),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 241.In all mass movements we must make abasic investigation and analysis of thenumber of active supporters, opponents andneutrals and must not decide problemssubjectively and without basis."MethodsofWorkofPartyCommittees" (March 13, 1949),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 380.The masses in any given place aregenerally composed of three parts, therelatively active, the intermediate and therelatively backward. The leaders musttherefore be skilled in uniting the smallnumber of active elements around theleadership and must rely on them to raise the作为领导的骨干，并凭借这批骨干去提高中间分子，争取落后分子。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零零页善于把党的政策变为群众的行动，善于使我们的每一个运动，每一个斗争，不但领导干部懂得，而且广大的群众都能懂得，都能掌握，这是一项马克思列宁主义的领导艺术。
我们的工作犯不犯错误，其界限也在这里。
《对晋绥日报编辑人员的谈话》（一九四八年四月二日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一八——一三一九页只有领导骨干的积极性，而无广大群众的积极性相结合，便将成为少数人的空忙。
但如果只有广大群众的积极性，而无level of the intermediate elements and towin over the backward elements."Some Questions Concerning Methodsof Leadership" (June 1, 1943), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 118.To be good at translating the Party'spolicy into action of the masses, to be goodat getting not only the leading cadres butalso the broad masses to understand andmaster every movement and every strugglewe launch - this is an art of Marxist-Leninistleadership. It is also the dividing line thatdetermines whether or not we makemistakes in our work."A Talk to the Editorial Staff of theShansi-Suiyuan Daily" (April 2, 1948),Selected Works, Vol. IV, pp 242-43.However active the leading group may be,its activity will amount to fruitless effort bya handful of people unless combined withthe activity of the masses. On the other hand,if the masses alone are active without astrong leading group to organize their有力的领导骨干去恰当地组织群众的积极性，则群众积极性既不可能持久，也不可能走向正确的方向和提到高级的程度。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零零零页群众生产，群众利益，群众经验，群众情绪，这些都是领导干部们应时刻注意的。
为中直军直生产展览会题词，一九四三年十一月二十四日延安《解放日报》我们应该深刻地注意群众生活的问题，从土地、劳动问题，到柴米油盐问题。
……一切这些群众生活上的问题，都activity properly, such activity cannot besustained for long, or carried forward in theright direction, or raised to a high level."Some Questions Concerning Methods ofLeadership" (June 1, 1943), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 118.Production by the masses, the interests ofthe masses, the experiences and feelings ofthe masses - to these the leading cadresshould pay constant attention.Inscription for a production exhibitionsponsored by organizations directlyunder the Central Committee of theParty and the General Headquarters ofthe Eighth Route Army, LiberationDaily of Yen'an, November 24, 1943.We should pay close attention to thewell-being of the masses, from the problemsof land and labour to those of fuel, rice,cooking oil and salt.… All such problemsconcerning the well-being of the massesshould be placed on our agenda. We shoulddiscuss them, adopt and carry out decisions应该把它提到自己的议事日程上。
应该讨论，应该决定，应该实行，应该检查。
要使广大群众认识我们是代表他们的利益的，是和他们呼吸相通的。
要使他们从这些事情出发，了解我们提出来的更高的任务，革命战争的任务、拥护革命，把革命推到全国去，接受我们的政治号召，为革命的胜利斗争到底。
《关心群众生活，注意工作方法》（一九三四年一月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一三三页and check up on the results. We should helpthe masses to realize that we represent theirinterests, that our lives are intimately boundup with theirs. We should help them toproceed from these things to anunderstanding of the higher tasks which wehave put forward, the tasks of therevolutionary war, so that they will supportthe revolution and spread it throughout thecountry, respond to our political appeals andfight to the end for victory in the revolution."Be Concerned with the Well-Being ofthe Masses, Pay Attention to Methodsof Work" (January 27, 1934), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 149.*十二、政治工作那时（指一九二四——一九二七年第一次国内革命战争时期——编者）军队设立了党代表和政治部，这种制度是中国历史上没有的，靠了这种制度使军队一新其面目。
一九二七年以后的红军以至今日的八路军，是继承了这种制度而加以发展的。
《和英国记者贝特兰的谈话》（一九五七年十月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三七零页在人民战争的基础上，在军队和人民团结一致、指挥员和战斗员团结一致以及瓦解敌军等项原则的基础上，人民解放军建立了自己的强有力的革命的政治工作，这是我们战胜敌人的重大因素。
《目前形势和我们的任务》（一九四七年十二月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二四八页12. POLITICAL WORKThe system of Party representatives andof political departments, adopted for the firsttime in China, entirely changed thecomplexion of these armed forces. [2] TheRed Army, which was founded in 1927, andthe Eighth Route Army of today haveinherited this system and developed it."Interview with the British JournalistJames Bertram" (October 25, 1937),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 54.The People's Liberation Army hasdeveloped its vigorous revolutionarypolitical work, which is an important factorin winning victory over the enemy, on thebasis of a people's war and of the principlesof unity between army and people, of unitybetween commanders and fighters and ofdisintegrating the enemy troops."The Present Situation and Our Tasks"(December 25, 1947), SelectedMilitaryWritings, 2nd ed., p. 350.这个军队形成了为人民战争所必需的一系列的政治工作，其任务是为团结我军，团结友军，团结人民，瓦解敌军和保证战斗胜利而斗争。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），（毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零四零页政治工作是一切经济工作的生命线。
在社会经济制度发生根本变革的时期，尤其是这样。
《严重的教训》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第一二三页红军所以艰难奋战而不溃散，“支部建在连上”是一个重要原因。
《井冈山的斗争》（一九二八年十一月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第六八页This army has built up a system ofpolitical work which is essential for thepeople's war and is aimed at promotingunity in its own ranks, unity with thefriendly armies and unity with the people,and at disintegrating the enemy forces andensuring victory in battle."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 265.*Political work is the life-blood of alleconomic work. This is particularly true at atime when the social and economic systemis undergoing fundamental change.Introductory note to "A Serious Lesson"(1955), The Socialist Upsurge inChina's Countryside, Chinese ed., Vol.I."The Party branch is organized on acompany basis"; this is an important reasonwhy the Red Army has been able to carry onsuch arduous fighting without falling apart."The Struggle in the ChingkangMountains" (November 25, 1928),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 84.八路军的政治工作的基本原则有三个，即：第一、官兵一致的原则，这就是在军队中肃清封建主义，废除打骂制度，建立自觉纪律，实行同甘共苦的生活，因此全军是团结一致的。
第二、军民一致的原则，这就是秋毫无犯的民众纪律，宣传、组织和武装民众，减轻民众的经济负担，打击危害军民的汉奸卖国贼，因此军民团结一致，到处得到人民的欢迎。
第三、瓦解敌军和宽待俘虏的原则。
我们的胜利不但是依靠我军的作战，而且依靠敌军的瓦解。
《和英国记者贝特兰的谈话》（一九三七年十月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三六九页The political work of the Eighth RouteArmy is guided by three basic principles.First, the principle of unity between officersand men, which means eradicating feudalpractices in the army, prohibiting beatingand abuse, building up a consciousdiscipline, and sharing weal and woe - as aresult of which the entire army is closelyunited. Second, the principle of unitybetween the army and the people, whichmeans maintaining a discipline that forbidsthe slightest violation of the people'sinterests, conducting propaganda among themasses, organizing and arming them,lightening their economic burdens andsuppressing the traitors and collaboratorswho do harm to the army and the people - asa result of which the army is closely unitedwith the people and welcomed everywhere.Third, the principle of disintegrating theenemy troops and giving lenient treatment toprisoners of war. Our victory depends notonly upon our military operations but alsoupon the disintegration of the enemy troops."Interview with the British JournalistJames Bertram" (October 25, 1937),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 53.*我们的军队必须在军民关系上、军政关系上、军党关系上、官兵关系上、军事工作和政治工作关系上、干部相互关系上，遵守正确的原则，决不可犯军阀主义的毛病。
官长必须爱护士兵，不能漠不关心，不能采取肉刑；军队必须爱护人民，不能损害人民利益；军队必须尊重政府，尊重党，不能闹独立性。
《组织起来》（一九四三年十一月二十九日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九三七页对敌军、伪军、反共军的俘虏，除为群众所痛恶、非杀不可而又经过上级批准的人以外，应一律采取释放的政策。
其中被迫参加、多少带有革命性的分子，应大Our troops must observe the correctprinciples that govern relations between thearmy and the people, between the army andthe government, between the army and theParty, between officers and men, andbetween military work and political work,and relations among the cadres, and mustnever commit the errors of warlordism.Officers must cherish their men and mustnot be indifferent to their well-being orresort to corporal punishment; the armymust cherish the people and never encroachupon their interests; the army must respectthe government and the Party and never"assert independence".Get Organized!" (November 29, 1943),Selected Works, Vol. III, pp. 158-59.Our policy towards prisoners capturedfromtheJapanese,puppetoranti-Communist troops is to set them all free,except for those who have incurred the bitterhatred of the masses and must receivecapital punishment and whose deathsentence has been approved by the higherauthorities. Among the prisoners, those whowere coerced into joining the reactionary批地争取为我军服务，其他则一律释放；如其再来，则再捉再放；不加侮辱，不搜财物，不要自首，一律以诚恳和气的态度对待之。
不论他们如何反动，均取这种政策。
这对于孤立反动营垒，是非常有效的。
《论政策》（一九四零年十二月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第七六四——七六五页武器是战争的重要的因素，但不是决定的因素，决定的因素是人不是物。
力量对比不但是军力和经济力的对比，而且是人力和人心的对比。
军力和经济力是要人去掌握的。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第四五九页forces but who are more or less inclinedtowards the revolution should be won overin large numbers to work for our army. Therest should be released and, if they fight usand are captured again, should again be setfree. We should not insult them, take awaytheir personal effects or try to exactrecantations from them, but withoutexception should treat them sincerely andkindly. This should be our policy, howeverreactionary they may be. It is a veryeffective way of isolating the camp ofreaction."On Policy" (December 25, 1940),Selected Works, Vol. II, pp. 446-47.*Weapons are an important factor in war,but not the decisive factor; it is people, notthings, that are decisive. The contest ofstrength is not only a contest of military andeconomic power, but also a contest ofhuman power and morale. Military andeconomic power is necessarily wielded bypeople."On Protracted War" (May 1958),Selected Works, Vol. II, pp. 143-44.原子弹是美国反动派用来吓人的一只纸老虎，看样子可怕，实际上并不可怕。
当然，原子弹是一种大规模屠杀的武器，但是决定战争胜败的是人民，而不是一两件新式武器。
《和美国记者安娜•路易斯•斯特朗的谈话》（一九四六年八月），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一九二页军队的基础在士兵，没有进步的政治精神贯注于军队之中，没有进步的政治工作去执行这种贯注，就不能达到真正的官长和士兵的一致，就不能激发官兵最大限度的抗战热忱，一切技术和战术就不能得着最好的基础去发挥它们应有的效力。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五零零页单纯军事观点在红军一部分同志中The atom bomb is a paper tiger which theU.S. reactionaries use to scare people. Itlooks terrible, but in fact it isn't. Of course,the atom bomb is a weapon of massslaughter, but the outcome of a war isdecided by the people, not by one or twonew types of weapon."Talk with the American CorrespondentAnna Louise Strong" (August 1946),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 100.Soldiers are the foundation of an army;unless they are imbued with a progressivepolitical spirit, and unless such a spirit isfostered through progressive political work,it will be impossible to achieve genuineunity between officers and men, impossibleto arouse their enthusiasm for the War ofResistance to the full, and impossible toprovide an excellent basis for the mosteffective use of all our technical equipmentand tactics."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 185.*The purely military viewpoint is veryhighly developed among a number of非常发展。
其表现如：（一）认为军事政治二者是对立的，不承认军事只是完成政治任务的工具之一。
甚至还有说“军事好，政治自然会好，军事不好，政治也不会好”的，则更进一步认为军事领导政治了。
……《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第八七——八八页掌握思想教育，是团结全党进行伟大政治斗争的中心环节。
如果这个任务不解决，党的一切政治任务是不能完成的。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九五页在知识分子和青年学生中间，最近一itself as follows:comrades in the RedArmy. It manifests1. These comrades regard military affairsand politics as opposed to each other andrefuse to recognize that military affairs areonly one means of accomplishing politicaltasks. Some even say, "If you are goodmilitarily, naturally you are good politically;if you are not good militarily, you cannot beany good politically" - this is to go a stepfurther and give military affairs a leadingposition over politics.…"On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in theParty" (December 1929), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, pp. 105-06.Ideological education is the key link to begrasped in uniting the whole Party for greatpolitical struggles. Unless this is done, theParty cannot accomplish any of its politicaltasks."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 315.*Recently there has been a falling off inideological and political work among个时期，思想政治工作减弱了，出现了一些偏向。
在一些人的眼中，好像什么政治，什么祖国的前途，人类的理想，都没有关心的必要。
好像马克思主义行时了一阵，现在就不那么行时了。
针对着这种情况，现在需要加强思想政治工作。
不论是知识分子，还是青年学生，都应该努力学习。
除了学习专业之外，在思想上要有所进步，政治上也要有所进步，这就需要学习马克思主义，学习时事政治。
没有正确的政治观点，就等于没有灵魂。
……思想政治工作，各个部门都要负责任。
共产党应该管，青年团应该管，政府主管部门应该管，学校的校长教师更应该管。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九二八年十一月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第六六页students and intellectuals, and someunhealthy tendencies have appeared. Somepeople seem to think that there is no longerany need to concern oneself with politics orwith the future of the motherland and theideals of mankind. It seems as if Marxismwas once all the rage but is currently not somuch in fashion. To counter thesetendencies, we must strengthen ourideological and political work. Both studentsand intellectuals should study hard. Inaddition to the study of their specializedsubjects, they must make progress bothideologically and politically, which meansthat they should study Marxism, currentevents and politics. Not to have a correctpolitical point of view is like having nosou.… All departments and organizationsshould shoulder their responsibilities inideological and political work. This appliesto the Communist Party, the Youth League,government departments in charge of thiswork, and especially to heads of educationalinstitutions and teachers."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957); 1st pocket ed., pp.43-44.*经过政治教育，红军士兵都有了阶级觉悟，都有了分配土地、建立政权和武装工农等项常识，都知道是为了自己和工农阶级而作战。
因此，他们能在艰苦的斗争中不出怨言。
连、营、团都有了士兵会，代表士兵利益，并做政治工作和民众工作。
《井冈山的斗争》（一九二八年十一月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第六六页由于诉苦（诉旧社会和反动派所给予劳动人民之苦）和三查（查阶级、查工作、查斗志）运动的正确进行，大大提高了全军指战员为解放被剥削的劳动大众，为全After receiving political education, theRed Army soldiers have all becomeclass-conscious and learned the essentials ofdistributing land, setting up political power,arming the workers and peasants, etc., andthey all know they are fighting forthemselves, for the working class and thepeasantry. Hence they can endure thehardships of the bitter struggle withoutcomplaint. Each company, battalion orregiment has its soldiers' committee whichrepresents the interests of the soldiers andcarries on political and mass work."The Struggle in the ChingkangMountains" (November 25, 1928),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 81.*The correct unfolding of the movementfor pouring out grievances (the wrongs doneto the labouring people by the old societyand by the reactionaries) and the threecheck-ups (on class origin, performance ofduty and will to fight) greatly heightened thepolitical consciousness of commanders andfighters throughout the army in the fight for国的土地改革，为消灭人民公敌蒋介石匪帮而战的觉悟性；同时就大大加强了全体指战员在共产党领导之下的坚强的团结。
在这个基础上，部队的纯洁性提高了，纪律整顿了，群众性的练兵运动开展了，完全有领导地有秩序地在部队中进行的政治、经济、军事三方面的民主发扬了。
这样就使部队万众一心，大家想办法，大家出力量，不怕牺牲，克服物质条件的困难，群威群胆，英勇杀敌。
这样的军队，将是无敌于天下的。
《评西北大捷兼论解放军的新式整军运动》（一九四八年三月七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二九二页the emancipation of the exploited workingmasses, for nationwide land reform and forthe destruction of the common enemy of thepeople, the Chiang Kai-shek bandit gang. Italso greatly strengthened the firm unity ofall commanders and fighters under theleadership of the Communist Party. On thisbasis, the army achieved greater purity in itsranks, strengthened discipline, unfolded amass movement for training, and furtherdeveloped its political, economic andmilitary democracy in a completely well-ledand orderly way. Thus the army has becomeunited as one man, with everybodycontributing his ideas and his strength, anarmy fearless of sacrifice and capable ofovercoming material difficulties, whichdisplays mass heroism and daring indestroying the enemy. Such an army will beinvincible."On the Great Victory in the Northwestand on the New Type of IdeologicalEducation Movement in the LiberationArmy" (March 7, 1948), SelectedMilitary Writings, 2nd ed., pp. 358-59.差不多一切人民解放军的部队，在最近几个月内，都利用了战争的空隙，实行了大规模的整训。
这种整训，是完全有领导地和有秩序地采用民主方法进行的。
由此，激发了广大的指挥员和战斗员群众的革命热情，明确地认识了战争的目的，清除了存在于军队中的若干不正确的思想上的倾向和不良现象，教育了干部和战士，极大地提高了战斗力。
这种民主的群众性的新式的整军运动，今后必须继续进行。
《在晋绥干部会议上的讲话》（一九四八年四月一日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一零——一三一一页抗大的教育方针是：坚定正确的政治方向，艰苦朴素的工作作风，灵活机动的In the last few months almost all thePeople's Liberation Army has made use ofthe intervals between battles for large-scaletraining and consolidation. This has beencarried out in a fully guided, orderly anddemocratic way. It has therefore aroused therevolutionary fervour of the great masses ofcommanders and fighters, enabled themclearly to comprehend the aim of the war,eliminated certain incorrect ideologicaltendencies and undesirable manifestations inthe army, educated the cadres and fightersand greatly enhanced the combateffectiveness of the army. From now on, wemust continue to carry on this new type ofideological education movement in the army,a movement which has a democratic andmass character."Speech at a Conference of Cadres inthe Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area"(April 1, 1948), Selected Works, Vol. IV,p. 234.The educational policy of the college [theAnti-Japanese Military and Political College]is to cultivate a firm and correct politicalorientation, an industrious and simple style战略战术。
这三者是造成一个抗日的革命的军人所不可缺的。
抗大的职员、教员、学生，都是根据这三者去进行教育，从事学习的。
《被敌人反对是好事而不是坏事》（一九三九年五月二十六日），人民出版社版第三页我们民族历来有一种艰苦奋斗的作风，我们要把它发扬起来。
……共产党历来提倡坚定正确的政治方向，……这种坚定正确的政治方向，是与艰苦奋斗的工作作风不能脱离的，没有坚定正确的政治方向，就不能激发艰苦奋斗的工作作风；没有艰苦奋斗的工作作风，也就不能执行坚定正确的政治方向。
《在延安庆祝五一国际劳动节大会上的讲话》（一九三九年五月一日），一九三九年五月十日《新中华报》of work, and flexible strategy and tactics.These are the three essentials in the makingof an anti-Japanese revolutionary soldier. Itis in accordance with these essentials thatthe staff teach and the students study."To Be Attacked by the Enemy Is Not aBad Thing but a Good Thing" (May 26,1939), 1st pocket ed., p. 3.Our nation has always had a traditionalstyle of hard struggle, which we shoulddevelop.… What is more, the CommunistParty has always advocated a firm andcorrect political orientation, …Thisorientation is inseparable from a style ofhard struggle. Without a firm and correctpolitical orientation, it is impossible topromote a style of hard struggle. Without thestyle of hard struggle, it is impossible tomaintain a firm and correct politicalorientation."Speech at the Yen'an Rally inCelebration of International LabourDay" (May 1, 1939).团结、紧张、严肃、活泼。
为“抗大”制定的校训世界上怕就怕“认真”二字，共产党就最讲“认真”。
在莫斯科会见我国留学生和实习生时的谈话（一九五七年十一月十七日），《毛主席在苏联的言论》人民日报出版社版第一五页Be united, alert, earnest and lively.Motto for the Anti-Japanese Militaryand Political College.What really counts in the world isconscientiousness, and the Communist Partyis most particular about being conscientious."Talk at a meeting with Chinese studentsand trainees in Moscow" (November 17,1957).十三、官兵关系我们的军队一向就有两条方针：第一对敌人要狠，要压倒它，要消灭它；第二对自己人、对人民、对同志、对官长、对部下要和，要团结。
在中央招待留守兵团学习代表时的演说（一九四四年九月十八日），一九四四年九月二十三日延安《解放日报》我们都是来自五湖四海，为了一个共同的革命目标，走到一起来了。
……我们的干部要关心每一个战士，一切革命队伍的人都要互相关心，互相爱护，互相帮助。
《为人民服务》（一九四四年九月八日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零零三——一零零四页13. RELATIONSBETWEEN OFFICERSAND MENOur army has always had two policies.First, we must be ruthless to our enemies,we must overpower and annihilate them.Second, we must be kind to our own, to thepeople, to our comrades and to our superiorsand subordinates, and unite with them."Speech at the reception given by theCentral Committee of the Party formodel study delegates from the RearArmy Detachments" (September 18,1944).We hail from all corners of the countryand have joined together for a commonrevolutionary objective.… Our cadres mustshow concern for every soldier, and allpeople in the revolutionary ranks must carefor each other, must love and help eachother."Serve the People" (September 8, 1944),Selected Works, Vol. III, pp. 227-28.应在每一部队内部举行拥干爱兵运动，号召干部爱护士兵，同时号召士兵拥护干部，彼此的缺点错误，公开讲明，迅速纠正，这样就能达到很好地团结内部之目的。
《一九四五年的任务》（一九四四年十二月十五日），一九四四年十二月十六日延安《解放日报》很多人对于官兵关系、军民关系弄不好，以为是方法不对，我总告诉他们是根本态度（或根本宗旨）问题，这态度就是尊重士兵和尊重人民。
从这态度出发，于是有各种的政策、方法、方式。
离了这态度，政策、方法、方式也一定是错的，官兵之间、军民之间的关系便决然弄不好。
军队政治工作的三大原则：第一是官兵一A movement to support the cadres andcherish the soldiers should be launched inevery army unit, calling on the cadres tocherish the soldiers and the soldiers tosupport the cadres. They should speak upabout each other's shortcomings andmistakes and quickly correct them. In thisway they will be able to achieve a very goodinternal unity."The Tasks for 1945" (December15, 1944)Many people think that it is wrongmethods that make for strained relationsbetween officers and men and between thearmy and the people, but I always tell themthat it is a question of basic attitude (or basicprinciple), of having respect for the soldiersand the people. It is from this attitude thatthe various policies, methods and formsensue. If we depart from this attitude, thenthe policies, methods and forms willcertainly be wrong, and the relationsbetween officers and men and between thearmy and the people are bound to beunsatisfactory. Our three major principles致，第二是军民一致，第三是瓦解敌军。
这些原则要实行有效，都须从尊重士兵、尊重人民和尊重已经放下武器的敌军俘虏的人格这种根本态度出发。
那些认为不是根本态度问题而是技术问题的人，实在是想错了，应该加以改正才对。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五零一页共产党人在劳动人民中间进行工作的时候必须采取民主的说服教育的方法，决不允许采取命令主义态度和强制手段。
中国共产党忠实地遵守马克思列宁主义的这个原则。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第八页for the army's political work are, first, unitybetween officers and men; second, unitybetween the army and the people; and third,the disintegration of the enemy forces. Toapply these principles effectively, we muststart with this basic attitude of respect forthe soldiers and the people, and of respectfor the human dignity of prisoners of waronce they have laid down their arms. Thosewho take all this as a technical matter andnot one of basic attitude are indeed wrong,and they should correct their view."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, pp. 186-87.Selected Works, Vol. II, pp. 186-87.Communists must use the democraticmethod of persuasion and education whenworking among the labouring people andmust on no account resort to commandismor coercion. The Chinese Communist Partyfaithfully adheres to this Marxist-Leninistprinciple."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p.15.*我们的同志一定要懂得，思想改造的工作是长期的、耐心的、细致的工作，不能企图上几次课，开几次会，就把人家在几十年生活中间形成的思想意识改变过来。
要人家服，只能说服，不能压服。
压服的结果总是压而不服。
以力服人是不行的。
对付敌人可以这样，对付同志，对付朋友，绝不能用这个方法。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一七页要分清敌我，不能站在敌对的立场用对待敌人的态度来对待同志。
必须是满腔热情地用保护人民事业和提高人民觉悟的态度来说话，而不能用嘲笑和攻击的态度来说话。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一五——一六页Our comrades must understand thatideological remoulding involves long-term,patient and painstaking work, and they mustnot attempt to change people's ideology,which has been shaped over decades of life,by giving a few lectures or by holding a fewmeetings. Persuasion, not compulsion, is theonly way to convince them. Compulsionwill never result in convincing them. To tryto convince them by force simply won'twork. This kind of method is permissible indealing with the enemy, but absolutelyimpermissible in dealing with comrades orfriends."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty's National Conference onPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957),1st pocket ed., p. 23.We must make a distinction between theenemy and ourselves, and we must not adoptan antagonistic stand towards comrades andtreat them as we would the enemy. Inspeaking up, one must have an ardent desireto protect the cause of the people and raisetheir political consciousness, and there mustbe no ridiculing or attacking in one'sapproach.Ibid., p. 20.*十四、军民关系军队须和民众打成一片，使军队在民众眼睛中看成是自己的军队，这个军队便无敌于天下，……《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五零一页应该使每一个同志懂得，只要我们依靠人民，坚决地相信人民群众的创造力是无穷无尽的，因而信任人民，和人民打成一片，那就任何困难也能克服，任何敌人也不能压倒我们，而只会被我们所压倒。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九七页我们的同志不论到什么地方，都要和群众的关系搞好,要关心群众，帮助他们解14. RELATIONSBETWEEN THE ARMYAND THE PEOPLEThe army must become one with thepeople so that they see it as their own army.Such an army will be invincible,…"On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 186.Every comrade must be helped tounderstand that as long as we rely on thepeople, believe firmly in the inexhaustiblecreative power of the masses and hence trustand identify ourselves with them, we cansurmount any difficulty, and no enemy cancrush us while we can crush any enemy."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 316.*Wherever our comrades go, they mustbuild good relations with the masses, beconcerned for them and help them overcome决困难。
团结广大人民，团结得越多越好。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一六一页在解放区，一方面，军队应实行拥政爱民的工作，另一方面，民主政府应领导人民实行拥军优抗的工作，更大地改善军民关系。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九一页军队中应当从每个指战员的思想上解决问题，使他们彻底认识拥政爱民的重要性。
只要军队方面做好了，地方对军队their difficulties. We must unite with themasses, the more of the masses we unitewith, the better."OntheChungkingNegotiations"(October 17, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.IV, p. 59.The army in the Liberated Areas mustsupport the government and cherish thepeople, while the democratic governmentsmust lead the people in the work ofsupporting the army and giving preferentialtreatment to the families of soldiers fightingJapan. In this way relations between thearmy and the people will become still better."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 311.*In the army the task of supporting thegovernment and cherishing the peopleshould be handled through the ideologicaleducation of every commander and fighter,so that they all thoroughly understand its的关系必会跟着改善。
《一九四六年解放区工作的方针》（一九四五年十二月十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一七三页在拥政爱民和拥军优抗的运动中，彻底检查军队方面和党政方面各自在一九四三年的缺点错误，而于一九四四年坚决改正之。
以后应于每年正月普遍举行一次，再三再四地宣读拥政爱民公约和拥军优抗公约，再三再四地将各根据地曾经发生的军队欺压党政民和党政民关心军队不足的缺点错误，实行公开的群众性的自importance. As long as the army on its partdoes this job well, the local government andthe people will also improve their relationswith the army."Policy for Work in the Liberated Areasfor 1946" (December 15, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 77.*In the course of these campaigns[3], thearmy on its side and the Party and thegovernment on theirs should thoroughlyexamine the shortcomings and mistakes of1943, and should resolutely correct them in1944. From now on, such campaigns shouldbe launched everywhere in the first month ofevery lunar year, and in the course of themthe pledges to "support the government andcherish the people" and "support the armyand give preferential treatment to thefamilies of soldiers fighting Japan" shouldbe read out time and again, and there shouldbe repeated self-criticism before the massesof any high-handed behaviour by the troopsin the base areas towards the Party orgovernment personnel or towards civilians,我批评（各方面只批评自己，不批评对方），而彻底改正之。
《开展根据地的减租、生产和拥政爱民运动》（一九四三年十月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九一六页or of any lack of concern for the troopsshown by the Party or government personnelor the civilians (each side criticizing itselfand not the other) in order that theseshortcomings and mistakes may bethoroughly corrected."Spread the Campaigns to Reduce Rent,Increase Production and 'Support theGovernment and Cherish the People' inthe Base Areas" (October 1, 1943),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 135.*十五、三大民主军队应实行一定限度的民主化，主要地是废除封建主义的打骂制度和官兵生活同甘苦。
这样一来，官兵一致的目的就达到了，军队就增加了绝大的战斗力，长期的残酷的战争就不患不能支持。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五零零——五零一页红军的物质生活如此菲薄，战斗如此频繁，仍能维持不敝，除党的作用外，就是靠实行军队内的民主主义。
官长不打士兵，官兵待遇平等，士兵有开会说话的自15. DEMOCRACY IN THETHREE MAIN FIELDSA proper measure of democracy should beput into effect in the army, chiefly byabolishing the feudal practice of bullyingand beating and by having officers and menshare weal and woe. Once this is done, unitywill be achieved between officers and men,the combat effectiveness of the army will begreatly increased, and there will be no doubtof our ability to sustain the long, cruel war."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 186.Apart from the role played by the Party,the reason why the Red Army has been ableto carry on in spite of such poor materialconditions and such frequent engagements isits practice of democracy. The officers donot beat the men; officers and men receiveequal treatment; soldiers are free to holdmeetings and to speak out; trivial formalities由，废除烦琐的礼节，经济公开。
……中国不但人民需要民主主义，军队也需要民主主义。
军队内的民主主义制度，将是破坏封建雇佣军队的一个重要的武器。
《井冈山的斗争》（一九二八年十一月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第六七——六八页部队内部政治工作方针，是放手发动士兵群众、指挥员和一切工作人员，通过集中领导下的民主运动，达到政治上高度团结、生活上获得改善、军事上提高技术和战术的三大目的。
目前在我军部队中热烈进行的三查、三整，就是用政治民主、经济民主的方法，达到前两项目的。
关于经济民主，必须使士兵选出的代have been done away with; and the accountsare open for all to inspect.… In China thearmy needs democracy as much as thepeople do. Democracy in our army is animportant weapon for undermining thefeudal mercenary army."The Struggle in the ChingkangMountains" (November 25, 1928),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 83.The policy for political work in our armyunits is fully to arouse the rank and file, thecommanders and all working personnel inorder to achieve three major objectivesthrough a democratic movement undercentralized leadership, namely, a highdegree of political unity, better livingconditions, and better military technique andtactics. The Three Check-ups and ThreeImprovements [4] now being enthusiasticallycarried out in our army units are intended toattain the first two of these objectivesthrough the methods of political andeconomic democracy.With regard to economic democracy, therepresentatives elected by the soldiers must表有权协助（不是超过）连队首长管理连队的给养和伙食。
关于军事民主，必须在练兵时实行官兵互教，兵兵互教；在作战时，实行在火线上连队开各种大、小会。
在连队首长指导下，发动士兵群众讨论如何攻克敌阵，如何完成战斗任务。
在连续几天的战斗中，此种会应开几次。
此项军事民主，在陕北蟠龙战役和晋察冀石家庄战役中，都实行了，收到了极大效果。
证明只有好处，毫无害处。
《军队内部的民主运动》（一九四八年一月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二七五页be ensured the right to assist (but not tobypass) the company leadership inmanaging the company's supplies and mess.With regard to military democracy, inperiods of training there must be mutualinstruction as between officers and soldiersand among the soldiers themselves; and inperiods of fighting the companies at thefront must hold big and small meetings ofvarious kinds. Under the direction of thecompany leadership, the rank and fileshould be roused to discuss how to attackand capture enemy positions and how tofulfill other combat tasks. When the fightinglasts several days, several such meetingsshould be held. This kind of militarydemocracy was practised with great successin the battle of Panlung in northern Shensiand in the battle of Shihchiachuang in theShansi-Chahar-Hopei area. It has beenproved that the practice can only do goodand can do no harm whatsoever."The Democratic Movement in theArmy" (January 30, 1948), SelectedMilitary Writings, 2nd ed., p. 353.处在伟大斗争面前的中国共产党，要求整个党的领导机关，全党的党员和干部，高度地发挥其积极性，才能取得胜利。
所谓发挥积极性，必须具体地表现在领导机关、干部和党员的创造能力，负责精神，工作的活跃，敢于和善于提出问题、发表意见、批评缺点，以及对于领导机关和领导干部从爱护观点出发的监督作用。
没有这些，所谓积极性就是空的。
而这些积极性的发挥，有赖于党内生活的民主化。
党内缺乏民主生活，发挥积极性的目的就不能达到。
大批能干人材的创造，也只有在民主生活中才有可能。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一七页In the present great struggle, the ChineseCommunist Party demands that all itsleading bodies and all its members andcadres should give the fullest expression totheir initiative, which alone can ensurevictory. This initiative must be demonstratedconcretely in the ability of the leadingbodies, the cadres and the Party rank and fileto work creatively, in their readiness toassume responsibility, in the exuberantvigour they show in their work, in theircourage and ability to raise questions, voiceopinions and criticize defects, and in thecomradely supervision that is maintainedover the leading bodies and the leadingcadres. Otherwise, "initiative" will be anempty thing. But the exercise of suchinitiative depends on the spread ofdemocracy in Party life. It cannot be broughtinto play if there is not enough democracy inParty life. Only in an atmosphere ofdemocracy can large numbers of able peoplebe brought forward."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 204.不论什么人，只要不是敌对分子，不是恶意攻击，允许大家讲话，讲错了也不要紧。
各级领导人员，有责任听别人的话。
实行两条原则：（一）知无不言，言无不尽；（二）言者无罪，闻者足戒。
如果没有“言者无罪”一条，并且是真的，不是假的，就不可能收到“知无不言，言无不尽”的效果。
《一九四五年的任务》（一九四四年十二月十五日），一九四四年十二月十六日延安《解放日报》必须在党内施行有关民主生活的教育，使党员懂得什么是民主生活，什么是民主制和集中制的关系，并如何实行民主集中制。
这样才能做到：一方面，确实扩Anyone should be allowed to speak out,whoever he may be, so long as he is not ahostile element and does not make maliciousattacks, and it does not matter if he sayssomething wrong. Leaders at all levels havethe duty to listen to others. Two principlesmust be observed: (1) Say all you know andsay it without reserve; (2) Don't blame thespeaker but take his words as a warning.Unless the principle of "Don't blame thespeaker" is observed genuinely and notfalsely, the result will not be "Say all youknow and say it without reserve"."The Tasks for 1945" (December15, 1944)Education in democracy must be carriedon within the Party so that members canunderstand the meaning of democratic life,the meaning of the relationship betweendemocracy and centralism, and the way inwhich democratic centralism should be putinto practice. Only in this way can we really大党内的民主生活；又一方面，不至于走到极端民主化，走到破坏纪律的自由放任主义。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一七页无论在军队或在地方，党内民主都应是为着巩固纪律和增强战斗力，而不是削弱这种纪律和战斗力。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一七——五一八页从理论上铲除极端民主化的根苗。
首先，要指出极端民主化的危险，在于损伤以至完全破坏党的组织，削弱以至完全毁灭党的战斗力，使党担负不起斗争的责任，由此造成革命的失败。
其次，要指出extend democracy within the Party and atthe same time avoid ultra-democracy andthe laissez-faire which destroys discipline."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 205.*Both in the army and in the localorganizations, inner-Party democracy ismeant to strengthen discipline and increasecombat effectiveness, not to weaken them.Ibid.In the sphere of theory, destroy the rootsof ultra-democracy. First, it should bepointed out that the danger ofultrademocracy lies in the fact that itdamages or even completely wrecks theParty organization and weakens or evencompletely undermines the Party's fightingcapacity, rendering the Party incapable offulfilling its fighting tasks and therebycausing the defeat of the revolution. Next, it极端民主化的来源，在于小资产阶级的自由散漫性。
这种自由散漫性带到党内，就成了政治上的和组织上的极端民主化的思想。
这种思想是和无产阶级的斗争任务根本不相容的。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第九一页should be pointed out that the source ofultra-democracy consists in the pettybourgeoisie's individualistic aversion todiscipline. When this characteristic isbrought into the Party, it develops intoultra-democratic ideas politically andorganizationally. These ideas are utterlyincompatible with the fighting tasks of theproletariat."On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in theParty"(DecemberWorks, Vol. I, p. 108.1929),Selected十六、教育和训练我们的教育方针，应该使受教育者在德育、智育、体育几方面都得到发展，成为有社会主义觉悟的有文化的劳动者。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二三页对于在职干部的教育和干部学校的教育，应确立以研究中国革命实际问题为中心，以马克思列宁主义基本原则为指导的方针，废除静止地孤立地研究马克思列宁主义的方法。
《改造我们的学习》（一九四一年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八零三页16. EDUCATION AND THETRAINING OF TROOPSOur educational policy must enableeveryone who receives an education todevelopmorally,intellectuallyandphysically and become a worker with bothsocialist consciousness and culture."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p.44.*As for education for cadres whether atwork or in schools for cadres, a policyshould be established of focusing sucheducation on the study of the practicalproblems of the Chinese revolution andusingthebasicprinciplesofMarxism-Leninism as the guide, and themethod of studying Marxism-Leninismstatically and in isolation should bediscarded."Reform Our Study" (May 1941),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 24.一个军事学校，最重要的问题，是选择校长教员和规定教育方针。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一七零页一个百人的学校，如果没有一个从教员中、职员中、学生中按照实际形成的（不是勉强凑集的）最积极最正派最机敏的几个人乃至十几个人的领导骨干，这个学校就一定办不好。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零一页我全军将士必须提高军事艺术，在必胜的战争中勇猛前进，坚决彻底干净全部For a military school, the most importantquestion is the selection of a director andinstructors and the adoption of aneducational policy."Problems of Strategy in China'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 185.*A school of a hundred people certainlycannot be run well if it does not have aleading group of several people, or a dozenor more, which is formed in accordance withthe actual circumstances (and not throwntogether artificially) and is composed of themost active, upright and alert of the teachers,the other staff and the students."Some Questions Concerning Methodsof Leadership" (June 1, 1943), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, pp. 118-l9.All officers and fighters of our army mustimprove their military art, march forwardcourageously towards certain victory in the地歼灭一切敌人。
《中国人民解放军宣言》（一九四七年十月），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二三九页目前开始的一年整训计划，军事整训与政治整训应该并重，并使二者互相结合。
整训开始时，还应着重政治方面，着重于改善官兵关系，增强内部团结，发动干部与战士群众的高度积极性，军事整训才易于实施与更有效果。
《一九四五年的任务》（一九四四年十二月十五日），一九四四年十二月十六日延安《解放日报》练兵方法，应开展官教兵、兵教官、war and resolutely, thoroughly, whollyand completely wipe out all enemies."Manifesto of the Chinese People'sLiberation Army" (October 1947),Selected Military Writings, 2nd ed., p.340.Equal importance should be attached tothe military and political aspects of theone-year consolidationandtrainingprogramme which has just begun, and thetwo aspects should be integrated. At the start,stress should be placed on the politicalaspect, on improving relations betweenofficers and men, enhancing internal unityand arousing a high level of enthusiasmamong the masses of cadres and fighters.Only thus will the military consolidation andtraining proceed smoothly and attain betterresults."The Tasks for 1945" (December15, 1944)As for the method of training, we shouldunfold the mass training movement in whichofficers teach soldiers, soldiers teach兵教兵的群众练兵运动。
《一九四六年解放区工作的方针》（一九四五年十二月十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一七二页我们练兵的口号是：“官教兵，兵教官，兵教兵。
”战士们有很多打仗的实际经验。
当官的要向战士学习，把别人的经验变成自己的，他的本领就大了。
《对晋绥日报编辑人员的谈话》（一九四入年四月二日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一九页练兵项目，仍以提高射击、刺杀、投投弹项技术程度为主,提高战术程度为辅，特别着重于练习夜战。
《一九四六年解放区工作的方针政策》（一九四五年十二月十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一七二页officers and the soldiers teach each other."Policy for Work in the Liberated Areasfor 1946" (December 15, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 76.Our slogan in training troops is, "Officersteach soldiers, soldiers teach officers andsoldiers teach each other". The fighters havea lot of practical combat experience. Theofficers should learn from the fighters, andwhen they have made other people'sexperience their own, they will becomemore capable."A Talk to the Editorial Staff of theShansi-Suiyuan Daily" (April 2, 1948),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 243.As for the training courses, the mainobjective should still be to raise the level oftechnique in marksmanship, bayonetinggrenade-throwing and the like and thesecondary objective should be to raise thelevel of tactics, while special emphasisshould be laid on night operations."Policy for Work in the Liberated Areasfor 1946" (December 15, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 76.*十七、为人民服务我们应该谦虚，谨慎，戒骄，戒躁，全心全意地为人民服务，……《两个中国之命运》（一九四五年四月二十三日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零二八页全心全意地为人民服务，一刻也不脱离群众；一切从人民的利益出发，而不是从个人或小集团的利益出发；向人民负责和向党的领导机关负责的一致性；这些就是我们的出发点。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九五——一零九六页国家机关实行民主集中制，国家机关17. SERVING THEPEOPLEWe should be modest and prudent, guardagainst arrogance and rashness, and servethe Chinese people heart and soul,…"China's Two Possible Destinies"(April 23, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.III p. 253.Our point of departure is to serve thepeople whole-heartedly and never for amoment divorce ourselves from the masses,to proceed in all cases from the interests ofthe people and not from one's self-interest orfrom the interests of a small group, and toidentify our responsibility to the people withour responsibility to the leading organs ofthe Party."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 315.*The organs of state must practisedemocratic centralism, they must rely on the必须依靠人民群众，国家机关工作人员必须为人民服务。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第四页白求恩同志毫不利己专门利人的精神，表现在他对工作的极端的负责任，对同志对人民的极端的热忱。
每个共产党员都要学习他。
……我们大家要学习他毫无自私自利之心的精神。
从这点出发，就可以变为大有利于人民的人。
一个人能力有大小，但只要有这点精神，就是一个高尚的人，一个纯粹的人，一个有道德的人，一个脱离了低级趣味的人，一个有益于人民的人。
《纪念白求恩》（一九三九年十二月二十一日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六五三——六五四页masses and their personnel must serve thepeople."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p.8.*Comrade Bethune's spirit, his utterdevotion to others without any thought ofself, was shown in his boundless sense ofresponsibility in his work and his boundlesswarm-heartedness towards all comrades andthe people. Every Communist must learnfrom him.……We must all learn the spirit of absoluteselflessness from him. With this spiriteveryone can be very useful to the people. Aman's ability may be great or small, but if hehas this spirit, he is already noble-mindedand pure, a man of moral integrity andabove vulgar interests, a man who is ofvalue to the people.."In Memory of Norman Bethune"(December 21, 1939), Selected Works,Vol. II, pp. 337-38.*我们的共产党和共产党所领导的八路军、新四军，是革命的队伍。
我们这个队伍完全是为着解放人民的，是彻底地为人民的利益工作的。
《为人民服务》（一九四四年九月八日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零零三页我们一切工作干部，不论职位高低，都是人民的勤务员，我们所做的一切，都是为人民服务，我们有些什么不好的东西舍不得丢掉呢？《一九四五年的任务 》（一九四四年十二月十五日），一九四四年十二月十六日延安《解放日报》我们的责任，是向人民负责，每句话，每个行动，每项政策，都要适合人民的利益，如果有了错误，定要改正，这就叫向人民负责。
《抗日战争后的时局和我们的方针》（一九四五年八月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一二八页Our Communist Party and the EighthRoute and New Fourth Armies led by ourParty are battalions of the revolution. Thesebattalions of ours are wholly dedicated tothe liberation of the people and workentirely in the people's interests."Serve the People" (September 8, 1944),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 227.All our cadres, whatever their rank, areservants of the people, and whatever we dois to serve the people. How then can we bereluctant to discard any of our bad traits?"The Tasks for 1945" (December 15,1944).Our duty is to hold ourselves responsibleto the people. Every word, every act andevery policy must conform to the people'sinterests, and if mistakes occur, they must becorrected - that is what being responsible tothe people means."The Situation and Our Policy After theVictory in the War of ResistanceAgainst Japan" (August 13, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 16.要奋斗就会有牺牲，死人的事是经常发生的。
但是我们想到人民的利益，想到大多数人民的痛苦，我们为人民而死，就是死得其所。
不过，我们应当尽量地减少那些不必要的牺牲。
《为人民服务》（一九四四年九月八日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零零四页人总是要死的，但死的意义有不同。
中国古时候有个文学家叫做司马迁的说过：“人固有一死，或重于泰山，或轻于鸿毛。
”为人民利益而死，就比泰山还重；替法西斯卖力，替剥削人民和压迫人民的人去死，就比鸿毛还轻。
《为人民服务》（一九四四年九月八日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零零三页Wherever there is struggle there issacrifice, and death is a common occurrence.But we have the interests of the people andthe sufferings of the great majority at heart,and when we die for the people it is aworthy death. Nevertheless, we should doour best to avoid unnecessary sacrifices."Serve the People" (September 8, 1944),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 228.All men must die, but death can vary inits significance. The ancient Chinese writerSzuma Chien said, "Though death befalls allmen alike, it may be weightier than MountTai or lighter than a feather." To die for thepeople is weightier than Mount Tai, but towork for the fascists and die for theexploiters and oppressors is lighter than afeather.Ibid., p. 227.*十八、爱国主义和国际主义国际主义者的共产党员，是否可以同时又是一个爱国主义者呢？我们认为不但是可以的，而且是应该的。
爱国主义的具体内容，看在什么样的历史条件之下来决定。
有日本侵略者和希特勒的“爱国主义”，有我们的爱国主义。
对于日本侵略者和希特勒的所谓“爱国主义，共产党员是必须坚决地反对的。
日本共产党人和德国共产党人都是他们国家的战争的失败主义者。
用一切方法使日本侵略者和希特勒的战争归于失败，就是日本人民和德国人民的利益；失败得越彻底，就越好。
……18. PATRIOTISM ANDINTERNATIONALISMCan a Communist, who is aninternationalist, at the same time be a patriot?We hold that he not only can be but must be.The specific content of patriotism isdetermined by historical conditions. There isthe "patriotism" of the Japanese aggressorsand of Hitler, and there is our patriotism.Communists must resolutely oppose the"patriotism" of the Japanese aggressors andof Hitler. The Communists of Japan andGermany are defeatists with regard to thewars being waged by their countries. Tobring about the defeat of the Japaneseaggressors and of Hitler by every possiblemeans is in the interests of the Japanese andthe German people, and the more completethe defeat the better. … For the warslaunched by the Japanese aggressors andHitler are harming the people at home as这是因为日本侵略者和希特勒的战争，不但是损害世界人民的，也是损害其本国人民的。
中国的情况则不同，中国是被侵略的国家。
因此，中国共产党人必须将爱国主义和国际主义结合起来。
我们是国际主义者，我们又是爱国主义者，我们的口号是为保卫祖国反对侵略者而战。
对于我们，失败主义是罪恶，争取抗日胜利是责无旁贷的。
因为只有为着保卫祖国而战才能打败侵略者，使民族得到解放。
只有民族得到解放，才有使无产阶级和劳动人民得到解放的可能。
中国胜利了，侵略中国的帝国主义者被打倒了，同时也就是帮助了外国的人民。
因此，爱国主义就是国际主义在民族解放战争中的实施。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五零八——五零九页well as the people of the world. China'scase, however, is different, because she isthe victim of aggression. ChineseCommunists must therefore combinepatriotism with internationalism. We are atonce internationalists and patriots, and ourslogan is, "Fight to defend the motherlandagainst the aggressors." For us defeatism is acrime and to strive for victory in the War ofResistance is an inescapable duty. For onlyby fighting in defence of the motherland canwe defeat the aggressors and achievenational liberation. And only by achievingnational liberation will it be possible for theproletariat and other working people toachieve their own emancipation. The victoryof China and the defeat of the invadingimperialists will help the people of othercountries. Thus in wars of national liberationpatriotism is applied internationalism."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 196.*一个外国人，毫无利已的动机，把中国人民的解放事业当作他自己的事业，这是什么精神？这是国际主义的精神，这是共产主义的精神，每一个中国共产党员都要学习这种精神。
……我们要和一切资本主义国家的无产阶级联合起来，要和日本的、英国的、美国的、德国的、意大利的以及一切资本主义国家的无产阶级联合起来，才能打倒帝国主义，解放我们的民族和人民，解放世界的民族和人民。
这就是我们的国际主义，这就是我们用以反对狭隘民族主义和狭隘爱国主义的国际主义。
《纪念白求恩》（一九三九年十二月二十一日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六五三页被压迫人民争取彻底的解放，首先是依靠自己的斗争，其次才是国际的援助。
What kind of spirit is this that makes aforeigner selflessly adopt the cause of theChinese people's liberation as his own? It isthe spirit of internationalism, the spirit ofcommunism, from which every ChineseCommunist must learn.... We must unitewith the proletariat of all the capitalistcountries, with the proletariat of Japan,Britain, the United States, Germany, Italyand all other capitalist countries, before it ispossible to overthrow imperialism, toliberate our nation and people, and toliberate the other nations and peoples of theworld. This is our internationalism, theinternationalism with which we oppose bothnarrow nationalism and narrow patriotism."In Memory of Norman Bethune"(December 21, 1939), Selected Works,Vol. II, p. 337.*In the fight for complete liberation theoppressed people rely first of all on theirown struggle and then, and only then, on已经获得革命胜利的人民，应该援助正在争取解放的人民的斗争，这是我们的国际主义的义务。
接见非洲朋友时的谈话《一九六三年八月八日》，一九六三年八月九日《人民日报》社会主义国家是完全新型的国家，是推翻了剥削阶级而由劳动人民掌握权力的国家。
在这些国家间的相互关系中，实现着国际主义和爱国主义相统一的原则。
共同的利益和共同的理想把我们紧紧地联结在一起。
《在苏联最高苏维埃庆祝伟大的十月社会主义革命四十周年会议上的讲话》（一九五七年十一月六日），人民出版社版第九——十页社会主义阵营各国人民要联合起来，亚洲、非洲、拉丁美洲各国人民要联合起来，全世界各大洲的人民要联合起来，所international assistance. The people whohave triumphed in their own revolutionshould help those still struggling forliberation. This is our internationalist duty."Talk with African friends" (August 8,1963).The socialist countries are states of anentirely new type in which the exploitingclasses have been overthrown and theworking people are in power. The principleof integrating internationalism withpatriotism is practised in the relationsbetween these countries. We are closelybound by common interests and commonideals."Speech at the Meeting of the SupremeSoviet of the U.S.S.R. in Celebration ofthe 40th Anniversary of the GreatOctoberSocialistRevolution"(November 6, 1957).The people of the countries in thesocialist camp should unite, the people ofthe countries in Asia, Africa and Latinthe continents should unite, all peace-loving有爱好和平的国家要联合起来，所有受到美国侵略、控制、干涉和欺负的国家要联合起来，结成最广泛的统一战线，反对美帝国主义的侵略政策和战争政策，保卫世界和平。
《支持巴拿马人民反美爱国正义斗争的谈话》（一九六四年一月十二日），《全世界人民团结起来打败美国侵略者及其一切走狗》人民出版社版第九页事物总是发展的。
一九一一年的革命，即辛亥革命，到今年，不过四十五年，中国的面目完全变了。
再过四十五年，就是二千零一年，也就是进到二十一世纪的时候，中国的面目更要大变。
中国将变为一个强大的社会主义工业国。
中国应当这样。
因为中国是一个具有九百六十万平方公里土地和六万万人口的国家，中国应当对于人类有较大的贡献。
而这种贡献，在America should unite, the people of allcountries should unite, and all countriessubjected to U.S. aggression, control,intervention or bullying should unite, and soform the broadest united front to oppose theU.S. imperialist policies of aggression andwar and to defend world peace."Statement Supporting the PanamanianPeople's Just Patriotic Struggle AgainstU.S. Imperialism" (January 12, 1964),People of the World, Unite and Defeatthe U.S. Aggressors and All TheirLackeys, 2nd ed., p. 9.Things develop ceaselessly. It is onlyforty-five years since the Revolution of 19II,but the face of China has completelychanged. In another forty-five years, that is,in the year 2001, or the beginning of the21st century, China will have undergone aneven greater change. She will have becomea powerful socialist industrial country. Andthat is as it should be. China is a land withan area of 9,600,000 square kilometres and apopulation of 600 million people, and she过去一个长时期内，则是太少了。
这使我们感到惭愧。
但是要谦虚。
不但现在应当这样，四十五年之后也应当这样，永远应当这样。
中国人在国际交往方面，应当坚决、彻底、干净、全部地消灭大国主义。
《纪念孙中山先生》（一九五六年十一月），一九五六年十一月十二日《人民日报》我们决不可有傲慢的大国主义的态度，决不应当由于革命的胜利和在建设上有了一些成绩而自高自大。
国无论大小，都各有长处和短处。
《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会开幕词》（一九五六年九月十五日），《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会文献》第九页ought to have made a greater contribution tohumanity. Her contribution over a longperiod has been far too small. For this weare regretful.But we must be modest - not only now,but forty-five years hence as well. Weshould always be modest. In our inter-national relations, we Chinese people shouldget rid of great-power chauvinism resolutely,thoroughly, wholly and completely."In Commemoration of Dr. SunYat-sen" (November 1956).We must never adopt an arrogant attitudeof great-power chauvinism and becomeconceited because of the victory of ourrevolution and certain achievements in ourconstruction. Every nation, big or small, hasits strong and weak points."OpeningAddressattheEighthNational Congress of the CommunistParty of China" (September 15, 1956).十九、革命英雄主义这个军队具有一往无前的精神，它要压倒一切敌人，而决不被敌人所屈服。
不论在任何艰难困苦的场合，只要还有一个人，这个人就要继续战斗下去。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零三九页发扬勇敢战斗、不怕牺牲、不怕疲劳和连续作战（即在短期内不休息地接连打几仗）的作风。
《目前形势和我们的任务》（一九四七年十二月二十五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二四七页成千成万的先烈，为着人民的利益，在我们的前头英勇地牺牲了，让我们高举19. REVOLUTIONARYHEROISMThis army has an indomitable spirit and isdetermined to vanquish all enemies andnever to yield. No matter what thedifficulties and hardships, so long as a singleman remains, he will fight on."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 264.*Give full play to our style of fighting -courage in battle, no fear of sacrifice, nofear of fatigue, and continuous fighting (thatis, fighting successive battles in a short timewithout rest)."The Present Situation and Our Tasks"(December 25, 1947), Selected Works,Vol. IV, p. 161.Thousands upon thousands of martyrshave heroically laid down their lives for thepeople; let us hold their banner high and起他们的旗帜，踏着他们的血迹前进吧！《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九九页下定决心，不怕牺牲，排除万难，去争取胜利。
《愚公移山》（一九四五年六月十一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一一零一页……正当北伐战争向前发展的紧要关头，这个代表中国人民解放事业的国共两党和各界人民的民族统一战线及其一切革命政策，就被国民党当局的叛卖性的反人民的“清党”政策和屠杀政策所破坏了。
……从此以后，内战代替了团结，独裁代替了民主，黑暗的中国代替了光明的中国。
但是中国共产党和中国人民并没有被吓倒，被征服，被杀绝。
他们从地下爬march ahead along the path crimson withtheir blood!"On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 318.Be resolute, fear no sacrifice andsurmount every difficulty to win victory."The Foolish Old Man Who RemovedtheMountains"(June11,1945),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 321.*At a critical moment in the progress of theNorthern Expedition, ... the treacherous andreactionary policies of "party purge" andmassacre adopted by the Kuomintangauthorities wrecked this national unitedfront - the united front of the Kuomintang,the Communist Party and all sections of thepeople, which embodied the Chinesepeople's cause of liberation - and all itsrevolutionary policies.… Thereupon unitywas replaced by civil war, democracy bydictatorship, and a China full of brightnesspeople were neither cowed nor conquerednor exterminated. They picked themselves起来，揩干净身上的血迹，掩埋好同伴的尸首，他们又继续战斗了。
他们高举起革命的大旗，举行了武装的抵抗，在中国的广大区域内，组织了人民的政府，实行了土地制度的改革，创造了人民的军队——中国红军，保存了和发展了中国人民的革命力量。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零三六页你们有许多的长处，有很大的功劳，但是你们切记不可以骄傲，你们被大家尊敬，是应当的，但是也容易因此引起骄傲。
如果你们骄傲起来，不虚心，不再努力，不尊重人家，不尊重干部，不尊重群众，by a China covered in darkness. But theChinese Communist Party and the Chineseup, wiped off the blood, buried their fallencomrades and went into battle again.Holding high the great standard ofrevolution, they rose in armed resistance andover a vast territory in China they set uppeople's governments, carried out landreform, built up a people's army - theChinese Red Army - and preserved andexpanded the revolutionary forces of theChinese people."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 261.*You have many good qualities and haverendered great service, but you must alwaysremember not to become conceited. You arerespected by all, and quite rightly, but thiseasily leads to conceit. If you becomeconceited, if you are not modest and cease toexert yourselves, and if you do not respectothers, do not respect the cadres and themasses, then you will cease to be heroes and你们就会当不成英雄和模范了。
过去已有一些这样的人，希望你们不要学他们。
《必须学会做经济工作》（一九四五年一月十日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零一三页你们在消灭敌人的斗争中，在恢复和发展工农业生产的斗争中，克服了很多的艰难困苦，表现了极大的勇敢、智慧和积极性。
你们是全中华民族的模范人物，是推动各方面人民事业胜利前进的骨干，是人民政府的可靠支柱和人民政府联系广大群众的桥梁。
代表中共中央在全国战斗英雄和劳动模范代表会议上的祝词（一九五零年九月二十五日），一九五零年九月二十六日《人民日报》models. There have been such people in thepast, and I hope you will not follow theirexample."We Must Learn to Do Economic Work"(January 10, 1945), Selected Works, Vol. III,p. 239.In the fight to wipe out the enemy and torestore and increase industrial andagricultural production, you have overcomemany difficulties and hardships anddemonstrated immense courage, wisdomand initiative. You are models for the wholeChinese nation, the backbone of thevictorious advance of the people's cause inall spheres, pillars of support to the People'sGovernment and bridges linking thePeople's Government with the great masses."Message of greetings on behalf of theCentral Committee of the ChineseCommunist Party to the Meeting ofRepresentatives of National CombatHeroesandModelWorkers"(September 25, 1950).我们中华民族有同自己的敌人血战到底的气概。
有在自力更生的基础上光复旧物的决心，有自立于世界民族之林的能力。
《论反对日本帝国主义的策略》（一九三五年十二月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一五六页We the Chinese nation have the spirit tofight the enemy to the last drop of our blood,the determination to recover our lostterritory by our own efforts, and the abilityto stand on our own feet in the family ofnations."OnTacticsAgainstJapaneseImperialism" (December 27, 1935),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 170.*二十、勤俭建国要使全体干部和全体人民经常想到我国是一个社会主义的大国，但又是一个经济落后的穷国，这是一个很大的矛盾。
要使我国富强起来，需要几十年艰苦奋斗的时间，其中包括执行厉行节约、反对浪费这样一个勤俭建国的方针。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三六页勤俭办工厂，勤俭办商店，勤俭办一切国营事业和合作事业，勤俭办一切其他事业，什么事情都应当执行勤俭的原则。
20. BUILDING OURCOUNTRY THROUGHDILIGENCE ANDFRUGALITYWe must see to it that all our cadres andall our people constantly bear in mind thatours is a big socialist country but aneconomically backward and poor one, andthat this is a very great contradiction. Tomake China rich and strong needs severaldecades of intense effort, which will include,among other things, the effort to practisestrict economy and combat waste, i.e., thepolicy of building up our country throughdiligence and frugality."On theCorrectHandling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p.71.Diligence and frugality should bepractised in running factories and shops andall state-owned, co-operative and other这就是节约的原则，节约是社会主义经济的基本原则之一。
中国是一个大国，但是现在还很穷，要使中国富起来，需要几十年时间，几十年以后也需要执行勤俭的原则，但是特别要提倡勤俭，特别要注意节约的，是在目前这几十年内，是在目前这几个五年计划的时期内。
《勤俭办社》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第一六页任何地方必须十分爱惜人力物力，决不可只顾一时，滥用浪费。
任何地方必须从开始工作的那一年起，就计算到将来的很多年，计算到长期坚持战争，计算到反攻，计算到赶走敌人之后的建设。
一面决enterprises. The principle of diligence andfrugality should be observed in everything.This principle of economy is one of thebasic principles of socialist economics.China is a big country, but she is still verypoor. It will take several decades to makeChina prosperous. Even then we will stillhave to observe the principle of diligenceand frugality. But it is in the coming fewdecades, during the present series offive-year plans, that we must particularlyadvocate diligence and frugality, that wemust pay special attention to economy.Introductory note to "Running aCo-operative Diligently and Frugally"(1955), The Socialist Upsurge inChina's Countryside, Chinese ed., Vol.I.Wherever we happen to be, we musttreasure our manpower and materialresources, and must not take a short viewandindulgeinwastefulnessandextravagance. Wherever we are, from thevery first year of our work we must bear inmind the many years to come, the protractedwar that must be maintained, thecounter-offensive, and the work ofreconstruction after the enemy's expulsion.On the one hand, never be wasteful or不滥用浪费，一面努力发展生产。
过去有些地方缺少长期打算，既未注意节省人力物力，又未注意发展生产，吃了大亏。
得了这个教训，现在必须引起注意。
《必须学会做经济工作》（一九四五年一月十日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零一九页为了迅速地恢复和发展农业生产和市镇上的工业生产，在消灭封建制度的斗争中，必须注意尽一切努力最大限度地保存一切可用的生产资料和生活资料，采取办法坚决地反对任何人对于生产资料和生活资料的破坏和浪费，反对大吃大喝，注意节约。
《在晋绥干部会议上的讲话》（一九四八年四月一日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三一四页extravagant; on the other, activelyexpand production. Previously, in someplaces people suffered a great deal becausethey did not take the long view andneglected economy in manpower andmaterial resources and the expansion ofproduction. The lesson is there and attentionmust be called to it."We Must Learn to Do EconomicWork" (January 10, 1945), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 244.In order to speed up this restoration anddevelopment [of agricultural production andindustrial production in small towns], wemust do our utmost, in the course of ourstruggle for the abolition of the feudalsystem, to preserve all useful means ofproduction and of livelihood, take resolutemeasures against anyone's destroying orwasting them, oppose extravagant eatingand drinking and pay attention to thrift andeconomy."Speech at a Conference of Cadres inthe Shansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area"(April 1, 1948), Selected Works, Vol. IV,p. 238.财政的支出，应该根据节省的方针。
应该使一切政府工作人员明白，贪污和浪费是极大的犯罪。
反对贪污和浪费的斗争，过去有了些成绩，以后还应用力。
节省每一个铜板为着战争和革命事业，为着我们的经济建设，是我们的会计制度的原则。
《我们的经济政策》（一九三四年一月二十三日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一二九页在我们的许多工作人员中间，现在滋长着一种不愿意和群众同甘苦，喜欢计较个人名利的危险倾向，这是很不好的。
我们在增产节约运动中要求精简机关，下放干部，使相当大的一批干部回到生产中去，就是克服这种危险倾向的一个方法。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三六页Thrift should be the guiding principle inour government expenditure. It should bemade clear to all government workers thatcorruption and waste are very great crimes.Our campaigns against corruption and wastehave already achieved some results, butfurther efforts are required. Our system ofaccounting must be guided by the principleof saving every copper for the war effort, forthe revolutionary cause and for oureconomic construction."Our Economic Policy" (January 23,1934), Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 145.A dangerous tendency has shown itself oflate among many of our personnel - anunwillingness to share the joys andhardships of the masses, a concern forpersonal fame and gain. This is very bad.One way of overcoming it is to simplify ourorganizations in the course of our campaignto increase production and practise economy,and to transfer cadres to lower levels so thata considerable number will return toproductive work."On the Correct Handling of Contra-dictions Among the People" (February27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p 71.军队生产自给，不但改善了生活，减轻了人民负担，并因而能够扩大军队，而且立即带来了许多副产物。
这些副产物就是：（一）改善官兵关系。
官兵一道生产劳动，亲如兄弟了。
（二）增强劳动观念。
……生产自给以来，劳动观念加强了，二流子的习气被改造了。
（三）增强纪律性。
在生产中执行劳动纪律，不但不会减弱战斗纪律和军人生活纪律，反而会增强它们。
（四）改善军民关系。
部队有了家务，侵害老百姓财物的事就少了，或者完Production by the army for its ownsupport has not only improved the army'sliving conditions and lightened the burdenon the people, thereby making it possiblefurther to expand the army. In addition, ithas had many immediate side-effects. Theyare as follows:(1) Improved relations between officersand men. Officers and men work together inproduction and become like brothers.(2) Better attitude to labour.… since thearmy began to produce for its own support,the attitude to labour has improved andloafer ways have been overcome.(3) Strengthened discipline. Far fromweakening discipline in battle and in armylife, labour discipline in production actuallystrengthens it.(4) Improved relations between the armyand the people. Once an armed force beginsto "keep house" for itself, encroachmentsupon the property of the people seldom ornever occur. As the army and the peopleexchange labour and help each other in全没有了。
在生产中，军民变工互助，更增强他们之间的友好关系。
（五）军队埋怨政府的事也会少了，军政关系也好了。
（六）促进人民的大生产运动。
军队生产了，机关生产更显得必要，更有劲了；全体人民的普遍增产运动，当然也更显得必要，更有劲了。
《论军队生产自给，兼论整风和生产两大运动的重要性》（一九四五年四月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一一零七页有人说：部队生产，就不能作战和训练了；机关生产，就不能工作了。
这种说production, the friendship between them isstrengthened.(5) Less grumbling in the army about thegovernment and improved relations betweenthe two.(6) An impetus to the great productioncampaign of the people. Once the armyengages in production, the need forgovernment and other organizations to dolikewise becomes more obvious, and theydo so more energetically; also, the need for auniversal campaign of the whole people toincrease production naturally becomes moreobvious, and this too is carried on moreenergetically."On Production by the Army for Its OwnSupport and on the Importance of theGreat Movements for Rectification andfor Production" (April 27, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. III, pp. 327-28.*Some people say that if the army units goin for production, they will be unable totrain or fight and that if the government and法是不对的。
最近几年，我们边区部队从事大量的生产，衣食丰足，同时又进行练兵，又有政治和文化学习，这些都比从前有更大的成绩，军队内部的团结和军民之间的团结，也比从前更好了。
在前方，去年一年进行了大规模的生产运动，可是去年一年作战方面有很大的成绩，并且普遍地开始了练兵运动。
机关因为生产，工作人员生活改善了，工作更安心、更有效率，边区和前方都是这样。
《必须学会做经济工作》（一九四五年一月十日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零一八页other organizations do so, they will beunable to do their own work. This is a falseargument. In recent years our army units inthe Border Region have undertakenproduction on a big scale to providethemselves with ample food and clothingand have simultaneously done their trainingand conducted their political studies andliteracy and other courses much moresuccessfully than before, and there is greaterunity than ever within the army and betweenthe army and the people. While there was alarge-scale production campaign at the frontlast year, great successes were gained in thefighting and in addition an extensivetraining campaign was started. And thanksto production, the personnel of thegovernment and other organizations live abetter life and work with greater devotionand efficiency; this is the case both in theBorder Region and at the front."We Must Learn to Do Economic Work"(January 10, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.III, pp. 243-44.二十一、自力更生，艰苦奋斗我们的方针要放在什么基点上？放在自己力量的基点上，叫做自力更生。
我们并不孤立，全世界一切反对帝国主义的国家和人民都是我们的朋友。
但是我们强调自力更生，我们能够依靠自己组织的力量，打败一切中外反动派。
《抗日战争胜利后的时局和我们的方针》（一九四五年八月十三日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一三二页我们是主张自力更生的。
我们希望有外援，但是我们不能依赖它，我们依靠自己的努力，依靠全体军民的创造力。
《必须学会做经济工作》（一九四五年一月十日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零一五页21. SELF-RELIANCE ANDARDUOUS STRUGGLEOn what basis should our policy rest? Itshould rest on our own strength, and thatmeans regeneration through one's ownefforts. We are not alone; all the countriesand people in the world opposed toimperialism are our friends. Nevertheless,we stress regeneration through our ownefforts. Relying on the forces we ourselvesorganize, we can defeat all Chinese andforeign reactionaries."The Situation and Our Policy After theVictory in the War of ResistanceAgainst Japan" (August 13, 1945),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 20.We stand for self-reliance. We hope forforeign aid but cannot be dependent on it;we depend on our own efforts, on thecreative power of the whole army and theentire people."We Must Learn to Do EconomicWork" (January 10, 1945), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 241.夺取全国胜利，这只是万里长征走完了第一步。
……中国的革命是伟大的，但革命以后的路程更长，工作更伟大，更艰苦。
这一点现在就必须向党内讲明白，务必使同志们继续地保持谦虚、谨慎、不骄、不躁的作风，务必使同志们继续地保持艰苦奋斗的作风。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四三九——一四四零页干部中一切不经过自己艰苦奋斗、流血流汗，而依靠意外便利、侥幸取胜的心理，必须扫除干净。
《建立巩固的东北根据地》（一九四五年十月二十八日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一七九页我们应当把世界进步的情况和光明To win country-wide victory is only thefirst step in a long march of ten thousand li....The Chinese revolution is great, but the roadafter the revolution will be longer, the workgreater and more arduous. This must bemade clear now in the Party. The comradesmust be helped to remain modest, prudentand free from arrogance and rashness intheir style of work. The comrades must behelped to preserve the style of plain livingand hard struggle."Report to the Second Plenary Session ofthe Seventh Central Committee of theCommunist Party of China (March 5,1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 374.*We must thoroughly clear away all ideasamong our cadres of winning easy victoriesthrough good luck, without hard and bitterstruggle, without sweat and blood."BuildStableNortheast"BaseAreas(December28,inthe1945),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 84.We should carry on constant propagandaamong the people on the facts of world的前途，常常向人民宣传，使人民建立起胜利的信心，同时，我们还要告诉人民，告诉同志们，道路是曲折的。
在革命的道路上还有许多障碍物，还有许多困难。
我们党的七次代表大会设想过许多困难，我们宁肯把困难想得更多一些，有些同志不愿意多想困难。
但是困难是事实，有多少就得承认多少，不能采取“不承认主义”。
我们要承认困难，分析困难，向困难作斗争。
世界上没有直路，要准备走曲折的路，不要贪便宜。
不能设想，那一天早上，一切反动派会统统自己跪在地下。
总之，前途是光明的，道路是曲折的。
我们面前困难还多，不可忽视。
我们和全体人民团结progress and the bright future ahead so thatthey will build their confidence in victory.At the same time, we must tell the peopleand tell our comrades that there will betwists and turns in our road, There are stillmany obstacles and difficulties along theroad of revolution. The Seventh Congress ofour Party assumed that the difficulties wouldbe many, for we preferred to assume therewould be more difficulties rather than less.Some comrades do not like to think muchabout difficulties. But difficulties are facts;we must recognize as many difficulties asthere are and should not adopt a "policy ofnon-recognition". We must recognizedifficulties, analyse them and combat them.There are no straight roads in the world; wemust be prepared to follow a road whichtwists and turns and not try to get things onthe cheap. It must not be imagined that onefine morning all the reactionaries will godown on their knees of their own accord. Ina word, while the prospects are bright, theroad has twists and turns. There are stillmany difficulties ahead which we must notoverlook. By uniting with the entire peoplein a common effort, we can certainly起来，共同努力，一定能够排除万难，达到胜利的目的。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一六二页谁要是只看见光明一面，不看见困难一面，谁就会不能很好地为实现党的任务而斗争。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九四页社会的财富是工人、农民和劳动知识分子自己创造的。
只要这些人掌握了自己的命运，又有一条马克思列宁主义的路线，不是回避问题，而是用积极的态度去解决问题，任何人间的困难总是可以解决的。
《书记动手，全党办社》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第五——六页overcome all difficulties and win victory."On the Chungking Negotiations"(October 17, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.IV, pp. 59-60.Anyone who sees only the bright side butnot the difficulties cannot fight effectivelyfor the accomplishment of the Party's tasks."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 314.The wealth of society is created by theworkers, peasants and working intellectuals.If they take their destiny into their ownhands, follow a Marxist-Leninist line andtake an active attitude in solving problemsinstead of evading them, there will be nodifficulty in the world which they cannotovercome.Introductory note to "The PartySecretary Takes the Lead and All theParty Members Help Run theCo-operatives" (1955), The SocialistUpsurge in China's Countryside,Chinese ed., Vol. I.全党同志都必须充分地估计到，并准备用百折不回的毅力，有计划地克服所有的困难。
反动势力面前和我们面前都有困难。
但是反动势力的困难是不可能克服的，因为他们是接近于死亡的没有前途的势力。
我们的困难是能够克服的，因为我们是新兴的有光明前途的势力。
《迎接中国革命的新高潮》（一九四七年二月一日），毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二一四——一二一五页我们的同志在困难的时候，要看到成绩，要看到光明，要提高我们的勇气。
《为人民服务》（一九四四年九月八日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零零四页任何新生事物的成长都是要经过艰难曲折的。
在社会主义事业中，要想不经过艰难曲折，不付出极大努力，总是一帆The comrades throughout the Party musttake all this fully into account and beprepared to overcome all difficulties with anindomitable will and in a planned way. Thereactionary forces and we both havedifficulties. But the difficulties of thereactionary forces are insurmountablebecause they are forces on the verge ofdeath and have no future. Our difficultiescan be overcome because we are new andrising forces and have a bright future."Greet the New High Tide of theChineseRevolution"(February1,1947), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 125.In times of difficulty we must not losesight of our achievements, must see thebright future and must pluck up our courage."Serve the People" (September 8, 1944),Selected Works, Vol. III, pp. 227-28.New things always have to experiencedifficulties and setbacks as they grow. It issheer fantasy to imagine that the cause ofsocialism is all plain sailing and easy风顺，容易得到成功，这种想法，只是幻想。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第一七页革命斗争中的某些时候，困难条件超过顺利条件，在这种时候，困难是矛盾的主要方面，顺利是其次要方面。
然而由于革命党人的努力，能够逐步地克服困难，开展顺利的新局面，困难的局面让位于顺利的局面。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月）《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三一三页什么叫工作，工作就是斗争。
那些地方有困难、有问题，需要我们去解决。
我success, without difficulties and setbacks orthe exertion of tremendous efforts."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., pp.32-33.At certain times in the revolutionarystruggle, the difficulties outweigh thefavourable conditions and so constitute theprincipal aspect of the contradiction and thefavourable conditions constitute thesecondary aspect. But through their effortsthe revolutionaries can overcome thedifficulties step by step and open up afavourable new situation, thus a difficultsituation yields place to a favourable one."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 335.What is work? Work is struggle. There aredifficulties and problems in those places forus to overcome and solve. We go there todifficulties. A good comrade is one who is们是为着解决困难去工作、去斗争的。
越是困难的地方越是要去，这才是好同志。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日。
），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一六零页中国古代有个寓言，叫做“愚公移山”。
说的是古代有一位老人，住在华北，名叫北山愚公。
他的家门南面有两座大山挡住他家的出路，一座叫做太行山，一座叫做王屋山。
愚公下决心率领他的儿子们要用锄头挖去这两座大山。
有个老头子名叫智叟的看了发笑，说是你们这样干未免太愚蠢了，你们父子数人要挖掉这样两座大山是完全不可能的。
愚公回答说：我死了以后有我的儿子，儿子死了，又有孙子，子子孙孙是没有穷尽的。
这两座山虽然很高，却是不会再增高了，挖一点就会少一点。
为什么挖不平呢？愚公批驳了智叟的work and struggle to overcome these moreeager to go where the difficulties are greater."OntheChungkingNegotiations"(October 17, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.IV, p. 58.There is an ancient Chinese fable called"The Foolish Old Man Who Removed theMountains". It tells of an old man who livedin northern China long, long ago and wasknown as the Foolish Old Man of NorthMountain. His house faced south andbeyond his doorway stood the two greatpeaks, Taihang and Wangwu, obstructing theway. With great determination, he led hissons in digging up these mountains hoe inhand. Another greybeard, known as the WiseOld Man, saw them and said derisively,"How silly of you to do this! It is quiteimpossible for you few to dig up these twohuge mountains." The Foolish Old Manreplied, "When I die, my sons will carry on;when they die, there will be my grandsons,and then their sons and grandsons, and so onto infinity. High as they are, the mountains错误思想，毫不动摇，每天挖山不止。
这件事感动了上帝，他就派了两个神仙下凡，把两座山背走了。
现在也有两座压在中国人民头上的大山，一座叫做帝国主义，一座叫做封建主义。
中国共产党早就下了决心，要挖掉这两座山。
我们一定要坚持下去，一定要不断地工作，我们也会感动上帝的。
这个上帝不是别人，就是全中国的人民大众。
全国人民大众一齐起来和我们一道挖这两座山，有什么挖不平呢？《愚公移山》（一九四五年六月十一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一一零二页cannot grow any higher and with everybit we dig, they will be that much lower.Why can't we clear them away?" Havingrefuted the Wise Old Man's wrong view, hewent on digging every day, unshaken in hisconviction. God was moved by this, and hesent down two angels, who carried themountains away on their backs. Today, twobig mountains lie like a dead weight on theChinese people. One is imperialism, theother is feudalism. The Chinese CommunistParty has long made up its mind to dig themup. We must persevere and workunceasingly, and we, too, will touch God'sheart. Our God is none other than themasses of the Chinese people. If they standup and dig together with us, why can't thesetwo mountains be cleared away?"The Foolish Old Man Who RemovedtheMountains"(June11,Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 322.*1945),二十二、思想方法和工作方法人类的历史，就是一个不断地从必然王国向自由王国发展的历史。
这个历史永远不会完结。
在有阶级存在的社会内，阶级斗争不会完结。
在无阶级存在的社会内，新与旧、正确与错误之间的斗争永远不会完结。
在生产斗争和科学实验范围内，人类总是不断发展的，自然界也总是不断发展的，永远不会停止在一个水平上。
因此，人类总得不断地总结经验，有所发现，有所发明，有所创造，有所前进。
停止的论点，悲观的论点，无所作为和骄傲自满的论点都是错误的。
其所以是错误，因为这些论点，不符合大约一百万年22. METHODS OFTHINKING ANDMETHODS OF WORKThe history of mankind is one ofcontinuous development from the realm ofnecessity to the realm of freedom. Thisprocess is never-ending. In any society inwhich classes exist class struggle will neverend. In classless society the strugglebetween the new and the old and betweentruth and falsehood will never end. In thefields of the struggle for production andscientific experiment, mankind makesconstant progress and nature undergoesconstant change, they never remain at thesame level. Therefore, man has constantly tosum up experience and go on discovering,inventing, creating and advancing. Ideas ofstagnation,pessimism,inertiaandcomplacency are all wrong. They are wrongbecause they agree neither with thehistorical facts of social development overthe past million years, nor with the historical以来人类社会发展的历史事实，也不符合迄今为止我们所知道的自然界（例如天体史，地球史，生物史，其他各种自然科学史所反映的自然界）的历史事实。
转摘自《周恩来总理在第三届全国人民代表大会第一次会议上的政府工作报告》，一九六四年十二月三十一日《人民日报》自然科学是人们争取自由的一种武装。
人们为着要在社会上得到自由，就要用社会科学来了解社会，改造社会进行社会革命。
人们为着要在自然界里得到自由，就要用自然科学来了解自然，克服自然和改造自然，从自然里得到自由。
在边区自然科学研究会成立大会上的讲话（一九四零年二月五日），一九四零年三月十五日《新中华报》马克思主义的哲学辩证唯物论有两facts of nature so far known to us (i.e.,nature as revealed in the history of celestialbodies, the earth, life, and other naturalphenomena).Quoted in "Premier Chou Enlai'sReport on the Work of the Governmentto the First Session of the ThirdNational People's Congress of thePeople's Republic of China" (December21-22, 1964).Natural science is one of man's weaponsin his fight for freedom. For the purpose ofattaining freedom in society, man must usesocial science to understand and changesociety and carry out social revolution. Forthe purpose of attaining freedom in theworld of nature, man must use naturalscience to understand, conquer and changenature and thus attain freedom from nature."Speech at the inaugural meeting of theNatural Science Research Society of theBorder Region" (February 5, 1940).The Marxist philosophy of dialecticalmaterialism has two outstanding charac-个最显著的特点：一个是它的阶级性，公然申明辨证唯物论是为无产阶级服务的；再一个是它的实践性，强调理论对于实践的依赖关系，理论的基础是实践，又转过来为实践服务。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二七三页马克思主义的哲学认为十分重要的问题，不在于懂得了客观世界的规律性，因而能够解释世界，而在于拿了这种对于客观规律性的认识去能动地改造世界。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二八零——二八一页人的正确思想是从哪里来的？是从天上掉下来的吗？不是。
是自己头脑里固有的吗？不是。
人的正确思想，只能从社会实践中来，只能从社会的生产斗争、阶级斗争和科学实验这三项实践中来。
《人的正确思想是从那里来的？》（一九六三年五月），人民出版社版第一页teristics. One is its class nature: it openlyavows that dialectical materialism is in theservice of the proletariat. The other is itspracticality: it emphasizes the dependence oftheory on practice, emphasizes that theory isbased on practice and in turn serves practice."On Practice" (July 1937), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 297.Marxist philosophy holds that the mostimportant problem does not lie inunderstanding the laws of the objectiveworld and thus being able to explain it, butin applying the knowledge of these lawsactively to change the world.Ibid., p. 304.Where do correct ideas come from? Dothey drop from the skies? No. Are theyinnate in the mind? No. They come fromsocial practice, and from it alone; they comefrom three kinds of social practice, thestruggle for production, the class struggleand scientific experiment."Where Do Correct Ideas Come from?"(May 1963), 1st pocket ed., p. 1.人们的社会存在，决定人们的思想。
而代表先进阶级的正确思想，一旦被群众掌握，就会变成改造社会、改造世界的物质力量。
《人的正确思想是从那里来的？》（一九六三年五月），人民出版社版第一页人们在社会实践中从事各项斗争，有了丰富的经验，有成功的，有失败的。
无数客观外界的现象通过人的眼、耳、鼻、舌、身这五个官能反映到自己的头脑中来，开始是感性认识。
这种感性认识的材料积累多了，就会产生一个飞跃，变成了理性认识，这就是思想。
这是一个认识过程。
这是整个认识过程的第一个阶段，即由客观物质到主观精神的阶段，由存在到思想的阶段。
这时候的精神、思想（包括理论、政策、计划、办法）是否正确地反It is man's social being that determines histhinking.Oncethecorrectideascharacteristic of the advanced class aregrasped by the masses, these ideas turn intoa material force which changes society andchanges the world.Ibid.In their social practice, men engage invarious kinds of struggle and gain richexperience, both from their successes andfrom their failures. Countless phenomena ofthe objective external world are reflected ina man's brain through his five sense organs -the organs of sight, hearing, smell, taste andtouch. At first, knowledge is perceptual. Theleap to conceptual knowledge, i e., to ideas,occurswhensufficientperceptualknowledge is accumulated. This is oneprocess in cognition. It is the first stage inthe whole process of cognition, the stageleading from objective matter to subjectiveconsciousness, from existence to ideas.Whether or not one's consciousness or ideas(including theories, policies, plans ormeasures) do correctly reflect the laws of映了客观外界的规律，还是没有证明的，还不能确定是否正确，然后又有认识过程的第二个阶段，即由精神到物质的阶段，由思想到存在的阶段，这就是把第一个阶段得到的认识放到社会实践中去，看这些理论、政策、计划、办法等等是否能得到预期的成功。
一般的说来，成功了的就是正确的，失败了的就是错误的，特别是人类对自然界的斗争是如此。
在社会斗争中，代表先进阶级的势力，有时候有些失败，并不是因为思想不正确，而是因为在斗争力量的对比上，先进势力这一方，暂时还不如反动势力那一方，所以暂时失败了，但是以后总有一天会要成功的。
人们的认识经过实践的考验，又会产生一个飞跃。
这次飞跃，比起前一次飞跃来，意义更加伟大。
因为只有这一次飞跃才能证明认识的第一次飞跃，即从客观外界的反映the objective external world is not yetproved at this stage, in which it is not yetpossible to ascertain whether they arecorrect or not. Then comes the second stagein the process of cognition, the stage leadingfrom consciousness back to matter, fromideas back to existence, in which theknowledge gained in the first stage isapplied in social practice to ascertainwhether the theories, policies, plans ormeasures meet with the anticipated success.Generally speaking, those that succeed arecorrect and those that fail are incorrect, andthis is especially true of man's struggle withnature. In social struggle, the forcesrepresenting the advanced class sometimessuffer defeat not because their ideas areincorrect but because, in the balance offorces engaged in struggle, they are not aspowerful for the time being as the forces ofreaction; they are therefore temporarilydefeated, but they are bound to triumphsooner or later. Man's knowledge makesanother leap through the test of practice.This leap is more important than the过程中得到的思想、理论、计划、办法等等，究竟是正确的还是错误的，此外再无别的检验真理的办法。
《人的正确思想是从那里来的？》（一九六三年五月），人民出版社版第一——二页一个正确的认识，往往需要经过由物质到精神，由精神到物质，即由实践到认识，由认识到实践这样多次的反复，才能够完成。
这就是马克思主义的认识论，就是辩证唯物论的认识论。
《人的正确思想是从那里来的？》（一九六三年五月），人民出版社版第三页无论何人要认识什么事物，除了同那个事物接触，即生活于（实践于）那个事物的环境中，是没有法子解决的。
……你要有知识，你就得参加变革现实的实践。
你要知道梨子的滋味，你就得变革梨子，previous one. For it is this leap alone thatcan prove the correctness or incorrectness ofthe first leap in cognition, i.e., of the ideas,theories, policies, plans or measuresformulated in the course of reflecting theobjective external world. There is no otherway of testing truth.Ibid., pp. 1-3.*Often, correct knowledge can be arrivedat only after many repetitions of the processleading from matter to consciousness andthen back to matter, that is, leading frompractice to knowledge and then back topractice. Such is the Marxist theory ofknowledge, the dialectical materialist theoryof knowledge.Ibid., p. 3.*Whoever wants to know a thing has noway of doing so except by coming intocontact with it, that is, by living (practising)in its environment. ... If you wantknowledge, you must take part in thepractice of changing reality. If you want toknow the taste of a pear, you must changewant to know the theory and methods of亲口吃一吃。
……你要知道革命的理论和方法，你就得参加革命。
一切真知都是从直接经验发源的。
《实践论》（一九三七年七），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二七五——二七六页认识从实践始，经过实践得到了理论的认识，还须再回到实践去。
认识的能动作用，不但表现于从感性的认识到理性的认识之能动的飞跃，更重要的还须表现于从理性的认识到革命的实践这一个飞跃。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二八一页大家明白。
不论做什么事，不懂得那件事的情形，它的性质，它和它以外的事情的关联，就不知道那件事的规律，就不知道如何去做，就不能做好那件事。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一六三——一六四页the pear by eating it yourself.... If yourevolution, you must take part in revolution.All genuine knowledge originates in directexperience."On Practice" (July 1937), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, pp. 299-300.Knowledge begins with practice, andtheoretical knowledge which is acquiredthrough practice must then return to practice.The active function of knowledge manifestsitself not only in the active leap fromperceptual to rational knowledge, but - andthis is more important - it must manifestitself in the leap from rational knowledge torevolutionary practice.Ibid., p. 304.*It is well known that when you doanything, unless you understand its actualcircumstances, its nature and its relations toother things, you will not know the lawsgoverning it, or know how to do it, or beable to do it well."Problems of Strategy in China'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 179.人们要想得到工作的胜利即得到预想的结果，一定要使自己的思想合于客观外界的规律性，如果不合，就会在实践中失败。
人们经过失败之后，也就从失败取得教训，改正自己的思想使之适合于外界的规律性，人们就能变失败为胜利，所谓“失败者成功之母”，“吃一堑长一智”，就是这个道理。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二七三页我们是马克思主义者，马克思主义叫我们看问题不要从抽象的定义出发，而要从客观存在的事实出发，从分析这些事实中找出方针、政策、办法来。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话》（一九四二年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八五五页按照实际情况决定工作方针，这是一If a man wants to succeed in his work,that is, to achieve the anticipated results, hemust bring his ideas into correspondencewith the laws of the objective external world;if they do not correspond, he will fail in hispractice. After he fails, he draws his lessons,corrects his ideas to make them correspondto the laws of the external world, and canthus turn failure into success; this is what ismeant by "failure is the mother of success"and "a fall into the pit, a gain in your wit".。
"On Practice" (July 1937), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, pp. 296-97.We are Marxists, and Marxism teachesthat in our approach to a problem we shouldstart from objective facts, not from abstractdefinitions, and that we should derive ourguiding principles, policies and measuresfrom an analysis of these facts."Talks at the Yen'an Forum onLiterature and Art" (May 1942),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 74.The most fundamental method of workwhich all Communists must firmly bear inmind is to determine our working policiesaccording to actual conditions. When we切共产党员所必须牢牢记住的最基本的工作方法。
我们所犯的错误，研究其发生的原因，都是由于我们离开了当时当地的实际情况，主观地决定自己的工作方针。
《在晋绥干部会议上的讲话》（一九四八年四月一日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一三零六页世界上只有唯心论和形而上学最省力，因为它可以由人们瞎说一气，不要根据客观实际，也不受客观实际检查的。
唯物论和辩证法则要用气力，它要根据客观实际，并受客观实际检查，不用气力就会滑到唯心论和形而上学方面去。
《关于胡风反革命集团的材料》按语（一九五五年五月），《关于胡风反革命集团的材料》人民出版社版第七零页我们看事情必须要看它的实质，而把study the causes of the mistakes we havemade, we find that they all arose because wedeparted from the actual situation at a giventime and place and were subjective indetermining our working policies."Speech at a Conference of Cadres in theShansi-Suiyuan Liberated Area" (April1, 1948), Selected Works, Vol. IV, pp.229-30.*Idealism and metaphysics are the easiestthings in the world, because people can talkas much nonsense as they like withoutbasing it on objective reality or having ittested against reality. Materialism anddialectics, on the other hand, need effort.They must be based on and tested byobjective reality. Unless one makes theeffort one is liable to slip into idealism andmetaphysics.Introductory note to "Material on theHuFengCounter-RevolutionaryClique" (May 1955).When we look at a thing, we mustexamine its essence and treat its appearance它的现象只看作入门的向导，一进了门就要抓住它的实质，这才是可靠的科学的分析方法。
《星星之火，可以燎原》（一九三零年一月五日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一零三页事物发展的根本原因，不是在事物的外部而是在事物的内部，在于事物内部的矛盾性。
任何事物内部都有这种矛盾性，因此引起了事物的运动和发展。
事物内部的这种矛盾性是事物发展的根本原因，一事物和他事物的互相联系和互相影响则是事物发展的第二位的原因。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二八九——二九零页唯物辩证法认为外因是变化的条件，内因是变化的根据，外因通过内因而起作用。
鸡蛋因得适当的温度而变化为鸡子，merely as an usher at the threshold, andonce we cross the threshold, we must graspthe essence of the thing; this is the onlyreliable and scientific method of analysis."A Single Spark Can Start a PrairieFire" (January 5, 1930), Selected Works,Vol. I, p. 119.Thefundamentalcauseofthedevelopment of a thing is not external butinternal; it lies in the contradictorinesswithin the thing. This internal contradictionexists in every single thing, hence its motionand development. Contradictoriness within athing is the fundamental cause of itsdevelopment, while its interrelations andinteractions with other things are secondarycauses."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 313.It [materialist dialectics] holds thatexternal causes are the condition of changeand internal causes are the basis of change,and that external causes become operative但温度不能使石头变为鸡子，因为二者的根据是不同的。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年蜍 月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二九一页马克思主义的哲学认为，对立统一规律是宇宙的根本规律。
这个规律，不论在自然界、人类社会和人们的思想中，都是普遍存在的。
矛盾着的对立面又统一，又斗争，由此推动事物的运动和变化。
矛盾是普遍存在的，不过按事物的性质不同，矛盾的性质也就不同，对于任何一个具体的事物说来，对立的统一是有条件的、暂时的、过渡的，因而是相对的，对立的斗争则是绝对的。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第九——一零页分析的方法就是辩证的方法。
所谓分析，就是分析事物的矛盾。
不熟悉生活，through internal causes. In a suitabletemperature an egg changes into a chicken,but no temperature can change a stone into achicken, because each has a different basis.Ibid., p. 314.Marxist philosophy holds that the law ofthe unity of opposites is the fundamentallaw of the universe. This law operatesuniversally, whether in the natural world, inhuman society, or in man's thinking.Between the opposites in a contradictionthere is at once unity and struggle, and it isthis that impels things to move and change.Contradictions exist everywhere, but theydiffer in accordance with the different natureof different things. In any givenphenomenon or thing, the unity of oppositesis conditional, temporary and transitory, andhence relative, whereas the struggle ofopposites is absolute."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p.18.The analytical method is dialectical. Byanalysis,wemeananalysingthecontradictions in things. And sound analysisis impossible without intimate knowledge对于所论的矛盾不真正了解，就不可能有中肯的分析。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一五页列宁说，对于具体情况作具体的分析，是“马克思主义的最本质的东西，马克思主义的活的灵魂”。
我们许多同志缺乏分析的头脑，对于复杂事物，不愿作反复深入的分析研究，而爱作绝对肯定或绝对否定的简单结论。
……今后应该改善这种状况。
《学习和时局》（一九四四年四月十二日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九四三页这些同志看问题的方法不对。
他们不去看问题的本质方面，主流方面，而是强调那些非本质方面、非主流方面的东西。
应当指出：不能忽略非本质方面和非主流of life and without real understanding of thepertinent contradictions."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty's National Conference onPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957),l5t pocket ed., p. 20.Concrete analysis of concrete conditions,Lenin said, is "the most essential thing inMarxism, the living soul of Marxism".Lacking an analytical approach, many of ourcomrades do not want to go deeply intocomplex matters, to analyse and study themover and over again, but like to draw simpleconclusions which are either absolutelyaffirmative or absolutely negative.... Fromnow on we should remedy this state ofaffairs."Our Study and the Current Situation"(April 12, 1944), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 165.The way these comrades look at problemsis wrong. They do not look at the essentialor main aspects but emphasize thenon-essential or minor ones. It should bepointed out that these non-essential or minoraspects must not be overlooked and must bedealt with one by one. But they should not方面的问题，必须逐一地将它们解决。
但是，不应当将这些看成为本质和主流，以致迷惑了自己的方向。
《关于农业合作化问题》（一九五五年七月三十一日），《人民出版社版第二一页世界上的事情是复杂的，是由各方面的因素决定的。
看问题要从各方面去看，不能只从单方面看。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一五六页只有那些主观地、片面地和表面地看问题的人，跑到一个地方，不问环境的情况，不看事情的全体（事情的历史和全部现状），也不触到事情的本质（事情的性质及此一事情和其他事情的内部联系），就自以为是地发号施令起来，这样的人是没有不跌交子的。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二七八——二七九页be taken as the essential or main aspects, orwe will lose our bearings."On the Question of AgriculturalCo-operation" (July 31, 1955), 3rd ed.,pp. 17-18.In this world, things are complicated andare decided by many factors. We shouldlook at problems from different aspects, notfrom just one."On the Chungking Negotiations''(October 17, 1945), Selected Works,Vol. IV, p. 54.Only those who are subjective, one-sidedand superficial in their approach to problemswill smugly issue orders or directives themoment they arrive on the scene, withoutconsidering the circumstances, withoutviewing things in their totality (their historyand their present state as a whole) andwithout getting to the essence of things(their nature and the internal relationsbetween one thing and another). Suchpeople are bound to trip and fall."On Practice" (July 1937), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 302.研究问题，忌带主观性、片面性和表面性。
所谓主观性，就是不知道客观地看问题，也就是不知道用唯物的观点去看问题。
这一点，我在《实践论》一文中已经说过了。
所谓片面性，就是不知道全面地看问题。
……或者叫做只看见局部，不看见全体，只看见树木，不看见森林。
这样，是不能找出解决矛盾的方法的，是不能完成革命任务的，是不能做好所任工作的，是不能正确地发展党内的思想斗争的。
孙子论军事说：“知彼知己，百战不殆。
”他说的是作战的双方。
唐朝人魏征说过：“兼听则明，偏信则暗。
”也懂得片面性不对。
可是我们的同志看问题，往往带片面性，In studying a problem, we must shunsubjectivity, one-sidedness and superficiality.To be subjective means not to look atproblems objectively, that is, not to use thematerialist viewpoint in looking at problems.I have discussed this in my essay "OnPractice". To be one-sided means not to lookat problems all-sidedly.... Or it may becalled seeing the part but not the whole,seeing the trees but not the forest. That wayit is impossible to find the method forresolving a contradiction, it is impossible toaccomplish the tasks of the revolution, tocarry out assignments well or to developinner-Party ideological struggle correctly.When Sun Wu Tzu said in discussingmilitary science, "Know the enemy andknow yourself, and you can fight a hundredbattles with no danger of defeat", he wasreferring to the two sides in a battle. WeiCheng of the Tang Dynasty also understoodthe error of one-sidedness when he said,"Listen to both sides and you will beenlightened, heed only one side and you willbe benighted." But our comrades often look这样的人就往往碰钉子。
……列宁说：“要真正地认识对象，就必须把握和研究它的一切方面、一切联系和‘媒介’。
我们决不会完全地作到这一点，可是要求全面性，将使我们防止错误，防止僵化。
”我们应该记得他的话。
表面性，是对矛盾总体和矛盾各方的特点都不去看，否认深入事物里面精细地研究矛盾特点的必要，仅仅站在那里远远地望一望，粗枝大叶地看到一点矛盾的形相，就想动手去解决矛盾（答复问题、解决纠纷、处理工作、指挥战 争 ）。
 这 样 的 做 法 ， 没 有 不 出 乱 子的。
……片面性、表面性也是主观性，因为一切客观事物本来是互相联系的和具at problems one-sidedly, and so they oftenrun into snags. ... Lenin said: "... in orderreally to know an object we must embrace,study, all its sides, all connections and"mediations". We shall never achieve thiscompletely, but the demand for all-sidednessis a safeguard against mistakes and rigidity."We should remember his words. To besuperficial means to consider neither thecharacteristics of a contradiction in itstotality nor the characteristics of each of itsaspects; it means to deny the necessity forprobing deeply into a thing and minutelystudying the characteristics of itscontradiction, but instead merely to lookfrom afar and, after glimpsing the roughoutline, immediately to try to resolve thecontradiction (to answer a question, settle adispute, handle work, or direct a militaryoperation). This way of doing things isbound to lead to trouble. ...To be one-sidedand superficial is at the same time to besubjective. For all objective things areactually interconnected and are governed byinner laws, but, instead of undertaking the有内部规律的，人们不去如实地反映这些情况，而只是片面地或表面地去看它们，不认识事物的互相联系，不认识事物的内部规律，所以这种方法是主观主义的。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三零零——三零二页片面性就是思想上的绝对化，就是形而上学地看问题。
对于我们的工作的看法，肯定一切或者否定一切，都是片面性的。
……肯定一切，就是只看到好的，看不到坏的，只能赞扬，不能批评。
说我们的工作似乎一切都好，这不合乎事实。
不是一切都好，还有缺点和错误。
但是也不是一切都坏，这也不合乎事实。
要加以分析。
否定一切，就是不加分析地认为事情task of reflecting things as they reallyare, some people only look at thingsone-sidedly or superficially and knowneither their interconnections nor their innerlaws, and so their method is subjectivist."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, pp. 323-24.*One-sidedness means thinking in terms ofabsolutes, that is, a metaphysical approachto problems. In the appraisal of our work, itis one-sided to regard everything either asall positive or as all negative. ... To regardeverything as positive is to see only thegood and not the bad, and to tolerate onlypraise and no criticism. To talk as thoughour work is good in every respect is atvariance with the facts. It is not true thateverything is good; there are stillshortcomings and mistakes. But neither is ittrue that everything is bad, and that, too, isat variance with the facts. Here analysis isnecessary. To negate everything is to think,without having made any analysis, thatnothing has been done well and that the都做得不好，社会主义建设这样一个伟大事业，几亿人口所进行的这个伟大斗争，似乎没有什么好处可说，一团糟。
许多具有这种看法的人，虽然和那些对社会主义制度心怀敌意的人还不相同，但是这种看法是很错误的，很有害的，它只会使人丧失信心。
不论是用肯定一切的观点或者否定一切的观点来看我们的工作，都是错误的。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一三——一四页马克思主义者看问题，不但要看到部分，而且要看到全体。
一个虾蟆坐在井里说：“天有一个井大。
”这是不对的，因为天不止一个井大。
如果它说：“天的某一great work of socialist construction, thegreat struggle in which hundreds of millionsof people are participating, is a completemess with nothing in it worth commending.Although there is a difference between themany people who hold such views and thosewho are hostile to the socialist system, theseviews are very mistaken and harmful andcan only dishearten people. It is wrong toappraise our work either from the viewpointthat everything is positive, or from theviewpoint that everything is negative."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty'sNationalConferenceonPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957),1st pocket ed., pp. 16-17.*In approaching a problem a Marxistshould see the whole as well as the parts. Afrog in a well says, "The sky is no biggerthan the mouth of the well." That is untrue,for the sky is not just the size of the mouthof the well. If it said, "A part of the sky is部分有一个井大。
”这是对的，因为合乎事实。
《论反对日本帝国主义的策略》（一九三五年十二月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一四四页我们必须学会全面地看问题，不但要看到事物的正面，也要看到它的反面。
在一定的条件下，坏的东西可以引出好的结果，好的东西也可以引出坏的结果。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三四页我们承认总的历史发展中是物质的东西决定精神的东西，是社会的存在决定社会的意识；但是同时又承认而且必须承认精神的东西的反作用，社会意识对于社会存在的反作用，上层建筑对于经济基础的反作用。
这不是违反唯物论，正是避免了机械唯物论，坚持了辩证唯物论。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三一四页the size of the mouth of a well", that wouldbe true, for it tallies with the facts."OnTacticsAgainstJapaneseImperialism" (December 27, 1935),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 159.We must learn to look at problemsallsidedly, seeing the reverse as well as theobverse side of things. In given conditions, abad thing can lead to good results and agood thing to bad results."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., pp.66-67.*While we recognize that in the generaldevelopment of history the materialdetermines the mental and social beingdetermines social consciousness, we also -and indeed must - recognize the reaction ofmental on material things, of socialconsciousness on social being and of thesuperstructure on the economic base. Thisdoes not go against materialism; on thecontrary, it avoids mechanical materialismand firmly upholds dialectical materialism."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 336.*指导战争的人们不能超越客观条件许可的限度期求战争的胜利，然而可以而且必须在客观条件的限度之内，能动地争取战争的胜利。
战争指挥员活动的舞台，必须建筑在客观条件的许可之上，然而他们凭借这个舞台，却可以导演出很多有声有色、威武雄壮的戏剧来。
《论持久战》（一九三八年五月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第四六八页人们的思想必须适应已经变化的情况，当然，任何人不可以无根据地胡思乱想，不可以超越客观情况所许可的条件去计划自己的行动，不要勉强地去做那些实在做不到的事情。
但是现在的问题，还是右倾保守思想在许多方面作怪，使许多方面的工作不能适应客观情况的发展。
现在的问题是经过努力本来可以做到的事情，In seeking victory, those who direct a warcannot overstep the limitations imposed bythe objective conditions; within theselimitations, however, they can and must playa dynamic role in striving for victory. Thestage of action for commanders in a warmust be built upon objective possibilities,but on that stage they can direct theperformance of many a drama, full of soundand colour, power and grandeur."On Protracted War" (May 1938),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 152.People must adapt their thinking to thechanged conditions. Of course no oneshould go off into wild flights of fancy, ormake plans of action unwarranted by theobjective situation, or stretch for theimpossible. The problem today, however, isthat Rightist conservative thinking is stillcausing mischief in many spheres andpreventing the work in these spheres fromkeeping pace with the development of theobjective situation. The present problem isthat many people consider it impossible toaccomplishthings which could be却有很多人认为做不到。
《中国农村的社会主义高潮》的序言（一九五五年十二月二十七日），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第四页凡事应该用脑筋好好想一想。
俗话说：“眉头一皱，计上心来。
”就是说多想出智慧。
要去掉我们党内浓厚的盲目性，必须提倡思索，学会分析事物的方法，养成分析的习惯。
《学习和时局》（一九四四年四月十二日），《毛泽东选集》第九五二页任何过程如果有多数矛盾存在的话，其中必定有一种是主要的，起着领导的、决定的作用，其他则处于次要和服从的地位。
因此，研究任何过程，如果是存在着两个以上矛盾的复杂过程的话，就要用全力找出它的主要矛盾。
捉住了这个主要矛accomplished if they exerted themselves.Preface to "The Socialist Upsurge inChina's Countryside" (December 27,1955), Chinese ed., Vol. I.We should always use our brains and thinkeverything over carefully. A common sayinggoes, "Knit your brows and you will hitupon a stratagem." In other words muchthinking yields wisdom. In order to get ridof the blindness which exists to a seriousextent in our Party, we must encourage ourcomrades to think, to learn the method ofanalysis and to cultivate the habit ofanalysis."Our Study and the Current Situation"(April 12, 1944), Selected Works, Vol.III, pp. 174-75.*If in any process there are a number ofcontradictions, one of them must be theprincipal contradiction playing the leadingand decisive role, while the rest occupy asecondary and subordinate position.Therefore, in studying any complex processin which there are two or morecontradictions, we must devote every effortto finding its principal contradiction. Once盾，一切问题就迎刃而解了。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三一零页矛盾着的两方面中，必有一方面是主要的，他方面是次要的。
其主要的方面，即所谓矛盾起主导作用的方面。
事物的性质，主要地是由取得支配地位的矛盾的主要方面所规定的。
然而这种情形不是固定的，矛盾的主要和非主要的方面互相转化着，事物的性质也就随着起变化。
《矛盾论》（九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三一零页我们不但要提出任务，而且要解决完成任务的方法问题。
我们的任务是过河，但是没有桥或没有船就不能过。
不解决桥this principal contradiction is grasped, allproblems can be readily solved."On Contradiction" (AugustSelected Works, Vol. I, p. 332.*1937),Of the two contradictory aspects, onemust be principal and the other secondary.The principal aspect is the one playing theleading role in the contradiction. The natureof a thing is determined mainly by theprincipal aspect of a contradiction, theaspect which has gained the dominantposition.But this situation is not static; theprincipal and the non-principal aspects of acontradiction transform themselves intoeach other and the nature of the thingchanges accordingly.Ibid., p. 333.It is not enough to set tasks, we must alsosolve the problem of the methods forcarrying them out. If our task is to cross ariver, we cannot cross it without a bridge ora boat. Unless the bridge or boat problem issolved, it is idle to speak of crossing the或船的问题，过河就是一句空话。
不解决方法问题，任务也只是瞎说一顿。
《关心群众生活，注意工作方法》（一九三四年一月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一三四页任何工作任务，如果没有一般的普遍的号召，就不能动员广大群众行动起来。
但如果只限于一般号召，而领导人员没有具体地直接地从若干组织将所号召的工作深入实施，突破一点，取得经验，然后利用这种经验去指导其他单位，就无法考验自己提出的一般号召是否正确，也无法充实一般号召的内容，就有使一般号召归于落空的危险。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八九九页river. Unless the problem of method issolved, talk about the task is useless."Be Concerned with the Well-Being ofthe Masses, Pay Attention to Methodsof Work" (January 27, 1934), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 150.In any task, if no general and widespreadcall is issued, the broad masses cannot bemobilized for action. But if persons inleading positions confine themselves to ageneral call - if they do not personally, insome of the organizations, go deeply andconcretely into the work called for, make abreak-through at some single point, gainexperience and use this experience forguiding other units - then they will have noway of testing the correctness or ofenriching the content of their general call,and there is the danger that nothing maycome of it."Some Questions Concerning Methodsof Leadership" (June 1, 1943), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 117.任何领导人员，凡不从下级个别单位的个别人员、个别事件取得具体经验者，必不能向一切单位作普遍的指导。
这一方法必须普遍地提倡，使各级领导干部都能学会使用。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零零页在任何一个地区内，不能同时有许多中心工作，在一定时间内只能有一个中心工作，辅以别的第二位、第三位的工作。
因此，一个地区的总负责人，必须考虑到该处的斗争历史和斗争环境，将各项工作摆在适当的地位；而不是自己全无计划，只按上级指示来一件做一件，形成很多的No one in a leading position is competentto give general guidance to all the unitsunless he derives concrete experience fromparticular individuals and events inparticular subordinate units. This methodmust be promoted everywhere so thatleading cadres at all levels learn to apply it.Ibid., p. 118.In any given place, there cannot be anumber of central tasks at the same time. Atany one time there can be only one centraltask, supplemented by other tasks of asecond or third order of importance.Consequently, the person with over-allresponsibility in the locality must take intoaccount the history and circumstances of thestruggle there and put the different tasks intheir proper order; he should not act uponeach instruction as it comes from the higherorganization without any planning of hisown, and thereby create a multitude of"central tasks" and a state of confusion and“中心工作”和凌乱无秩序的状态。
上级机关也不要不分轻重缓急地没有中心地同时指定下级机关做很多项工作，以致引起下级在工作步骤上的凌乱，而得不到确定的结果。
领导人员依照每一具体地区的历史条件和环境条件，统筹全局，正确地决定每一时期的工作重心和工作秩序，并把这种决定坚持地贯彻下去，务必得到一定的结果，这是一种领导艺术。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零三页必须随时掌握工作进程，交流经验，纠正错误，不要等数月、半年以至一年后，disorder. Nor should a higher organizationsimultaneously assign many tasks to a lowerorganization without indicating their relativeimportance and urgency or withoutspecifying which is central, for that will leadto confusion in the steps to be taken by thelower organizations in their work and thusno definite results will be achieved. It is partof the art of leadership to take the wholesituation into account and plan accordinglyin the light of the historical conditions andexisting circumstances of each locality,decide correctly on the centre of gravity andthe sequence of the work for each period,steadfastly carry through the decision, andmake sure that definite results are achieved.Ibid., p. 121.It [a regional or sub-regional bureau of theCentral Committee of the Party] shouldconstantly have a grip on the progress of thework, exchange experience and correct才开总结会，算总帐，总的纠正。
这样损失太大，而随时纠正，损失较少。
《关于工商业政策》（一九四八年二月二十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二八页不要等到问题成了堆，闹出了许多乱子，然后才去解决。
领导一定要走在运动的前面，不要落在它的后面。
《季节包工》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》下册第一一五九页我们需要的是热烈而镇定的情绪，紧张而有秩序的工作。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一九六——一九七页mistakes; it should not wait several months,half a year or a year before holdingsumming-up meetings for a generalcheck-up and a general correction ofmistakes. Waiting leads to great loss, whilecorrecting mistakes as soon as they occurreduces loss."On the Policy Concerning Industryand Commerce" (February 27, 1948),Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 204.Don't wait until problems pile up andcause a lot of trouble before trying to solvethem. Leaders must march ahead of themovement, not lag behind it..Introductory note to "Contract on aSeasonal Basis" (I955), The SocialistUpsurge in China's Countryside,Chinese ed., Vol. III.What we need is an enthusiastic but calmstate of mind and intense but orderly work."Problems of Strategy in China'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 211.二十三、调查研究一切实际工作者必须向下作调查。
对于只懂得理论不懂得实际情况的人，这种调查工作尤有必要，否则他们就不能将理论和实际相联系。
“没有调查就没有发言权”，这句话，虽然曾经被人讥为“狭隘经验论”的，我却至今不悔；不但不悔，我仍然坚持没有调查是不可能有发言权的。
有许多人，“下车伊始”,就哇喇哇喇地发议论,提意见,这也批评,那也指责，其实这种人十个有十个要失败。
因为这种议论或批评，没有经过周密调查，不过是无知妄说。
我们党吃所谓“钦差大臣”的亏，23. INVESTIGATIONAND STUDYEveryone engaged in practical work mustinvestigate conditions at the lower levels.Such investigation is especially necessaryfor those who know theory but do not knowthe actual conditions, for otherwise they willnot be able to link theory with practice.Although my assertion, "No investigation noright to speak", has been ridiculed as"narrow empiricism", to this day I do notregret having made it; far from regretting it,I still insist that without investigation therecannot possibly be any right to speak. Thereare many people who "the moment theyalight from the official carriage" make ahullabaloo, spout opinions, criticize this andcondemn that; but, in fact, ten out of ten ofthem will meet with failure. For such viewsor criticisms, which are not based onthorough investigation, are nothing butignorant twaddle. Countless times our Party是不可胜数的。
而这种“钦差大臣”则是满天飞，几乎到处都有。
斯大林的话说得对：“理论若不和革命实践联系起来，就会变成无对象的理论。
”当然又是他的话对：“实践若不以革命理论为指南，就会变成盲目的实践。
”除了盲目的、无前途的、无远见的实际家，是不能叫做“狭隘经验论”的。
《“农村调查”的序言和跋》（一九四一年三月、四月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第七九一页这种态度，就是实事求是的态度。
“实事”就是客观存在着的一切事物，“是”就是客观事物的内部联系，即规律性，“求”就是我们去研究。
我们要从国内外、省内外、县内外、区内外的实际情况出发，suffered at the hands of these "imperialenvoys", who rushed here, there andeverywhere. Stalin rightly says that "theorybecomes purposeless if it is not connectedwith revolutionary practice". And he rightlyadds that "practice gropes in the dark if itspath is not illumined by revolutionarytheory". Nobody should be labelled a"narrow empiricist" except the "practicalman" who gropes in the dark and lacksperspective and foresight."Preface and Postscript to RuralSurveys" (March and April 1941),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 13.*To take such an attitude is to seek truthfrom facts. "Facts" are all the things thatexist objectively, "truth" means their internalrelations, that is, the laws governing them,and "to seek" means to study. We shouldproceed from the actual conditions insideand outside the country, the province,county or district, and derive from them, asour guide to action, laws which are inherentin them and not imaginary, that is, we从其中引出其固有的而不是臆造的规律性，即找出周围事变的内部联系，作为我们行动的向导。
而要这样做，就须不凭主观想像，不凭一时的热情，不凭死的书本，而凭客观存在的事实，详细地占有材料，在马克思列宁主义一般原理的指导下，从这些材料中引出正确的结论。
《改造我们的学习》（一九四一年五月）《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八零一页“闭塞眼睛捉麻雀”，“瞎子摸鱼”，粗枝大叶，夸夸其谈，满足于一知半解，这种极坏的作风，这种完全违反马克思列宁主义基本精神的作风，还在我党许多同志中继续存在着。
马克思、恩格斯、列宁、斯大林教导我们认真地研究情况，从客观的真实的情况出发，而不是从主观的愿望出发；我们的许多同志却直接违反这一真should find the internal relations of theevents occurring around us. And in order todo that we must rely not on subjectiveimagination, not on momentary enthusiasm,not on lifeless books, but on facts that existobjectively; we must appropriate thematerial in detail and, guided by the generalprinciples of Marxism-Leninism, drawcorrect conclusions from it."ReformOurStudy" (May 1941),Selected Works, Vol. III, pp. 22-23.To behave like "a blindfolded mancatching sparrows", or "a blind man gropingfor fish", to be crude and careless, to indulgein verbiage, to rest content with a smatteringof knowledge - such is the extremely badstyle of work that still exists among manycomrades in our Party, a style utterlyopposed to the fundamental spirit ofMarxism-Leninism. Marx, Engels, Leninand Stalin have taught us that it is necessaryto study conditions conscientiously and toproceed from objective reality and not from理。
《改造我们的学习》（一九四一年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第七九七页你对于那个问题不能解决么？那末，你就去调查那个问题的现状和它的历史吧！你完完全全调查明白了，你对那个问题就有解决的办法了。
一切结论产生于调查情况的末尾，而不是在它的先头。
只有蠢人，才是他一个人，或者邀集一堆人，不作调查，而只是冥思苦索地“想办法”，“打主意”。
须知这是一定不能想出什么好办法，打出什么好主意的。
《反对本本主义》（一九三零年五月），人民出版社版第二页调查就像“十月怀胎”，解决问题就像“一朝分娩”。
调查就是解决问题。
《反对本本主义》（一九三零年五月），人民出版社版第三页subjective wishes; but many of ourcomrades act in direct violation of this truth.Ibid. p. 18.You can't solve a problem? Well, getdown and investigate the present facts andits past history! When you have investigatedthe problem thoroughly, you will know howto solve it. Conclusions invariably comeafter investigation, and not before. Only ablockhead cudgels his brains on his own, ortogether with a group, to "find a solution" or"evolve an idea" without making anyinvestigation. It must be stressed that thiscannot possibly lead to any effectivesolution or any good idea."Oppose Book Worship" (May 1930), 1stpocket ed., p. 2.Investigation may be likened to the longmonths of pregnancy, and solving a problemto the day of birth. To investigate a problemis, indeed, to solve it.Ibid., p. 3.应用马克思列宁主义的理论和方法，对周围环境作系统的周密的调查和研究。
不是单凭热情去工作，而是如同斯大林所说的那样：把革命气概和实际精神结合起来。
《改造我们的学习》（一九四一年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八零一页要了解情况，唯一的方法是向社会作调查，调查社会各阶级的生动情况。
对于担负指导工作的人来说，有计划地抓住几个城市、几个乡村，用马克思主义的基本观点，即阶级分析的方法，作几次周密的调查，乃是了解情况的最基本的方法。
《“农村调查”的序言和跋》（一九四一年三月、四月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第七八九页开调查会每次人不必多，三五个七八[With the Marxist-Leninist attitude,] aperson applies the theory and method ofMarxism-Leninism to the systematic andthorough investigation and study of theenvironment. He does not work byenthusiasm alone but, as Stalin says,combines revolutionary sweep withpracticalness."Reform Our Study" (May 1941),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 22.The only way to know conditions is tomake social investigations, to investigate theconditions of each social class in real life.For those charged with directing work, thebasic method for knowing conditions is toconcentrate on a few cities and villagesaccording to a plan and, using thefundamental viewpoint of Marxism, i.e., themethod of class analysis, make a number ofthorough investigations."Preface and Postscript to RuralSurveys" (March and April 1941),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 11.*A fact-finding meeting need not be large;from three to five or seven or eight people个人即够。
必须给予时间，必须有调查纲目，还必须自己口问手写，并同到会人展开讨论。
因此，没有满腔的热忱，没有眼睛向下的决心，没有求知的渴望，没有放下臭架子、甘当小学生的精神，是一定不能做，也一定做不好的。
《“农村调查”的序言和跋》（一九四一年三月、四月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第七九零页指挥员的正确的部署来源于正确的决心，正确的决心来源于正确的判断，正确的判断来源于周到的和必要的侦察，和对于各种侦察材料的联贯起来的思索。
指挥员使用一切可能的和必要的侦察手段，are enough. Ample time must be allowedand an outline for the investigation must beprepared; furthermore, one must personallyask questions, take notes and havediscussions with those at the meeting.Therefore one certainly cannot make aninvestigation, or do it well, without zeal, adetermination to direct one's eyes downwardand a thirst for knowledge, and withoutshedding the ugly mantle of pretentiousnessand becoming a willing pupil.Ibid., p. 12.A commander's correct dispositions stemfrom his correct decisions, his correctdecisions stem from his correct judgements,and his correct judgements stem from athorough and necessary reconnaissance andfrom pondering on and piecing together thedata of various kinds gathered throughreconnaissance. He applies all possible andnecessary methods of reconnaissance, andponders on the information gathered aboutfalse and retaining the true, proceeding from将侦察得来的敌方情况的各种材料加以去粗取精、去伪存真、由此及彼、由表及里的思索，然后将自己方面的情况加上去，研究双方的对比和相互的关系，因而构成判断，定下决心，作出计划，——这是军事家在作出每一个战略、战役或战斗的计划之前的一个整个的认识情况的过程。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一七三页the enemy's situation, discarding the drossand selecting the essential, eliminating thethe one to the other and from the outside tothe inside; then, he takes the conditions onhis own side into account, and makes astudy of both sides and their interrelations,thereby forming his judgements, making uphis mind and working out his plans. Such isthe complete process of knowing a situationwhich a military man goes through beforehe formulates a strategic plan, a campaignplan or a battle plan."Problemsof Strategy inChina'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I. p. 188.二十四、纠正错误思想即使我们的工作得到了极其伟大的成绩，也没有任何值得骄傲自大的理由。
虚心使人进步，骄傲使人落后，我们应当永远记住这个真理。
《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会开幕词》（一九五六年九月十五日），《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会文献》第九——一零页因为胜利，党内的骄傲情绪，以功臣自居的情绪，停顿起来不求进步的情绪，贪图享乐不愿再过艰苦生活的情绪，可能生长。
因为胜利，人民感谢我们，资产阶级也会出来捧场。
敌人的武力是不能征服我们的，这点已经得到证明了。
资产阶级的捧场则可能征服我们队伍中的意志薄24. CORRECTINGMISTAKEN IDEASEven if we achieve gigantic successes inour work, there is no reason whatsoever tofeel conceited and arrogant. Modesty helpsone to go forward, whereas conceit makesone lag behind. This is a truth we mustalways bear in mind.。
"Opening Address at the EighthNational Congress of the CommunistParty of China" (September 15, 1956).With victory, certain moods may growwithin the Party - arrogance, the airs of aself-styled hero, inertia and unwillingness tomake progress, love of pleasure and distastefor continued hard living. With victory, thepeople will be grateful to us and thebourgeoisie will come forward to flatter us.It has been proved that the enemy cannotconquer us by force of arms. However, theflattery of the bourgeoisie may conquer the弱者。
可能有这样一些共产党人，他们是不曾被拿枪的敌人征服过的，他们在这些敌人面前不愧英雄的称号；但是经不起人们用糖衣裹着的炮弹的攻击，他们在糖弹面前要打败仗。
我们必须预防这种情况。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四三九页有许多的东西，只要我们对它们陷入盲目性，缺乏自觉性，就可能成为我们的包袱，成为我们的负担。
例如：犯过错误，可以使人觉得自己反正是犯了错误的，从此萎靡不振；未犯错误，也可以使人觉得自己是未犯过错误的，从此骄傲起来。
工作无成绩，可以使人悲观丧气；工作有成绩，又可以使人趾高气扬。
斗争历史短的，weak-willed in our ranks. There may besome Communists, who were notconqueredby enemies with guns and wereworthy of the name of heroes for standingup to these enemies, but who cannotwithstand sugar-coated bullets; they will bedefeated by sugar-coated bullets. We mustguard against such a situation."Report to the Second Plenary Session ofthe Seventh Central Committee of theCommunist Party of China" (March 5,1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 374.Many things may become baggage, maybecome encumbrances if we cling to themblindly and uncritically. Let us take someillustrations. Having made mistakes, youmay feel that, come what may, you aresaddled with them and so become dispirited;if you have not made mistakes, you may feelthat you are free from error and so becomeconceited. Lack of achievement in workmay breed pessimism and depression, whileachievement may breed pride and arrogance.A comrade with a short record of strugglemay shirk responsibility on this account,可以因其短而不负责任；斗争历史长的，可以因其长而自以为是。
工农分子，可以自己的光荣出身傲视知识分子；知识分子，又可以自己有某些知识傲视工农分子。
各种业务专长，都可以成为高傲自大轻视旁人的资本。
甚至年龄也可以成为骄傲的工具：青年人可以因为自己聪明能干而看不起老年人，老年人又可以因为自己富有经验而看不起青年人。
对于诸如此类的东西，如果没有自觉性，那它们就会成为负担或包袱。
《学习和时局》（一九四四年四月十二日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九五一页一部分军队工作同志养成了一种骄气，对士兵，对人民，对政府，对党，横蛮不讲理，只责备做地方工作的同志，不while a veteran may become opinionatedbecause of his long record of struggle.Worker and peasant comrades, because ofpride in their class origin, may look downupon intellectuals, while intellectuals,because they have a certain amount ofknowledge, may look down upon workerand peasant comrades. Any specialized skillmay be capitalized on and so may lead toarrogance and contempt of others. Evenone's age may become ground for conceit.The young, because they are bright andcapable, may look down upon the old; andthe old, because they are rich in experience,may look down upon the young. All suchthings become encumbrances or baggage ifthere is no critical awareness."Our Study and the Current Situation"(April 12, 1944), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 173.*Some comrades in the army have becomearrogant and high-handed in their behaviourtowards the soldiers, the people, thegovernment and the Party, always blamingthe comrades doing local work but never责备自己，只看见成绩，不看见缺点，只爱听恭维话，不爱听批评话。
……军队必须注意克服这种毛病。
《组织起来》（一九四三年十一月二十九日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九三七页艰苦的工作就像担子，摆在我们的面前，看我们敢不敢承担。
担子有轻有重。
有的人拈轻怕重，把重担子推给人家，自己拣轻的挑。
这就不是好的态度。
有的同志不是这样，享受让给人家，担子拣重的挑，吃苦在别人前头，享受在别人后头。
这样的同志就是好同志。
这种共产主义者的精神，我们都要学习。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一六零页不少的人对工作不负责任，拈轻怕themselves, always seeing their ownachievements but never their ownshortcomings, and always welcomingflattery but never criticism. … the armymust endeavour to eradicate these faults."Get Organized!" (November 29, 1943),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 159.*Hard work is like a load placed before us,challenging us to shoulder it. Some loads arelight, some heavy. Some people prefer thelight to the heavy; they pick the light andshove the heavy on to others. That is not agood attitude. Some comrades are different;they leave ease and comfort to others andtake the heavy loads themselves; they arethe first to bear hardships the last to enjoycomforts. They are good comrades. Weshould all learn from their communist spirit."On the Chungking Negotiations"(October 17, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.IV, p. 58.*There are not a few people who areirresponsible in their work, preferring the重，把重担子推给人家，自己挑轻的。
一事当前，先替自己打算，然后再替别人打算。
出了一点力就觉得了不起，喜欢自吹，生怕人家不知道。
对同志对人民不是满腔热忱，而是冷冷清清，漠不关心，麻木不仁。
这种人其实不是共产党员，至少不能算一个纯粹的共产党员。
《纪念白求恩》（一九三九年十二月二十一日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六五三——六五四页闹这类独立性的人，常常跟他们的个人第一主义分不开，他们在个人和党的关系问题上，往往是不正确的。
他们在口头上虽然也说尊重党，但他们在实际上却把个人放在第一位，把党放在第二位。
刘少奇同志曾经说过，有意中人的手特别长，很会替自己打算，至于别人的利益和全党light to the heavy, shoving the heavy loadson to others and choosing the easy ones forthemselves. At every turn they think ofthemselves before others. When they makesome small contribution, they swell withpride and brag about it for fear that otherswill not know. They feel no warmth towardscomrades and the people but are cold,indifferent and apathetic. In fact such peopleare not Communists, or at least cannot becounted as true Communists."In Memory of Norman Bethune"(December 21, 1939), Selected Works,Vol. II, pp. 337-38.*Those who assert this kind of"independence" are usually wedded to thedoctrine of "me first" and are generallywrong on the question of the relationshipbetween the individual and the Party.Although in words they profess respect forthe Party, in practice they put themselvesfirst and the Party second. Comrade LiuShao-chi once said of certain people thatthey have unusually long arms and are veryclever in looking after their own interests,but pay little heed to the interests of othersand of the party as a whole. “What's mine is利益，那是不大关心的。
“我的就是我的，你的还是我的。
”（大笑）这种人闹什么东西呢？闹名誉，闹地位，闹出风头。
在他们掌管一部分事业的时候，就要闹独立性。
为了这些，就要拉拢一些人，排挤一些人，在同志中吹吹拍拍，拉拉扯扯，把资产阶级政党的庸俗作风也搬进共产党里来了。
这种人的吃亏在于不老实。
我想，我们应该是老老实实地办事；在世界上要办成几件事，没有老实态度是根本不行的。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二三——八二四页共产党员必须懂得以局部需要服从全局需要这一个道理。
如果某项意见在局部的情形看来是可行的，而在全局的情形反之也是一样，在局部的情形看来是不可mine, and what’s yours is mine too.” (Loudlaugbter.) What are these people after? Theyare after fame and position and want to be inthe limelight. Whenever they are put incharge of a branch of work, they assert their"independence". With this aim, they drawsome people in, push others out and resort toboasting, flattery and touting among-thecomrades, thus importing the vulgar style ofthe bourgeois political parties into theCommunist Party. It is their dishonesty thatcauses them to come to grief. I believe weshould do things honestly, for without anhonest attitude it is absolutely impossible toaccomplish anything in this world."Rectify the Party's Style of Work"(February 1, 1942), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 44.They [Communists] must grasp theprinciple of subordinating the needs of thepart to the needs of the whole. If a proposalappears feasible for a partial situation butnot for the situation as a whole, then the partmust give way to the whole. Conversely, ifthe proposal is not feasible for the part but isfeasible in the light of the situation as a看来是不可行的，就应以局部服从全局。
行的，而在全局的情形看来是可行的，也应以局部服从全局。
这就是照顾全局的观点。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一三——五一四页享乐主义。
个人主义见于享乐方面的，在红军中也有不少的人。
他们总是希望队伍开到大城市去。
他们要到大城市不是为了去工作，而是为了去享乐。
他们最不乐意的是在生活艰难的红色区域里工作。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第九六页必须反对只顾自己不顾别人的本位主义的倾向。
谁要是对别人的困难不管，whole, again the part must give way tothe whole. This is what is meant byconsidering the situation as a whole."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 201.Pleasure-seeking. In the Red Army thereare also quite a few people whoseindividualismfindsexpressioninpleasure-seeking. They always hope thattheir unit will march into big cities. Theywant to go there not to work but to enjoythemselves. The last thing they want is towork in the Red areas where life is hard."On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in theParty" (December 1929), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 113.We must oppose the tendency towardsselfish departmentalism by which theinterests of one's own unit are looked afterto the exclusion of those of others. Whoeveris indifferent to the difficulties of others,refuse s to transfer cadres to other units on别人要调他所属的干部不给，或以坏的送人，“以邻为壑”，全不为别部、别地、别人想一想，这样的人就叫做本位主义者，这就是完全失掉了共产主义的精神。
不顾大局，对别部、别地、别人漠不关心，就是这种本位主义者的特点。
对于这样的人，必须加重教育，使他们懂得这就是一种宗派主义的倾向，如果发展下去，是很危险的。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二五——八二六页自由主义有各种表现。
因为是熟人、同乡、同学、知心朋友、亲爱者、老同事、老部下，明知不对，也不同他们作原则上的争论，任其下去，求request, or releases only the inferior ones,"using the neighbour's field as an outlet forhis overflow", and does not give theslightest consideration to other departments,localities or people - such a person is aselfish departmentalist who has entirely lostthe spirit of communism. Lack ofconsideration for the whole and completeindifference to other departments, localitiesand people are characteristics of a selfishdepartmentalist. We must intensify ourefforts to educate such persons and to makethemunderstandthatselfishdepartmentalism is a sectarian tendencywhich will become very dangerous, ifallowed to develop."Rectify the Party's Style of Work"(February 1, 1942), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 46.Liberalism manifests itself in variousways.To let things slide for the sake of peaceand friendship when a person has clearlygone wrong, and refrain from principledargument because he is an old acquaintance,a fellow townsman, a schoolmate, a close得和平和亲热。
或者轻描淡写地说一顿，不作彻底解决，保持一团和气。
结果是有害于团体，也有害于个人。
这是第一种。
不负责任的背后批评，不是积极地向组织建议。
当面不说，背后乱说；开会不说，会后乱说。
心目中没有集体生活的原则，只有自由放任。
这是第二种。
事不关己，高高挂起；明知不对，少说为佳；明哲保身，但求无过。
这是第三种。
命令不服从，个人意见第一。
只要组织照顾，不要组织纪律。
这是第四种。
不是为了团结，为了进步，为了把事情弄好，向不正确的意见斗争和争论，而是个人攻击，闹意气，泄私愤，图报复。
这是第五种。
friend, a loved one, an old colleague or oldsubordinate. Or to touch on the matterlightly instead of going into it thoroughly, soas to keep on good terms. The result is thatboth the organization and the individual areharmed. This is one type of liberalism.To indulge in irresponsible criticism inprivate instead of actively putting forwardone's suggestions to the organization. To saynothing to people to their faces but to gossipbehind their backs, or to say nothing at ameeting but to gossip afterwards. To showno regard at all for the principles ofcollective life but to follow one's owninclination. This is a second type.To let things drift if they do not affect onepersonally; to say as little as possible whileknowing perfectly well what is wrong, to beworldly wise and play safe and seek only toavoid blame. This is a third type.Not to obey orders but to give pride ofplace to one's own opinions. To demandspecial consideration from the organizationbut to reject its discipline. This is a fourthtype.To indulge in personal attacks, pickquarrels, vent personal spite or seek revengeinstead of entering into an argument and听了不正确的议论也不争辩，甚至听了反革命分子的话也不报告，泰然处之，行若无事。
这是第六种。
见群众不宣传，不鼓动，不演说，不调查，不询问，不关心其痛痒，漠然置之，忘记了自己是一个共产党员，把一个共产党员混同于一个普通的老百姓。
这是第七种。
见损害群众利益的行为不愤恨，不劝告，不制止，不解释，听之任之。
这是第八种。
办事不认真，无一定计划，无一定方向，敷衍了事，得过且过，做一天和尚撞一天钟。
这是第九种。
struggling against incorrect views for thesake of unity or progress or getting the workdone properly. This is a fifth type.To hear incorrect views without rebuttingthem and even to hear counter-revolutionaryremarks without reporting them, but insteadto take them calmly as if nothing hadhappened. This is a sixth type.To be among the masses and fail toconduct propaganda and agitation or speakat meetings or conduct investigations andinquiries among them, and instead to beindifferent to them and show no concern fortheir well-being, forgetting that one is aCommunist and behaving as if one were anordinary non-Communist. This is a seventhtype.To see someone harming the interests ofthe masses and yet not feel indignant, ordissuade or stop him or reason with him, butto allow him to continue. This is an eighthtype.To work half-heartedly without a definiteplan or direction; to work perfunctorily andmuddle along - "So long as one remains a自以为对革命有功，摆老资格，大事做不来，小事又不做，工作随便，学习松懈。
这是第十种。
自己错了，也已经懂得，又不想改正，自己对自己采取自由主义。
这是第十一种。
《反对自由主义》（一九三七年九月七日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三四七——三四八页革命的集体组织中的自由主义是十分有害的。
它是一种腐蚀剂，使团结涣散，关系松懈，工作消极，意见分歧。
它使革命队伍失掉严密的组织和纪律，政策不能贯彻到底，党的组织和党所领导的群众发monk, one goes on tolling the bell." This is aninth type.To regard oneself as having renderedgreat service to the revolution, to prideoneself on being a veteran, to disdain minorassignments while being quite unequal tomajor tasks, to be slipshod in work andslack in study. This is a tenth type.To be aware of one's own mistakes andyet make no attempt to correct them, takinga liberal attitude towards oneself. This is aneleventh type.。
"Combat Liberalism" (September 7,1937), Selected Works, Vol. II, pp.31-32.Liberalism is extremely harmful in arevolutionary collective. It is a corrosivewhich eats away unity, undermines cohesion,causes apathy and creates dissension. It robsthe revolutionary ranks of compactorganization and strict discipline, preventspolicies from being carried through andalienates the Party organizations from themasses which the Party leads. It is an生隔离。
这是一种严重的恶劣倾向。
《反对自由主义》（一九三七年九月七日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三四八页自由主义者以抽象的教条看待马克思主义的原则。
他们赞成马克思主义，但是不准备实行之，或不准备完全实行之，不准备拿马克思主义代替自己的自由主义。
这些人，马克思主义是有的，自由主义也是有的：说的是马克思主义，行的是自由主义；对人是马克思主义，对己是自由主义。
两样货色齐备，各有各的用处。
这是一部分人的思想方法。
《反对自由主义》（一九三七年九月七日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三四九页人民的国家是保护人民的。
有了人民的国家，人民才有可能在全国范围内和全体规模上，用民主的方法，教育自己和改extremely bad tendency.Ibid., p. 32.People who are liberals look upon theprinciples of Marxism as abstract dogma.They approve of Marxism, but are notprepared to practise it or to practise it in full;they are not prepared to replace theirliberalism by Marxism. These people havetheir Marxism, but they have their liberalismas well - they talk Marxism but practiseliberalism; they apply Marxism to others butliberalism to themselves. They keep bothkinds of goods in stock and find a use foreach. This is how the minds of certainpeople work.Ibid., pp. 32-33The people's state protects the people.Only when the people have such a state canthey educate and remould themselves bydemocratic methods on a country-wide scale,with everyone taking part, and shake off theinfluence of domestic and foreign reaction-造自己，使自己脱离内外反动派的影响（这个影响现在还是很大的，并将在长时期内存在着，不能很快地消灭），改造自己从旧社会得来的坏习惯和坏思想，不使自己走入反动派指引的错误路上去，并继续前进，向着社会主义社会和共产主义社会前进。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六人三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八一页一个人做点好事并不难，难的是一辈子做好事，不做坏事，一贯的有益于广大群众，一贯的有益于青年，一贯的有益于革命，艰苦奋斗几十年如一日，这才是最难最难的呵！《吴玉章同志六十寿辰祝词》（一九四零年一月十五日），一九四零年一月二十四日《新中华报》aries (which is still very strong, will survivefor a long time and cannot be quicklydestroyed), rid themselves of the bad habitsand ideas acquired in the old society, notallow themselves to be led astray by thereactionaries, and continue to advance - toadvance towards a socialist and communistsociety."OnthePeople'sDemocraticDictatorship" (June 30, 1949). SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 418.*It is not hard for one to do a bit of good.What is hard is to do good all one's life andnever do anything bad, to act consistently inthe interests of the broad masses, the youngpeople and the revolution, and to engage inarduous struggle for decades on end. That isthe hardest thing of all!"Message of Greetings on the 60thBirthday of Comrade Wu Yu-chang"(January 15, 1940).二十五、团结国家的统一，人民的团结，国内各民族的团结，这是我们的事业必定要胜利的基本保证。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第一页只有经过共产党的团结，才能达到全阶级和全民族的团结，只有经过全阶级全民族的团结，才能战胜敌人，完成民族和民主革命的任务。
《为争取千百万群众进入抗日民族统一战线而斗争》（一九三七年五月七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二六九页25. UNITYThe unification of our country, the unityof our people and the unity of our variousnationalities - these are the basic guaranteesof the sure triumph of our cause."OntheCorrectHandlingofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957). 1st pocket ed., pp.1-2.It is only through the unity of theCommunist Party that the unity of the wholeclass and the whole nation can be achieved,and it is only through the unity of the wholeclass and the whole nation that the enemycan be defeated and the national anddemocratic revolution accomplished."Win the Masses in Their Millions for theAnti-Japanese National United Front"(May 7, 1937), Selected Works, Vol. I, p.292.*我们要把我们党的一切力量在民主集中制的组织和纪律的原则之下，坚强地团结起来。
不论什么同志，只要他是愿意服从党纲、党章和党的决议的，我们就要和他团结。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九八页在一九四二年，我们曾经把解决人民内部矛盾的这种民主的方法，具体化为一个公式，叫做“团结——批评——团结”。
讲详细一点，就是从团结的愿望出发，经过批评或者斗争使矛盾得到解决，从而在新的基础上达到新的团结。
按照我们的经验，这是解决人民内部矛盾的一个正确的方法。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第六——七页We shall solidly unite all the forces of ourParty on democratic centralist principles oforganization and discipline. We shall unitewith any comrade if he abides by the Party'sProgramme, Constitution and decisions."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 317.*This democratic method of resolvingcontradictions among the people wasepitomized in 1942 in the formula "unity,criticism, unity". To elaborate, it meansstarting from the desire for unity, resolvingcontradictions through criticism or struggleand arriving at a new unity on a new basis.In our experience this is the correct methodof resolving contradictions among thepeople."OntheCorrectHandlingofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p.12.这个军队有一个很好的内部和外部的团结。
在内部——官兵之间，上下级之间，军事工作、政治工作和后勤工作之间；在外部——军民之间，军政之间，我友之间，都是团结一致的。
一切妨害团结的现象，都在必须克服之列。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零三九页This [our] army has achieved remarkableunity in its own ranks and with those outsideits ranks. Internally, there is unity betweenofficers and men, between the higher andlower ranks, and between military work,political work and rear service work; andexternally, there is unity between the armyand the people, between the army andgovernment organizations, and between ourarmy and the friendly armies. It isimperative to overcome anything thatimpairs this unity."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 264.*二十六、纪律在人民内部，民主是对集中而言，自由是对纪律而言。
这些都是一个统一体的两个矛盾着的侧面，它们是矛盾的，又是统一的，我们不应当片面地强调某一个侧面而否定另一个侧面。
在人民内部，不可以没有自由，也不可以没有纪律；不可以没有民主，也不可以没有集中。
这种民主和集中的统一，自由和纪律的统一，就是我们的民主集中制。
在这个制度下，人民享受着广泛的民主和自由；同时又必须用社会主义的纪律约束自己。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第五——六页26. DISCIPLINEWithin the ranks of the people,democracy is correlative with centralism andfreedom with discipline. They are the twoopposites of a single entity, contradictory aswell as united, and we should notone-sidedly emphasize one to the denial ofthe other. Within the ranks of the people, wecannot do without freedom, nor can we dowithout discipline; we cannot do withoutdemocracy, nor can we do withoutcentralism. This unity of democracy andcentralism, of freedom and discipline,constitutes our democratic centralism. Underthis system, the people enjoy extensivedemocracy and freedom, but at the sametime they have to keep within the bounds ofsocialist discipline."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., pp.10-11.必须重申党的纪律：（一）个人服从组织；（二）少数服从多数；（三）下级服从上级；（四）全党服从中央。
谁破坏了这些纪律，谁就破坏了党的统一。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一六页党的纪律之一是少数服从多数。
少数人在自己的意见被否决之后，必须拥护多数人所通过的决议。
除必要时得在下一次会议再提出讨论外，不得在行动上有任何反对的表示。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第九二页We must affirm anew the discipline of theParty, namely:(1) the individual is subordinate to theorganization;(2) the minority is subordinate to themajority;(3) the lower level is subordinate to thehigher level; and(4) the entire membership is subordinateto the Central Committee.Whoever violates these articles ofdiscipline disrupts Party unity."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, pp.203-04.*One requirement of Party discipline isthat the minority should submit to themajority. If the view of the minority hasbeen rejected, it must support the decisionpassed by the majority. If necessary, it canbring up the matter for reconsideration at thenext meeting, but apart from that it must notact against the decision in any way."On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in theParty"(DecemberWorks, Vol. I, p. 110.1929),Selected三大纪律如下：（一） 一切行动听指挥；（二）不拿群众一针一线；（三）一切缴获要归公。
八项注意如下：（一） 说话和气；（二）买卖公平；（三）借东西要还；（四）损坏东西要赔；（五）不打人骂人；（六）不损坏庄稼；（七）不调戏妇女；（八）不虐待俘虏。
《中国人民解放军总部关于重行颁布三大纪律八项注意的训令》（一九四七年十月十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二四一页The Three Main Rules of Discipline areas follows:(1) Obey orders in all your actions.(2) Do not take a single needle piece ofthread from the masses.(3) Turn in everything captured.The Eight Points for Attention are asfollows:(1) Speak politely.(2) Pay fairly for what you buy.(3) Return everything you borrow.(4) Pay for anything you damage.(5) Do not hit or swear at people.(6) Do not damage crops.(7) Do not take liberties with women.(8) Do not ill-treat captives."On the Reissue of the Three Main Rulesof Discipline and the Eight Points forAttention - Instruction of the GeneralHeadquarters of the Chinese People'sLiberation Army" (October 10, 1947),Selected Military Writings, 2nd ed., p.343.必须提高纪律性，坚决执行命令，执行政策，执行三大纪律八项注意，军民一致，军政一致，官兵一致，全军一致，不允许任何破坏纪律的现象存在。
《中国人民解放军宣言》（一九四七年十月），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一二三九页They [all officers and soldiers of our army]must heighten their sense of discipline andresolutely carry out orders, carry out ourpolicy, carry out the Three Main Rules ofDiscipline and the Eight Points for Attention- with army and people united, army andgovernment united, officers and soldiersunited, and the whole army united - andpermit no breach of discipline."Manifesto of the Chinese People'sLiberationArmy" (October 1947),Selected Military Writings, 2nd ed., p.340.二十七、批评和自我批评共产党是不怕批评的，因为我们是马克思主义者，真理是在我们方面，工农基本群众是在我们方面。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一一页彻底的唯物主义者是无所畏惧的，我们希望一切同我们共同奋斗的人能够勇敢地负起责任，克服困难，不要怕挫折，不要怕有人议论讥笑，也不要怕向我们共产党人提批评建议。
“舍得一身剐，敢把皇帝拉下马”，我们在为社会主义共产主义而斗争的时候，必须有这种大无畏的精神。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第一二——一三页27. CRITICISM ANDSELF-CRITICISMThe Communist Party does not fearcriticism because we are Marxists, the truthis on our side, and the basic masses, theworkers and peasants, are on our side."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty's National Conference onPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957),1st pocket ed., p. 14.Thoroughgoing materialists are fearless;we hope that all our fellow fighters willcourageously shoulder their responsibilitiesand overcome all difficulties, fearing nosetbacks or gibes, nor hesitating to criticizeus Communists and give us theirsuggestions. "He who is not afraid of deathby a thousand cuts dares to unhorse theemperor" - this is the indomitable spiritneeded in our struggle to build socialismand communism.Ibid., p. 16.我们有批评和自我批评这个马克思列宁主义的武器。
我们能够去掉不良作风，保持优良作风。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四零页有无认真的自我批评，也是我们和其他政党互相区别的显著的标志之一。
我们曾经说过，房子是应该经常打扫的，不打扫就会积满了灰尘；脸是应该经常洗的，不洗也就会灰尘满面。
我们同志的思想，我们党的工作，也会沾染灰尘的，也应该打扫和洗涤。
“流水不腐，户枢不蠹”，是说它们在不停的运动中抵抗了微生物或其他生物的侵蚀。
对于我们，经常地检讨工作，在检讨中推广民主作风，不惧怕批评和自我批评，实行“知无不言，言无不We have the Marxist-Leninist weapon ofcriticism and self-criticism. We can get ridof a bad style and keep the good."Report to the Second Plenary Sessionof the Seventh Central Committee ofthe Communist Party of China" (March5, 1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p.374.Conscientious practice of self-criticism isstill another hallmark distinguishing ourParty from all other political parties. As wesay, dust will accumulate if a room is notcleaned regularly, our faces will get dirty ifthey are not washed regularly. Ourcomrades' minds and our Party's work mayalso collect dust, and also need sweepingand washing. The proverb "Running water isnever stale and a door-hinge is neverworm-eaten" means that constant motionprevents the inroads of germs and otherorganisms. To check up regularly on ourwork and in the process develop ademocratic style of work, to fear neithercriticism nor self-criticism, and to applysuch good popular Chinese maxims as "Say尽”，“言者无罪，闻者足戒”，“有则改之，无则加勉”这些中国人民的有益的格言，正是抵抗各种政治灰尘和政治微生物侵蚀我们同志的思想和我们党的肌体的唯一有效的方法。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九七页党内不同思想的对立和斗争是经常发生的，这是社会的阶级矛盾和新旧事物的矛盾在党内的反映。
党内如果没有矛盾和解决矛盾的思想斗争，党的生命也就停止了。
《矛盾论》（一九三七年八月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二九四页我们主张积极的思想斗争，因为它是达到党内和革命团体内的团结使之利于all you know and say it without reserve","Blame not the speaker but be warned by hiswords" and "Correct mistakes if you havecommitted them and guard against them ifyou have not" - this is the only effective wayto prevent all kinds of political dust andgerms from contaminating the minds of ourcomrades and the body of our Party."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, pp.316-17.Opposition and struggle between ideas ofdifferent kinds constantly occur within theParty; this is a reflection within the Party ofcontradictions between classes and betweenthe new and the old in society. If there wereno contradictions in the Party and noideological struggles to resolve them, theParty's life would come to an end."On Contradiction" (August 1937),Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 317.We stand for active ideological strugglebecause it is the weapon for ensuring unitywithin the Party and the revolutionary战斗的武器。
每个共产党员和革命分子，应该拿起这个武器。
但是自由主义取消思想斗争，主张无原则的和平，结果是腐朽庸俗的作风发生，使党和革命团体的某些组织和某些个人在政治上腐化起来。
《反对自由主义》（一九三七年九月七日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三四七页我们反对主观主义、宗派主义、党八股，有两条宗旨是必须注意的：第一是“惩前毖后”，第二是“治病救人”。
对以前的错误一定要揭发，不讲情面，要以科学的态度来分析批判过去的坏东西，以便使后来的工作慎重些，做得好些。
这就是“惩前毖后”的意思。
但是我们揭发错误、批organizations in the interest of our fight.Every Communist and revolutionary shouldtake up this weapon.But liberalism rejects ideological struggleand stands for unprincipled peace, thusgiving rise to a decadent, philistine attitudeand bringing about political degeneration incertain units and individuals in the Party andthe revolutionary organizations."Combat Liberalism" (September 7,1937), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 31.In opposing subjectivism, sectarianismand stereotyped Party writing we must havein mind two purposes: first, "learn from pastmistakes to avoid future ones", and second,"cure the sickness to save the patient". Themistakes of the past must be exposedwithout sparing anyone's sensibilities; it isnecessary to analyse and criticize what wasbad in the past with a scientific attitude sothat work in the future will be done morecarefully and done better. This is what ismeant by "learn from past mistakes to avoid判缺点的目的，好像医生治病一样，完全是为了救人，而不是为了把人整死。
一个人发了阑尾炎，医生把阑尾割了，这个人就救出来了。
任何犯错误的人，只要他不讳疾忌医，不固执错误，以至于达到不可救药的地步，而是老老实实，真正愿意医治，愿意改正，我们就要欢迎他，把他的毛病治好，使他变为一个好同志。
这个工作决不是痛快一时，乱打一顿，所能奏效的。
对待思想上的毛病和政治上的毛病，决不能采用鲁莽的态度，必须采用“治病救人”的态度，才是正确有效的方法。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二九——八三零页关于党内批评问题，还有一点要说及future ones". But our aim in exposingerrors and criticizing shortcomings, like thatof a doctor curing a sickness, is solely tosave the patient and not to doctor him todeath. A person with appendicitis is savedwhen the surgeon removes his appendix. Solong as a person who has made mistakesdoes not hide his sickness for fear oftreatment or persist in his mistakes until heis beyond cure, so long as he honestly andsincerely wishes to be cured and to mend hisways, we should welcome him and cure hissickness so that he can become a goodcomrade. We can never succeed if we justlet ourselves go and lash out at him. Intreating an ideological or a political malady,one must never be rough and rash but mustadopt the approach of "curing the sicknessto save the patient", which is the onlycorrect and effective method."Rectify the Party's Style of Work"(February 1, 1942), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 50.*Another point that should be mentioned inconnection with inner-Party criticism is that的，就是有些同志的批评不注意大的方面，只注意小的方面。
他们不明白批评的主要任务，是指出政治上的错误和组织上的错误。
至于个人缺点，如果不是与政治的和组织的错误有联系，则不必多所指摘，使同志们无所措手足。
而且这种批评一发展，党内精神完全集注到小的缺点方面，人人变成了谨小慎微的君子，就会忘记党的政治任务，这是很大的危险。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第九四页党内批评要防止主观武断和把批评庸俗化，说话要有证据，批评要注意政治。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第九五页some comrades ignore the major issues andconfine their attention to minor points whenthey make their criticism. They do notunderstand that the main task of criticism isto point out political and organizationalmistakes. As to personal shortcomings,unless they are related to political andorganizational mistakes, there is no need tobe overcritical or the comrades concernedwill be at a loss as to what to do. Moreover,once such criticism develops, there is thegreat danger that within the Party attentionwill be concentrated exclusively on minorfaults, and everyone will become timid andovercautious and forget the Party's politicaltasks."On Correcting Mistaken Ideas in theParty" (December 1929), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, pp. 111-12.*In inner-Party criticism, guard againstsubjectivism,arbitrarinessandthevulgarization of criticism; statements shouldbe based on facts and criticism should stressthe political side.Ibid., p. 112.*党内批评是坚强党的组织、增加党的战斗力的武器。
但是红军党内的批评有些不是这样，变成了攻击个人。
其结果，不但毁坏了个人，也毁坏了党的组织。
这是小资产阶级个人主义的表现。
纠正的方法，在于使党员明白批评的目的是增加党的战斗力以达到阶级斗争的胜利，不应当利用批评去做攻击个人的工具。
《关于纠正党内的错误思想》（一九二九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第九二页因为我们是为人民服务的，所以，我们如果有缺点，就不怕别人批评指出。
不管是什么人，谁向我们指出都行。
只要你说得对，我们就改正。
你说的办法对人民有好处，我们就照你的办。
《为人民服务》（一九四四年九月八日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零零三页Inner-Party criticism is a weapon forstrengthening the Party organization andincreasing its fighting capacity. In the Partyorganization of the Red Army, however,criticism is not always of this character, andsometimes turns into personal attack. As aresult, it damages the Party organization aswell as individuals. This is a manifestationof petty-bourgeois individualism. Themethod of correction is to help Partymembers understand that the purpose ofcriticism is to increase the Party's fightingcapacity in order to achieve victory in theclass struggle and that it should not be usedas a means of personal attack.Ibid., p. 110.If we have shortcomings, we are notafraid to have them pointed out andcriticized, because we serve the people.Anyone, no matter who, may point out ourshortcomings. If he is right, we will correctthem. If what he proposes will benefit thepeople, we will act upon it."Serve the People" (September 8, 1941),Selected Works, Vol. III, P. 227.以中国最广大人民的最大利益为出发点的中国共产党人，相信自己的事业是完全合乎正义的，不惜牺牲自己个人的一切，随时准备拿出自己的生命去殉我们的事业，难道还有什么不适合人民需要的思想、观点、意见、办法，舍不得丢掉的吗？难道我们还欢迎任何政治的灰尘、政治的微生物来玷污我们的清洁的面貌和侵蚀我们的健全的肌体吗？无数革命先烈为了人民的利益牺牲了他们的生命，使我们每个活着人想起他们就心里难过，难道我们还有什么个人利益不能牺牲，还有什么错误不能抛弃吗？《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九七——一零九八页我们决不能一见成绩就自满自足起来。
我们应该抑制自满，时时批评自己的As we Chinese Communists, who base allour actions on the highest interests of thebroadest masses of the Chinese people andwho are fully convinced of the justice of ourcause, never balk at any personal sacrificeand are ready at all times to give our livesfor the cause, can we be reluctant to discardany idea, viewpoint, opinion or methodwhich is not suited to the needs of thepeople? Can we be willing to allow politicaldust and germs to dirty our clean faces or eatinto our healthy organisms? Countlessrevolutionary martyrs have laid down theirlives in the interests of the people, and ourhearts are filled with pain as we the livingthink of them - can there be any personalinterest, then, that we would not sacrifice orany error that we would not discard?"On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 317.*We must not become complacent overany success. We should check ourcomplacency and constantly criticize our缺点，好像我们为了清洁，为了去掉灰尘，天天要洗脸，天天要扫地一样。
《组织起来》（一九四三年十一月二十九日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九三八页批评要是及时的批评，不要老是爱好事后的批评。
《关于农业合作化问题》（一九五五年七月三十一日），人民出版社版第二九页错误和挫折教训了我们，使我们比较地聪明起来了，我们的事情就办得好一些。
任何个人，错误总是难免的，我们要求犯得少一点。
犯了错误则要求改正，改正得越迅速，越彻底，越好。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八五页shortcomings, just as we should wash ourfaces or sweep the floor every day toremove the dirt and keep them clean."Get Organized!" (November 29, 1943),Selected Works, Vol. III. p. 160.*As for criticism, do it in good time; don'tget into the habit of criticizing only after theevent."On the Question of AgriculturalCo-operation" (July 31, 1955), 3rd ed.,p. 25.Taught by mistakes and setbacks, we havebecome wiser and handle our affairs better.It is hard for any political party or person toavoid mistakes, but we should make as fewas possible. Once a mistake is made, weshould correct it, and the more quickly andthoroughly the better."OnthePeople'sDemocraticDictatorship" (June 30, 1949), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 422.二十八、共产党员一个共产党员，应该是襟怀坦白，忠实，积极，以革命利益为第一生命，以个人利益服从革命利益；无论何时何地，坚持正确的原则，同一切不正确的思想和行为作不疲倦的斗争，用以巩固党的集体生活，巩固党和群众的联系；关心党和群众比关心个人为重，关心他人比关心自己为重。
这样才算得一个共产党员。
《反对自由主义》（一九三七年九月七日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第三四九页应该使每个同志明了，共产党人的一切言论行动，必须以合乎最广大人民群众28. COMMUNISTSA Communist should have largeness ofmind and he should be staunch and active,looking upon the interests of the revolutionas his very life and subordinating hispersonal interests to those of the revolution;always and everywhere he should adhere toprinciple and wage a tireless struggle againstall incorrect ideas and actions, so as toconsolidate the collective life of the Partyand strengthen the ties between the Partyand the masses; he should be moreconcerned about the Party and the massesthan about any individual, and moreconcerned about others than about himself.Only thus can he be considered aCommunist."Combat Liberalism" (September 7,1937), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 33.*Every comrade must be brought tounderstand that the supreme test of thewords and deeds of a Communist is whether的最大利益，为最广大人民群众所拥护为最高标准。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九七页共产党员无论何时何地都不应以个人利益放在第一位，而应以个人利益服从于民族的和人民群众的利益。
因此，自私自利，消极怠工，贪污腐化，风头主义等等，是最可鄙的；而大公无私，积极努力，克已奉公，埋头苦干的精神，才是可尊敬的。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一零页共产党人必须随时准备坚持真理，因为任何真理都是符合于人民利益的；共产党人必须随时准备修正错误，因为任何错they conform with the highest interests andenjoy the support of the overwhelmingmajority of the people."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 316.*At no time and in no circumstancesshould a Communist place his personalinterests first; he should subordinate them tothe interests of the nation and of the masses.Hence, selfishness, slacking, corruption,seeking the limelight, and so on, are mostcontemptible, while selflessness, workingwith all one's energy, whole-hearteddevotion to public duty, and quiet hard workwill command respect."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 198.Communists must be ready at all times tostand up for the truth, because truth is in theinterests of the people; Communists must beready at all times to correct their mistakes,because mistakes are against the interests误都是不符合于人民利益的。
《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零九六页共产党员对任何事情都要问一个为什么，都要经过自己头脑的周密思考，想一想它是否合乎实际，是否真有道理，绝对不应盲从，绝对不应提倡奴隶主义。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二九页要提倡顾全大局。
每一个党员，每一种局部工作，每一项言论或行动，都必须以全党利益为出发点，绝对不许可违反这个原则。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二三页共产党员应是实事求是的模范，又是具有远见卓识的模范。
 因为只有实事求ofthe people."On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 315.Communists must always go into thewhys and wherefores of anything, use theirown heads and carefully think over whetheror not it corresponds to reality and is reallywell founded; on no account should theyfollow blindly and encourage slavishness."Rectify the Party's Style of Work"(February 1, 1942), Selected Works, Vol.III, pp. 49-50.We should encourage comrades to takethe interests of the whole into account.Every Party member, every branch of work,every statement and every action mustproceed from the interests of the wholeParty; it is absolutely impermissible toviolate this principle.Ibid., p. 44.Communists should set an example inbeing practical as well as far-sighted. Foronly by being practical can they fulfill the是，才能完成确定的任务；只有远见卓识，才能不失前进的方向。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一零页共产党员应该作到最有远见，最富于牺牲精神，最坚定，而又最能虚心体会情况，依靠群众的多数，得到群众的拥护。
《中国共产党在抗日时期的任务》（一九三七年五月三日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二五四页共产党员又应成为学习的模范，他们每天都是民众的教师，但又每天都是民众的学生。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一零——五一一页appointed tasks, and only far-sightednesscan prevent them from losing their bearingsin the march forward."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 198.Communists should be the most farsighted,the most self-sacrificing, the most resolute,and the least prejudiced in sizing upsituations, and should rely on the majority ofthe masses and win their support."The Tasks of the Chinese CommunistParty in the Period of Resistance toJapan" (May 3, 1937), Selected Works,Vol. I, p. 274.*Communists should set an example instudy; at all times they should be pupils ofthe masses as well as their teachers."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 198.*共产党员在民众运动中，应该是民众的朋友，而不是民众的上司，是诲人不倦的教师，而不是官僚主义的政客。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一零页共产党员决不可脱离群众的多数，置多数人的情况于不顾，而率领少数先进队伍单独冒进；必须注意组织先进分子和广大群众之间的密切联系。
这就是照顾多数的观点。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一四页我们共产党人好比种子，人民好比土地。
我们到了一个地方，就要同那里的人民结合起来，在人民中间生根、开花。
《关于重庆谈判》（一九四五年十月十七日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一一六一页我们共产党员，无论在什么问题上，一定要能够同群众相结合。
如果我们的党Every Communist working in the massmovements should be a friend of the massesand not a boss over them, an indefatigableteacher and not a bureaucratic politician.Ibid.*Communists must never separatethemselves from the majority of the peopleor neglect them by leading only a fewprogressive contingents in an isolated andrash advance, but must take care to forgeclose links between the progressiveelements and the broad masses. This is whatis meant by thinking in terms of themajority.Ibid., p. 201.*We Communists are like seeds and thepeople are like the soil. Wherever we go, wemust unite with the people, take root andblossom among them."On the Chungking Negotiations"(October 17, 1945), Selected Works, Vol.IV, p. 58.We Communists must be able to integrateourselves with the masses in all things. If员，一生一世坐在房子里不出去，不经风雨，不见世面，这种党员，对于中国人民究竟有什么好处没有呢？一点好处也没有的，我们不需要这样的人做党员。
我们共产党员应该经风雨，见世面；这个风雨，就是群众斗争的大风雨，这个世面，就是群众斗争的大世面。
《组织起来》（一九四三年十一月二十九日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九三六页共产党员的先锋作用和模范作用是十分重要的。
共产党员在八路军和新四军中，应该成为英勇作战的模范，执行命令的模范，遵守纪律的模范，政治工作的模范和内部团结统一的模范。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一零页共产党员决不可自以为是，盛气凌人，以为自己是什么都好，别人是什么都our Party members spend their whole livessitting indoors and never go out to face theworld and brave the storm, what good willthey be to the Chinese people? None at all,and we do not need such people as Partymembers. We Communists ought to face theworld and brave the storm the great world ofmass struggle and the mighty storm of massstruggle."Get Organized!" (November 29, 1943),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 158.The exemplary vanguard role of theCommunists is of vital importance.Communists in the Eighth Route and NewFourth Armies should set an example infighting bravely, carrying out orders,observing discipline, doing political workand fostering internal unity and solidarity."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 197.*A Communist must never be opinionatedor domineering, thinking that he is good ineverything while others are good in nothing;he must never shut himself up in his little不好；决不可把自己关在小房子里，自吹自擂，称王称霸。
《在陕甘宁边区参议会的演说》（一九四一年十一月二十一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八一一页共产党员必须倾听党外人士的意见，给别人以说话的机会。
别人说得对的，我们应该欢迎，并要跟别人的长处学习；别人说得不对，也应该让别人说完，然后慢慢加以解释。
《在陕甘宁边区参议会的演说》（一九四一年十一月二十一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八一一页共产党员对于在工作中犯过错误的人们，除了不可救药者外，不是采取排斥态度，而是采取规劝态度，使之翻然改进，弃旧图新。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一零页room, or brag and boast and lord it overothers."Speech at the Assembly ofRepresentativesoftheShensi-Kansu-Ningsia Border Region"(November 21, 1941), Selected Works,Vol. III, p. 33.*Communists must listen attentively to theviews of people outside the Party and letthem have their say. If what they say is right,we ought to welcome it, and we should learnfrom their strong points; if it is wrong, weshould let them finish what they are sayingand then patiently explain things to them.Ibid.The attitude of Communists towards anyperson who has made mistakes in his workshould be one of persuasion in order to helphim change and start afresh and not one ofexclusion, unless he is incorrigible."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 198.共产党员对于落后的人们的态度，不是轻视他们，看不起他们，而是亲近他们，团结他们，说服他们，鼓励他们前进。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一零页As for people who are politicallybackward, Communists should not slight ordespise them, but should befriend them,unite with them, convince them andencourage them to go forward.Ibid.二十九、干部为了保证我们的党和国家不改变颜色，我们不仅需要正确的路线和政策，而且需要培养和造就千百万无产阶级革命事业的接班人。
培养无产阶级革命事业接班人的问题从根本上来说，就是老一代无产阶级革命家所开创的马克思列宁主义的革命事业是不是后继有人的问题，就是将来我们党和国家的领导能不能继续掌握在无产阶级革命家手中的问题，就是我们的子孙后代能不能沿着马克思列宁主义的正确道路继续前进的问题，也就是我们能不能胜利地防止赫鲁晓夫修正主义在中国重演的问题。
 总之，这是关系我们党和国29. CADRESIn order to guarantee that our Party andcountry do not change their colour, we mustnot only have a correct line and correctpolicies but must train and bring up millionsof successors who will carry on the cause ofproletarian revolution.In the final analysis, the question oftraining successors for the revolutionarycause of the proletariat is one of whether ornot there will be people who can carry onthe Marxist-Leninist revolutionary causestarted by the older generation of proletarianrevolutionaries, whether or not theleadership of our Party and state will remainin the hands of proletarian revolutionaries,whether or not our descendants willcontinue to march along the correct road laiddown by Marxism-Leninism, or, in otherwords, whether or not we can successfullyprevent the emergence of Khrushchov'srevisionism in China. In short, it is an家命运的生死存亡的极其重大的问题。
这是无产阶级革命事业的百年大计，千年大计，万年大计。
帝国主义的预言家们根据苏联发生的变化，也把“和平演变”的希望，寄托在中国党的第三代或者第四代身上。
我们一定要使帝国主义的这种预言彻底破产。
我们一定要从上到下地、普遍地、经常不断地注意培养和造就革命事业的接班人。
具备什么条件，才能够充当无产阶级革命事业的接班人呢？他们必须是真正的马克思列宁主义者，而不是像赫鲁晓夫那样的挂着马克思列宁主义招牌的修正主义者。
他们必须是全心全意为中国和世界的绝大多数人服务的革命者，而不是像赫鲁晓夫那样，在国内为一小撮资产阶级特权阶extremely important question, a matter oflife and death for our Party and our country.It is a question of fundamental importanceto the proletarian revolutionary cause for ahundred, a thousand, nay ten thousand years.Basing themselves on the changes in theSoviet Union, the imperialist prophets arepinning their hopes of "peaceful evolution"on the third or fourth generation of theChinese Party. We must shatter theseimperialist prophecies. From our highestorganizations down to the grass-roots, wemust everywhere give constant attention tothe training and upbringing of successors tothe revolutionary cause.What are the requirements for worthysuccessors to the revolutionary cause of theproletariat?They must be genuine Marxist-Leninistsand not revisionists like Khrushchovwearing the cloak of Marxism-Leninism.They must be revolutionaries whowholeheartedly serve the overwhelmingmajority of the people of China and thewhole world, and must not be like层的利益服务，在国际为帝国主义和反动派的利益服务。
他们必须是能够团结绝大多数人一道工作的无产阶级政治家。
不但要团结和自己意见相同的人，而且要善于团结那些和自己意见不同的人，还要善于团结那些反对过自己并且已被实践证明是犯了错误的人。
但是要特别警惕像赫鲁晓夫那样的个人野心家和阴谋家，防止这样的坏人篡夺党和国家的各级领导。
他们必须是党的民主集中制的模范执行者，必须学会“从群众中来，到群众中去”的领导方法，必须养成善于听取群众意见的民主作风。
而不能像赫鲁晓夫那样，破坏党的民主集中制，专横跋扈，对Khrushchov who serves both the interests ofthe handful of members of the privilegedbourgeois stratum in his own country andthose of foreign imperialism and reaction.They must be proletarian statesmencapable of uniting and working togetherwith the overwhelming majority. Not onlymust they unite with those who agree withthem, they must also be good at uniting withthose who disagree and even with those whoformerly opposed them and have since beenproved wrong in practice. But they mustespecially watch out for careerists andconspirators like Khrushchov and preventsuch bad elements from usurping theleadership of the Party and the state at anylevel.They must be models in applying theParty's democratic centralism, must masterthe method of leadership based on theprinciple of "from the masses, to themasses", and must cultivate a democraticstyle and be good at listening to the masses.They must not be despotic like Khrushchovand violate the Party's democratic同志搞突然袭击，不讲道理，实行个人独裁。
他们必须谦虚谨慎，戒骄戒躁，富于自我批评精神，勇于改正自己工作中的缺点和错误。
而绝不能像赫鲁晓夫那样，文过饰非，把一切功劳归于自己，把一切错误归于别人。
无产阶级革命事业的接班人，是在群众斗争中产生的，是在革命大风大浪的锻炼中成长的。
应当在长期的群众斗争中，考察和识别干部，挑选和培养接班人。
转摘自《关于赫鲁晓夫的假共产主义及其在世界历史上的教训》，一九六四年七月十四日《人民日报》我们党的组织要向全国发展，要自觉地造就成万数的干部，要有几百个最好的centralism, make surprise attacks oncomrades or act arbitrarily and dictatorially.They must be modest and prudent andguard against arrogance and impetuosity;they must be imbued with the spirit ofselfcriticism and have the courage to correctmistakes and shortcomings in their work.They must never cover up their errors likeKhrushchov, and claim all the credit forthemselves and shift all the blame on others.Successors to the revolutionary cause ofthe proletariat come forward in massstruggles and are tempered in the greatstorms of revolution. It is essential to testand judge cadres and choose and trainsuccessors in the long course of massstruggle.Quoted in "On Khrushchov's PhoneyCommunism and Its Historical Lessonsfor the World" (July 14,1964), pp.72-74.*Our Party organizations must be extendedall over the country and we mustpurposefully train tens of thousands of群众领袖。
这些干部和领袖懂得马克思列宁主义，有政治远见，有工作能力，富于牺牲精神，能独立解决问题，在困难中不动摇，忠心耿耿地为民族、为阶级、为党而工作。
党依靠着这些人而联系党员和群众，依靠着这些人对于群众的坚强领导而达到打倒敌人之目的。
这些人不要自私自利，不要个人英雄主义和风头主义，不要懒惰和消极性，不要自高自大的宗派主义，他们是大公无私的民族的阶级的英雄，这就是共产党员、党的干部、党的领袖应该有的性格和作风。
《为争取千百万群众进入抗日民族统一战线而斗争》（一九三七年五月七日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二六七——二六八页cadres and hundreds of first-rate massleaders. They must be cadres and leadersversed in Marxism-Leninism, politicallyfar-sighted, competent in work, full of thespirit of selfsacrifice, capable of tacklingproblems on their own, steadfast in themidst of difficulties and loyal and devoted inserving the nation, the class and the Party. Itis on these cadres and leaders that the Partyrelies for its links with the membership andthe masses, and it is by relying on their firmleadership of the masses that the Party cansucceed in defeating the enemy. Such cadresand leaders must be free from selfishness,from individualistic heroism, ostentation,sloth, passivity, and arrogant sectarianism,and they must be selfless national and classheroes; such are the qualities and the style ofwork demanded of the members, cadres andleaders of our Party."Win the Masses in Their Millions forthe Anti-Japanese National UnitedFront" (May 7, 1937), Selected Works,Vol. I, p. 291.*政治路线确定之后，干部就是决定的因素。
因此，有计划地培养大批的新干部。
就是我们的战斗任务。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一四页共产党的干部政策，应是以能否坚决地执行党的路线，服从党的纪律，和群众有密切的联系，有独立的工作能力，积极肯干，不谋私利为标准，这就是“任人唯贤”的路线。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一五页必须坚持干部参加集体生产劳动的制度。
我们党和国家的干部是普通劳动者，而不是骑在人民头上的老爷。
干部通过参加集体生产劳动，同劳动人民保持最Cadres are a decisive factor, once thepolitical line is determined. Therefore, it isour fighting task to train large numbers ofnew cadres in a planned way."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 202.The criterion the Communist Party shouldapply in its cadres policy is whether or not acadre is resolute in carrying out the Partyline, keeps to Party discipline, has close tieswith the masses, has the ability to find hisbearings independently, and is active,hardworking and unselfish. This is what"appointing people on their merit" means.Ibid.It is necessary to maintain the system ofcadre participation in collective productivelabour. The cadres of our Party and state areordinary workers and not overlords sittingon the backs of the people. By taking part incollective productive labour, the cadres广泛的、经常的、密切的联系。
这是社会主义制度下一件带根本性的大事，它有助于克服官僚主义，防止修正主义和教条主义。
转摘自《关于赫鲁晓夫的假共产主义及其在世界历史上的教训》，一九六四年七月十四日《人民日报》必须善于识别干部。
不但要看干部的一时一事，而且要看干部的全部历史和全部工作，这是识别干部的主要方法。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一五页必须善于使用干部。
领导者的责任，归结起来，主要地是出主意、用干部两件事。
一切计划、决议、命令、指示等等，都属于“出主意”一类。
使这一切主意见maintain extensive, constant and close tieswith the working people. This is a majormeasure of fundamental importance for asocialist system; it helps to overcomebureaucracy and to prevent revisionism anddogmatism.Quoted in "On Khrushchov's PhoneyCommunism and Its Historical Lessonsfor the World" (July 14, 1964), pp.68-69.*We must know how to judge cadres. Wemust not confine our judgement to a shortperiod or a single incident in a cadre's life,but should consider his life and work as awhole. This is the principal method ofjudging cadres."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 202.We must, know how to use cadres well. Inthe final analysis, leadership involves twomain responsibilities: to work out ideas, andto use cadres well. Such things as drawingup plans, making decisions, and givingorders and directives, are all in the categoryof "working out ideas". To put the ideas into之实行，必须团结干部，推动他们去做，属于“用干部”一类。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一五页必须善于爱护干部。
爱护的办法是：第一，指导他们。
这就是让他们放手工作，使他们敢于负责；同时，又适时地给以指示，使他们能在党的政治路线下发挥其创造性。
第二，提高他们。
这就是给以学习的机会，教育他们，使他们在理论上在工作能力上提高一步。
第三，检查他们的工作，帮助他们总结经验，发扬成绩，纠正错误。
有委托而无检查，及至犯了严重的错误，方才加以注意，不是爱护干部的办practice, we must weld the cadrestogether and encourage them to go intoaction; this comes into the category of"using the cadres well".Ibid.We must know how to take good care ofcadres. There are several ways of doing so.First, give them guidance. This meansallowing them a free hand in their work sothat they have the courage to assumeresponsibility and, at the same time, givingthem timely instructions so that, guided bythe Party's political line, they are able tomake full use of their initiative.Second, raise their level. This meanseducating them by giving them theopportunity to study so that they canenhance their theoretical understanding andtheir working ability.Third, check up on their work, and helpthem sum up their experience, carry forwardtheir achievements and correct theirmistakes. To assign work without checkingup and to take notice only when seriousmistakes are made - that is not the way to法。
第四，对于犯错误的干部，一般地应采取说服的方法。
帮助他们改正错误。
只有对犯了严重错误而又不接受指导的人们，才应当采取斗争的方法。
在这里，耐心是必要的；轻易地给人们戴上“机会主义”的大帽子，轻易地采用“开展斗争”的方法，是不对的。
第五，照顾他们的困难。
干部有疾病、生活、家庭等项困难问题者，必须在可能限度内用心给以照顾。
这些就是爱护干部的方法。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一五——五一六页凡属真正团结一致、联系群众的领导骨干，必须是从群众斗争中逐渐形成，而不是脱离群众斗争所能形成的。
在多数情take care of cadres.Fourth, in general, use the method ofpersuasion with cadres who have mademistakes, and help them correct theirmistakes. The method of struggle should beconfined to those who make seriousmistakes and nevertheless refuse to acceptguidance. Here patience is essential. It iswrong lightly to label people "opportunists"or lightly to begin "waging struggles"against them.Fifth, help them with their difficulties.When cadres are in difficulty as a result ofillness, straitened means or domestic orother troubles, we must be sure to give themas much care as possible.This is how to take good care of cadres.Ibid., p. 203.A leading group that is genuinely united andis linked with the masses can gradually beformed only in the process of mass struggle,and not in isolation from it. In the process ofa great struggle, the composition of the形下，一个伟大的斗争过程，其开始阶段、中间阶段和最后阶段的领导骨干，不应该是也不可能是完全同一的；必须不断地提拔在斗争中产生的积极分子，来替换原有骨干中相形见绌的分子，或腐化了的分子。
《关于领导方法的若干问题》（一九四三年六月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第九零零页我们党如果没有广大的新干部同老干部一致合作，我们的事业就会中断。
所以一切老干部应该以极大的热忱欢迎新干部，关心新干部。
不错，新干部是有缺点的，他们参加革命还不久，还缺乏经验，他们中的有些人还不免带来旧社会不良思想的尾巴，这就是小资产阶级个人主义leading group in most cases should notand cannot remain entirely unchangedthroughout the initial, middle and finalstages; the activists who come forward inthe course of the struggle must constantly bepromoted to replace those original membersof the leading group who are inferior bycomparison or who have degenerated."Some Questions Concerning Methodsof Leadership" (June 1, 1943), SelectedWorks, Vol. III, p. 118.*If our Party does not have a great manynew cadres working in unity andcooperation with the old cadres, our causewill come to a stop. All old cadres, therefore,should welcome the new ones with theutmost enthusiasm and show them thewarmest solicitude. True, new cadres havetheir shortcomings. They have not been longin the revolution and lack experience, andunavoidably some have brought with themvestiges of the unwholesome ideology of theold society, remnants of the ideology ofpetty-bourgeois individualism. But such思想的残余。
但是这些缺点是可以从教育中从革命锻炼中逐渐地去掉的。
他们的长处，正如斯大林说过的，是对于新鲜事物有锐敏的感觉，因而有高度的热情和积极性，而在这一点上，有些老干部则正是缺乏的。
新老干部应该是彼此尊重，互相学习，取长补短，以便团结一致，进行共同的事业，而防止宗派主义的倾向。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二六页不但要关心党的干部，还要关心非党的干部。
党外存在着很多的人材，共产党不能把他们置之度外。
去掉孤傲习气，善于和非党干部共事，真心诚意地帮助shortcomings can be gradually eliminatedthrough education and tempering in therevolution. The strong point of the newcadres, as Stalin has said, is that they areacutely sensitive to what is new and aretherefore enthusiastic and active to a highdegree - the very qualities which some ofthe old cadres lack. Cadres, new and old,should respect each other, learn from eachother and overcome their own shortcomingsby learning from each other's strong points,so as to unite as one in the common causeand guard against sectarian tendencies."Rectify the Party's Style of Work"(February 1, 1942), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 47.Our concern should extend to non-Partycadres as well as to Party cadres. There aremany capable people outside the Partywhom we must not ignore. The duty ofevery Communist is to rid himself ofaloofness and arrogance and to work wellwith non-Party cadres, give them sincere他们，用热烈的同志的态度对待他们，把他们的积极性组织到抗日和建国的伟大事业中去，这是每一个共产党员的责任。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五一五页help, have a warm, comradely attitudetowards them and enlist their initiative in thegreat cause of resisting Japan andreconstructing the nation."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 202.三十、青年世界是你们的，也是我们的，但是归根结底是你们的。
你们青年人朝气蓬勃，正在兴旺时期，好像早晨八、九点钟的太阳。
希望寄托在你们身上。
……世界是属于你们的。
中国的前途是属于你们的。
在莫斯科会见我国留学生和实习生时的谈话（一九五七年十一月十七日），《毛主席在苏联的言论》人民日报出版社版第一四——一五页要使全体青年们懂得，我们的国家现在还是一个很穷的国家，并且不可能在短时间内根本改变这种状态，全靠青年和全体人民在几十年时间内，团结奋斗，用自己的双手创造出一个富强的国家。
社会主义制度的建立给我们开辟了一条到达理30. YOUTHThe world is yours, as well as ours, but inthe last analysis, it is yours. You youngpeople, full of vigour and vitality, are in thebloom of life, like the sun at eight or nine inthe morning. Our hope is placed on you. …The world belongs to you. China'sfuture belongs to you."Talk at a meeting with Chinesestudents and trainees in Moscow"(November 17, 1957).We must help all our young people tounderstand that ours is still a very poorcountry, that we cannot change this situationradically in a short time, and that onlythrough the united efforts of our youngergeneration and all our people, working withtheir own hands, can China be made strongand prosperous within a period of severaldecades. The establishment of our socialistsystem has opened the road leading to the想境界的道路，而理想境界的实现还要靠我们的辛勤劳动。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二三页不少青年人由于缺少政治经验和社会生活经验，不善于把旧中国和新中国加以比较，不容易深切了解我国人民曾经怎样经历千辛万苦的斗争才摆脱了帝国主义和国民党反动派的压迫，而建立一个美好的社会主义社会要经过怎样的长时间的艰苦劳动。
因此，需要在群众中间经常进行生动的、切实的政治教育，并且应当经常把发生的困难向他们作真实的说明，和他们一起研究如何解决困难的办法。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三二——三三页ideal society of the future, but to translatethis ideal into reality needs hard work."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., pp.44-45Because of their lack of political andsocial experience, quite a number of youngpeople are unable to see the contrastbetween the old China and the new, and it isnot easy for them thoroughly to comprehendthe hardships our people went through in thestruggle to free themselves from theoppression of the imperialists andKuomintang reactionaries, or the longperiod of arduous work needed before ahappy socialist society can be established.That is why we must constantly carry onlively and effective political educationamong the masses and should always tellthem the truth about the difficulties that cropup and discuss with them how to surmountthese difficulties.。
Ibid., p. 63.青年是整个社会力量中的一部分最积极最有生气的力量。
他们最肯学习，最少保守思想，在社会主义时代尤其是这样。
希望各地的党组织，协同青年团组织，注意研究如何特别发挥青年人的力量，不要将他们一般看待，抹杀了他们的特点。
当然青年人必须向老年人和成年人学习，要尽量争取在老年人和成年人同意之下去做各种有益的活动。
《中山县新平乡第九农业生产合作社的青年突击队》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》下册第九五九页看一个青年是不是革命的，拿什么做The young people are the most active andvital force in society. They are the mosteager to learn and the least conservative intheir thinking. This is especially so in the eraof socialism. We hope that the local Partyorganizations in various places will help andwork with the Youth League organizationsand go into the question of bringing into fullplay the energy of our youth in particular.The Party organizations should not treatthem in the same way as everybody else andignore their special characteristics. Ofcourse, the young people should learn fromthe old and other adults, and should strive asmuch as possible to engage in all sorts ofuseful activities with their agreement.Introductory note to "A Youth ShockBrigade of the No. 9 AgriculturalProducers' Co-operative in HsinpingTownship, Chungshan County" (1955),The Socialist Upsurge in China'sCountryside, Chinese ed., Vol. III.How should we judge whether a youth isa revolutionary? How can we tell? There can标准呢？拿什么去辨别他呢？只有一个标准，这就是看他愿意不愿意、并且实行不实行和广大的工农群众结合在一块。
愿意并且实行和工农结合的，是革命的，否则就是不革命的，或者是反革命的。
他今天把自己结合于工农群众，他今天是革命的；但是如果他明天不去结合了，或者反过来压迫老百姓，那就是不革命的，或者是反革命的了。
《青年运动的方向》（一九三九年五月四日），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五五四页知识分子在其未和群众的革命斗争打成一片，在其未下决心为群众利益服务并与群众相结合的时候，往往带有主观主义和个人主义的倾向，他们的思想往往是空虚的，他们的行动往往是动摇的。
因此，中国的广大的革命知识分子虽然有先锋only be one criterion, namely, whether ornot he is willing to integrate himself withthe broad masses of workers and peasantsand does so in practice. If he is willing to doso and actually does so, he is a revolutionary;otherwise he is a nonrevolutionary or acounter-revolutionary. If today he integrateshimself with the masses of workers andpeasants, then today he is a revolutionary; iftomorrow he ceases to do so or turns roundto oppress the common people, then hebecomes a nonrevolutionary or acounter-revolutionary."The Orientation of the YouthMovement" (May 4, 1939), SelectedWorks, Vol. II, p. 246.The intellectuals often tend to besubjective and individualistic, impractical intheir thinking and irresolute in action untilthey have thrown themselves heart and soulinto mass revolutionary struggles, or madeup their minds to serve the interests of themasses and become one with them. Hencealthough the mass of revolutionaryintellectuals in China can play a vanguard的和桥梁的作用，但不是所有这些知识分子都能革命到底的。
其中一部分，到了革命的紧急关头，就会脱离革命队伍，采取消极态度；其中少数人，就会变成革命的敌人。
知识分子的这种缺点，只有在长期的群众斗争中才能克服。
《中国革命和中国共产党》（一九三九年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第六三六页青年团除了应继续配合党的中心工作以外，还要有适合青年特点的独立工作。
新中国要为青年们着想，要关怀青年一代的成长。
青年们要学习，要工作，但青年时期是长身体的时期。
因此，要充分兼顾青年的工作、学习和娱乐、体育、休息两个方面。
在接见青年团第二次全国代表大会主席团时的指示（一九五三年六月三十日），一九五三年七月三日《人民日报》role or serve as a link with the masses, notall of them will remain revolutionaries to theend. Some will drop out of the revolutionaryranks at critical moments and becomepassive, while a few may even becomeenemies of the revolution. The intellectualscan overcome their shortcomings only inmass struggles over a long period."The Chinese Revolution and theChinese Communist Party" (December1939), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 322.*Apart from continuing to act inco-ordination with the Party in its centraltask, the Youth League should do its ownwork to suit the special characteristics ofyouth. New China must care for her youthand show concern for the growth of theyounger generation. Young people have tostudy and work, but they are at the age ofphysical growth. Therefore, full attentionmust be paid both to their work and studyand to their recreation, sport and rest."Talk at the reception for the Presidiumof the Second National Congress of theYouth League" (June 30, 1953).三十一、妇女中国的男子，普通要受三种有系统的权力（指政权、族权、神权——编者）的支配，……至于女子，除受上述三种权力的支配以外，还受男子的支配（夫权）。
这四种权力——政权、族权、神权、夫权，代表了全部封建宗法的思想和制度，是束缚中国人民特别是农民的四条极大的绳索。
农民在乡下怎样推翻地主的政权，已如前头所述。
地主政权，是一切权力的基干。
地主政权既被打翻，族权、神权、夫权便一概跟着动摇起来。
……夫权这种东西，自来在贫农中就比较地弱一点。
因为31. WOMENA man in China is usually subjected to thedomination of three systems of authority[political authority, clan authority andreligious authority].... As for women, inaddition to being dominated by these threesystems of authority, they are alsodominated by the men (the authority of thehusband). These four authorities - political,clan, religious and masculine - are theembodiment of the whole feudal-patriarchalideology and system, and are the four thickropes binding the Chinese people,particularly the peasants. How the peasantshave overthrown the political authority ofthe landlords in the countryside has beendescribed above. The political authority ofthe landlords is the backbone of all the othersystems of authority. With that overturned,the clan authority, the religious authority andthe authority of the husband all begin tototter.... As to the authority of the husband,this has always been weaker among the poorpeasants because, out of economic necessity,their womenfolk have to do more manual经济上贫农妇女不能不较富有阶级的女子多参加劳动，所以她们取得对于家事的发言权以至决定权的是比较多些。
至近年，农村经济益发破产，男子控制女子的基本条件，业已破坏了。
最近农民运动一起，许多地方，妇女跟着组织了乡村女界联合会，妇女抬头的机会已到，夫权便一天一天地动摇起来。
总而言之，所有一切封建的宗法的思想和制度，都随着农民权力的升涨而动摇。
《湖南农民运动考察报告》（一九二七年三月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第三三——三四页团结起来，参加生产和政治活动，改善妇女的经济地位和政治地位。
为《新中国妇女》杂志的题词，一九四九年七月二十日《新中国妇女》创刊号labour than the women of the richer classesand therefore have more say and greaterpower of decision in family matters. Withthe increasing bankruptcy of the ruraleconomy in recent years, the basis for men'sdomination over women has already beenundermined. With the rise of the peasantmovement, the women in many places havenow begun to organize rural women'sassociations; the opportunity has come forthem to lift up their heads, and the authorityof the husband is getting shakier every day.In a word, the whole feudal-patriarchalideology and system is tottering with thegrowth of the peasants' power."Report on an Investigation of thePeasant Movement in Hunan" (March1927), Selected Works, Vol. I, pp.44-46.*Unite and take part in production andpolitical activity to improve the economicand political status of women.Inscription for the magazine "Women ofNew China", printed in its first issue,July 20, 1949.要求保护青年、妇女、儿童的利益，救济失学青年，并使青年、妇女组织起来，以平等地位参加有益于抗日战争和社会进步的各项工作，实现婚姻自由，男女平等，使青年和儿童得到有益的学习；……《论联合政府》（一九四五年四月二十四日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零六五页有组织地调剂劳动力和推动妇女参加生产，是我们农业生产方面的最基本的任务。
《我们的经济政策》（一九三四年一月二十三日），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一二六——一二七页为了建设伟大的社会主义社会，发动广大的妇女群众参加生产活动，具有极大的意义。
在生产中，必须实现男女平等，Protect the interests of the youth, womenand children - provide assistance to youngstudents who cannot afford to continue theirstudies, help the youth and women toorganize in order to participate on an equalfooting in all work useful to the war effortand to social progress, ensure freedom ofmarriage and equality as between men andwomen, and give young people and childrena useful education.…"On Coalition Government" (April 24,1945), Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 288.*[In agricultural production] our funda-mental task is to adjust the use of labourpower in an organized way and to encouragewomen to do farm work."Our Economic Policy" (January 23,1934), Selected Works, Vo1. I, p. 142.*In order to build a great socialist society itis of the utmost importance to arouse thebroad masses of women to join inproductive activity. Men and women mustreceive equal pay for equal work in只有在整个社会的社会主义改造过程中才能实现。
《妇女走上了劳动战线》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第三五七页在合作化以后，许多合作社感到劳动力不足了，有必要发动过去不参加田间劳动的广大的妇女群众参加到劳动战线上去。
……中国的妇女是一种伟大的人力资源。
必须发掘这种资源，为了建设一个伟大的社会主义国家而奋斗。
《发动妇女投入生产，解决了劳动力不足的困难》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》中册第六七四——六七五页production. Genuine equality between thesexes can only be realized in the process ofthe socialist transformation of society as awhole.Introductory note to "Women HaveGone to the Labour Front" (1955), TheSocialistUpsurgeinChina'sCountryside, Chinese ed., Vol. I.With the completion of agriculturalcooperation, many co-operatives are findingthemselves short of labour. It has becomenecessary to arouse the great mass ofwomen who did not work in the fieldsbefore to take their place on the labourfront.… China's women are a vast reserveof labour power. This reserve should betapped in the struggle to build a greatsocialist country.Introductory note to "Solving theLabour Shortage by Arousing theWomen to Join in Production" (1955),The Socialist Upsurge in China'sCountryside, Chinese ed., Vol. II.使全部妇女劳动力，在同工同酬的原则下，一律参加到劳动战线上去，这个要求，应当在尽可能短的时间内，予以实现。
《邢台县民主妇女联合会关于发展农业合作化运动中妇女工作的规划》一文的按语（一九五五年），《中国农村的社会主义高潮》上册第六六页Enable every woman who can work totake her place on the labour front, under theprinciple of equal pay for equal work. Thisshould be done as quickly as possible.Introductory note to "On Widening theScope of Women's Work in theAgricultural Co-operative Movement"(1955), The Socialist Upsurge inChina's Countryside, Chinese ed., Vol.I.三十二、文化艺术在现在世界上，一切文化或文学艺术都是属于一定的阶级，属于一定的政治路线的。
为艺术的艺术，超阶级的艺术，和政治并行或互相独立的艺术，实际上是不存在的。
无产阶级的文学艺术是无产阶级整个革命事业的一部分，如同列宁所说，是整个革命机器中的“齿轮和螺丝钉”。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话》（一九四二年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八六七页革命文化，对于人民大众，是革命的有力武器。
革命文化，在革命前，是革命的思想准备；在革命中，是革命总战线中的一条必要和重要的战线。
《新民主主义论》（一九四零年一月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第七零一页32. CULTURE AND ARTIn the world today all culture, all literatureand art belong to definite classes and aregeared to definite political lines. There is infact no such thing as art for art's sake, artthat stands above classes, art that is detachedfrom or independent of politics. Proletarianliterature and art are part of the wholeproletarian revolutionary cause; they are, asLenin said, cogs and wheels in the wholerevolutionary machine."Talks at the Yen'an Forum onLiterature and Art" (May 1942),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 86.*Revolutionary culture is a powerfulrevolutionary weapon for the broad massesof the people. It prepares the groundideologically before the revolution comesand is an important, indeed essential,fighting front in the general revolutionaryfront during the revolution."On New Democracy" (January 1940),Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 382.我们的文学艺术都是为人民大众的，首先是为工农兵的，为工农兵而创作，为工农兵所利用的。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话》（一九四二年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八六五页我们的文艺工作者一定要完成这个任务，一定要把立足点移过来，一定要在深入工农兵群众、深入实际斗争的过程中，在学习马克思主义和学习社会的过程中，逐渐地移过来，移到工农兵这方面来，移到无产阶级这方面来。
只有这样，我们才能有真正为工农兵的文艺，真正无产阶级的文艺。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话》（一九四二年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八五九页要使文艺很好地成为整个革命机器的一个组成部分，作为团结人民、教育人All our literature and art are for themasses of the people, and in the first placefor the workers, peasants and soldiers; theyare created for the workers, peasants andsoldiers and are for their use."Talks at the Yen'an Forum onLiterature and Art" (May 1942),Selected Works, Vol. III, p. 84.*Our literary and art workers mustaccomplish this task and shift their stand;they must gradually move their feet over tothe side of the workers, peasants andsoldiers, to the side of the proletariat,through the process of going into their verymidst and into the thick of practicalstruggles and through the process ofstudying Marxism and society. Only in thisway can we have a literature and art that aretruly for the workers, peasants and soldiers,a truly proletarian literature and art.Ibid., p. 78.[Our purpose is] to ensure that literatureand art fit well into the whole revolutionarymachine as a component part, that theyoperate as powerful weapons for uniting and民、打击敌人、消灭敌人的有力的武器，帮助人民同心同德地和敌人作斗争。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话》（一九四二年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八五零页文艺批评有两个标准，一个是政治标准，一个是艺术标准。
……又是政治标准，又是艺术标准，这两者的关系怎么样呢？政治并不等于艺术，一般的宇宙观也并不等于艺术创作和艺术批评的方法。
我们不但否认抽象的绝对不变的政治标准，也否认抽象的绝对不变的艺术标准，各个阶级社会中的各个阶级都有不同的政治标准和不同的艺术标准。
但是任何阶级社会中的任何阶级，总是以政治标准放在第一位，以艺术标准放在第二位的。
……我们的要求则是政治和艺术的统一，内容和形式的统一，革命的政治educating the people and for attacking anddestroying the enemy, and that they help thepeople fight the enemy with one heart andone mind.Ibid., p. 70.In literary and art criticism there are twocriteria, the political and the artistic.…There is the political criterion and there isthe artistic criterion; what is the relationshipbetween the two? Politics cannot be equatedwith art, nor can a general world outlook beequated with a method of artistic creationand criticism. We deny not only that there isan abstract and absolutely unchangeablepolitical criterion, but also that there is anabstract and absolutely unchangeable artisticcriterion; each class in every class societyhas its own political and artistic criteria. Butall classes in all class societies invariablyput the political criterion first and the artisticcriterion second.… What we demand is theunity of politics and art, the unity of contentand form, the unity of revolutionary politicalcontent and the highest possible perfection内容和尽可能完美的艺术形式的统一。
缺乏艺术性的艺术品，无论政治上怎样进步，也是没有力量的。
因此，我们既反对政治观点错误的艺术品，也反对只有正确的政治观点而没有艺术力量的所谓“标语口号式”的倾向。
我们应该进行文艺问题上的两条战线斗争。
《在延安文艺座谈会上的讲话》（一九四二年五月），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八六九——八七一页百花齐放、百家争鸣的方针，是促进艺术发展和科学进步的方针，是促进我国的社会主义文化繁荣的方针。
艺术上不同的形式和风格可以自由发展，科学上不同的学派可以自由争论。
利用行政力量，强制推行一种风格，一种学派，禁止另一种风格，另一种学派，我们认为会有害于艺术和科学的发展。
艺术和科学中的是非问of artistic form. Works of art which lackartistic quality have no force, howeverprogressive they are politically. Therefore,we oppose both works of art with a wrongpolitical viewpoint and the tendencytowards the "poster and slogan style" whichis correct in political viewpoint but lackingin artistic power. On questions of literatureand art we must carry on a struggle on twofronts.Ibid., pp. 88-90.*Letting a hundred flowers blossom and ahundred schools of thought contend is thepolicy for promoting the progress of the artsand the sciences and a flourishing socialistculture in our land. Different forms andstyles in art should develop freely anddifferent schools in science should contendfreely. We think that it is harmful to thegrowth of art and science if administrativemeasures are used to impose one particularstyle of art or school of thought and to bananother. Questions of right and wrong in the题，应当通过艺术界科学界的自由讨论去解决，通过艺术和科学的实践去解决，而不应当采取简单的方法去解决。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第二五——二六页没有文化的军队是愚蠢的军队，而愚蠢的军队是不能战胜敌人的。
《文化工作中的统一战线》（一九四四年十月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第一零零九页arts and sciences should be settled throughfree discussion in artistic and scientificcircles and through practical work in thesefields. They should not be settled insummary fashion."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., pp.49-50.An army without culture is a dull-wittedarmy, and a dull-witted army cannot defeatthe enemy."The United Front in Cultural Work"(October 30, 1944), Selected Works,Vol. III, p. 235.三十三、学习要把一个落后的农业的中国改变成为一个先进的工业化的中国，我们面前的工作是很艰苦的，我们的经验是很不够的。
因此，必须善于学习。
《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会开幕词》（一九五六年九月十五日），《中国共产党第八次全国代表大会文献》第九页情况是在不断地变化，要使自己的思想适应新的情况，就得学习。
即使是对于马克思主义已经了解得比较多的人，无产阶级立场比较坚定的人，也还是要再学习，要接受新事物，要研究新问题。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第七页33. STUDYIn transforming a backward agriculturalChina into an advanced industrializedcountry, we are confronted with arduoustasks and our experience is far fromadequate. So we must be good at learning."OpeningAddressattheEighthNational Congress of the CommunistParty of China" (September 15, 1956).Conditions are changing all the time, andto adapt one's thinking to the new conditions,one must study. Even those who have abetter grasp of Marxism and arecomparatively firm in their proletarian standhave to go on studying, have to absorb whatis new and study new problems."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty's National Conference onPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957),1st pocket ed., p. 8.*我们能够学会我们原来不懂的东西。
我们不但善于破坏一个旧世界，我们还将善于建设一个新世界。
《在中国共产党第七届中央委员会第二次全体会议上的报告》（一九四九年三月五日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四四零页学习有两种态度。
一种是教条主义的态度，不管我国情况，适用的和不适用的，一起搬来。
这种态度不好。
另一种态度，学习的时候用脑筋想一下，学那些和我国情况相适合的东西，即吸取对我们有益的经验，我们需要的是这样一种态度。
《关于正确处理人民内部矛盾的问题》（一九五七年二月二十七日），人民出版社版第三八页马克思、恩格斯、列宁、斯大林的理论，是“放之四海而皆准”的理论。
不应当把他们的理论当作教条看待，而应当看作行动的指南。
不应当只是学习马克思列We can learn what we did not know. Weare not only good at destroying the oldworld, we are also good at building the new."Report to the Second Plenary Session ofthe Seventh Central Committee of theCommunist Party of China" (March 5,1949), Selected Works, Vol. IV, p. 374.Now, there are two different attitudestowards learning from others. One is thedogmaticattitudeoftransplantingeverything, whether or not it is suited to ourconditions. This is no good. The otherattitude is to use our heads and learn thosethings which suit our conditions, that is, toabsorb whatever experience is useful to us.That is the attitude we should adopt."On the Correct Handling ofContradictions Among the People"(February 27, 1957), 1st pocket ed., p.75.The theory of Marx, Engels, Lenin andStalin is universally applicable. We shouldregard it not as a dogma, but as a guide toaction. Studying it is not merely a matter oflearning terms and phrases but of learningMarxism-Leninism as the scienc of宁主义的词句，而应当把它当成革命的科学来学习。
不但应当了解马克思、恩格斯、列宁、斯大林他们研究广泛的真实生活和革命经验所得出的关于一般规律的结论，而且应当学习他们观察问题和解决问题的立场和方法。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五二一页如果有了正确的理论，只是把它空谈一阵，束之高阁，并不实行，那末，这种理论再好也是没有意义的。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月）《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二八一页对于马克思主义的理论，要能够精通它、应用它，精通的目的全在于应用。
如果你能应用马克思列宁主义的观点，说明一个两个实际问题，那就要受到称赞，就算有了几分成绩。
被你说明的东西越多，revolution. It is not just a matter ofunderstanding the general laws derived byMarx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin from theirextensive study of real life and revolutionaryexperience, but of studying their standpointand method in examining and solvingproblems."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, pp.208-09.If we have a correct theory but merelyprate about it, pigeonhole it and do not put itinto practice, then that theory, however good,is of no significance."On Practice" (July 1937), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 304.It is necessary to master Marxist theoryand apply it, master it for the sole purpose ofapplying it. If you can apply theMarxist-Leninist viewpoint in elucidatingone or two practical problems, you shouldbe commended and credited with someachievement. The more problems youelucidate and the more comprehensively and越普遍，越深刻，你的成绩就越大。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八一七页马克思列宁主义理论和中国革命实际，怎样互相联系呢？拿一句通俗的话来讲，就是“有的放矢”。
“矢”就是箭，“的”就是靶，放箭要对准靶。
马克思列宁主义和中国革命的关系，就是箭和靶的关系。
有些同志却在那里“无的放矢”，乱放一通，这样的人就容易把革命弄坏。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二一页有工作经验的人，要向理论方面学习，要认真读书，然后才可以使经验带上条理性、综合性，上升成为理论，然后才可以不把局部经验误认为即是普遍真理，才可不犯经验主义的错误。
《整顿党的作风》（一九四二年二月一日），《毛泽东选集》第三卷第八二零页profoundly you do so, the greater will beyour achievement."Rectify the Party's Style of Work"(February 1, 1942), Selected Works, Vol.III, p. 38.How is Marxist-Leninist theory to belinked with the practice of the Chineserevolution? To use a common expression, itis by "shooting the arrow at the target". Asthe arrow is to the target, so isMarxism-LeninismtotheChineserevolution. Some comrades, however, are"shooting without a target", shooting atrandom, and such people are liable to harmthe revolution.Ibid., p. 42.Those experienced in work must take upthe study of theory and must read seriously;only then will they be able to systematizeand synthesize their experience and raise itto the level of theory, only then will they notmistake their partial experience for universaltruth and not commit empiricist errors.Ibid.读书是学习，使用也是学习，而且是更重要的学习。
从战争学习战争——这是我们的主要方法。
没有进学校机会的人仍然可以学习战争，就是从战争中学习。
革命战争是民众的事，常常不是先学好了再干，而是干起来再学习，干就是学习。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一七四页从“老百姓”到军人之间有一个距离，但不是万里长城，而是可以迅速地消灭的，干革命，干战争，就是消灭这个距离的方法。
说学习和使用不容易，是说学得彻底，用得纯熟不容易。
说老百姓很快可以变成军人，是说此门并不难入。
把二者总合起来，用得着中国一句老话：“世上Reading is learning, but applying is alsolearning and the more important kind oflearning at that. Our chief method is to learnwarfare through warfare. A person who hashad no opportunity to go to school can alsolearn warfare - he can learn through fightingin war. A revolutionary war is a massundertaking; it is often not a matter of firstlearning and then doing, but of doing andthen learning, for doing is itself learning."Problems of Strategy in China'sRevolutionary War" (December 1936),Selected Works, Vol. I, pp. 189-90.There is a gap between the ordinarycivilian and the soldier, but it is no GreatWall, and it can be quickly closed, and theway to close it is to take part in revolution,in war. By saying that it is not easy to learnand to apply, we mean that it is hard to learnthoroughly and to apply skillfully. By sayingthat civilians can very quickly becomesoldiers, we mean that it is not difficult tocross the threshold. To put the twostatements together, we may cite theChinese adage, "Nothing in the world is无难事，只怕有心人。
”入门既不难，深造也是办得到的，只要有心，只要善于学习罢了。
《中国革命战争的战略问题》（一九三六年十二月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第一七四——一七五页我们必须向一切内行的人们（不管什么人）学经济工作。
拜他们做老师，恭恭敬敬地学，老老实实地学。
不懂就是不懂，不要装懂。
《论人民民主专政》（一九四九年六月三十日），《毛泽东选集》第四卷第一四八五页知识的问题是一个科学问题，来不得半点的虚伪和骄傲，决定地需要的倒是其反面——诚实和谦逊的态度。
《实践论》（一九三七年七月），《毛泽东选集》第一卷第二七六页difficult for one who sets his mind to it." Tocross the threshold is not difficult, andmastery, too, is possible provided one setsone's mind to the task and is good atlearning.Ibid., p. 190.We must learn to do economic work fromall who know how, no matter who they are.We must esteem them as teachers, learningfrom them respectfully and conscientiously.We must not pretend to know when we donot know."OnthePeople'sDemocraticDictatorship" (June 30, 1949), SelectedWorks, Vol. IV, p. 423.Knowledge is a matter of science, and nodishonesty or conceit whatsoever ispermissible. What is required is definitelythe reverse - honesty and modesty.。
"On Practice" (July 1937), SelectedWorks, Vol. I, p. 300.学习的敌人是自己的满足，要认真学习一点东西，必须从不自满开始。
对自己，“学而不厌”，对人家，“诲人不倦”，我们应取这种态度。
《中国共产党在民族战争中的地位》（一九三八年十月），《毛泽东选集》第二卷第五二三页有些人读了一些马克思主义的书，自以为有学问了，但是并没有读进去，并没有在头脑里生根，不会应用，阶级感情还是旧的。
还有一些人很骄傲，读了几句书，自以为了不起，尾巴翘到天上去了，可是一遇风浪，他们的立场，比起工人和大多数劳动农民来，就显得大不相同。
前者动摇，后者坚定，前者暧昧，后者明朗。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第六页Complacency is the enemy of study. Wecannot really learn anything until we ridourselves of complacency. Our attitudetowards ourselves should be "to beinsatiable in learning" and towards others"to be tireless in teaching"."The Role of the Chinese CommunistParty in the National War" (October1938), Selected Works, Vol. II, p. 210.Some people have read a few Marxistbooks and think themselves quite learnedbut what they have read has not penetrated,has not struck root in their minds, so thatthey do not know how to use it and theirclass feelings remain as of old. Others arevery conceited and having learned somebook-phrases, think themselves terrific andare very cocky; but whenever a storm blowsup, they take a stand very different from thatof the workers and the majority of thepeasants. They waver while the latter standfirm, they equivocate while the latter areforthright."Speech at the Chinese CommunistParty's National Conference onPropaganda Work" (March 12, 1957),1st pocket ed., pp. 7-8.克思主义，不但要从书本上学，主要地还要通过阶级斗争、工作实践和接近工农群众，才能真正学到。
如果我们的知识分子读了一些马克思主义的书，又在同工农群众的接近中，在自己的工作实践中有所了解，那末，我们大家就有了共同的语言，不仅有爱国主义方面的共同语言、社会主义制度方面的共同语言，而且还可以有共产主义世界观方面的共同语言。
如果这样，大家的工作就一定会做得好得多。
《在中国共产党全国宣传工作会议上的讲话》（一九五七年三月十二日），人民出版社版第九——一零页In order to have a real grasp of Marxism,one must learn it not only from books, butmainly through class struggle, throughpractical work and close contact with themasses of workers and peasants. When inaddition to reading some Marxist books ourintellectualshavegainedsomeunderstanding through close contact withthe masses of workers and peasants andthrough their own practical work, we will allbe speaking the same language, not only thecommon language of patriotism and thecommon language of the socialist system,but probably even the common language ofthe communist world outlook. If thathappens, all of us will certainly work muchbetter.Ibid., p. 12.NOTES[1]Yenan WaS the headquarters of theCentral Committee of the Communist Party ofChina from January 1937 to March 1947; Sian wasthe centre of the reactionary rule of the Kuomintangin north-western China． Comrade Mao Tse-tungcited the two cities as symbols of revolution andcounter-revolution．(p.219)[2]This refers to the revolutionary armed forcesorganized jointly by the Chinese Communist Partyand the Kuomintang in the years of theircooperation during the First Revolutionary CivilWar Period(1924-27).-Tr.(p.257)[3]Campaigns to "support the government andcherish the people" and to "support the army andgive preferential treatment to the families ofsoldiers fighting Japan".-Tr.(p.295)[4]The "Three Check-ups" and "Three Impro-vements" constituted an important movement forParty consolidation and for ideological education inthe army which was carried out by our Party inconjunction with the land reform during thePeople's War of Liberation. In the localities, the"Three Check-ups" meant checking on class origin,ideology and style of work; in the armed units, thecheck-ups were on class origin, performance ofduty and will to fight. The "Three Improvements"meant organizational consolidation, ideologicaleducation and rectification of style of work.-Tr.(p.301)注 释[1]1937 年 1 月至 1947 年 3 月，延安是中国共产党中央的总部，西安是中国西北地区国民党反动统治的中心，毛泽东同志把这两个城市作为革命和反革命的象征。
[2]这是指中国共产党和国民党在第一次国内革命战争时期（1924-1927 年）合作组织的国民革命军。
[3]“拥护政府、爱护人民”和“拥护军队、优待抗日军人家属”的运动。
[4]“三查”、“三整”是我党结合人民解放战争时期的土地改革，开展的巩固党和军队思想教育的重要运动。
在地方，“三查”是查阶级出身、查思想、查作风；在部队，是查阶级出身、查义务、查意志。
“三整”是组织巩固、思想教育和作风整顿。
本书根据中国人民解放軍总政治部編印的《毛主席語录》和外文出版社出版的《毛主席語录》英譯本（一九六七年第二版）排印毛 主 席 语 录（汉英对照）*东方红出版社出版（北京复兴门外翠微路）第二新华印刷厂印装 新华书店发行编号：（英）1050-491统一书号：1017.213*1967 年 8 月初版 1967 年 8 月北京第一次印刷开本：787X1092 1/64 字数：192 千字印张：9 16/32 插页 4 定价：0.80 元网站编辑制作2019 年 4 月