ROUTLEDGE
Routledge
ritical
Taylor & Francis Group
ASIAN
Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars
STUDIES
RudSeedic
ISSN: 0007-4810 (Print) (Online) ournal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rcra19
A theory of transitional society Mao Zedong and
the Shanghai School
Peer Moller Christensen & Jorgen Delman
To cite this article: Peer Moller Christensen & Jorgen Delman (1981) A theory of transitional
society Mao Zedong and the Shanghai School, Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars, 13:2, 2-15,
DOI: 10.1080/14672715.1981.10409925
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14672715.1981.10409925
Published online: 05 Jul 2019.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 118
Q
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
=====第1页=====
A Theory of Transitional Society
Mao Zedong and the Shanghai School
by Peer Moller Christensen and Jorgen Delman
Introduction
The coup d'état in China in October 1976 struck most of
Our article is divided into five parts: First, we present a
the Western world with astonishment. Within a couple of
theory we call the"system theory'which was developed under
months political power relations in China seemed to be re-
Stalin's auspices in the Soviet Union in the forties and early
versed, as was its most recent history. Taken aback by the
fifties and later exported to China.Parttwo is a brief digression
Chinese explanations and disoriented by the suddenness and
introducing the development of a theory of market-socialism in
finality of events, public opinion in the West tended to accept
China in the late fifties and early sixties. Part three traces Mao
the reasons for the coup d'état offered by the victorious
Zedong's development of a "generative class theory,"and in
conspirators.
part four we analyze the theory of what we call the Shanghai
It is, however, highly problematic to accept immediately
School which was developed in the early and mid-seventies. It is
new explanations—as well as old—just because they are of-
presented here for the first time outside China. In our fial
fered by people in power. Beneath current accusations against
remarks we shall offer some comments on the applicability of
Mao Zedong and the"Gang of Four''forsabotaging,""un-
this theory as well as on its self-contradictions and obvious
dermining,"etc.the socialist economy and the socialist system.
limitations.
one finds substantial evidence that doing away with the Cultural
Revolution is not just a question of legal justice. Real political
The"System Theory"
and theoretical contradictions between factions within the
The political economy of socialism was not introduced in
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership certainly existed
China on a wider scale until the early fifties,and then in the form
and formed the basis for recurrent power struggles. Therefore
of the Soviet"system theorywhich found its way to China as
we still find it worthwhile to study the decade of the Cultural
part of the superstructure of Soviet economic and political
Revolution—not to "acquit' Mao Zedong or the "Gang of
assistance after Liberation in 1949. The system theory"'was
Four'' of whatever mistakes or crimes they may have commit-
presented as the Marxist theory on the political economy of
ted,but togaina more sober and realistic understandingoftha
socialism and was expounded by Soviet manuals on political
tumultuous decade.
economy, primarily in Political Economy; A Textbook pub-
In this respect it is necessary to consider the theory or
lished in 1954.2
theories lying behind the Cultural Revolution as a basis for
Before this book came to China, Chinese economists all-
analyzing actual policy-making. In this article we intend to
ready had a notion of the nature and ideas of the "system
present an outline of the theory of transitional society developed
theory'from Stalin's small pamphlet: "Economic Problems of
during the period 1949-1976 by the radical wing within the
Socialism in the USSR' (1952), which was meant as a guide-
CCP, notably Mao Zedong and the Shanghai School, econo-
line for the authors of the "Textbook,' themselves distin-
mists and politicians in Shanghai who cooperated with radical
guished Sovieteconomists.3Stalin's participation inwritingthe
politicians within the CCP leadership (such as Zhang Chunqiao
"Textbook' and final approval of it made it the most authorita-
and Yao Wenyuan).
tive work of the "system theory.' It later appeared in second
This theory was presented as a "political economy of
and third editions, but the theoretical substance remained
socialism' based on, but critical of, Soviet Marxism. In
its final version it came close to contemporary Marxist theory
identical.
propagated by members of the New Left in Europe such as
Charles Bettelheim and Rossanna Rossanda. One of the in-
teresting faturesofthisChinesetheory wasitsabilitytrad-
ally freeitslf from talinist dogmatism andthetraighacketof
1.This is ourown designation for this specific theory.Itis meanttodescrea
theory regarding socialism as a social system govered by a set of objective
Soviet Marxism and to reach new insights concerning the nature
laws.Thesystemtheoryisregarded ascientificsysteminitelf.
and structure of China as a socialist society.
2. Danish ed.. Copenhagen 1955.
2
=====第2页=====
We do not know to what extent the Textbook' was used
in China before 1959, when an official translation of the third
edition appeared.4 But we do know that Mao Zedong followed
the translation of the third edition with intense interest and that
Notice
he criticized it in his“Reading Notes'immediately afer its
publication.
Most of the ideas and concepts of the 'system theory'
Here, in a two-part special, the Editors present essays that
came from the classical writings of Marx, Engels and Lenin,
focus on China since the death of Mao Zedong. As with
from Stalin, and from various Soviet economists. They were
our continuing series of articles on Southeast Asia since
well-known beforehand, but this was the first attempt to present
1975, the contributions here and in the accompanying
socialist political economy as acoherent entity and a scientific
issue (Vol. 13, No. 3) are not definitive or final. We invite
system. The Textbook'was divided into chapters covering all
other readers to join this dialogue by submitting essays or
known modes of production from tribal communism to as-yet-
research reports (in triplicate, please) that will, both in a
unrealized communism. The aim was to elaborate on Stalin's
progressive and critical manner, further our understand-
rather sketchy theses and concepts, to present a scientific under-
ing of contemporary China.
standing of the evolution of society, and to bring order to the
The Editors
chaos of history.
One basic concept in the Textbook'is that social de-
velopment is determined by two qualitatively different cate-
gories of objective laws. One category of laws consists of
general laws operating through all known modes of production,
as for example the law determining that production relations
Around the fundamental law' there are a series of mutu-
(which Stalin defined as comprising the ownership system,
ally interrelated non-fundamental laws. They are all subor-
mutual relations within production and the distribution system)
dinated to the "fundamental law'and serve to fulfill its de-
will invariably, and almost automatically adapt to new eco-
mands. The most important "non-fundamental laws' are: (1)
nomic imperatives and will follow developments in social pro-
The law of planned and proportinate development guaranteeing
ductive forces. The other category of laws are specific to one or
correct relations among the various sectors of the economy and
some, but not all modes of production, as for example the law of
of production; (2) the law determining that there will be a
value, which is the basic law of commodity production, as in
constant heightening of labor productivity guaranteeing a con-
capitalism.
stant and swift development of material production; (3) the law
The'Textbook'defines socialism as an independent and
of distribution according to work guaranteeing everybody who
relatively stable social formation with its own set of objective
works an income in correspondence to his/her productive ef-
laws.Atthecore isafundamental law ofsocialism'determi-
forts; (4) the law of value (itself the fundamental law of
ing that socialist production producesnot for profit, as in capi-
capitalism') guaranteeing that products are exchanged at equal
talist productionbut to satisfy the ever-increasing material and
value.
cultural needs of the working people in the process of building
These laws are defined as objective and incontestable.
socialism.
They are independent of man's will.They gradually extend their
sphere of influence after the establishment of socialist produc-
tion relations, and at the same time they replace the specific laws
of the previous mode of production.
The"Textbook'follows Stalin in asserting that the law of
3. Another source has been: Mi Fei Sibilidunnuofu (M.F. Spiridonov).
Zhengzhi jingjixue jiangyi, I-II (Lectures on Political Economy).Beijing: Gao-
value still exerts its influence under socialism because commod-
deng Jiaoyu Chubanshe, I954. We found this manual in a second-hand book-
ity production and commodity circulation still exist. But it is
store in Shanghai in 1979. As it was published neibu (interally) in a limited
emphatically stressed that it operates in a "purified form,'
number of copies it has—to our knowledge-never been listed in an official
controlled by public ownership and socialist planning and con-
bibliography.Consequently.we did not know of its existence until accidentally
sequently having only a regulatory function. Even though so-
buying it.Basically.its theoretical substance corresponds to that of theText-
book."and we shall still consider this the most authoritative and influential
cialism is considered to be an independent social formation,
work in the Chinese context as it was written under Stalin's auspices and later
there still exist categories such as money, commodities,value
criticized by Mao personally.
etc. known to be vital to capitalist economies. Theoretically
4. Zhengzhi jingjixue.Jiaokeshu (disan zengding ben)1-II (Political Economy:
they are identified as concrete expressions and manifestations of
Textbook [Third Enlarged and Revised Ed.J), Beijing: Renmin Chubanshe.
the objective laws governing socialist society, but it is asserted
1960. This is yet a revised edition of the third revised edition published in
that they too exist in a "purified form,"free of capitalist
January1959(Reviewed by Li Yunin Hongqi(Red Flag)no.15.1959).An East
German edition of the "Textbook' is available: Politische konomie in der
content.
USSR, in Martin (see note 5). pp. 124-129.
According to theTextbook,'as long as these laws are
5.The Reading Notes on the Soviet Text Political Economy is available in Mao
understood and applied correctly, socialist production will be
Tsetung,A Critique of Soviet Economics. annotated by Richard Levy and with
able to develop smoothly and at a rapid pace. Consequently,
an introduction by James Peck (N.Y.: Monthly Review Press, 1977). German
socialist society will experience a corresponding fulfillment of
ed.: Helmut Martin (ed.).Mao Tse-tung. Das Machen wir anders als Moskau,
the ever-increasing material and cultural needs of the people.
(Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1975). The Chinese original is available in two slightly
Political economists, therefore, have it as their task to identify
different versions (both published in Taiwan): Mao Zedong sixiang wansui
(Long Live Mao Zedong Thought). 1967. pp. 167-247. and Mao Zedong
and study the objective laws in order to provide a basis for
sixiang wansui. 1969. pp. 319-99. Hereafter: Wansui-67 and Wansui-69
rational economic policies.
respectively.
3
=====第3页=====
Even though the "system theory'presents itself as a
The political economy of the "system theory"was the
logically coherent and scientific theory of socialism,it contains
subject of several articles in the Chinese economic magazine
a series of more or less obvious self-contradictions and unsolved
Jingji Yanjiu (Economic Studies)from its inception in 1955.6
theoretical problems which tend to neutralize its analytical po-
But most articles concentrated on specific topics, primarilyth
tential altogether. To mention but a few:
question of objective laws under socialism. The "system
The"system theory'defines objective laws as part of
theory'wasnot presentedofficially in its entirety until the
the object of political economy. However, when reading the
appearance in 1959 of the translation of the third edition of the
'Textbook' it becomes apparent that these laws have all een
"Textbook." The Chinese version of the system theory' was
defined beforehand, not detected by analyzing real social prob-
basically identicaltotheSovietoriginalbutithad tobe applied
lems, relations and contradictions in the USSR. Thus the meth-
in an entirely different social and historical context. Therefore,
od tends to become tautological, and the conception of social-
it quickly met with opposition, notably from market socialists
ism mechanistic.
like Chen Yun and Xue Muqiao, and from Mao Zedong, who
● Secondly, the entire theoretical complex has een put
was at that time starting to develop a theoretical platform of his
together from bits and pieces taken from the writings of Max,
own.
Engels, Lenin, Stalin, and various Russian economists without
taking into consideration the original textual and historical con-
The Theory of Market Socialism
text. The intention of Stalin and the authors obviously was to
We shall not dwell long on the topic of market socialism
substantiate a preconceived theory of socialism and to construe
here. but only briefly give an introduction to the theoretical
a system of thought, a "genuine'and scientific'Marxist
platform of its foremost protagonists,Chen Yun and Xue
theory, only in order to explain economic policies and beautify
Muqiao. For them the key problem left unsolved by the"system
harsh social realities.
theory" was the question of how to interpret the function of the
● Thirdly, the "system theory'is a closed system of
law of value* under socialism. They claimed that the law of value
thought which precludesthe possibility of identifying new laws.
should be allowed to play an independent and active role in
This tendstoglect theallegedly dialectical mthodofaalyi
developing and controlling the market in a socialist economy,
of the 'Textbook.'
thus contending the idea of the system theory'that the law of
value only had a regulatory function and was controlled by
economic planning.
From 1970 to 1976—especially after the fall of Lin
Chen and Xue maintained that large sectors of a planned
Biao in 1971—an intense effort was made to develop a
economy could be substituted by a market economy controlled
comprehensive, independent Chinese theory on social-
by the law of value, i.e. primarily the supply-demand mecha-
ism. The result was the manual "Political Economy of
nism. They acknowledged the qualitative difference between
Socialism'  (PES), which was based on the cultural
the laws governing a planned economy and market economy,
revolutionary experiences and Mao's interpretation of
and consequently the contradiction between the two. But, none-
the nature and structure of Chinese society.
theless, they believed that a market economy could still cure
some of the maladies of a planned economy, such as overr-
centralization of economic decision-making, bureaucratization
Fourthly, the critical dimension so prevalent in Marx's
criticism of bourgeois political economy entirely disappeared in
the"system theory.' TheTextbook"reduced political econ-
6. For the indices and subjects of Jingji Yanjiu see: James Nickum,A Research
Guide to Jingji Yanjiu (Economic Studies)(Berkeley: University of California.
omy to a science of legitimization more geared to the needs of
Center for Chinese Studies, 1972).
economic policy-making than to the needs of obtaining knowl-
7.A good introduction is given in an article by Yu Ding: Xuexi chengji
edge about the nature and structure of socialist society.
jingjixue xuyao zhuyi de jige wenti (Some Problems to Pay Attention to When
Finally, the "system theory'purported to be a science
Studying Political Economy),Renmin Ribao (People's Daily). July 27. 1959.
for and of the working people. It maintained that anything done
8. The issue of market socialism in China is still virgin soil. Here we can only
by the leaders and the Communist Party was done "in the
give a few tentative references: G.W. Lee, Current Debates on Profits and
Value in Mainland China. Australian Economic Papers. June-Dec.. 1965. pp.
interests of the working people.'' This idea based itself on the
72-78: Charles Bettelheim, Die Preispolitik und die Rolle des Profits. in Bet-
assumption that, due to the nationalization of the means of
telheim et al.. Der Aufbau der Sozialismus in Chinu. Munchen, 1972. pp.
production, the working class had become masters in socialist
103-74: Jiunguo vilai shehuizhuvi shangpin shengchan he jiazhi guilii lun
society. Furthermore, class-struggle would die out ecause
wenxuan,I-ll (Selected essays on the theory of socialist commodity production
there was no more private ownership to form a basis for con-
and the law of value since the founding of the PRC). Shanghai: Renmin
Chubanshe. 1979. Unfortunately, this collection of essays excludes material
tinued exploitation of the working people. The obvious inten-
from the Cultural Revolution including that of the Shanghai School.
tion was to ideologize a non-existent social harmony within
production relations. It is a well-known fact that production
*The law of value was identified by Karl Marx as the law governing commodity
relations in the USSR were imbued with contradictions. The
production. Roughly speaking.the law of value determines that all exchange in
violent suppression of opposition under Stalin bears testimony
a commodity economy is carried out at equal values, measured in terms of
to this. By ideologizing production relations, the system
socially necessary labor spent in producing a specific economy. In capitalist
theory'precluded itself from becoming the critical theory and
society the law of value has a wide range of economic. social and political
instrument of class-struggle which Marx's original theory had
implications and consequences manifesting themselves in a very competitive
and anarchic production leading to waste of raw materials and labor force.
been.
4
=====第4页=====
of theplanning apparatusineffectiveness in creating oerall
cannot allow oneself to become a slave of them as did the
balance, and extensive waste of raw materials and labor. These
protagonists of the "system theory.' Mao favored a much more
were all problems which had arisen in the course of the first
voluntarist approach in his recurrent stress on the primacy of
five-year plan based on Soviet planning principles and the ideas
production relations over productive forces. It was stated sev-
of the "system theory."
eral times by Mao that major developments in productive forces
The inspiration for working out a Chinese theory of market
always come after changes in production relations. The process
socialism came from various sources, primarily the Yugoslav
of constantly revolutionizing production relations is a process of
experiment, but also from debates on economic reforms then
simultaneously changing all three aspects of these relations:
current in East European countries.
the ownership system, mutual relations within production, and
the system of distribution of the social product. The direction of
Mao Zedong's "Generative Class Theory"
the process is from private to collective to state ownership and
finally to ownership by the whole people; from one person
Mao Zedong was a most radical critic of the system
management to party committee control and other forms of
theory.' During the fifties and early and mid-sixties he de-
democratic management; and from individual consumption to
veloped a stand of his own on several aspects of political
collective, from pay according to work to recompensation ac-
economy, in opposition both to thesystem theoryand to the
cording to need.
theory of market socialism. Mao's formulation of a"generative
By stressing the need for simultaneous revolutionization of
class theorry' (a theory on the growth of new classes within
all three aspects of production relations, Mao discarded the
socialist society with a socialist economy as the material foun-
evolutionary and mechanistic beliefs inherent in the "system
dation) was undoubtedly his most significant contribution to
theory'and stressed the revolutionary potential of socialism
socialist theory. 10
instead. This approach manifested itself in many respects.
The"generative class theorysaw the light of day in the
First of all, Mao saw the Great Leap Forward in 1958 as a
mid-sixties as the result of a long and rather complex develop-
conscious attempt to evade the inherent logic and implicit social
ment running through at least three phases: (a) before 1958;
consequences of the law of value as identified by Marx in
(b)1958-61; (c) after 1961. Here we shall briefly summarize
Capital. The Leap did not justify its costs economically speak-
the main points in this development, in order to provide the
Chinese theoretical and conceptual background to the theory of
the Shanghai School.
Before I958 Mao's most important theoretical contribu-
By stressing the need for simultaneous revolutioniza-
tions were his assertions that class struggle continues in socialist
tion of all three aspects of production relations, Mao
society even after the transformation of the ownership system"
discarded the evolutionary and mechanistic beliefs in-
and that revolutionizing production relations is a necessary
herent in the'"system theory and stressed the revo-
precondition to promoting an extensive development of social
productive forcesi.e.,economicgrowth.Furthermore, Mao
lutionary potential of socialism instead.
revived the concept of revisionism which was excluded from the
system theory,'identifying revisionism as a bourgeois ten-
dency within the communist party having its roots in socialist
society itself. The protagonists of revisionism "dream of a
9. A designation introduced by Bill Brugger in Brugger (ed.), China, The
restoration of the capitalist systemstated Mao.1
Impact of the Cultural Revolution, Croom Helm, 1978.
In the second phase Mao criticized Soviet theory directy.
10. In "On the 'Restoration of Capitalism'—Mao and Marxist Theory,"
In two criticisms (1958 and 1959)4 of the above-mentioned
(Modern China, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 41-78), Joseph W. Esherick traces the
pamphlet by Stalin and in hisReading Notesof 1960,Mao
roots of the analytical conceptRestoration of Capitalism"in Marxist literature
and in Mao's writings. He sees Mao's contribution to socialist theory as being
presentediesofwia.Allterticleswreciticism
the development of the analytical concept "capitalist restoration.' But it be-
of Soviet texts, and therefore do not present themselves as
comes apparent from Esherick's article that Mao’s contribution in this respect
consistent theoretical works. They were sketchy commentaries
cannot be identified by explicit reference to his own works, but only by
and critical notes by means of which Mao reached new insights
induction.Therefore,we find it more fruitful to trace Mao'sgenerative class
theory."which can be substantiated by references, and which is, actually,a
concerning the nature of socialist society.
blueprint for the theory of the Shanghai School, which expounded the concept of
In these works Mao broke away from the idea that social-
"capitalist restorationby taking Mao'sgenerative classtheory"asone of its
ism was an independent mode of production. He found social-
starting points.
ism to be a transitional social form,a society on its way between
11."Guanyu chengque chuli renmin neibu maodun de wenti'(1957) (On the
capitalism and communism. It is not—as claimed by the sys-
Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People). Mao Zedong xuanji
tem theory'—characterized by harmonious and peaceful de-
(Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung),vol. V. Beijing: Renmin Chubanshe, 1977.
pp. 363-402. p. 389.
velopment (provided objective laws are correctly interpreted
12. 'Guanvu nongve hezuohua weni(1955)(On the Co-operative Transfor-
and applied). On the contrary, Mao found that socialism is
mation of Agriculture). Mao Zedong Xuanji. vol. V. pp. 168-91, where Mao
dominated by contradictions between economic base and super-
argues that cooperativization precedes industrialization on a big scale and
structure, between productive forces and production relations,
consequently mechanization of agriculture.
and—most importantly—within production relations them-
13. 'Guanyu chengque. .. .p. 392.
selves. Thus he still considered social contradictions and class
14. "Guanvu 'Sulian shehuizhuvi jingji weni yi shu de jianghua'(1958)
(Speech ConcerningEconomic Problems of Socialism in the USSR,"in: Mao
contradictions to be the motivating force in social and eco-
Tse-tung.ACritique ...pp. 129-134),Wansui-69.pp.247-251;'Dui Sidalin
nomic development.
'Sulian shehuizhuvi jingji wenti' de piyu'(1959) (Critique of Stalin's"Eco-
Mao acknowledged the existence of objective laws, but
nomic Problems of Socialism in the USSR."in: ibid.. pp. 135-137), Wansui-
stressed that they are, after all, only man-made and that one
67.pp. 156-166.
5
=====第5页=====
According to the Shanghai School's theory, socialism
that the turbulent class struggles of the past had come to an end.
is a transitional society consisting of both communist
But at the same time he asserted that the bourgeoisie still
and capitalistfactors and elements,existing simul-
existed, and that the contradiction between 'the bourgeoisie on
taneously within socialist relations of production. The
the one hand and the proletariat on the other would continue to
capitalist factors are not simply surviving elements of
exist for a considerable period.*Class struggle was by no means
capitalist structure but are factors reproduced
over and might even evolve into a state of violent clashes
betweenantagonisticclasseandpoliticalgroups.Thisposed
through the social and economic processes in socalist
the question of whether the struggle came from the old, now
society.
socialized, bourgeoisie or a new one generated within socialist
society. Mao was far from clear on this point. In 'Reading
Notes'' he did, however, argue that there are "vested interest
groups'and"conservative strata'in socialist society trying at
ing,but itwss inliticlmsirrtoisfy ew
each new phase of social development to exert their influence to
demands of production. Secondly, the always incomplete proc-
consolidate development and prevent further changes in order to
ess of continually revolutionizing production relations will exert
protect their own vested interests and privileges.
its influence on the economy, which will move forward in leaps
Basing himself on these theoretical observations,Mao
and bounds and will constantly suffer from imbalances. Mao
quickly moved towards new insights when combining them
disagreed with the system theory'that regarded balanced and
with actual developments in China during the period 1961-64/5.
proportionate development as an objective law. He argued that
In early 1962 he argued that in socialist society the working
it can only be regarded as a political imperative. Consequently.
class is confronted with new bourgeois elements' generated
development is wave-like, leaps are followed by stagnation,
within the given social framework and that these are also to be
maybe even retrogression,until followed by new leaps.Finally
found within the Communist Party, thus opposing socialism
Mao argued that planning can by no means be meta-historic,
from within.16In August1962hestated that class struggle most
always securing proportionate development and correct coordi-
importantly was aimed at new non-socialist forces,i.e., new
nation between supply and demand. The role of planning is to
bourgeois elements and"people walking the capitalist road.'
maintain a certain equilibrium, but this can only be done tempo-
Here Maofor thefirst time used the concept of capitalist
rarily.Planning is a process of learning and planning can only be
roader.' He furthermore stated that China might change color
and become revisionist or even fascist if these people were
perfected by studying leaps and bounds, disproportions and
allowed to make policy. 17
imbalances, whenever they occur. Therefore, plans do not be-
long to the economic base—as claimed in the "system
Later in 1962 Mao advocated the policy of continued class
theory—but tothe superstructure,as a form of consciousness.
struggle in the essay,"The Party's Basic Line Forthe Historical
On the question of the existence of the law of value and of a
Period of Socialism,' but this was only a summary of theoreti-
commodity economy in socialist society,Mao basically agreed
cal concepts presented previously.
with Stalin's viewpoints. But he did dispute Stalin's assertion
During the period 1961-65 Mao more than once criticized
that the means of production are not commodities simply be-
the leadership's desire for privileges and warned people in
cause they are produced by state-owned enterprises and trans-
leading positions against trying to protect their vested interests.
ferred within the state-owned sector.Mao argued that as long as
All these points were summarized and further elaborated upon
there are two ownership systems,collective and state, means of
in "On Khruschev's Phony Communism and Its Historical
production will still be exchanged as commodities. Therefore,
Lesson For the World' (1964), which presented an analysis of
the only way to finally do away with commodity production
"capitalist restoration'in the Soviet Union and attempted to
is—given the necessary stage of development of productive
identify the material basis for a new privileged layer taking over
forces—to carry through the transition to ownership by the
power in a socialist society. This analysis was primarily made
whole people within all spheres of production,to go from
for foreign policy reasons, and Mao never applied this analytical
exchange of commodities to exchange of products and from
approach in detail to China. But he obviously thought a similar
exchange of value to exchange of use-value.
restoration possible in China.
*
During the third phase Mao again focused on China's
internal problms,andspciallyonthetureofclasssruggle.
This led finally to his formulating the"generative class theory'
* According to Mao Zedong Xuanji. vol. V.p.65. Mao. as early as 1953. had
around 1964-65.This process can be traced in the development
already identified the main contradiction in socialist society as being that
of Mao's vocabulary during the period, but let us first sum-
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. It has to be borne in mind, however.
marizethe preconditions.Inthe mid-ffties Maohad pointed out
that vol.V of the Xuanji was published after Mao died under the auspices of Hua
Guofeng.It has been proved that some of the texts were revised.crucial words
were changed and paragraphs inserted or omited. So this short quotation from
1953 may be an invention of the editors made for political reasons.
15. "Guanyu zhengque ...."p.389.
16."Zai kuoda de zhongyang gongzuo huii shang de jianghuaalk a the
Enlarged Work Conference of the Centre), Wansui-69. pp. 399-423, here pp.
* Whereas Marx saw acloseconnection in thecontradiction between exchange
406-407.
value and use value withincommodities undercapitalism and the exisence of
17."Zai Beidaihe hongyang gongzuo huiyishang de jianghua' (Talk at the
class struggle in capitalist societies. Mao did not draw the same conclusions
concerningclassstruggleunderocilism.Tohimthelawof value wasaply
Central Work Conference in Beidaihe), Wansui-69. pp. 423-429. here pp.
424-428. The manuscript for this talk is probably the most important source for
economic phenomenon.
identifying Mao's theoretical stand in this period.
6
=====第6页=====
Even though he would not admit to the existence of new
classes of social layers in China (specifically anew our-
geoisie'), he said that it was important to focus on"people in
When one uses money and prices, the price of a com-
power within the communist party. They were identified
modity may be higher than its value. Production of
later in December that year as the protagonists of capitalist
this kind of commodity will earn a bigger profit than
policies and brandedpeople in power within the communist
the average item, and therefore it may become attrac-
party walking along thecapitalist road. Thus Mao had form-
tive for certain enterprises to maximize their profit by
ulated the basic analytical concept of his"generative class
producing that kind of commodity rather than less
theory."
profitable (but socially useful) ones.
In May 1967 he commented further on the issue ofcapi-
talist roaders." He stated that they were old revolutionaries who
had stopped with the democratic revolution. They did not want
We do not know the exact nature of the relationship bet-
to make socialist revolution, and consequenly propagated capi-
ween the"Shanghai School'and the"cultural revolutionary"
talist policies.20 By identifying the Communist Party as the
wing, but without doubt Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan
nodal point in the overall social process whereby the new
took active part in the work and Zhang Chunqiao played an
bourgeoisie is generated, and by pointing out the need for
especially important role. After their arrest in October 196, the
continued class struggle, Mao not only presented a new concep-
"Gang of Fourand the Shanghai School were accused of
tion of socialist society; he also provided a guideline for future
having planned to canonizeZhang Chunqiao Thought.1
political struggles in China. As Mao was not willing directly to
The final edition of Political Economy of Socialism'
admit to the existence of a new bourgeoisie as a class, but only
never appeared. The printing press was stopped by the coup
as a stratum,'"elements,"etc.,it may be argued that his
d'état on October 6, 1976. The book was confiscated and a year
"generative class theory was at most a sociological theory.
later it was condemned as a work intended to create 'the
Apparently he never succeeded in combining his insights in the
theoretical basis for the counterrevolutionary program of the
political economy of socialism with his new theory of classes
'Gang of Four.
22Later we shall present a rough outline of the
and class struggle. But with the publication in 1976 of his
theoretical content of the final edition of'Political Economy of
“Instructions'(which we shall deal with later on), he may have
Socialism.As the process of writing this book, however, ran
reached new understandings, especially during his last ten years
through many stages and phases and took the form of a constant
while cooperating with the new cultural revolutionary theoreti-
and thorough-going revision and development of the theory, we
cians such as Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan.
have chosen also to describe the different manuscripts which
The Shanghai School and
were written during the process.
"Political Economy of Socialism'"
It is a general rule that discussions and decisions concern-
ing important political matters in China occur behind closed
After the many tumultuous events of the Cultural Revolu-
doors. Solutions and documents are not presented to the public
tion and its many programmatic and organizational reforms, a
until an agreement has been reached. Apart from the more
theoretical summary had to be made—a summary which could
chaotic periods of the Cultural Revolution this has been the main
draw theoretical conclusions from the practical experiences and
pattern of political life in China ever since 1949. But this
put them into a theoretical framework. After the de facto sus-
procedure was not followed during the process of writing
pension of the most radical cultural revolutionary reforms from
1967 and onwards,the"cultural revolutionarywing within
'PES," even though it was of considerable importance to the
the CCP hadtotry to maitaiat leastthetheortical perspec-
policymakers of thecultural revolutionary' wing within the
CCP. All the manuscripts were published in limited numbers in
tives of the Cultural Revolution.
order to give people an opportunity to make comments on the
From 1970 to 1976—especially after the fall of Lin Biao
manuscripts and thus contribute to the constant improvement of
in 1971—an intense effort was made to develop a comprehen-
the theory. In this way there are rich opportunities for compara-
sive, independent Chinese theory on socialism.The result was
tively open discussions on the theory. It is remarkable to see
the manual Political Economy of Socialism(PES), which
how thorough were the changes made during the relatively short
was based on the cultural revolutionary experiences and Mao's
period from 1971 to 1976. Original self-contradictions were
interpretation of the nature and structure of Chinese society.
gradually solved and the final edition of "PESpresented a
This work was mainly carried out by a group of economists from
comprehensive and consistent theory. This theory analyzes the
Shanghai, many of them connected with the Institute of Political
social basis of class contradictions in Chinese society. In con-
Economy at Fudan University.(We shall call this group the
trast to the above-mentioned Soviet "system theory,"this
“Shanghai School.') The purpose of writing the manual was to
theory could not be used to legitimate the Chinese social struc-
summarize and develop the theoretical basis of the actual policy
ture: it was a "critical' theory.*
propagated by the"cultural revolutionary wing within the
CCP.
18.'Zhongyang gongzuo zuotanhui jiyao(Summary of the Central Work
21. Renmin Ribao (The People's Daily), November 24. 1977.
Conference), Wansui-69, pp. 578-97, here p. 582.
22. Ibid.
19. "Zai zhongyang gongzuo huiyishang de jianghua' (Talk at the Central
* Peer Moller Christensen had access to the 1972 and 1975 manuscripts when he
Work Conference), Wansui-69. pp. 598-602, here p. 599.
was a foreign exchange student at Fudan University in Shanghai in 1979. As for
the unpublished 1976 manuscript, we have only had access to selected quota-
20. "Dui Arbaniya junshi daibiaotuan de jianghua'(1967) (Talk to the A-
tions from it published by the Chinese press after the coup in 1976. The rest of
banian Military Delegation), Wansui-69. pp.673-679.here p.677-678.
7
=====第7页=====
The Starting Point
When writing a manual on the political economy of social-
same. In socialist society these phenomena are socialist. This
ism during the '7Os,Chinese economists could base themselves
way of conceiving economic categories was a legacy from
upon Mao's conception of socialism as well as on the Soviet
Stalin, and for a long time it was an obstacle to making a realistic
“Textbook'and a manual writtenin Shanghai in1961.23But at
and concrete analysis of actual problems in Chinese society.
the same time it would be necessary to further develop Mao's
According to this manuscript, the abolition of private own-
theory of socialism by incorporating criticisms of what was
ership to the means of production has made comprehensive
consideredtobethe"capitalistrestoration"intheSoviet Unin
economic planning possible. Introduction of conscious plan-
as well as the experiences from the actual classstruggles during
ning has in itself caused a change in the nature of socialist
the Cultural Revolution. Therefore a manual on political econ-
production that is basically different from private production.
omy of socialism would have to provide answers to the follow-
Socialist production is,fundamentally speaking,directly social
ing questions:
production, and labor in socialist production is therefore no
How could the Soviet Union have turned capitalist?
longer private labor but directly social labor producing directly
Can China turn capitalist as well? If so, how could this
social products. As exchange within socialism, however, takes
happen and what could be done to prevent it?
the form of commodity exchange, the products of socialist
Can a bourgeoisie be generated in China that might eventu-
production also contain value." Therefore socialist produc-
ally usurp political and economic power? If the answer is
tion is a unity of a directly social-working processand avalue-
positive,what will thisbourgeoisiebe likeand will itbable
creating process.
to initiate and promote a capitalist development?
This conception originates in the Soviet textbooks on the
The following description of the development of the theory
political economy of socialism.Inouropinion it isatheoretical
elaborated by the Shanghai School will emphasize those ele-
misconception, an ideologization of reality. According to
ments in the different manuscripts representing phases in the
Marx, directly social labor is work which does not have to use
criticism ofthe Stalinistsystemtheory.'Inthisconnection we
the value form to realize its social content. All commodities are
particularly want to examine how the books answer the above-
a unity of use-value as well as exchange value, and this unity is
mentioned questions. In our opinion the answers provided to
actually what the manuscript describes. When distribution of
these questions gradually burst the dogmas and formulas of the
products in China has to take the form of commodity exchange,
'system theory." Therefore, we do not intend to give a total
it really shows that Chinese economic planning is insufficient to
and complete picture of the books and manuscripts, but only
make production directly social and work directly social labor.
intend to describe the main theoretical development.
In the 196l manual from Shanghai all production under
The First Manuscript
socialism had been described as commodity production, but still
From 1971to 1976 five versions ofPolitical Economy of
as a form of commodity production which is basically different
from commodity production under capitalism. According to the
Socialism' were writen. The actual work started in June 1971
1972 manuscript of "PES,"all commodity production under
when Zhang Chunqiao approved the plans for writing suh a
socialism is not only basically different from its capitalist coun-
book.The first manuscript was presented in September 1972.24
According to that manuscript, the main feature of socialism is
terpart, but a part of production under socialism is simply no
the abolition of private ownership of the means of production.
longer regarded as commodity production. Exchange within the
Socialism is a coherent social system basically different from
state-owned sector of the economy is not called "commodity
capitalism.The socialist system determinesthe character of the
exchange' but product exchange.'' Product exchange is not
various elements within the system,which, therefore, apriori
realized through a market but through state allocation based
are different from their capitalist counterparts.
upon economic plans.
In describing socialism the manuscript used China as an
In this way the 1972 manuscript adheres to ideas propa-
example—as a concrete manifestation of the conception of
gated in "Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR,'
socialism. Apart from the fact that this brought the theory close
where Stalin wrote that the reason for the objective existence of
to becoming a theory of legitimation,it also implied that certain
commodity relations within socialist society is the existence of
two forms of ownership, collective and state-ownership. Ac-
phenomena in Chinese society a priori are defined as socialist
cording to Stalin, exchange within the state-owned sector of the
and therefore fundamentally different from similar phenomena
economy (primarily exchange of means of production) can no
inside capitalist societies. Economic categories such as com-
longer be called commodity exchange.2 Similarly the 972
modity, money, wage, capital, profit, etc. found to be objec-
manuscript asserts that socialist product exchange as well as
tively existing within Chinese society are not equivalent to their
capitalist counterparts. On the contrary, only the form is the
commodity exchange are basically different from all other
forms of commodity exchange known down through history.
With these new forms of exchange, elements of a direct distribu-
the manuscripts have been unavailable to us,but fortunately the Shanghai
tion of means of production and goods for consumption emerge,
School customarily printed popular versions of the PES. thereby making it
elements pointing forward towards communism.
possible for us to analyze the main trends of thought in the unavailable manus-
cripts. The popular versions were published in greater numbers and were more
widely distributed than the originals.
23.'Zhengzhijinjixue jiaocai(Shehuizhuvi bufen)Teaching Materialon
Political Economy.(Socialism-part)).Shanghai.1961.
24.Shehuihuihenijinixue(hengqiuijian ga(PoliticalEcon-
omofcilis).Mancrttoecommentedn7.er
25. Stalin: "Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR.' 1952. Beijing.
FLP. 1972.p. 53 ff.
`"PES."'Shanghai 1972).
8
=====第8页=====
All in all, the conception of socialism presented by this
manuscript is a mere duplication of Stalin's basic ideas and
CHINA
concepts. It contains the implicit conclusion that, due to the
abolitionofprivateowershipof themeansof productionh
CHECKLIST
bourgeoisiehas losttheocialbasis foexrtingitsowa
consequently the bourgeoisie will never reemerge. Therefore
there is no longer anyrisk of acapitalistrestoration"The
mostimportatimicilicity ithereforetovlop
productive forces through planned production. This will lead
AmeriCans and Cbinese: PASSAGE TO DIFFERENCES by
socialist society to a gradual transition to communism.
Francis L. K. Hsu. A classic comparative interpretation
The most apparent self-contradiction in the 1972 manu-
of Chinese and American life, updated and revised by
script is between the authors’repetition of the fundamental
the author. Using these cultures to criticize each other,
Hsu illuminates both. Fall 1981, hardcover $22.50,
concepts and ideas propagated by the "system theory'on the
paperback $9.95
one hand, and the incorporation of Mao's critical viewpoints
and his rejection of the conception of socialism of the system
theory' on the other. A few examples should suffice to show
The Quality of MErCy: AMNESTIES AND TRADITIONAL
CHINESE JUSTICE by Brian E. McKnight. The notion, ur-
this:
rent in most of the standard texts, that the Sung dynasty
marked the start of theLater Empire'is challenged by
—Even though the authors of the manuscript considered
McKnight's findings. Spring 1981, $15.00
the change in the system of ownership the constituting factor of
socialism, they also stated that the question of ownership has not
China's IslAnd FrOntiEr: STUDIES IN THE HISTORICAL
been completely solved in China; a major part of the Chinese
GEOGRAPHY OF TAIWAN edited by RoNald G. KnapP.
economy is still collectively owned and, therefore,only soial-
Eleven essays provide a multifaceted look at the patterns
ist to a certain degree. Furthermore, there is still a problem with
and processes of Taiwan's historical geography. Fall
the leadership in the state-owned sector of the economy. If
1980, $20.00
power slips from the hands of the working class and 'true
marxists,'the "bourgeoisie and its agents inside the party,
Ethnic Groups and Social Cbange in a Chinese Market
walking the capitalist road,' may transform the enterprises into
Town by C. Fred Blake. How people use ethnic identi-
capitalist ones. In this way the bourgeoisie may usurp power and
ties to organize and to reorganize social relations in the
lead the country in a capitalist direction. This, states the manu-
process of adapting to a changing environment. Asian
script, was what had happened in the Soviet Union.
Studies at Hawaii. No. 27, Spring 1981, paperback
$10.50
—The 196l manual had also come to the conclusion that
the collective sector might change character and turn capitalist if
MOVing a MOUntAin: CULTURAL CHANGE IN CHINA
edited by Godwin C. Chu and Francis L. K. Hsu. Seven-
the leadership-power of the collectively owned units was
teen essays examine the role of the media in the process
usurped by rich peasants and higher middle-peasants. In the
of cultural change in China from 1950 until the downfall
1972 manuscript the question of leadership-power was extended
of the "Gang of Four.' An East-West Center Book.
to include relations within the state-owned sector. In this way
1979, $17.50
the first step was taken to reject the schematic division inherited
from Mao, of the relations of production in three elements: (a)
Popular Media in Cbina: SHAPING NEW CULTURAL PAT-
the ownership system; (b) mutual relations within production;
TERNS edited by Godwin C. Chu. Eight essays examine
and (c) the distribution system. Mao had inherited this schem-
some of the propaganda tools used in the PRC—
atic tripartition from Soviet Marxism and it had been part of the
revolutionary opera, children's songs, serial picture
Stalinist legacy adhered to by the CCP. Conceiving the problem
books, short stories, and big character posters. An East-
of leadership as a constituent element of the ownership system,
West Center Book, 1978, $12.00
however, makes this tripartition analytically inapplicable. As
long as the relations of ownership were synonymous with for-
Radical Cbange tbrough Communication in Mao's
mal, legal relations, there was no problem. But when interpret-
China by Godwin C. Chu. Chu's analysis, based on
ing leadership-power—which belongs to the category of mutual
communication theory, describes how the Communist
relations within production—as being a constituent element of
Party was able to transform the social, political, and eco-
the ownership system, the demarcation line between the aspects
nomic life of the Chinese people through skillful use of
of the relations of production is blurred. Consequently, you
communication. An East-West Center Book, 1977,
have to approach the relations of production as a totality.* On
$15.00
the one hand, the transformation of the relations of production is
not simply a legal transformation of the ownership of the means
To order books (please add $.50 per book for shipping), or to
request our complete Asian Studies catalog, please wrie:
Tbe University Press of Hawaii
2840 Kolowalu Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96822
*Despite this new recognition.the1972 manuscript still takes thetripartition of
production relations as the basis for the description and analysis of socialist
society. Furthermore.this apparent self-contradiction was never dealt with by
More than 200 Asian Studies titles in print
the Shanghai School in later manuscripts.
=====第9页=====
The Second Manuscript
of production.On theotrhand,trasforming therltionsof
When the first manuscript was finished in September1972,
production is a necessary prerequisite for developing thepro-
Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan left Beijing for Shanghai in
ductive orce.Itisrspcttismacit adotsMo
order to arrange a meeting to discuss the problems which had
from 'Reading Notesthat A change in the relations of
arisen in the writing.30 The meeting took place in October and
production always precedes a major development of the produc-
Zhang Chunqiao presented some new directives'on the basic
tive forces."'26
theory and line of argumentation presented by the book. The
directives suggested the following themes to be elaborated uon
—Even though it is stated that planning changes the nature
and they were to provide the theoretical nuclei of the book:
of production, the manuscript adheres to Mao's idea on the
—l. There are capitalist factors inside socialist relations of
incompleteness of planning.The authors of the manuscript state
production.
that a plan can never guarantee a development with complete
—2. The question of ownership is a question of power.
sectoral balance:
—3. Mutual relations within the working people are class-
relations.
1ε
Nothing in the whole world develops in complete equilib-
The first thorough revision of the manuscript was made after
rium. Equilibrium is temporary and relative,disequilibrium
this meeting, and the process of revision was finished and the
constant and absolute. 27
second manuscript written some time during 1973.
2ε
-The manuscript attempts an analysis of a new bour-
The manuscript itself is unavailable, but in May 1974
geoisie'which might take the lead inacapitalistrestoraion
another popular manual on political economy entitled "'Funda-
mentals of Political Economywas published in Shanghai.
by introducing twoconcepts,those inside the party taking he
Even though the manuscript had been revised, the theoretical
capitalist road,' and the "bureaucratic monopoly bour-
contents do not seem to have been basically altered. The three
geoisie."But the manuscript doesnot identify the materialbasis
themes mentioned by Zhang Chunqiao at the meeting in October
for the emergence of thisnew bourgeoisieor for a possible
1972 were not elaborated upon; forexample,the conceptcapi-
capitalist development. It only points out illegal,"system-
external'factors in this process: the ideological influence from
talist factors inside socialist relations of production' was not
the bourgeoisie,capitalist traditions and birthmarks,"and the
mentioned at all. (In fact it was not to reappear until the final
illegal sprouts of capitalism such as black market, corruption
edition in October 1976.) The self-contradictions so manifest in
and the like.
the first manuscript remained, and the authors still adhered to
the fundamental ideas of thesystem theory'which excluded
-This manuscript describes economic categories under
the possibility of acapitalist restoration.'
socialism as fundamentally different from theircounterpartsin
capitalistconomiesthus makiit impossibltoexl w
Mao's 1975 Instructions
the same economic categories and phenomena may become
Shortly after the Fourth National People's Congress in
constituents in a capitalist process of production.
January 1975, the national media published a quotation of
—Furthermore, the 1972 manuscript describes exchange
Mao's which started a mass discussion campaign,The Cam-
within the state-owned sector as a form of exchange which can
paign for Studying the Theory of Proletarian Dictatorship.'
no longer be calledcommodity-exchange.What would then
Mao did not take part in the NPC session, and many China-
be the preconditionfortransforming thisproduct-exchange
watchers interpreted this as his way of showing disagreement
back into capitalist commodity-exchange?
with the decisions taken by the Congress. If this is true, the
publication of the quotation and the following campaign might
It can be seen that this manuscript contained a lot of
be an answer to the Congress made by him and his political
self-contradictions and inconsistencies,which had to be solved
allies.
in the following process of rewriting and revision. After its
In the quotation which was called "Mao's Latest Instruc-
publication in September 1972, the Shanghai daily, Wen-
tion on the Question of Theorry," Mao states:
huibao, published a number of articles under the headline
'Study Some Political Economy.' They presented the most
In a word, China is a socialist country. Before liberation she
important ideas and concepts from the manuscript in a more
was much the same as capitalism. Even now she practices an
popular form and subsequently compiled and published them in
eight-grade wage-system, distribution to each according to
November 1972 in a small pamphlet again called Study Some
his work and exchange by means of money, which are
Political Economy.2 The book carried the same introduction
scarcely different from those in the old society. What
as the manuscript, an essay by Fang Hai originally published in
is different is that the system of ownership has changed.
the Magazine Hong Qi2 The purpose of publishing the book
seems to have been to start a broad public study campaign and
discussion on the political economy of socialism.
30. Guangming Ribao. January 16.1978.
31. Ibid.
26. `PES." Shanghai. 1972.p. 120.
32."Shehuizhuvi shengzhi jingjixue(Modinggao),"PES(Final draft.
27. Ihid.. p. 164.
Shanghai, 1973.
28."Xuedian chengzhi jingjixue. Shanghai. 1972.
33.Zhengzhi jingjixue jichu hishi.Shanghai.1974.It has been translated into
English and published by M.E. Sharpe: "Fundamentals of Political Economy.
29. Hongqi no. 7.1972.
ed. by George Wang (New York. 1977).
10
=====第10页=====
Our country at present practices a commodity
system, and the wage-system is unequal too,there being the
eight-grade wage-system,etc;these can only be restricted
NEW BOOKS
under the dictatorship of the proletariat.Thus it would be
FROM M.E. SHARPE
quite easy for people like Lin Biao to push the capitalist
system, if they came to power.
34
Who's Who in the People's Republic of China
This quotation fitsperctly intothetheoretical development of
By Wolfgang Bartke, Institute of Asian Afairs, Hamburg
the Shanghai School.It solved one fundamental theoretial
"Who's Who in the People's Republic of China has great value for all re-
searchers and students of contemporary China.The need for an up-to-date.
problemofthefirsttwomaucisthecoraictionbetween
comprehensive biography has been acute.We all shall be in Bartkes debt in
the years immediately ahead
—Robert A. Scalapino,Director,
the Stalinist conception of socialism on the one hand, and the
Institute of East Asian Studies,University of California.Berkely
744 pages
May 1981
$100
claim that acapitalist restoration' could take place on the
other. According to Mao,socialist economic categories such as
Party and Professionals: The Political Role of
commodity, money and wage are not basically different from
Teachers in Contemporary China
their capitalist counterparts.Onthe contrary there is no ualita-
By Gordon White
tive difference, and they could, therefore, quite easily become
The problematic relationship between a professional subgroup and the
functional in a capitalist production process.
Chinese Communst party and its implications for political dstrbution and
social stratification.
In the same year, Yao Wenyuan and Zhang Chunqiao
368 pages
Summer 1981
$30.00
published articles,in March and April respectively They
elaborated further upon the ideas presented in Mao's Instruc-
NEW IN THE CHINA BOOK PROJECT
tion'and on the framework and issues raised by the manu-
Water Management Organization in the
scripts of the'PES." The close connection between the start of
People's Republic of China
the"Campaign for Studying the Theory of Proletarian Dictator-
Edited with an introduction by James E. Nickum
ship'and the theoretical work done by the Shanghai School is
Chinese case studies and an extended introduction that define and llustrate
made clear by the fact that Yao Wenyuan and Zhang Chunqiao's
the problems and solutions in irigation and food control.
280 pages
Summer 1981
$25.00
articles as well as Mao's Instruction'' initiated the campaign.
Yao Wenyuan and Zhang Chunqiao, who were both in the
Science and Socialist Construction in China
"Cultural Revolutionarywing of the CCP, were directly in-
(Beijing, 1957) By Xu Liangying and Fan Dainian, edited with
volved in the theoretical work with the PES'in Shanghai.
an introduction by Pierre M. Perrolle
Nevertheless,it has to be underlined that the campaign was not
Theoretical discussions and a broad but detailed survey of Chinas scientific
development. Preface to this English edition by Fan Dainian
only a part of the theoretical development of the Shanhai
250 pages
Summer 1981
$22.50
School;it was alsothestarting pointofnew and veryintense
political struggle in China.
M.E. Sharpe iNC.
In their articles Yao Wenyuan and Zhang Chunqiao used
the designationthe Lin Biao clique'as a synonym forthe
80 Business Park Drive.
Armonk, New York 10504
new bourgeoisie.'Apparently,the articles were not drected a
Lin Biao and his political allies.They wereattempts at analyz-
ing the material and social basis for the appearance of a"new
bourgeoisie'and the possibility of a"capitalist restoration.
No doubt, the object of the analysis was a much broader social
group thanthe group around Lin Biao.Accordingto the articles
the problem with thenew bourgeoisie' had not been solved by
interpretation of economic categories and mechanisms under
purging Lin and his group. The"new bourgeoisie' was still to
socialism as fundamentally different from those under capital-
be found in powerful positions in China.*
ism, and the supposition that a capitalist restoration'' is a
Taken as a whole, Mao's Instruction' and Yao Wen-
possibility under socialism.
yuan's and Zhang Chunqiaos articles presented asolutiontothe
In their articles Yao Wenyuan and Zhang Chunqiao
most conspicuous weaknesses and self-contradictions of the
pointed at "bourgeois right' as the material basis for the emer-
second manuscript of thePES': the first being the absence of
gence of capitalism and a "new bourgeoisie.' They rejected the
an analysis of the material basis for the emergence of a"new
views presented by the first two manuscripts of'PES,"where
bourgeoisie'; and the second the contradiction between the
'bourgeois right'' was regarded as a phenomenon closely con-
nected with the "three major differences' (i.e.,the differences
between city and countryside, between worker and peasant, and
between intellectual work and manual work) and as a principle
primarily functioning withithesphereofdistribution.Yaoand
34. Peking Review, February 28.1975.
Zhang regardedbourgeois rightas a more general concept,
35.Yao Wenyuan: Onthe social basis ofthe Lin Piao-anti-party-clique.Peking
Review. March 7. 1975. Chang Chun-chiao: On exercising all-round dictator-
as exchange at equal values with its roots in commodity-produc-
ship over the bourgeoisie. Peking Review, April 4. 1975.
tion,and playing arole withinall aspectsof relationsof produc-
tion. In accordance with Mao'sInstruction,they stressed
*Seen from a theoretical point of view.it is difficult to understand why the Lin
that it is possible for a "new bourgeoisie'to promote a capital-
Biao group was used as a target,but it has to be borne in mind that Lin Biao was
the most recent victim of inner-party struggle in China,and following the rules
ist development because socialist economic categories and
and traditions of political strife in China,theoretical criticisms and analysis
mechanisms are not basically different from their capitalist
frequently are made as criticisms of the most recently degraded political op-
counterparts.
ponent. regardless of actual political viewpoints.
11
=====第11页=====
The Third Manuscript
After the publication of Yao Wenyuan and Zhang Chun-
is commodity exchange. But whereas the 1961 manual
qiao's articles,the second major revision of the manuscript of
considered commodity exchange and commodity produc-
thePES' was started. The revision resulted in the third man-
tion under socialism to be fundamentally different from
uscript.36 This manuscript incorporated the theoretical iw-
commodity exchange and commodity production under
points contained in Mao's Instruction'and in Yao and
capitalism, "Fundamentals' stated that commodity ex-
Zhang's articles. But at the same time, the conceptproduct-
change under socialism is not very different from its
exchange' was still used to describe exchange within the state-
capitalist counterpart.
owned sector of the economy. The idea that socialist com-
modities are not basicallydifferent from theircapitalist counr-
In these respects the 1975 edition of the PES'repre-
sented a step forward both in rejecting Stalin's analysis of
parts did not include products produced and exchanged within
the state-owned sector. Even though Mao's "Instruction' and
socialist commodity production and his general concept of social-
Yao and Zhang's articles were an enormous inspiration to the
ism, and in the theoretical clarification of the Shanghai School.
Shanghai School's theoretical clarifications,the"PES'still
But it still contained a fundamental self-contradiction inherited
from earlier manuscripts, i.e., the idea that production under
contained ambiguities and self-contradictions in 1975.
socialism is a unity of direct social production and value creat-
ing production. This self-contradiction was not solved until the
The Fourth Manuscript
writing of the fifth and final manuscript of the PES.' which
The fourth manuscript of the 'PES' was written during
was to have been published in Shanghai in October 1976.
the period from June 1975 to December 1975, when Zhang
Chunqiao corrected the draft himself. Unfortunately, we have
The Fifth Manuscript
not had access to this manuscript, but in December 1975 a
When the fourth manuscript of the PES' was ready in
revised edition of "Fundamentals of Political Economy'was
December 1975 Zhang Chunqiao wrote a new "directive,'
published.As itcanbe presumed that thismanual waswrien
which started the last major revision of the manuscript. In this
on the basis of the fourth manuscript, it is possible to attain a
"directive'' he wrote:
fairly clear picture of the theoretical contents of the fourth
manuscript.
We must criticize revisionism.Criticize Liu,LinandDeng.40
The "Fundamentals' goes even further than the earlier
Criticize Trotsky, Bukharin and the like. Political economy
manuscripts in two respects: in the analysis of the role of state
can not be written properly, if revisionism is not criticized..
under socialism; and in the analysis of commodity production
We must understand that the influence from Stalin' s mistakes
under socialism.
is still very strong.
41
—I. The analysis of the state. The manual states that the
The result of the revision was the fifth manuscript of the
socialist state is—in Lenin's words—a "bourgeois
"PES.'4² The authors had planned to publish the book in
state' because it has to protectbourgeois right." Con-
October 1976, but, as noted, when the book was still in the
sequently the transformation of private ownership of the
press, the coup d'état of October6 occurred and the manuscript
means of production into state-ownership is not tanta-
was confiscated. After the coup the Chinese media heavily
mount to a transformation of the system of ownership into
criticized the unpublished book and a similar one written in
a"non-bourgeoisform.Thus'Fundamentalsrejects
Tianjin in close cooperation with the Shanghai School.43
the identification of socialism with state-ownership of the
The critical media articles contain quite a few quotations
means of production, an idea which was stll present in
from the two "PES'' books, which were considered to be the
Zhang Chunqiaos articleand in the third manuscri.
result of the theoretical work of the "Gang of Four' and their
In this way the road had been paved for a more reasonable
supporters. (For a list of critical articles, see the Appendix.)
and logically consistent explanation of Soviet state
Even though we have not had access to the two "PES' manu-
monopoly capitalism.'
scripts, it has been possibleby means of the many quotations
-2.
The analysis of commodity production. The manual re-
in newspapers and magazines—to get a fairly comprehensive
jects the concept product-exchange' used in earlier
manuscripts. According to theFundamentals, all ex-
change under socialism is commodity exchange, and this
goes for exchange within the state-owned sector as well.
This is a complete rejection of Stalin's idea concerning
40. Liu Shaoqi, Lin Biao. Deng Xiaoping.
production within the state-owned sector. Actually, this
41. Renmin Ribao, November 24, 1977.
had already been the case in the 1961 manual from Shang-
42. Shehuihui hengzhi jingjixue (Political Economy of Socialism.Shang-
hai³which had stated that all exchange under socialism
hai. 1976.
43. According to the Guangming Ribao. April 17. 1978. contact was es-
tablished betweenthe Shanghai School andagroup fromthe Nankai University
in Tianjin.also working on a manual on the politicaleconomy of socialismin
July 1975.The cooperation between the two groups was continued until 1976.
The book written by the Tianjingroup was published as late as November 1976
36."Shehuizhuyi zhengzhi jingjixue(Modinggao dierban).PES'(Second
(Political Economy'(Socialism part)(Revised Edition)(Tianjin.November
edition of the final draft). Shanghai. 1975.
1976) and later it was criticized alongside the book writen in ShjanghaiW
37. Zhengzhi jingjixue jichu zhishi (Fundamentals of Political Economy).
considerthe Tianjin groupasblongingtotheShanghaiSchool.Inreconstrut-
Shanghai. 1975.
ing the theoretical contents of the final manuscript of the PESwe have.
therefore.also used quotationsfromthisbook.astheyboth are criticid fr
38. See Bettelheim: The Great Leap Backwards.
being Gang of Four"-theory.
39. See note 23.
12
=====第12页=====
Appendix
Chronological list of articles in Chinese magazines and
newspapers criticizing the Shanghai School.
Nov. 24, 1977, People's Daily (PD): "A book which
July 20, 1978,JY no. 7, 1978: "On profit in the socialist
creates the theoretical basis for the counterrevolutionary
economy,' by Kuang Rian and Zhang Zhouyuan. And:
program of 'the gang of four' by Dong Fureng and
"Criticize the false doctrines fabricated by 'the gang of
Tang Zongkan.
four' concerning the law of value,' by Wang Yongzhi.
Dec. 5, 1977, Guangmin Ribao (GR): "On socialist
And: "The question of the relationship between the fun-
wages and their concrete forms,' by Wu Jinglian, Zhou
damental and the most important contradiction in soialist
Shulian and Wang Haibo. (Continued in GR Dec. 12,
society,"by Jiang Zhong.
1977).
Aug. 20, 1978, JY no. 8, 1978: 'Why must this book be
Jan. 16, 1978, GR: "A completely counterrevolutionary
criticized?' by Tang Zongkan. And: "A bad book propa-
'Political Economy,''by Hu Naishi and Wang Yongzhi.
gating the reactionary ideological system of 'the gang of
Jan. 20,1978, Jingji Yanjiu (JY) no. 1,1978: Leading
four,' by the critique-group of the Institute of Eco-
article: "Lead the struggle to expose the gang of four' in
nomic Research, Nankai University, Tianjin. And: "Re-
the fields of economics to the end.'
ject the slogan Repudiate the slogan: All for the moderni-
Feb. 20, 1978,JY no. 2, 1978: Refute the theory in-
zation,'' by Yang Shengming and Guan Bai.
vented by the gang of four' on 'the double character of
Sept. 20, 1978, JY no. 9, 1978: 'The category, rofit,
socialist relations or production,'' by Hu Ruiling. And:
and the management of socialist enterprises," by Wu
"Will money inside the socialist economy necessarily
Jinglian, Zhou Shulian and Wang Haibo. And: 'The
create a bourgeoisie?'' by Zhang Wenxiao.
fundamental difference between the circulation of funds
March 20,1978,JY no.3,1978:"Areactionary theoreti-
and the circulation of capital,' by Cheng Mujiu.
cal system.' by Dong Fureng. And:An example of how
Sept. 20,1979,JY no.9,1979:The theory that classes
'the gang of four' distorted the character of socialist
exist from the beginning to the end' has brought confusion
commodity production, by Yang Dongqing.
into the formulation of the political economy of social-
April 5,1978, PD: "Condemn a Political Economy,'
ism,' by Dong Fureng.
by Zhang Chaozun and Hu Naishi. And: 'Refute the
Nov.20,1978, JY no.11,1978: We will not alow the
theory of thesocalledtwo factors'of socialistrelationsof
distortion of the character of socialist reproduction," by
production,' by Xing Hua.
Wu Shuqing.
April 17, 1978,GR: "Examples of phenomena pretend-
ing to be left but actually right,inside the political econ-
omy,' by Ma Piao. And: "A bad book propagating the
reactionary viewpoints of the gang of four,'' by He
JUST PUBLISHED
Wei.
April 20, 1978,JY no. 4. 1978:"Criticize the idealistic
TWIN ILLUSTRATED BIOGRAPHIES
economic theory of the gang of four,'by Hu Ruilong,
of
Mao
Zhou
Zhao Renwei and Duan Ruofei. And: "Refute the theory
&
of the socalled two factors' inside the socialist relations
of production,'by Wei Xinghua. And:Is the contradi-
"TO EMBRACE
"COMING
tion and struggle between the proletariat and the bour-
THE MOON"
OF GRACE"
geoisie the concentrated expression of the fundamental
contradiction of socialism?'' by Wang Qingbao.
(A China Book Club Selection)
April 24, 1978, PD: "Criticize the counterrevolutionay
By Ed Hammond
'gang-book,''Political Economy of Socialism.
May 20, 1978,JY no.5, 1978:Are the socialist relations
"Hammond's concise and informative texts comprise
of production, relations between the proletariat and the
two valuable profiles of these great historical figures.'
—Orville Schell
bourgeoisie?'' by Zhou Shyulian.
"Excellent, timely and fill a great need."
May 29, 1978,GR: "Socialist commodity exchange can
—John S. Service
not engender capitalism,' by Li Guangzi.
"Elegant, colourful...captivating.'
June 20,1978,JY no.6, 1978: "A black example of
—Asiaweek
historical idealism,by Wang Ruisun. And: "We wil
Each volume: 196 pages, 140 photographs,81/2"x 11".
Cloth $14.95, quality paper $8.95.
not allow the distortion of the present socialist common
Available from:
Ownership system in our country," by Wang Changchun.
Lancaster-Miller Publishers / Asian Humanities Press
And: "Are mutual relations between people in the social-
3165 Adeline Street, Berkeley, California 94703
ist production process class-antagonistic relations?" by
Write for our full list of over 10o titles in Asian History.
Philosophy, Art & Religion.
Wang Haibo. And: Will the socialist commodity system
necessarily produce capitalism and new bourgeois ele-
ments?'' by Liu Gangdi.
=====第13页=====
picture of the theoretical contents of the manuscripts.In the
modities. The existence of commodities and commodity pro-
following we shall present the manuscripts as one theory of
duction is not just due to the coexistence of the two forms of
political economy of socialism elaborated by the Shanghai
ownership, ownership by the state and collective ownership.
School immediately before their political defeat.
Within the state-owned sector alone, an equally important rea-
According to the Shanghai School's theory,socialism isa
son is the relative independence of individual accounting en-
transitional society consisting of both communist and capitalist
terprises such that the mutual relations between the enterprises
factors and elements,existing simultaneously within socialist
will in fact be relations between individual owners,and pro-
relations of production. The capitalist factors are not simply
duction even within the state-owned sector will again be private
surviving elements of capitalist structure but are factors repro-
production.
duced through the social and economic processes in socialist
The circulation of commodities under socialism can also be
society. They are found within all spheres of socialist economy.
transformed into circulation of capital.If this transformation is
The existence of capitalist factors and elements within socialist
carried through, labor power may again become a commodity
relations of production implies that capitalism and a bourgeoisie
and money can be transformed into capital. This transformation
are constantly produced and reproduced in socialist society.
may come about if the necessary realization of value becomes
''The new bourgeoisie' emerges within the ranks of the work-
the aim of commodity exchange instead of the realization of
ing people and especially inside the Communist Party. The
use-value. This is important because the law of value is the law
material basis for the emergence of a new bourgeoisie is to be
of commodity production and here it is identified as playing an
found in the incompletely transformed structures of socialist
important role in the socialist economy. In other words, accord-
society—i.e., in the above-mentioned capitalist factors and
ing to the 1976 "PES'manuscript, the law of value under
elements such as commodity, money, wage-relations, the ex-
socialism is not basically different from the law of value under
change of equal values as a regulating principle in the economy
capitalism. By letting the law of value regulate production the
and, finally, the continued existence of a division of labor
bourgeoisie can subordinate the production of use-values to the
inherited from the old society.
production of values. When one uses money and prices, the
Division of labor leads to the development of an "in-
price of a commodity may be higher than its value. Production
tellectual aristocracy,which deprives the workers of the real
of this kind of commodity will earn a bigger profit than the
right of leadership to the means of production. In this way the
average item, and therefore it may become attractive for certain
system of ownership will gradually change its nature. Within
enterprises to maximize their profit by producing that kind of
the enterprises there will emerge a system of intellectual work-
commodity rather than less profitable (but socially useful) ones.
ers ruling over manual workers. According to the final stand of
Production aimed at realizing surplus-value may thus, uder
the Shanghai School, such a system has to a certain degree
given circumstances, distort overall production and the alloca-
already developed in China. Therefore the proletariat is already
tion of occasionally scarce resources in a socialist society.
being ruled over and exploited by the "new bourgeoisie.
As mentioned above, a capitalist restoration may take
Consequently thenew bourgeoisie' will be the most impor-
place first and foremost because of the existence of this com-
tant adversaryof the proletariat intheclass strugglesdigth
modity circulation carried out by means of money. Further-
entire socialist period, and the "new bourgeoisie' must be
more, thefunds'of the various enterprises are only incomp-
regarded asthe most important object of therevolution under the
letely transformed forms of capital,thus being still very similar
dictatorship of the proletariat.
tocapital inthe old society.Therefore, it would not be necessary
The contradiction between the proletariat and the bour-
to change fundamentally the form or contents of such funds to
geoisie is thereforethe most important contraiction in socialist
have them performing the function of capital. The same goes for
society; and class struggles,which are outcomesof thisconra-
wages. The socialist principle, 'To each according to one's
diction,willfirstof albestrugglesfortheextensionorlimta-
work'is not basically different from wage labor. No fundamen-
tion of"bourgeois right,i.ethecapitalist factors and ele-
tal transformation of the form and content of wages would be
ments within the socialist relations of production.
necessary to make labor power a commodity once again.
The collectively-owned economy is an incompletely trans-
According to the 1976 manuscript, the ideological form of
formed structure within the ownership system. The means of
a
'capitalist restoration'in China might well be likethe
production as well as the results of production are private
"theory of productive forces'and "the four modernizations,'
property owned by individual collective units: production is, in
both of which express the ideology of the "dying out of class
struggle under socialism.' To make sure that socialist society
that sense, private production. Furthermore, the question of the
leadership of collective units as well as within the state-owned
advances towards communism, then, it is said to be necessary o
sector plays a very important role, with the decisive question
stage many"cultural revolutions,"the aim of which will be
being which class really controls the means of production. If the
gradually to limit and eliminate capitalist elements and those
factors defined asbourgeois right' within the relations of
power structure of the leadership of an enterprise is changed, the
"ownership' of the means of production may change accord-
production,including the division of labor inherited from the
old society.Inthis way the material basisfor theemergence of a
ingly. Socialist enterprises may change their nature and become
"new bourgeoisie' and capitalism can be eliminated.
the property of a bureaucratic monopoly-bourgeoisie if the
The old division of labor has to be eliminated by the
workers are deprived of the leadership-power, i.e., the right to
workers taking active part in and exerting control over the
manage the enterprise or the collective unit. When the "new
bourgeoisie' has the means of production in its hands it may be
management of the enterprises and by forcing intellectual work-
ers to take part regularly in manual work. The contradiction
able further to promote a capitalist production process, because
between intellectual and manual labor should be eliminatd
capitalist factors and elements already exist in all spheres of
through these means and through a restructuring of the educa-
socialist production.
tional system, which gradually must eliminate the boundaries
Socialist production, moreover, is the production of com-
14
=====第14页=====
between productionandeducation.The material privilesoft
Mao Zedong's theory and that of the Shanghai School
'new bourgeoisie' must gradually be eliminated through a
emerged amidst factional struggles within a Communist Party
reform of the wage system. The reform must aim, first, at
which had inherited much Stalinist dogmatism and which was
discarding the use of "material incentives' as the most im-
without political democracy. Within the political and theoretical
portant means of raising the enthusiasm of the workers, and
traditions of either the CPSU or the CCP, it has been common
second, at establishing a more even distribution of wages.
practice to barrage opponents with abuse rather than conduct
Bonuses and piece-rate wages would be abolished and society as
serious political debates.The eventual aim was always to purge
a whole would gradually leave the principle"to each according
opponents,not to come to terms with them.In this connection,
to one's work.' Finally, production must be planned, in ac-
the term 'bourgeois,for example, has been one of many
cordance with use-value criteria and, conversely, the influence
useful words in the treasury of abusive vocabulary. It might be
of value categories must be limited.
argued that it should be unnecessary to pay any serious atention
to one faction calling a competing faction bourgeoisin its
Comments on the Final Theory
quest for power, because this is what the political culture
demands.
The 1976 manuscript of thePolitical Economy of Social-
In our opinion, however, this would be too hasty a concu-
ism' was the final result of a long process of theoretical de-
sion. Even though Mao and the Shanghai School were in-
velopment, which was suddenly and involuntarily cut off. It
fluenced by rigid Stalinist dogmatism,it would be erroneous to
presents,if not a complete,then at any rate aconsistent answer
write off the analytical potential of their theory. When looking
to the questions left unanswered by Mao, specifically how can a
at the entire theoretical process developed by Mao and the
capitalist restoration take place in China or in any other social-
Shanghai School we find sufficient proof that their angle and
ist country, and which social forces will promote such a
analytical method were new. They showed an astounding desire
development?
to do away with the somewhat metaphysical conception of
Even though this final theoretical position solved most of
socialism prevalent in thesystem theory' and to adapt a more
the self-contradictions inherent in the earlier manuscripts of the
realistic attitude towards some of the problems of Chinese
'PES," it still contained a number of unclarified points and
society. They eventually worked out a platform for analyzing
weaknesses. As mentioned above, the basic issue in the theoreti-
the incompletely transformed social and economic structures in
cal development of the Shanghai School seems to have been
how capitalism can develop in a socialist society. But Mao and
so-called socialist societies. It is, after all, remarkable that a
critical theory such as this could be conceived by leading politi-
the Shanghai School never formulated a clear and consistent
cal figures within the party and state of an allegedly socialist
definition of capitalism. They described China before 1949 as
country.
"semi-feudal and semi-colonial' as well as"much the same as
But does the theory of the Shanghai School hae real
capitalism.'Because of this ambiguity it is difficult tosee why
theoretical validity? What are the implications for understand-
the difference between the Soviet Union and China is so great
ing modern China? Does this theoretical platform in any way
that China deserves to be called "socialist' while the Soviet
contribute to the still evolving theories on transitional society?
Union is described as "capitalist.' They did not say which
These are extremely important questions that remain open, and
structures within China's socialist economy' have to be
changed before itmight becalledoneproducingsurplus valua
we hope that further research may provide answers to them.
in capitalist production.
Another weak point is the class analysis. The "new bour-
geoisie'is defined as the bureaucratic monopoly bour-
geoisie'andthose performing intellectual work in produ-
SOCIAL SCIENCES IN CHINA
tion.'How does this fit with the idea propagated by the manu-
scripts that the Communist Party is the mainhotbed'for this
The leading journal of the Chinese Academy of Social Sci-
“new bourgeoisie'? This problem was left unsolved, because
ences, published as a quarterly in English. It keeps you
the Shanghai School lacked acritical analysis of the functions of
abreast of the latest development in philosophy and social
the Communist Party in China.
sciences in China,and discusses issues in the country's
modernization.
Describing the specific measures which must be underta-
The third issue:
ken to prevent a "capitalist'restoration, the Shanghai school
'Initial Reforms in China's Economic Structure'by Lin Zili
failed to make clear who the agents of these measures might be.
"What is the Origin of the Law of Value?"' by Sun Yefang
They implicitly assign the Communist Party a central role in this
"The Movement for a Parliament in the Last Years of the
process. This seems problematic after defining the party as the
Qing Dynasty'by Geng Yunzhi
most importanthotbed'for the new bourgeoisie and capitalist
"Ancient Feudalism'' by Zhou Gucheng
tendencies. It seems that the members of the Shanghai School
'The Feudal Clan System Inherited from the Song snd Ming
were able to criticize and abandon Stalin's economic ideas and
Dynasties' by Xu Yangjie
theories, but when it came to practical political measures and
their implementation they could get no further than clinging to
Subscription rates:
Lenin's ideas and the theory of a vanguard party. This seems
U.S.A. $7.80 (per copy)
paradoxical when one recalls that the Shanghai School had its
$26.00 Annual Subs. (surface)
roots in the cultural revolutionary wing of the CCP which
advocated replacing this very same party with other political
Orders plus payment can be sent to a local dealer,or direct to:
structures.
GUOZI SHUDIAN, P.O. Box 399, Beijing, China
15
=====第15页=====