    Selected Works
    BRAHIM
    KAYPAKKAYA
    NISAN PUBLISHING

==========第1頁==========
    NISAN YAYMCLK(NISAN PUBLISHING

==========第2頁==========
    SELECTED VVORKS
    Nisan Yaylmcilik-nisan Publishing
    July 2014
    Ibrahim Kaypakkaya

==========第3頁==========
    Table of Contents
    Introducti
    Forward to the Second Editionmall Groups and Great Audacity
    Kurecik Regional Report
    et Us Grasp Correctly the Red Political Power Doctrine of
    Chairman Mao
    Critique of T'llkp draft programme
    The Theses of Shafak Revisionism Regarding the Kemalist
    Movement. Kemalist Government Period, Second World
    War Years, Post-war and 27 Ma
    The National Question in Turkey
    The Origin And Development Of The Differences Between
    Ourselves Annd Shafak Revisionism
    The Main Points on Which We Disagree With Shafak
    Revisionism

==========第4頁==========
    INTRODUCTION
    COMMUNIST MANIFEST OF TURKEY REVOLUTION
    As in all countries; there have been many revolutionist and communist leaders in Turkey ( Turkey Kurdistan ), too
    Each of them contributed so much to revolution or communismstruggle. They have existed in Turkey revolution history and in oppressed peoples mind and heart as significant personages and will alwavs exist
    But some of them deserve to be exceptional. Their personalitiesinevitably indentified with revolutions political and social charactersbecause they historically shouldered and performed duties during certain moment of history
    Theirs most distinguishing point of other is that they revealed po-litical and personal country revolution's basic characteristics like finding a gem via the light of scientific socialism
    Leaders, who revealed this gem out, deserve definitely a specialace in duration of history. Their names have a talismanic mpact
    Here, Ibrahim Kaypakkaya merits to be mentioned such a historicapersonage
    Kaypakkaya identified with Turkey political and social revolu-tions character. He achieved this by theorical, political and organiza-tional line he established. He became fairly the spirit of Turkerevolution. He grew early and shouldered this historic responsibilityby maturing on the point that ongoing process, availability of socialconditions and strong principals of the class struggle which knockedterms door as revealing necessity of a pioneering and leadin
    ower
    Controversially to resist tendency against social process and term's

==========第5頁==========
    stream, Kaypakkaya struggled for understanding and comprehending
    more important, our leader comrade's views are not only crops a deep
    this stream within the obiective conditions
    comprehension in relation scientific socialism doctrines, but also hold
    Forasmuch understand, comprehend, being interlaced with this
    the maturity of being grown with the class struggle line
    stream within the objective conditions and dominating its principals
    Kaypakkaya grew and developed an identity from the common
    not only a formidable work but also a venturous one. And this was
    point of revolutionist struggle in Turkey on the second half of 1960s
    built in comply with comprehending of objective world like the class
    and raising class struggle all over the world. His theses have a com
    production and scientific struggles
    munist manifesto value as a result of this historical process. Toda
    Kaypakkaya is a battle front opened against mind which takes sci
    undisputedly his inscriptions, like all articles belonging to theorical
    entific socialisms theorical crops and knowledge as dogmatic heaps
    treasure of scientific socialism, could have out of dated sides with re
    md absolute formulations. He adhered only to practical Method as a
    ard to actuality and they have also deficient, inadequate sides. but
    way for true knowledge. He kept faith with historic unity of subic
    sclence progressing perspective becomes meaningful at this point
    tive and objective, theory and practice together with sutras and ap
    However much the state of things may have altered during the last
    plying. He did not stand back to attack unexceptionally and fiercely
    twenty-five years, the general principles laid down in this Manifesto
    against all kinds of ideas, ideologies and views of world which (li
    are, on the whole as correct today as ever, Here and there some detail
    gress this method
    might be improved. The practical application of the principloles will de
    Kaypakkaya was just 23 years old when he pioneered and made his
    pend, as the Manifesto itself states, everywhere and at all time
    debut on serial of basic incidents like socio-economical reality. poli
    the historical conditions for the time being existing (K. Marks and P
    ical and Social contradictions, political regimes quality, national prob
    Engels. Preface to the German Edition of 1872. Manifesto of the Com
    lems rudiments, route of revolution, main organizing and working
    must Party, London, June 24, 1872)
    ncipes
    In fact Kaypakkaya's opinions it processed with the leadership o
    He put forward his extraordinary ideas for Turkey revolution
    him for decades
    which were not even considered by any other potential strugglers u
    In a side obiectives development, on the other hand the progress
    to that time. After forty years. even today his ideas are valid so they
    of the class struggle had tried, tested and strengthened. From the
    deserved to be mentioned among communist classics
    main route on this line, the fact of the classes struggle today's po
    In general, the oflicial program of a party is of less importance
    litical line, arise and development depend on dynamics, the Co
    than what a party does. But a new program is after all a banner pub
    munist Manifesto the main principle underlying owes. Analysis and
    licly raised, and the outside world judges the party by it.(F. Engels
    lightening the powe
    Letter to A. Bebel. London,, March 18-28. 1875
    Also it is justifiable, this process international proletariat common
    Kaypakkaya's inscriptions on this book consist of communist
    alues is enriched by the experience of worldwide. War of the boul
    party 'programmatic views of which he is founder-leader. These ar
    geoisie in all kinds of methods and tactics, forming the basis of hege
    developed views some of which were prepared specifically in form
    mony to reproduce all the elements mechanism to run at full speed and
    thesis and some of other during polemics with revisionist streams, and
    taken all the blows of the proletariat representing forces of future. Guid
    they were penned to clarify basic issues of Turkey revolution. Yet
    ing them the inevitable ideological basis form is further strengthened

==========第6頁==========
    For the ultimate triumph of the ideas set forth in the Manifesto
    regard Marx's theory as something completed and inviolable; on the
    Marx relied solely and exclusively upon the intellectual development
    contrary, we are convinced that it has only laid the foundation stone
    of the working class, as it necessarily had to ensue from united action
    of the science which socialists must develop in all directions if they
    and discussion. The events and vicissitudes in the struggle against cap
    wish to keep pace with life. (Lenin, Collected Works, English Edition
    ital, the defeats even more than the successes. could not but demon
    Progress Publishers Moscow, Fourth Printing, 1977, Volume 4, p 21 1
    strate to the fighters the inadequacy hitherto of their universa
    212
    panaceas and make their minds more receptive to a thorough under
    Kaypakkaya have been conveyer of a science, namely a spirit In
    standing of the true conditions for the emancipation of the workers
    the class war that we should catch by the way reaching data, compre
    And Marx was right. (F. Engels, Preface to the German Edition o
    hending truth, supplying unity of theory and practice, and compre
    1890 Manifesto of the Communist Party, London. May 1, 1890)
    hending method of social contradictions
    Kaypakkkaya had a short but an efficient communist life, torture
    He has been a creative conveyer of communist ideology in Turkey
    continued for months, and that lasted finally, murdered by firing squad
    Namely he is a young but master student and teacher of dialectic-ma
    In the end after completed a historic manifesto of resistance. His com
    terialist doctrine such in the class war, social liberation process, dur-
    munist leadership identification and his heroic resistance agains
    ng organizing and realizing revolution
    enemy, the enemy did not have any other alternative only to destroy
    He is a productive private and leader of revolutionist commu
    him. I should be happy, that creates the program around the party
    t line
    founded and fighting comrades who have created a great tradition of
    He is the collimating master of destructive and constructive power
    struggle and resistance
    of masses,revolutionary spirit
    That tradition of Kaypakkaya's Jine carried great pay to today and
    He is a triggered bullet against dogma, ossified ideas, status quo
    to tomorrow in order to reach revolution continue to grow hopes
    and things to be seen unchangeable
    His followers have gathered way with the duty of practicing, de
    He is a revolutionist fighter that adores himself for the sake of peo
    veloping and taking forward views of Kaypakkaya that he formulized
    ple, understanding today comprehensively, looking past with today
    specifically on Turkey and Turkey Kurdistan. For that reason their ad
    eye and with great hopes to future
    dress have been Kaypakkaya for style of analyze and movement
    He will live forever just like his masters and leaders, just like his
    Henceforth it will continue to be like this. Following in founders and
    all immortal comrades and all private revolutionists of the revolution
    developers of scientific socialism steps passes through admiration phl-
    struggle
    losophy of this theorys correlation with life s material phenomena
    May,2014
    There can be no strong socialist party without a revolutionary theory which unites all socialists, from which they draw all their convictions, and which they apply in their methods of struggle and means ofaction To defend such a theory, which to the best of your knowledgeyou consider to be true, against unfounded attacks and attempts to courupt it is not to imply that you are an enemy of all criticism. We do not10

==========第7頁==========
    Kurecik Regional Report
    October 1971

==========第8頁==========
    The area in which we have operated up to now is the sub-districttown ofk, which has 2 I villages within its boundaries. The distance tothe provicial capital is 70kms and the distance to the district centre is5kms. The main road linking the centre of Eastern Anatolia to Centraland Western Anatolia passes through this sub-district town. The eastern Taurus Mountains reach down to the land of this sub-district withthe high peaks and ranges of the Nurhak Mountains. The sub-district isgenerally made up of mountains and hills, which are treeless. Therevery little flat land. As befits such a hilly terrain the villages have beenestablished over a wide area. In somme villages it can take an hour towalk from one end to the other. The houses are generally next to arableland and the dwellings of those from the same family are usually closetogether and comprise a neighbourhood. Those who own sheep andgoats also have sheepfolds in the mountain pastures. On summer daysthe owners of these sheds ascend to them. This is the geographical andettlement situation of the area in which we are carrying out activities
    SECTION 1
    The Economic Social and Political Situation
    A) How to distinguish the classes from one other
    What is the criterion useful to distinguish the classes in the area
    Is it the size of the land owned. or the number of animals, or the number of pear trees, or something else
    Let us state firstly: In this area the classes are not yet separated bysharp lines. There are almost no rich peasants(village bourgeoisie)exploiting the peasants through waged labour as we see in the Aegeanand Thrace regions
    A widespread poverty afflicts a large proportion of the population(estimated at more than 90%) Within this there are of course those whoare worse off, just as there are those who are relatively speaking better off
    5

==========第9頁==========
    Secondly. let us state that: there are no landlords, as in the Url
    poverished peasants who have migrated have not sold their land. and
    Mardin and D Bakir plain who exploit the peasantry as sharecroppers,
    have not handed it to their partners either, leaving it uncultivated
    forced labour etc. The peasants are in general'free smallholders.
    The unsuitability of the land, secondly, is an obstacle to the exten
    Thirdly, let us state the tollowing: No aspect of social production
    sive use of agricultural machinery such as tractors, combine harvesters
    has yet undergone serious development and become fundamental. That
    and threshing machines and the use of fertilizers and pesticides, pre-
    Is, neither arable agriculture nor animal husbandry and animal proclucts
    venting Significant development. As far as we know there is a thresh
    agriculture, nor fruit-growing constitutes the main basis of productiol
    ing machine and tractor in only one village in K. sub-district. On the
    All the above are carried on in parallel and all appear to be of the same
    ew pieces of arable land tractors and threshing machines are hired. but
    importance. Amongst these arable agriculture and animal husband
    this does not happen on a large scale(tractor hire is 10 lira per quarte
    based on sheep and goats is relatively predominant, but here, as with the
    acre, of a threshing machine 50 lira an hour)
    other categories, there is yet to be significant development. Therefore.
    As for pesticides, chemicals are only used to prevent smut(10 Iit
    neither the area of land owned nor the number of animals kept is on its
    kilo )and manure is used
    small amounts(110 kurus a kilo
    own a correct critieria to distinguish the classes from one other
    Arable agriculture generally consists of wheat. Despite this there
    Since the terrain is hilly and the land is infertile and arid it is almost
    are hardly any families that sell grain. As for families that buy grain
    impossible to operate modern vehicles such as tractors and combine
    the figure given by the peasants is close to 99%
    harvesters. There is no intensive agriculture. The reason crop-produc
    Another branch of agriculture that is of iinportance is animal hus
    ing agriculture has not developed and become the main social mneans of
    bandry. Sheep, followed by goats, are the most commonly kept ani
    production is the unsuitability of the terrain. Even on the best land the
    mals. But since animal husbandry, like arable agriculture, has not
    yield rarely exceeds five to one sown ?? (* explain Therefore, even
    developed Into a commercially run, dominant branch of agriculture
    amilies that own more than 25 acres are unable to get by, and are
    the number of animals owned by peasants is not by itself a criterion to
    forced to sell their labour. There are some families that barely make a
    distinguish the classes one from the other. A definite distinction be
    living despite owning 50 acres of land. As they are unable to get a re
    tween, on the one hand, owners of large flocks and, on the other semi
    turn from the labour they put into the land they abandon some parts of
    proletarians and proletarians who work in the care etc of these flocks
    their land and do not cultivate them
    has yet to take shape. Although it is true that a section of the better off
    Due to the unsuitability of the land and its infertility not much value
    have more sheep and goats, and the impoverished have very few or
    is attached to land. There is not a tendency for land to be concentrated
    none at all, there are some who are poor and sell their labour but have
    in the hands of wealthy peasants(even if it is happening, it is exceedingly
    a large number of animals, and a small number of better off families
    slow). The buying and selling of land, renting and sharecropping does
    who have no animals at all. Furthermore, Since most of the peasant
    not constitute a serious problem. Impoverished and medium peasants
    families own sheep and goats it is necessary to look at the number of
    offering of land in return for a loan, or sale for marriag
    animals owned when distinguishing the classes one from the other. but
    does occur. But at least as we have mentioned. this has not led to a fun
    not sufficient by itself.
    damental concentration of land in the hands of the wealthy. Some im
    Another important source of income in K sub-district is pear trees

==========第10頁==========
    In the fields and the hills there is an abundance of pear trees and the
    hand they sell their products they are exploited by the livestock and
    peasants gather and sell the fruit. But there is almost no one who spe
    pear merchants. Those amongst the peasants who are better off and
    cialises in this, who works at increasing yields, who cares for and en
    have money to spare generally go into trade. The goods of the imperi-
    deavours to develop this. The trees give fruit every 2 years and the
    alist monopolies and collaborationist capitalists pass into the hands of
    Peasants pick whatever they find. Some of the trees are even cut down
    the peasants with high commercial profit. On the other hand, for in
    and used for fuel. Therefore the number of trees owned is not on its
    stance, pears are bought from the peasants for 60-75 kurus and sold at
    own a criterion to use in distinguishing one class from another
    he market for between 200-350 kurus. This situation leads to the fur
    In that case what criteria shall we use in order to distinguish the
    ther impoverishment of the poor peasants, to their selling their labour
    classes one from the other? The arable land. number of animals and
    more and to their proletarianisation
    number of pear trees, the three of them in total may be a correct crite
    Fifthly, let us say the following: Peasants whose income is insuf-
    rion to distinguish classes, but it is not a very practical one. We there
    ticient to meet their needs are gradually becoming indebted. Banks
    fore found it more appropriate to use a different criterion. The annua)
    offer very little or no credit to those who are outside the small minor
    income of a peasant family gives a much clearerpicture of what class
    Ity of better off peasants. They therefore have to borrow money from
    the family belongs to, and is a lot easier to calculate than working out
    the better off peasants. The interest of loans is on average 5% a month
    the above(amount of land, number of animals, number of pear trees.
    In a year that makes 60%. In the second vear. in the event the loan is
    Fourthly, let us state the following: Trade is entering a little niore
    not paid off, interest is liable on the interest. While this high rate of in
    each day into the peasants lives. The inbabitants most basic needs are
    erest enriches a handful of usurers, the peasants who take the loans
    being met increasingly by the market. Electric lamps instead of
    with interest, who have to take them, are gradually forced to take on a
    kerosene lamps and stoves instead of hearths have been obtained from
    heavy burden from under which they will never recover and leads to
    the market. as have sacks, cushions, pillows and rugs that were previ
    them losing all their possessions( their land, animals, houses, etc.)
    ously made by hand. Radios, tape recorders, gramophone players and
    Sixthly, let us state the following: A majority of the peasants who
    clocks have entered most houses. Tea has been a regular item on the
    are forced into misery by high commercial profits and exploited by
    of articles consumed for some time. Vegetables are to a wide extent ob-
    loans with interest, end up becoming migrant workers. Most of them go
    tained froin the market. Wheat grain etc for consumption is purchased
    to Antep, Adana, Istanbul and Antakya and work as building labourers
    from the market. Handicrafts are being forgotten. On the other hand
    porters, beggars and, most common of all, as street traders. (80% of
    products made by the peasants are being taken in increasing volumes
    those who leave are street traders). There are hundreds of street traders
    to the market on a daily basis. The most commonly sold products are
    from the villages in Ksub district in the places mentioned( particularly
    sheep, goats and pears. Smaller amounts of butter, cheese and felt are
    in Antep and Istanbul). A lot of peasants have also gone to Germany, o
    also sold. What does this mean? This means that to ever-increasing de
    are awaiting their turn to go. For instance, from one village of 60
    grees the peasants are being exploited by commercial capital, and being
    dwellings there are 120 people in Germany. From another village o
    dragged into bankruptcy and misery. While on the one hand the peas
    200 houses there are 200 people in Germany. On average there is one
    ants obtain the things they need from the market, when on the othel
    member of every family in Germany. Many of the inhabitants are also

==========第11頁==========
    migrating to Antep, Adana, Istanbuland Malatya. There has been a
    tion. The land of impoverished peasants is generally in hilly and stony
    considerable increase in the numbers of those migrating
    terrain. Those who had land in flat, fertile places have had to abandonthese lands to usurers on account of being unable to pay loans they had
    B)Classes and their attitude to the Revolution
    taken out on these fertile fields. Since they are unable to afford chemical fertiliser their yields fall year on year(they use dried
    Let us deal with the classes one by one
    as fuel instead of wood)
    The agricultural proletariat
    All the poor peasants leave their homes to work on a seasonal basis
    An agricultural proletariat, for the reasons set out above, has no
    Those from this class who work as building labourers. porters. street
    come into being. Those in the villages who have no
    ns to make
    living in general migrate(to Antep and Istanbul). The small numbers ot
    traders and beggars constitute the majority of the population of K
    A section of the poor peasantry works as farm labourers on the land
    families that remain usually graze the Flocks of 5-10 households, thatis, they are shepherds. We may deem them to be agricultural proietar
    of better-off families. The land owner provides the seed and the peasant share cropper sows, reaps and brings in the harvest. The wheat
    Ins (apart from a section of middle peasants who graze their own an
    and straw is then shared half and half
    imals ) The most impoverished in the area are the shepherds who lookafter the flocks of others. Their annual income is in the region ol 4+
    A section of the poor peasantry also reaps the field of others at han
    thousand lira. Additionally, the bread etc. of the shepherd is provided
    vesl time (upper middle and well off peasants). In return they receive
    in turn by the families for whorn he works
    wheat corresponding to the amount of seed sown. The impoverished
    The shepherds in our area are generally the most revolutionary el
    peasantry constitutes the majority of those who migrate to the citieshey work in particular in Antep as porters, woodcutters and as work-
    ements. They are the fieriest advocates of the armed struggle. Mlost o
    ers in flour mills etc. Most of those going to Germany are also from the
    them suffered the persecution of the commandos and were beaten Ir
    impoverished. The peasants say: "If it wasn't for Germany most of
    the gendarme posts for feeding Sinan Cemgil and his companions. But
    them would die of hunger
    the shepherds put up a stiff resistance and did not give in. They wcre
    The poor peasants are unable to benefit fron the Ziraat Bank or
    also promised large sums of money if they told where Sinan and hiscompanions were, but these people, who clo not have two coins to rub
    the Agricultural Credit Cooperatives. In order to get 200 liras in credittey need to expend lots of energy and visit
    offices. Most of them
    together, refused without hesitation. They know the terrain extremely
    cannot get any credit whatsoever. Since conditions of life are worsen
    wcl. They know caves and hiding places that are not on miliary maps.
    The shepherds will make a significant contribution to the peasant
    ing by the day paying off these loans is another worry. There are virtually no poor peasants who do not have a debt to several local usurers
    anned struggle
    Impoverished peasants: Families with an annual income between
    grocers etc .T he usurers do not give loans to impoverished peasantswithout and or livestock
    and 15 thousand lira in general come into this category. (An increaseor decrease in the number of individuals in a family can slightly change
    This layer feels a strong desire for revolution and the armed strug
    these boundaries). They make up the majority of the peasant popula
    ge, and turn up their noses at all manner of reformist and bourgeoisvews. They are the force on which we will rely in rural areas. Their

==========第12頁==========
    destiny and liberation has definitely and irrevocably united with the
    For instance, a peasant earned 35,000 lira from land elsewhere. but
    destiny and liberation of the proletariat
    his family owe 70 thousand plus interest. Their situation is therefore
    Middle Peasantry: Families with an annual income of over I5
    worse off than a family whose annual income is 15-20 thousand lira
    thousand lira in general come into this category. They either have rela
    but has no debts
    tively good land, have 50-60 animals, or have both a piece of good land
    Most middle peasants are street traders in Antep, Adana and Istan
    and a number of sheep. A section also has two oxen, one or a lew cows
    bul. They do not perform jobs such as portering, wood-cutting, labour
    and a donkey or a mule, too. Another section, while having little or no
    ing in the construction sector or begging. These jobs are for the
    and or livestock, possesses an amount of money. The situation of those
    Impoverished peasants
    who have returned from Germany, of minibus owners, or of grocers and
    Due to the increasing cost of living and worsening of conditions of
    similar in the town, is like this. They are also considered middle peas
    life the majority of middle peasants are becoming poorer, while the bet-
    antry. Some of them lend money with interest: some of them buy land
    ter off minority are endeavouring to join the wealthy peasantry
    etc. In the city and some go into commerce. Middle peasant families are
    The lower section of the middle peasantry and the impoverished
    the second most numerous groups after the impoverished peasantry. But
    peasantry together constitute the overwhelming majority of the peasant
    there are a lot fewer of them than the poor peasants. Those families that
    population in the area. The lower section of the middle peasantry wish
    have returned from Germany, and were previously poor peasants, have
    for a revolution. They are gradually feeling more deeply and graspin
    joined the ranks of the middle peasantry, creating an Increase In their
    the reality that their liberation will come through the armed struggle
    numbers. The medium peasants generally work their own land. There
    They are suspicious of reformist views
    are some who employ poor peasants, but they are in the minority S
    The upper section of the middle peasantry is also sympathetic to the
    eral families that own livestock get together and employ a shepherd
    revolution. However this section does not think it feasible that work
    while a small section graze their own animals. Again, some middle peas
    ers and peasants will succeed with an armed struggle. They tend to suc
    ants with a small amount of land work as share cropperson the land of
    cumb to bourgeois reformism. They are very curious to learn whether
    better off middle peasants or wealthy peasants
    there are officers in the military that support us and pin their hopes on
    Middle peasants are unable to benefit sufficiently from the Agri
    them. They see the ruling classes as stronger than they are and the peo
    culture Bank or the Agricultural Credit Cooperatives. Depending on
    ple as weaker. These views are prevalent particularly amongst thos
    the amount of land they possess they are able to obtain between 500 and
    who have a good chance to join the ranks of the wealthy peasantry. In
    a 1,000 lira in credit, They are also unable to purchase enough ferilise
    the future. when the revolutionary wave swells up this section of the
    on account of the high cost. For this reason many owe money to local
    middle peasantry will join the ranks of the revolution, having freed
    usurers, There who are better off have less or no debt, They are able to
    themselves of indecision
    save what is surplus to their needs every year. A section of the middle
    Wealthy Peasants: The annual income of this stratum is gener
    peasantry with high incomes, but who also owe money with interest, Is
    ally above 40-50 thousand lira. The annual income of a section is
    in a worse situation than middle peasants with less income but no debts
    around 100 thousand lira. The number of wealthy peasants is very low
    with interest
    not exceeding 1% of peasant families
    22

==========第13頁==========
    In general they possess the most fertile land in the village In
    section of the wealthy peasants that sense the smell of blood in the u)
    which they reside. They also own the areas with plentiful water that
    coming armed struggle, feel the need to say with appropriate words
    are suitable for growing vegetables. Most of them have at least 50 an-
    that they sympathise with the revolution and shed tears for revolution
    imals. some have more than 100. They also have at least 20-30 thou
    aries who are gunned down, in order to safeguard their futures and also
    and lira in money-capital. Some have more money, but not as muc
    to free themselves from the pressures of the poor and middle peasant
    land or livestock. while others have more land and livestock. but not
    who enthusiastically support the revolutionary struggle
    as huch caplta
    Those who are openly opposed to the revolution do not make this
    Those who own land that is flat work their land with a tractor. A
    obvious. They oppose it in roundabout ways."Can one oppose the gov
    section works the land jointly with middle and poor peasants
    ernment? If you do thats what will happen, " they say. Since they are
    Some of the wealthy peasants have gone into commerce: they own
    scared of the reaction of peasants they cannot inform on revolutiona
    land, premises, etc. in towns, or sell wool, butter, cheese etc. Or en
    ies active in the area
    gage in smuggling. The biggest opium smuggler in the area is a rich
    Those in the middle say: I can,t see this succeeding. But it's a
    peasant with the most capital
    shame for these young people who die and are tortured. They duped
    The wealthy peasants are able to benefit from fertiliser and credits
    the youngsters and sent them to their deaths. ' According to most of
    from the Agriculture Bank and Agricultural Credit Cooperative
    them it was Ismet Pasha who deceived the young people and put them
    Local usurers emerge fron amongst the wealthy peasantry. A sec
    in the firing line
    tion of the wealthy peasants endeavour to increase their capital by lend
    t an advanced phase of our revolutionary struggle some of these
    ing money at high interest rates to the impoverished and middle
    ( the lower segment of the wealthy peasantry )will be dragged along by
    peasants (and even to the lower section of wealthy peasants)
    the momentum of the revolution, others will try to sit on the fence
    Those who exploit and bankrupt the poor and lower section of the
    while a very small number (in particular the large usurers)will openly
    middle peasants are wealthy peasants engaged in usury. Some olthese
    oppose the revolution
    borrow money from the bank at 3-4 percent interest and lend it out 10
    Landlords: These are no landlords in the area today. According
    the peasants at 60% interest according to the peasants themselves
    to the villagers there were persons that might be called'agha'in the
    Compared to the usurers of the Aegean and Thrace regions they are
    past. However, their authority over and exploitation of the peasants
    modest, since the richest of these only has capital of around 250 thou
    stemmed fromn their cruelty, religious authority or their descent fron
    sand lira. There is another difference to the usurers of the West
    a large clan (or their economic power)rather than their ownership of
    Whereas those in the West seize tobacco. cotton. sunflowers. milk and
    Jarge amounts of land. They were a kind of local despot in the vil
    other crops in return for loans and interest. those here take money and
    lages in which they dwelt
    interest. However, they do usurp the land and livestock of those unable
    They would take crops and property and even wives from the peas
    to pay back their loan, as the market for crops with a value is not die
    ants by force, and put them to work as they wished solely in return fo
    veloped in this area
    food. They would send those they didnt need to perform military serv
    Since revolutionary ideas are increasingly spreading to the area, a
    ice and not send those they needed. Even now villages are called b

==========第14頁==========
    their names
    ervant of.. These "aghas,and their descendants have
    ants. The heads of the clans that oppressed the people, from timne to
    one by one disappeared as a result of the struggle of the peasants anc
    time channeled the people's anger at state oppression for their own
    their own competition and quarrels between themselves and their clans
    ends. For instance. there was a rebellion in the area after the founding
    The last agha remnant was killed by another", in 1956 on accoun
    of the Republic, led by the owner of Kasimoglu village and a leading
    of competition. In this way the concept of'agha' was consigned to his
    clan member, Kasimoglu Mehmet Ali. He declared independence, tak
    tory. The children and relatives of these remain, but they have
    Ing the people from 4 or 5
    lages with him. When state forces sur
    bsolutely no authority over the peasants. Moreover, economically they
    rounded the area he only lasted 2 hours. Kasimoglu and 3 of his
    are in the same boat. Despite this they still think of themselves as agha
    companions were executed and the people were tortured
    and act pompously, looking down on the peasants and the revolution-
    In the Republican period. as stated above, the"aghas vanished one
    ary struggle. But no one takes any notice of them
    by one as a consequence of the struggle of the peasants and inter-clanconflict. By the 1950s the'aghas were no more. Since 1967 in partic
    C) The class struggle in the area and the level of political con
    ular the revolutionary spark which is spreading to rural areas has af-
    sciousness of the peasant mass
    fected the area in which we are active. Peasants in the area haveorganised many marches and rallies for democratic rights, striking fear
    Now let us review the situation of the class struggle waged by the
    into the hearts of the ruling classes with the revolutionary slogans they
    peasants in the area in question and the level of their consciousness
    chanted. Some peasant leaders bave even been imprisoned on account
    The revolutionary past of the area in which we are active stretches
    of these actions
    back to Ottoman times. According to information we have received
    Two of the martyrs of revolutionary youth are from this area. Their
    from elderly peasants, in the final years of the Ottoman period up to 40
    deaths have inflamed the anger of the people. Furthermore, the merci
    peasants rose up against the oppression of village aghas and the Ot
    less gunning down of Sinan and his companions by the oppressor forces
    toman state and established armed bands in the mountains. The men-
    of the ruling class has deeply affected the people
    bers of these groups were all impoverished peasants who wer
    Revolutionary ideas, the desire for revolution and the armed strug
    employed by the aghas. As long as they did as they were told and served
    gle and political awareness have spread and developed in the area in an
    their lord they were not sent to do military service, but as soon as they
    unexpected way.
    refused to bow to the orders of the agha they were labelled as military
    Of the 2
    ages in the area. 5 or 6 are Sunni and the rest are
    fugitives 'and the authorities were informed. The bands from time to
    Alevi. In almost all the Alevi villages religious pressure has been re
    time raided the aghas,'houses and also resisted the state forces
    duced to zero. The state of'dede's [note necessary regarding Alevi cul
    After the War of Liberation the persecution of the aghas contin
    ture) who 20 years ago had people kissing their feet is pathetic. It is
    ued. The impoverished peasants, in particular, continued the occupation
    impossible to find a dede who does not say: Tm a revolutionary. Since
    of slavery under the agha's whip which they inherited from their fa-
    the people know that they give the appearance of being a revolutionary
    thers. The aghas and the state competed with each other to oppress the
    on account of popular pressure, they see them as fake and do not show
    impoverished people. This persecution tried the patience of the peas
    much respect to their utterances
    26

==========第15頁==========
    In Sunni villages the effect of religion is still strong, with a per
    At this juncture we should also make the following point: the fact
    sisting influence of religious teachers and reactionary religious men on
    that some of the local inhabitants have gone to Germany, and that oth
    the people. The Sunnis in the area are in general backward and reac
    ers hope to go, has to a slight extent quietened the revolutionary anger
    tionary, whereas the Alevis play a progressive and revolutionary role
    of the people. On the other hand nearly all the poor peasants, In par
    We shall not dwell on the reasons for this here. but let us point out that
    ticular the youth, are united on the subject of armed struggle. Amongst
    local reactionaries and state forces are doing all they can to degenerate
    thein are some who are prepared to sacrifice everything and join the
    the class struggle of the peasantry by turning it into an Alevi-sunr
    ruggle immediatel
    conflict. They are endeavouring to incite the Sunnis against the Alevis
    Primary school pupils and even 4 and 5 years olds see themselves
    and in this way pit the oppressed and exploited peasants one against
    as revolutionaries, saying in their broken, Turkish: I,m a revolution-
    the other. The reactionary religious men in particular label"revolu
    ary, I' m a socialist; while they raise their left fists into the air
    tionary thinking as'kizilbaslik', (note necessary regarding origins o
    Most of the young women, brides and daughters feel a strong sym
    term kizilbas] trying to deceive the peasants by saying: " look. it's al
    pathy for the revolutionary struggle. They sing laments for dead revo
    ways the kizilbas that hold these ideas, this business is kizilbas itself
    lutionary youth and shed tears. They admire and respect the
    and unfortunately the majority of the Sunni toilers is still taken in bv
    companions active in the area. Some of the young girls are even not
    this. But the Alevis are not in general affected by this. They say: it's
    considering marriage, in order not to create an obstacle to their joining
    a mistake to make a distinction by saying Sunni, Alevi, Tu
    the armed struggle in the future
    Kurd, this struggle is poor against rich, whatever their origin all the im
    Even at this early stage of our revolutionary movement in the area
    poverished must unite. Twenty of the 21 villages where we are active
    it is possible to observe hundreds of concrete examples of how revo
    are Kurdish. All the Alevi villages are Kurdish. but it is not possible to
    lutionary ideas have taken root and flourished amongst the impover
    find even the tiniest trace of Kurdish nationalism in the area. On 1l
    ca peop
    contrary, the 'Turkicisation policy enforced by the ruiling classes hasbeen quite successful, leading to the emergence of"Turkish national-
    D) Summary of the chapter and conclusions
    Ism, even amongst the Kurds. Since the majority of the population is
    Impoverished Kurdish and Alevi. they have becoine accustomed to the
    These are the main economic, social, and political characteris
    yoke of a triple oppression over hundreds of years (economic, national
    tics of the area in which we are active
    and religious persecution). The state forces of the dominant rulin
    1) Conmercial capitalism in the area has developed rapidly in re
    classes that are the main enforcer of oppression have succeeded to a
    cent years in particular. Just as the goods of imperialist monopoles and
    certain degree In instilling fear in the people. This fear is particularly
    collaborationist capitalists are penetrating the villages, the produce of
    noticeable amongst the elderly, who are extremely reluctant when it
    the peasants is also increasingly being carried to the market. This de
    comes to the subject of the armed struggle. The crushing of the Kasi
    velopment has led to the merciless exploitation of the peasants by im
    mogu and Dersim uprisings and the subsequent brutal torture of the
    perialist monopolies, collaborationist bourgeois and many middlemen
    people is one of the reasons for this extreme caution
    merchants, and resulted in their being driven to bankruptcy and misery

==========第16頁==========
    2)On the other hand, social division of labour has yet to be re
    Section
    alised in production; that is, a systen where on the one hand there are
    Revolutionary activity in the area
    land or livestock owners who buy labour and on the other workers andsemi-workers who make a living by selling their labour, has not come
    A) The activities and influences of Bourgeois and
    into being. In particular there is not yet a branch of production pro
    Petit-bourgeois groups in the area
    ducing for the market. Capitalism is at a very backward and primitivelevel. Wealthy peasants are only now becoming a reality and
    None of these groups have carried out serious, lasting and funda
    ev ex
    loit the peasant mass by means of lending mone
    ith interest、not
    mental revolutionary activity amongst the peasants in this area
    through waged labour, and become wealthier in this way
    Apart from election specches the Workers'party of Turkey(TIP
    3) The impoverished and middle peasantry faces national and r
    Inote necessary] has not been active, which is not only the case here
    glous oppression in addition to economic persecution. The people
    but is also the same in other areas. While in the past TIP received sig
    have for years heroically resisted oppression on all three fronts, pass
    nilicant numbers of votes the party's current influence on peasants is almost n1
    ing through significant struggles
    4) The broad peasant mass(impoverished and middle peasants and
    With the disappearance of the influence of TIP the views of Mihri
    even the lower section of wealthy peasants)who are exploited to the
    Belli [note necessary] began to spread amongst the villagers by means
    very mamow by high commercial profits and interest on loans. consti
    of the youth. The Mihri Belli group has also not carried out serious and
    tute the forces of the Democratic Popular Revolution and are rapid
    lasting activity in the area. Neither propaganda, nor agitation, nor set-
    taking their places in the ranks of the revolutionary struggle. The
    ting up organisation. Mihri Belli himself, apparently, went to the area
    usurers, a section of wealthy peasants. profiteering merchants, reac
    a few times, made contact with a few peasants, but did nothing apart
    tionary religious men, corrupt, bribe-taking officials, and, indirect
    from giving them the good news (! that revolutionary officers would
    collaborationist large capitalists and US imperialism, are the enemies
    soon stage a coup. On one occasion he apparently told the peasants that
    of the peasants and constitute the ranks of the counter-revolution
    a 'military coup was imminent; adding that they should keep their ears
    5)In the area in which we are active local authority is almost non
    glued to the radio at night
    existent. There are no local reactionaries with their own private force
    The activities of youths connected to the Mihri Belli group consist
    of bully boys who oppress the peasants, as in the Urfa. Mardin. Di
    of calling occasional meetings and propaganda work of a temporary
    yarbakir plain. The reactionaries perpetuate their dominance over the
    and reformist nature. Organising the peasants for armed struggle has
    peasants by relying directly on state authority(gendarme, commando
    not even crossed their minds. From this viewpoint, although as a move
    police and military). Therefore, a policy of 'destruction of class ene
    ment the M. Belli group has not much influence the effect of their ideas
    still exists in some circles, but is of a kind that can be casily erased s
    mies in order to seize power cannot be the fundamental policy in thisarea. The struggle for power has to be waged directly against state
    The Kivilcimli group has no activity or influence in the area
    forces(that is, the central authority
    The most well known and influential group in the area is theTHKO, in particular Sinan Cemgil's group The arrival of this group inthe spring of 1971 in the mountains of this area, their launching of, in

==========第17頁==========
    their own words, rural guerrilla, their going hungry and sleeping in the
    were warned ( by Sinan and his companions: it will be better if you
    cold and suffering 3 fatalities, had a profound effect on the people long
    don't talk to us. The peasants do not think this was a correct attitude
    ing for armed struggle and plunged them into sadness. The peasants
    The criticisms of the peasants are entirely correct. Sinan and his
    saw Cemil and his companions movement as the concrete expression
    companions really did avoid the people. Absolutely no efforts were
    of their yearning for armed struggle. The majority of the people cor
    made to encourage the people to join the struggle. They just visited a
    sider that Cemngil and his companions died for theln. This summer, vil
    ew houses in order to procure bread and to sleep. The assistance ren
    lage women who had gathered after the death of an elderly person took
    dered by the peasants was entirely down to the efforts of the peasants
    the opportunity to wall a lament to Sinan, Niyazi, Battal and Cevahir
    What is the reason for these shortcomings? The mistaken nature of
    and shed tears until the evening. Newly born children have been given
    Sinan and his companions ideological and political line. Their reliance
    the name Sinan. Along with this the influence of the THKO on the peo
    on a coup by bourgeois officers and on bourgeois reformism. They
    ple consists of a distant sympathy and has not been transfermed into
    thought the revolution (!)would achieve success with an officers coup,
    something organised and lasting. The THKO'S organisational formation
    not the armed struggle of peasants and workers. They were merely to
    is not a clear and disciplined one, it is anarchic. It has neither a pro
    prepare the ground for such a coup. They therefore did not consider it
    gramme nor party rules, and no ldeological unity 1s required hom those
    necessary to organise the peasants, nor did they feel a need to do so
    who join its ranks. They consider everyone who joins as one of them
    Even though they had no organisational link, ideologically the line the
    and a member of the organisation. Such an organisational form cannot
    most approved of and adopted was the revisionist, reformist line of M
    be lasting and so it has been proved. The Feeling of the majority of the
    Belli. Many events, from their activities to debates On giving up arins
    people for the Deniz-sinan group is not support for their organisatio
    following the 12 March coup [note necessary], to their testimonies in
    and political Iine, but one in favour of the revolution and armed strug
    court, everything confinns what we are saying
    gle in general. There are no more than a handful of peasants who are
    It will be useful to grasp this point: even a movement this cut off
    bound to the organisation and its political Ime. Furthermore, the defeat
    rom the masses can affect the people and earn their affection, by tak
    of the THKO movement has Inade many peasants feel the movement
    ing up arms against the coercive forces of the ruling classes
    was on the wrong path. Many of their supporters amongst the youth
    The THKP-THKC is not active in the area in question and has no
    are undecided or have joued other groups. The advanced peasant rev
    influence. We do not know if they are working in the provincial capi
    olutionaries In the area say that Sinan's grouping set out without con
    tal, but it is highly likely that they are active amongst the youth, since
    sulting the people that they concealed themselves from the people and
    it is evident that they are relatively influential amongst high school stu-
    behaved erroneously in doing so. Most of the people agree that they
    dents and some educated persons
    hould have stayed in villages, not in caves in the mountains, andworking clandestinely, given the people ideas. The armed struggle
    B) The activities and influence of our communist movement in
    would then have commenced once the people
    the area
    Some of the peasants spent days unsuccessfully searching for thenin order to assist or join them. Those who did succeed in finding them
    Two comrades were sent to the area in the month of. There hadalso previously been a few propagandist visits there. Correspondence

==========第18頁==========
    was taking place with a few individuals and the Isci-koylu newspaper
    by the raids carried out in the area in the spring by Martial Law
    was being sent to some peasants. The great majority of the peasants, in
    3) The inability of our movement to supervise the allotted tasks
    cluding a section of the most advanced elements, was unable to distin
    and the limited possibilities to issue instructions to the comrades in
    guish the communist movement from the bourgeois and petit-bourgeo1s
    time and to follow these up
    cliques. and looked at them all in the same way. A section of peasants
    When it was established that it had not proved possible to carry
    who had participated in previous rallies and demonstrations and were
    out serious activity with these three comrades the decision was taken
    aware of the splits in various well-known currents, were in general op
    to send a Inore experienced comrade to the area. At the beginning of
    posed to our movement. In the city it
    Most entirely isolated
    August the first comrade was removed and sent to another area. The
    amongst the youth. While our mistakes have contributed to this, the
    second comrade was alone for a while. The removal of this comrade
    class character of those opposed to us is also a factor
    too, was considered. but this was not done as the comrade corrected
    he first comrade to be sent to the area in order to carry out last
    his mistakes by his own nitiative and efforts, making links with many
    ing activity had stayed there previously. However, neither the first time
    progressive peasants. This activity both developed the comrade and
    nor on the second occasion was he able to accomplish serious activity
    by enlarging his circle, increased his possibilities in the area as regards
    The reasons for this are both the comrade's personal shortcomings, In
    shelter and settling in the area
    experience and lack of initiative and our movements lack of a clear
    The comrade distributed revolutionary publications the Shafak
    action programme and perspective regarding the conducting of activ
    newspaper sent to the area extensively (previously, in order for secrecy
    ties in village areas. Furthermore, there was no possibility in those days
    () we learned, he had hidden the publications from the advanced peas
    of supervising the tasks allotted
    ants). He made links with many sound, determined, perceptive and tal-
    The second comrade was sent to the area at the beginning of July
    ented impoverished peasants, gaining their affection and support
    A young peasant was immediately recruited In this way a three-perso
    Following this initial step in the work, a more experienced comrade
    committee was constituted and this committee was made responslble
    was sent to the area. The work was reviewed and errors ascertained
    for all activities in the area. The first comrade was appointed secretary
    The most significant error was this: the comrades had to a great degree
    and it was explained in detail to him several times what his duties en
    neglected to explain in a language that the mass would understand, that
    tailed. However, it proved impossible to supervise these tasks at the
    we represented the real communist movement in Turkey, and the dif-
    time. The reason for this was that the comrade who needed to check up
    ferences between ourselves and the bourgeois and petit-bourgeois
    had to take on a huge amount of work on account of a shortage of cadre.
    cliques. ]t is true that they had set out in general terms the policy of our
    It was subsequently ascertained that by August nothing concrete had
    movement at all times during propaganda activities, but they had not
    been done. The reasons for this are as follow
    criticised the crucial mistakes of the revisionist and adventurist cliques
    1)All three comrades have no experience of clandestine work
    in clear, decisive language, citing the names of these cliques. They
    among peasants and lack initiative. They understand being clandestine
    thought"For now the political awareness of the masses is insufficient
    as concealing yourself from the people
    to grasp those differences, "thus in reality falling behind the masses. For
    2 )The negative effect on the peasants and the comrades created
    the peasants, while not able to grasp the profound theoretical basis of

==========第19頁==========
    the errors which we criticised understood by looking at the practical
    the area in question we shall extend our area of operations towards a
    consequences and made this clear at every opportunity. We were unable
    new area. We have not yet been able to be active in the provincial cap-
    to organise and win over sound elements to our organisation on ac-
    ital. We are yet to receive any news regarding the comrade we requested
    count of this error. which has been corrected. Now we have supporters
    to come and organise the youth. The person we previously considered
    amongst the peasants and educated people who grasp and definitely
    giving the task left everything and fled. There exists one organised per
    adopt the policy of our movement, and their number is gradually ir
    son in the city. This comrade was indecisive and hesitant when it was
    creasing. One comrade has recently been recruited and there are sev
    proposed to give him a previous task; he subsequently failed to turn up
    eral who are ready to be recruited. Many peasants are also working in
    to a rendezvous. It has since then not proved possible to meet him, both
    various ways for the movement. For instance, we make use of their ad
    on account of volume of work and the fact that he is very well known
    dresses for correspondence and rendezvous, hide publications and other
    to the police. At the first opportunity the position of this comrade will
    items that need to be concealed in their houses, conveying various pub
    be resolved: he will either be given a task, or in the event of his per
    lications to others with their assistance. We give a section of them the
    sisting in his indecisiveness his connection with the organisation will
    task of organising a group and reading clandestine publications to
    be severed
    gether. We also gain shelter to a great extent by means of the assistance
    Let us add that the activities we have carried out in the rural area
    of the peasants etc etc
    have also influenced the provincial capital. Close to a hundred students
    Through our activities we have now ascertained the most advanced
    from villages in our area attending high school have been influenced by
    peasants in the area. We have distinguished to a certain degree the good
    our movement and begun to show an interest in our line
    from the bad. the brave from the cowardly, the self-sacrificing from the
    Moreover, by means of our acquaintances in the villages the op-
    selfish. the discreet from the talkative, these with belief from those
    portunity has emerged to create broad possibilities in the city. The chain
    without the hard-working from the lazy, the modest from the braggart
    of isolation froin the youth has been broken. We now have an urgent
    the talented from those without talent, etc. We know, again to a certain
    need for an experienced comrade to organise the potential in the cit
    degree, who we can make use of and who and to what extent we car
    that is moving towards our ranks and to secure our communication with
    trust In the coming days we shall do the followin
    other parts of our movement
    We shall train the advanced and reliable elements and organisethem around tasks that are appropriate to their talents and the needs o
    C)Summary and Conclusion of Second Section
    the movemen
    2)We shall test those persons regarding whom we have not yet
    In the world in general and in our country in particular the revolu
    reached an opinion by allotting them various tasks
    tionary struggle is developing rapidly. The growing and deepening eco
    3) We shall endeavour to get to meet those advanced, reliable peas
    nomic and political crisis in our country has created and matured the
    ants (in particular the impoverished)who are respected figures and
    objective conditions for armed struggle. In our area the conditions for
    whom we have as yet not met and bring them into the movement
    armed struggle are particularly apt
    4)When our movement reaches a certain level of development in
    Although with the defeat of Sinan and his companions the persecution and oppression of martial law has cowed the people to a certain
    36

==========第20頁==========
    extent. it has also created the conditions for the sprouting of the mostcorrect revolutionary"ideas' Now the people grasp this reality betterwith every passing day: the revolution cannot be accomplished withbourgeois officers or a small group of educated peoplle acting Sepa
    A letter to administrator comrades
    rately from the people. It is necessary for the exploited and oppressed
    in a rural area
    people to take up arms themselves. Revolution is a serious businessthat needs thorough preparation and great self-sacritice
    We believe that if we possess and constantly protect the qualitiesneeded by a communist movement, our movement will rapidly developand put down roots and flourish amongst the popular masses. For thepeople resemble soil that is ready for sowing, We must be seeds that aresound and ready to flourish
    7 December 1971

==========第21頁==========
    Comrades! There are a lot of cadres who wish to work in thelages. They all have a common characteristic: they are politically backward and inexperienced, but at the same time are hugely enthusiastic
    We should boldly mobilise these companions In rural areas. But it 1s notenough merely to mobilise them. At the same time we have to offerthem correct leadership and to train them. The number of our comradeswho are politically advanced and relatively experienced is strictly limited. This is one of the problems that emerge when we send back wardand inexperienced comrades to the villages. That is, how will the smallnumber of advanced and partially comrades lead and train a large number of backward, inexperienced comrades?
    On the other hand, the content and form of our activities in ruareas has changed rapidly since our split from Shafak revisionism
    Forms of armed struggle, armed propaganda and methods of agitationhave replaced peaceful' propaganda and agitation. The atitude of theruling classes to revolutionary activity in general, and to revolutionaractivity in rural areas in particular, has also changed considerably. Theruling classes are launching ferocious attacks in order to prevent revo-lutionary activity In rural areas and to eradicate existing activity. Oneceipt of the tiniest scrap of information they mobilise large forces ofhundreds and thousands of troops to go after one or a handful of indi-viduals. For this reason it is no longer possible, particularly in the vil-lages, to carry out peaceful propaganda and agitation. We thereforehave to arm the cadre we send to rural areas and bring them to a position Where they may respond with arms to the armed assaults of theruling classes. Furthermore, the difficult conditions of the terrain alsorender it essential that we arm the cadres, even though our arms andmaterial strength are strictly limited. This is the second problem we encounter when sending new comrades to the rural areas, That is howwill we arm a large number (this figure is increasing by the day)ofcomrades with our very limited possibilities?
    Comrades! I assume that as new comrades arrive. these two prob-
    4

==========第22頁==========
    lems must concern you, too. But these are not unresolvable unman
    enced comrades. They also have to do this for their own development
    ageable problems. I believe that if we address these problems in a con
    Following the split from Shatak revisionism, an error emerged as a re
    scious way, determined to resolve them, we will be easily able to
    action to their rightist line that consisted of reading. Ideological and
    overcome then
    political education has been neglected to a certain extent. Importancehas not been attached to it. We must rapidly embark on political and
    I'n considering the following in order to resolve the first problem
    ideological education training tightly bound to practical activity.
    A minimum of several politically advanced and experienced
    For this in my opinion the following must be carried out: a central
    comrades should be given tasks in every guerrilla area, this has now
    publication that propagandists our programme, policies and line,
    been done
    and sheds light on the various questions of our revolution must be
    2)Within groups active in second degree areas in guerrilla areas
    produced as soon as possible. A decision has already been taken in
    there should be at least one advanced and experienced comrade. If this
    th
    is not possible then the advanced and experienced comrades in the
    Immediate preparations must be made to print, duplicate and dis
    guerrilla area should supervise the groups in the second-degree areas in
    tribute this publication in your area and you must complete these prepa-
    a strict and systematic way. They should allot tasks and demonstrate
    rations in a short time. Secondly, you must organise discussions
    how these tasks should be accomplished, and check up on whether
    amongst the cadre at which experiences are summarised. A livel
    these tasks have been carried out or to what degree success has been
    discussion environment must be created in our ranks. mistakes
    achieved. In this situation a great responsibility falls on the advanced
    must be constantly removed, correct things must be adopted, and
    and experienced comrades. In the circumstances in which we find our
    exchange of experience must take place.
    selves, in particular, they must work ten times, a hundred times harder,
    Thirdly, Marxist-leninist works which are the synthesis of the rev
    at the same time backward and inexperienced comrades must be as
    olutionary experiences of other countrics should be read and discussed
    sisted in developing their own initiative
    within a programme appropriate to the aim of shedding light on our
    The inexperience of back ward comrades will, through the prac
    practical activities
    tical struggle, turn into experience. But this is insufficient. Our cadre
    In the event of our implementing all the above mentioned, both our
    should have a deep theoretical grasp in addition to vast experience
    general level will rise. and, in particular. backward and inexperienced
    They must be politically advanced and mature perceptive understand
    comrades will progress rapidly and become experienced cadre
    ing individuals. They should be able to correctly assess their experi
    I'm considering the following in order to resolve the second prob
    ences. They should learn to put into practice M-L-M tse-tung thought
    lem, the anming problem
    should possess correct and sufficient views regarding all questions of
    1)Existing arms and materials should be distributed in an appro
    our revolution. They should be able to comfortably advocate and spread
    priate way amongst cadre
    the line. policy and programme of our movement. In order for this to
    2) Our arms and equipment should not be misused, wasted, broken
    happen, advanced and experienced comrades must make special efforts
    or treated in a cavalier fashion. They should also not be allowed to fall
    to raise the political and ideological level of backward and inexper
    into the hands of the eney or lost

==========第23頁==========
    3)In order to arm on a broad scale we should make use of these two
    Another problem is that of our cadres becoming expert in the
    sources: firstly, popular support; secondly, seizure from the enemy. Pop
    field of military activity. At present we should do the following
    ular support can be in two forrns: donations that are not to be returned
    1 )There are comrades in every area who are pretty experienced as
    and assistance rendered on a temporary basis. We must ascertain all those
    regards preparing and using explosives for sabotage and booby traps
    in the area who might donate arms, ammunition, explosives, fuses, deto
    and dismantling and reassemlling and using and maintaining our ex
    nators etc.. and make maximum use of these. Secondly, we must estab
    sting weapons. These comrades must personally train new and inex
    lish those who might give us arms on a temporary basis and make
    perienced comrades in an ordered and systematic way, demonstrating
    maximum use of them, too. I assume that we will be able in this way to
    how it is done
    make significant use of peasants, breach-loading rifles. When it comes
    2)On the subject of arms and explosives a text should be prepared
    to arming by seizing weapons from the enemy, this may happen in two
    containing practical information, that is, information that we may im.
    ways: firstly, cadres and sympathisers in appropriate situations may take
    plement, and be conveyed to all comrades. The first dratt of such a doc
    the enemy's military equipment, ammunition, explosives etc, secret
    ument has been prepared. Comrades should improve this text by adding
    and get them to us. For instance, workers employed in road-building and
    various information and experience(a previously distributed text is ful
    certain construction sites may provide us with abundant explosive mate
    of mistakes and should be disregarded)
    rial. Cadres and sypathisers within the military may procure various kinds
    3) Fundamentally, we will all learn how to fight by fighting. There
    of military eauipment in the same wav. Those working in laboratories
    fore. all comrades and other fighters should review all manner of ex
    and pharmacies may obtain various poisons and explosive materials
    perience in the military sphere, removing errors and adopting correct
    All these will of course only serve our arming to a certain degree
    practice. The conclusions of experiences should be shared between
    We can resolve our problem regarding arms in a fundamental way b
    comrades
    seizing them by force from the enemy. In order to do this there is a need
    4 )The revolutionary war experiences of the peoples of the Soviet
    for a minimum level of arming. We may achieve this in the ways set
    Union. China. Vietnam and other countries should be examined and
    down above. In particular we may make broad use of weapons lent to
    the necessary lessons drawn. In particular, Military Writings by com
    us on a temporary basis by peasants. if we add to these our own smal
    rade Mao Tse-tung should be a fundamental work to which we refer
    number of arms and equipment we shall have attained a minimum level
    in these examinations
    of arming. Following this, we may arm in a broader way by establish
    5)The military policy and tactics of the ruling classes in Turkey
    ing targets proportionate to our strength, attacking these targets and seiz
    should be examined and leamed as far as possibilities permit
    ing money and arms. If we can obtain appropriate intelligence we may
    6) The past struggles of our people, their successes, shortcomin
    be able to procure money and arms with much more primitive weapons
    weaknesses etc should be examined from a military viewpoint and the
    Also some peasants will ioin our ranks with their own weapons
    necessary lessons learned as regards the present da
    If we can do all these things I believe that we will be able to deal
    As our struggle advances and in parallel with successes achieved
    with the problem of arming our existing cadre and the new cadre that
    we shall find the possibilities to put our cadres through both theoreti
    are joining our ranks every day
    cal and practical military training(effective training). Today we are to
    45

==========第24頁==========
    a great degree lacking these opportunities. But in the event we evalu
    rades we are sending knows a more practical way of printing. You
    te properly the more important possibilities we do possess, there are
    too can make use of this method
    many reasons for our winning military victories
    8) For now prepare a clandestine library. This should be like theshelters and be big enough to work in All the books, publications and
    Comrades! After all this I propose the following for your area
    correspondence should be preserved here in an ordered way. When
    1 )Taking into account the new comrade we have dispatched, group
    needed they may be taken but after use should be returned. As our
    the cadre in an appropriate way.
    books increase in future we should create such libraries in every area
    The new comrade has significant experience amongst youth. His
    9)Again, in every area at least one clandestine depot should be
    ideological and political level is high, but he has no experience amongs
    prepared and abundant supplies of food, clothing, bedding, military
    the masses. We shall soon send comrade F to you. Let F. work with H
    materials and raw materials used in the preparation of military equip-
    Also, we are in a position to send new cadre to you. Calculate now how
    ument stored there
    you will mobilise them
    As much as is possible the least number of comrades should know
    2)Share your experiences with the new cadre Infori them re
    where these depots and library are. New cadres who have not been
    arding how and what they will do. Make a work programme for each
    tested, and regarding whom it is not yet clear whether they will stay
    roup
    should never know the whereabouts of such sites. Each group should
    ) Give the new cadre the necessary information regarding arms
    only know its own shelter, not the shelters of other groups
    and explosives. Teach them how to prepare and use explosives
    10)For inter-group meetings and other gatherings separate sites
    4 )In order to arm all the cadre in the area utilise all existing pos
    should be prepared apart from the shelters
    sibilities. The goal is for all cadre to have a long-barrelled weapon
    Comrades We Iust complete the above preparations in as short a
    5) Immediately manufacture a large amount of bombs and distrib
    time as possible. To be able to embark upon prolonged guerrilla activ
    ute them amongst the masses. The peasants may be mobilised to a great
    ity, be able to win lasting success and march with certain steps on the
    degree in the making and use of bombs and in sabotage and booby
    path of armed struggle is to a significant extent dependent on our hav
    trapping
    ing completed these preparations
    6)Prepare at least one clandestine shelter for each guerrilla unit
    Salutes, Success. I kiss you on the eyes
    (each unit should number between 2 and 7 persons ) It would be a lot
    ismail
    better to have more than one
    7)Prepare a place you consider appropriate in your area tor the
    NB: When M.calls you let him know how to find you, for soon we
    installation of a duplicating machine and allot a person to operate it.
    ill also send F
    Teach the person how to operate it. Store large amounts of stencilingpaper, duplicating paper ink etc. at or near the site of the machine
    Let only the operator and the responsible party cadre know thesplaces. In short, prepare everything in order to print. One of the com

==========第25頁==========
    Let Us Grasp Correctly the Red Political
    Power Doctrine of Chairman Mao
    anuar

==========第26頁==========
    Comrade, my main objections, criticisms and statement on thereplies you have given to a youth committees questions are as follows
    Firstly, let us look at what conditions Mao Tse-tung laid down for thesurvival and development of red political power in China(that is, of a fewsmall areas under red political power entirely encircled by the Whiteregime). In a draft resolution dated 5 October 1928 Mao Tse-tung prepared for the Hunan-kiangsi Border Area Second Party Congress afterwriting that"Red Political Power can exist and develop only undercertain conditions"(Mao Tse-tung, Why is it that Red Political Powercan exist in China? ), he listed these conditions thus
    First, It cannot occur in any imperialist country or in any colonyunder direct imperialist rule, but can only occur in China which is economically backward, and which is semi-colonial and under indirect imperialist rule. For this unusual phenomenon can occur only inconjunction with another unusual phenomenon, namely, war within the
    White regime(. ) Such a phenomenon is to be found in none of theimperialist countries nor for that matter in any colony under direct imperialist rule, but only in a country like China which is under indirect im
    Second, the regions where China,s Red political power has firstemerged and is able to last for a long time have not been those unaffectedby the democratic revolution where the masses of workers, peasants andsoldiers rose in great numbers. In many parts of these prunions and peasant associations were formed on a wide scale
    Third, whether it is possible for the peoples political power insmall areas to last depends on whether the nation-wide revolutionarysituation continues to develop. If the nation-wide revolutionary situation does not continue to develop but stagnates for a fairly long timethen it will be impossible for the small Red areas to last long. Actuallythe revolutionary situation in China is continuing to develop with thecontinuous splits and wars within the ranks of the comprador and land-lord classes and of the international bourgeoisie

==========第27頁==========
    Fourth, the existence of a regular Red Army of adequate
    situation] and another when it is split up [ this also means the upsurge of
    strength is a necessary condition for the existence of Red political
    the revolutionary situation. '(ibid)
    power
    Subsequently Mao Tse-tung explains other strategies. The conclu
    Fifth. the Communist Party organization should be strong and
    sion to be drawn here is that a red political power(that is, an existing
    its policy correct. (ibid
    power)may maintain its existence even if the revolutionary situation
    If we summarise, Mao Tse-tung links the reasons for the survival of
    does not develop nationwide and if it stagnates, as long as the other
    small areas under red political power encircled by the White regime to
    conditions exist and a correct strategy is pursued. That is, the revo
    the following conditions
    lutionary situations stagnation for a time does not end its existence
    1)The White regime being in conflict(on account of it being a semi
    Such a thing will only slow down the development and expansion othe red political power and at worst lead to partial re
    In Ch
    2)The existence of a sound mass base
    independent regimes survived even in periods when the White regimes
    3 )The development of the revolutionary situation nationwide
    were stable when correct strategies were pursued, while defeats and
    4) The existence of"a fairly strong and Red Ariny
    losses were suffered when mistaken strategies were followed. In th
    5)The existence of a strong communist party with a correct polit
    present day it cannot be said that in any semi-colony (or of course
    Mao Tse-tung summarised these conditions in an article dated 25
    colonies )White regimes will be stable for very long. The revolutionar
    November 1928(written after the other) entitled "Struggle in the
    ituation is excellent both as regards the world and for individual coun
    Chingkang Mountains
    tries(with certain exceptions). This is a typical characteristic of our era
    .We find on analysis that one reason for this phenornenon lies in the
    in Which imperialism is heading for total collapse and socialism is ad
    Incessant splits and wars within Chinas comprador and landlord classe
    vancing towards victory all over the world
    So long as these splits and wars continue, It is possible for an armed in
    et us continue
    dependent regime of workers and peasants to survive and grow In addi
    In his second article, Mao Tse-tung added two more conditions for
    tion to these splits and wars(ibid), its survival and growth require the
    the survival of red political regimes within the White regime. Terrain
    ollowing conditions: (1)a sound mass base, (2)a sound Party organ
    favourable to military operations and economic resources sufficient fo
    zation, (3 )a fairly strong Red Army, (4)terrain favourable to military
    sustenance. If we summarise once more
    operations, and (5) economic resources sufficient for sustenance.
    1) Splits and wars within the White regime
    Mao Tse-tung did not mention here one of the conditions he saw as
    2)A sound mass base
    necessary, the condition of the"nationwide development of the revolu
    3)A sound party organization
    tionary situation". But he says the following immediately after these
    4)A fairly strong Red Army
    conditions
    5) Terrain favourable to military operations
    An independent regime must vary its strategy against the enci
    6)Economic resources sufficient for sustenance
    eling ruling classes, adopting one strategy when the ruling class regime
    Subsequently, Mao Tse-tung's view regarding the impossibility of
    is temporarily stable [this also implies a stagnation of the revolutionary
    adependent regimes being established in colonies under the direct dom
    52

==========第28頁==========
    ination of imperialism(that is, regarding the necessityof there being
    tons are present red red political regimes may be brought into being
    war within the White regime in order for a red political regime to emerge
    and developed
    and survive)changed The shaking of the imperialist system worldwide
    2), 3) a sound party organization and a fairly strong Red Army
    following the Second World War, the weakening or collapse of all the
    These do not yet exist in our country. But a sound party and strong arm
    Imperialist powers except the USA and the strengthening of the Soviet
    are necessary conditions for the founding, survival and development of
    Union. all these factors
    red political power. This should be stressed. Not for the launch of armed
    meant that it became possible for all colonies in the East, or at
    struggle. " A sound party organisation" and"fairly strong red army
    least in some of them, to establish small or large revolutionary bases
    II emerge within the armed struggle. That is, while the party is weak
    and revolutionary regimes that would endure for a long time and te
    it will gain strength within the struggle. The armed forces, while pre
    unch protracted revolutionar
    ars from the rural areas encircling the
    vously weak, small and irregular, will become"fairly strong and"reg
    cities and then to capture the cities and achieve nationwide victory
    ular within such a struggle And the areas of red power will not be
    The emergence of social imperialism in the Soviet Union was un-
    established in a moment, but will emerge within a process of struggle
    able to alter this factor. Hence, in many Far Eastern countries red
    when the party attains a level of solidity and the armed forces become
    regimes have either been established or are close to being established
    tatly strong "and" regular". It is contrary to Mao Tse-tungs theory o
    There are also liberated zones in the Arab Gulf and in some parts o
    revolution and line of people's war to draw the conclusion of delaying
    Africa. Even though red political regimes bave not emerged, there are
    the armed struggle when at the outset a"sound party organisation and
    liberated zones In some countries
    fairly strong red army" are sought and cannot be found
    As a general rule we can say that
    4)Terrain favourable to military operations: although this is not
    Today in all oppressed and exploited counties(colonies or semi
    a determining factor, there are many regions and corners of our country
    colonies)in areas where these conditions exist-i)a sound mass base
    that are suitable for armed operations
    ))a sound party organization, 3)a fairly strong Red Army, 4) terrain
    5 )Economic resources sufficient for sustenance: this means that
    favourable to military operations and 5) economic resources sulticient
    even When an area is under economic blockade economic life may con-
    for sustenance. red regimes that will endure for a long time may be es
    tinue and the people in that locale may be able to meet their necessities
    tablished and from there protracted wars may be launched to seize the
    with their own resources. That is, the people in the area must not be re
    cities and gradually esttablish nationwide victo
    iant on other regions to meet their needs and have unbreakable ties with
    From the point of view of our country it is these five conditions that
    the internal market. For instance, places like Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir
    need to be examined
    have unbreakable ties to the internal market. People residing there have
    1)A sound mass base: we shall certainly not seek this In the entire
    their needs met to a great extent from other places and the products of
    country. In some areas of our country this mass base is stronger, and in
    these places are to a great extent consumed in other places. In the event
    others it is weaker. This, alongside other factors is a natural manifesta
    of these cities being encircled and placed under economic blockade eco
    tion of unbalanced economic development. But in many regions of our
    nomic life would be paralysed and it would become impossible to find
    country a sound mass base exists. In these areas where the other condi
    food and shelter. In that case the areas where red regimes may endure

==========第29頁==========
    may be backward areas that are as vet not an indispensable part o
    struggle will awaken and educate the masses in a massive way, not onl
    the internal market. The backward rural regions of our country ful-
    In that area, but will awaken the masses in other areas of the country
    fil this condition to a great degree
    and strengthen the Inass base. the party and armed forces essentially
    So in that case what is the conclusion we should reach as regars our
    being constructed during this struggle and that red regimes will emerge
    country? It is that in our country some of the conditions (a sound mass
    at a certain stage of this struggle
    base. economic resources sufficient for sustenance and terrain
    Dear comrade
    favourable to military operations )for the emergence and survival of red
    In your article you dwell upon the following five conditions for the
    political power have existed for a long time. What is lacking are"a
    emergence and survival of red political power
    sound party organisation and"a fairly strong red army". These two
    I)"Splits within the reactionary regime
    conditions are subjective ones, that is, things that will be realised by our
    Peasant uprisings
    e fforts. Our task is to ascertain the rural areas that have economic
    )The nationwide development of the revolutionary movement
    resources sufficient for sustenance and terrain favourable to mili
    Regular red army
    tary operations, and to construct the party and army within the
    5) A strong communist party following a correct policy
    armed struggle by intensifying our activities and concentrating our
    When Mao Tse-tung says"the White regime being engulfed in war
    forces in these areas. Within this construction activity when the party
    as regards the first condition, he means the continuing armed struggles
    attains certain solidity and when our armed forces attain a certan
    raging between warlords, not the natural and inevitable contradictions
    strength and regular state"red political power "will come into being In
    that are seen in every country amongst the reactionaries. Anyway as we
    one or more than one area of the country. And only after red politica
    aid he later abandoned this view. For this reason there is absolutely no
    power has been established in certain areas of the country will it be pos
    d to address this at length, and to take up the natural and inevitable
    sible to unite all the revolutionary classes and strata for the proletariat
    contradictions that are found in almost all countries(different from those
    and its party, that is, to establish the peoples revolutionary united front
    in China). The long explanations found in this section are not in any
    (the front established on the basic worker-peasant alliance)
    way a direct response to the questions of colleagues; rather they are a
    The conditions for the emergence and survival of red political power
    very indirect answer
    should not be confused with the conditions for the launching of armed
    As for the second condition: the essence of the matter has not been
    struggle. While for the reasons we have mentioned the conditions for the
    correctly set down there, either. Mao Tse-tung dealt with past (he took
    former do not exist in our country today. for the latter they essentially
    the recent past)peasant uprisings from the point of view of the ex
    do exist. After a short period of agitation-propaganda activity and or
    isting Iass basis. That is, the crux of the matter is whether there is a
    ganisational preparation in the rural areas we select(for instance, or
    strong mass base today, whereas in the article th
    ant uprisings o
    ganising the partys directive structure, constituting the initial nuclei of
    the Seljuk and Ottoman periods are listed. And no link is made between
    guerrillas by means of this and a short agitation and propaganda period
    these rebellions and the fundamental question. The following could have
    regarding the armed struggle and party policies)we can and should im
    been said: there exists today a strong mass base in the areas where these
    mediately launch the armed struggle. We should not forget that this
    rebellions took place, uprisings took place in such and such a place and

==========第30頁==========
    since its inhertance still endures in the future red areas wi emerge es
    rect party "when summarising the Chinese Revolution I am dwelling on
    sentially in these places. This was not said (As for me. I lack the infor
    this point. Why is this point important? In this respect: we are not a
    mation to say such a thing)and therefore all the historical events
    movement which is organised nationwide today. (Comrade Rustem
    mentioned do not go beyond an exhibition of historical know ledge or a
    claims we are, but he is wrong). If this were the case there would be no
    subject of propaganda pertaining to peasants having a revolutionary tra
    problem. We cannot organise nationwide in a short time (or even in 3 to
    dition. It would have been much better if instead of that recent peasant
    5 years). This is the first point. Secondly, as the revolution in our coun
    movements had been dealt with and if it had been said that a strong mass
    try will develop in an unbalanced way we do not want a widespread na
    base exists there and examples given of the existence of a revolutionary
    tionwide organisation. We attach importance: or rather we should attach
    mass base that will realise, develop and expand red political power And
    mportance, to those areas in particular where the revolution will first
    this would have been the answer required by the question asked
    rise. In the article as a whole since the conditions for the commence-
    Third point: nationwide development of the revolutionary
    ment of the armed struggle "and the conditions for"the emergence of
    movement
    red political power " are seen as the same, or at least as no differentia
    Mao Tse-tung's expression is: nationwide development of the
    tion is made between them, logically the armed struggle is postponed
    revolutionary situation" Replacing"revolutionary situation "witl
    until there is organisation in the whole country(that is, to an unspecified
    revolutionary movement 1n my opinion teads us unto a serious errol
    future), and today "the other forms"of the struggle are being produced
    in present conditions. What is the"revolutionary situation ])the
    for us. This is what is serious
    ruling classes becoming unable to govern as in the past; 2)the popu
    As for the question of the development of the'revolutionary situa
    ar masses no longer being able to live as they had in the past and see
    tion nationwide, firstly, this exists in the whole world and particularly
    ing change as imperative; 3)A massive upsurge in independent
    in our country. The stable periods of the "White regime are very short
    actions of the masses
    and temporary. Secondly, as T have demonstrated with a quote from Mao
    These are, according to Lenin, "the objective conditions of the rev
    Tse-tungs subsequent article, it is a factor that influences whether it will
    lution "and are"independent from the behest of individual classes, just
    expand and whether it will get stronger, not the actual existence ofred
    as they are independent from the behest of individual groups(for de
    power. There is absolutely no relation between the things I have written
    tailed information see Aydinlik, volume 3, pages 379-380). As for the
    here and the things in the article. Totally different questions are dealt
    revolutionary movement 'it is in general a progressive movement ain
    with in the article, and they are not an answer to the questions of the
    ing to overthrow the existing order. As for the article what is meant by
    outh committee
    the words"revolutionary movement is the"communist movement
    (Let me mention another point here: the communist movement
    one of the revolutionary movements. In this way, "communist mo
    being organised nationwide is, in my opinion, the organisation of part
    ment" replaces"revolutionary situation" And consequently, this is what
    organs, which is party committees, in every corner of the country, in
    emerges if the communist movement has not organised nationwide
    every or most provinces and districts, Inconsistent expressions are
    Red power cannot be established. Since comrade Kazim previously used
    being used on this question. For instance, in an article the phrase
    the words "a party organised nationwide"instead of"a sound and cor
    revolutionary political current that can make itself heard nationwide

==========第31頁==========
    Is used. This is another thing. For instance. the THKO and THKP-C
    eventing the revolution as impossible from the point of view of the
    are not political currents that are organised nationwide, but are currents
    future, just as it leads to a rightist error such as not firing a shot until
    that make themselves heard nationwide'', And then there is. The unit
    there is organisation in the main industrial cities. The suppression o
    ing of the struggle nationwide and its direction towards a single goal
    worker movements and the breaking off of solidarity between workers
    If what is meant by this is not"political orientation" but the"orienta
    and peasants will of course weaken peasant movements but why should
    tion of the popular struggle", then this, as far as I understand it. neces
    it make them"bound to be suppressed Didn't the Chinese revolution
    sitates nationwide organisation and this is something that will only be
    advance triumphantly even in periods when the reactionaries were
    possible in the period when the revolution is advancing to victory. Let
    able to dominate in the cities and silence the workers for a time
    us not forget this.
    Hence, the following conclusion is reached
    Let me point out another very important question of principle in
    In conclusion we can say that red political power may be estab
    this section: the sentence below states
    lished and perpetuated, not by a limited struggle, but by a proletarian
    A movement being nationwide,. is a political party making its
    party that has united and directed the struggle nationwide"(ibid)
    presence felt and heard to the entire people of the country and ori
    In other words, without nationwide organisation and becoming able
    enting to the goal of establishing revolutionary power nationwide
    tounite " and direct"the struggle of the entire people we cannot es
    ( This is a very vague and elastic expression. It may lead to very var
    tablish red power For goodness sake, lets not raise a hand. It is as if the
    nous interpretations. I have mentioned the question of"making your
    red power in question here is not one of political power to be established
    presence felt (o
    leard above. As for the orienting to the goal of es
    in one or more areas, but political power to be established in the entire
    tablishing revolutionary power nationwide, this is a characteristic of al
    country. Consequently, we see that the reality that the revolution will
    most all political movements. I am moving on)
    develop in an unbalanced way and the thesis that power will be attained
    For instance, a peasant movement without the support of the
    piece by piece from the countryside has been largely abandoned
    struggle in the cities is bound to be suppressed. For instance, a peasant
    I say this: it is not a condition in order for red power to be estab
    uprising in the Eastern region, if it were not supported by a struggle of
    lished and perpetuated (not for the armed struggle)to be organised na-
    the peasants in the Aegean and Cukurova regions and a working class
    tionwide and for all the people to be united and to be directed by us
    movement in our main industrial cities under the leadership of a prole
    Mao Tse-tung did not lay down such a condition either. This is a good
    tarian party it could not realise red political power. (ibid)
    thing, but it is something we will not possess until we are in the period
    Here there is an important error of principle. Peasants may estab
    of the revolution advancing towards victory. Whereas by concentrating
    lish and perpetuate red political power solely with their own forces
    our forces in three to five important areas(as far as our forces and cir-
    Even if the reactionaries establish absolute dominance in all of the"main
    cumstances permit)and launching the armed struggle there we can cre
    industrial cities and completely suppress the working class movement
    ate"a sound party with a correct policy and"a fairly strong red army
    or a long period, the peasants may still establish and perpetuate red po
    (and this is what is lacking today)and establish and perpetuate red
    litical pow
    and this is not an impossible thing. In this case to declare
    regimes And even in periods when the struggle of the working class is
    a peasant movement to be "bound to be suppressed "is equivalent t
    entirely suppressed (although this is an adverse situation )we can per-

==========第32頁==========
    uate these regimes on condition of pursuing a correct strategy. For in
    Let us abandon this Bukharinist formulation and say"the right of the
    stance. let us take the Dersim rebellion. The peasants controlled the re
    Kurdish nation to self-determination,
    gion for three years solely by their own efforts under the leadership o
    Since time is short I am moving on to the answer to the second
    the feudal leaders. If the clans hadn't been pitted one against the other
    question
    and if there had been a correct leadership, a communist party leade
    When examining this question it is necessary in my opinion for the
    ship, the Dersim uprising could never have been suppressed. This is
    lollowing three points to be clearly emphasised
    what the peasants say and there are other similar examples
    I What is the nature of change in semi-colonial semi-feudal cour
    Fourth and fifth points: Party and army. In the article these points
    tries that are under the indirect administration of imperialism?
    have not been dwelt upon and a single sentence for each has been con
    2)In general the imbalance in a country's economic structure
    Sidered sufiicient. Where, how and within which struggle will the party
    3)The difference between a national revolution in a country under
    and army be constructed? And in particular in this period what are oul
    imperialist occupation and a democratic revolution, the essence of which
    tasks on this qucstion? These have not been dealt with at all. whereas
    is a land revolution. in semi-colonial semi-feudal countries
    these are what is lacking for red power and in the event of our cor
    First point: in the article there is one sentence. In issues of Aydin
    structing the party and army in the areas where the other conditions exist
    lik too there is no clarity in articles on this question. In general there is
    (mass base. economic resources sufficient for sustenance. terrain
    the following: on the one hand feudal relations will dissolve, on the
    favourable for military operations )we can establish red power(of course
    other hand this dissolution will be limited. It is not clear in practice
    the party will not only be constructed in these areas, but it will be pri-
    hat this means. What happens is this: the system of landlords slowl
    marily constructed there and within the armed struggle)
    and within a long process turns into one of capitalist farms and mean-
    I will mention two points regarding the answer to the first question
    while feudal domination and forms of exploitation continue for a long
    and then move on to the other question
    time. Even when a peasant working on his landlords land becomes a
    Firstly: the contradictions within the army should not be dealt with
    waged worker some of the privileges the former landlord and new"gen
    parately: they should be dealt with as a manifestation of contradic
    teman farmer enjoyed(such as extra work without pay)continue as
    tions between social classes. We will pretty soon be creating a new class
    tradition. As for the peasant style or revolutionary mode, with a strong
    called"patriotic officers For a long timne now in all our leaflets, pro
    peasant revolt it will overthrow feudal property and demolish feudal re
    nouncements and publications we put"patriotic oflicers ' in the top cor
    lations
    ner wherever we mention"workers and peasants". It looks as though
    On the other hand, in areas where there is not the system of land
    this has replaced the old term "military civil intellectual class".The
    lords and instead where small and medium landholdings are widespread
    people we call"patriotic officers are people who have adopted national
    in self sufficient patriarchal enterprises imperialism on the one hand ties
    bourgeois ideology and will be categorised amongst them. Let us dea
    laces to the market, and on the other by strength
    g user
    th the question of the national bourgeoisie and when necessary ap
    which is a primitive form of capital accumulation, through banks and
    proach the"patriotic officers "as part of the national bourgeoisie
    credit institutions deprives the peasants of land and this process is a se
    secondly: the right of the Kurdish people to self-determination
    vere and bitter one

==========第33頁==========
    In the cities national industry is dying and being replaced by as
    There are two reasons why revolutions in semi-feudal, semi-colonial
    sembly industry bound to imperialism which is developing Large com
    countries like ours develop from the rural areas towards the towns
    mercial and financial institutions are enterin the control of imperialism
    I'irstly, the fact that the democratic revolution is, in essence. a land rev
    For these reasons the collaborationist capitalism developed by imperi
    olution, and secondly, the tact that imperialism and the reactionari
    alism can never sort out"peasant style "feudalism. And as long as feu
    ho are their lackeys (particularly imperialism )have taken completes
    dalism is not rooted out the peasant mass will remain
    significant
    control of the cities and advanced regions. Since we are a semi-colony
    revolutionary force and the content of the revolution will remain as a
    of Imperialism, the imperialist yoke renders it necessary that the revo
    democratic revolution
    lution develop by establishing bases in the countryside and develop to
    Second point: A significant characteristic of semi-colonial, semi-
    wards the cities (with us the democratic revolution and national
    feudal countries is the unbalanced nature of the countrys economic
    evolution are fused into one)
    structure. While in some regions feudal relations will dissolve to a
    In a semi-colonial, semi-feudal country the weakness of feudal-
    greater extent, in others they will retain their force. Imperialism, rather
    sm will decrease the tasks ofthe land revolution or limit its bound
    than removing this imbalance, heightens it. Such a situation exists in
    arles、 that is all
    our country with regard to the west and the east. Even if in the more ad
    Third point: in a country under the actual occupation of imperialism
    anced sections of the country the democratic revolution is of little si
    too, the revolution will develop from the rural areas towards the cities
    nificance for the general peasant mass (but with us even in the most
    whether it is a backward country which has not got rid of feudalism or
    advanced Aegean region this still has significance) for the broad peas
    developed capitalist country. For instance, France in the Second World
    ant masses in backward regions it will still retain importance
    War: This is because imperialism will firstly gain control of the cities and
    As long as the democratic revolution is on the agenda the question
    main roads. But it cannot control the broad areas of the countryside. But
    of reliance on the peasants will also be on the agenda. This is because
    in this situation the essence of the revolution is the" national revolu-
    the democratic revolution is in essence a peasant revolution. Besides, we
    tion", not the land revolution. If the country under occupation is at the
    live in a country where the peasants constitute 70% of the population
    same time a semi-feudal country then the"land revolution does not en
    today. It is a totally Menshevik logic to say let imperialism liquidate
    tirely vanish, but becomes secondary. If it is a capitalist country like
    feudalism and let us carry out the socialist revolution. The Mensheviks
    France, then there is no question of a land revolution
    opposed Lenin, saying the democratic revolution is the task of the bour-geoisie, lets allow them to carry it out, let us not frighten thein by young
    y brother,
    to the head of the peasantry. As for Lenin, he advocated the proletariat
    My time is running out. I do not have the chance to write another
    mediately forming an alliance with the peasantry, pushing to one side
    copy of the other letter I'li take it with me for now and send you a copy
    the indecisive, hesitant bourgeoisie, completing the revolution in a de
    as soon as I get the chance
    termined way and carrying on without pause to socialism. This is the
    Revolutionary greetings
    Marxist-leninist theory of continuous and phased revolution. Mao Tse
    Bektas
    tung adapted this to the conditions of semi-feudal, semi-colonial Chin
    January 1972

==========第34頁==========
    Critique of TIKP draft programme
    January 1971

==========第35頁==========
    Communism,s great leader and teacher Marx said
    Every step forward, all real progress is more important than a
    ozen prograinines
    These words are of a quality of a timeless law that never losestheir value! Our main goal must be to take steps forward. to ensureenuine progress. On the other hand, we must not forget that a newprogramme Is of the utmost importance
    Generally speaking, less importance attaches to the official programme of a party than to what it does. But a new programme is afterall a banner planted in public, and the outside world judges the partyby it. (Engels to August Bebel in Zwickau)
    We are now hoisting a flag to the skies. If this fl
    pay
    180)
    With this aim we have a criticised the Draft Programme
    SECTION 1
    In order for it to be scientifically correct and in order to contribute to the political consciousness of the proletariat, whatshould the name of our party be?
    Lenin asked this question in 191 7 and answered it th
    We must call ourselves the Communist Party-just as Marx and
    Engels called themselves. We must repeat that we are Marxists andthat we take as our basis the Communist Manifesto
    We must also give such an answer
    As Marx Engels. LenirStalin and Mao did we must give ourselves the name communist party. We must adopt the adjective com-munist without hesitation. But this is not enough, for firstly, there is arevisionist bourgeois club in our country that uses this glorious name
    We have to absolutely differentiate ourselves from this club. Secondlymost of the parties that have taken the name communist have todayfound themselves sunk in the morass. These are bourgeois parties, not

==========第36頁==========
    proletarian parties. They are vehicles of the counter-revolution
    ties aiming for socialism or communism. That is, they were petit
    the revolution. These parties in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
    bourgeois democrats. Proletarian parties too, when conditions make
    are not the vehicle of the proletarian dictatorship over the bourgeoisie
    It necessary, wish to extend bourgeois democracy to its furthest ex
    and reactionaries, but of the bourgeois dictatorship over the workers
    tent do this in order to create all the pre-conditions for a transition to
    and other toiling people
    proletarian democracy.(that is, transition to proletarian dictatorship)
    We must definitely distinguish ourselves from them and also ust
    Not to remain there and suffice with that. So what does the fighting for
    the adjective Maixist-leninist
    proletarian democracy of impoverished and middle peasantry together
    First let us dwell on the other names
    with the proletariat demonstrate? That there is no difference between
    Why is the name Revolutionary Worker-peasant Party erro-
    them and the working class? No! Only that without the demolishing of
    neous? Because it does not make clear our real character and ulti
    the foundations of capitalism the liberation of these peasant strata is
    mate goal. We are a working class Inovement, its vanguard. Not a
    mpossible, and that their liberation is bound to the liberation of the
    peasant movement. The current concrete circumstances of our coun
    proletariat. On the other hand, without the essential leading role of
    try? Us tasks regarding the peasantry, but this Is temporary
    the proletariat they cannot advance even a single step from bourgeois
    that will take is closer to our essential task. The peasantry, as a
    democracy. As for the current conditions in our country, without a pro
    whole, is. in the sphere of private property of the means of pro
    etarian leadership they cannot even extend bourgeois democracy to its
    duction.>> And is in favour of the conservation of the basis of capi
    limits, let alone pass to proletarian democracy. It is also the case that
    talist society. The peasantry is a class that is gradually disappearin
    the term peasant includes the rich and middle peasantry in addition to
    In the face of modern Industry, whereas the proletariat has broken al
    the impoverished and lower middle peasantry. The name Workers
    its ties with property. It is the particular and fundamental product of
    Peasant Party will only in practice serve to erase the difference be
    modern industry. It develops and consolidates with the development
    tween bourgeois democracy and proletarian democracy and confuse
    of modern industry. If represents the future, not the past. If repre
    the class consciousness of the proletariat
    sents that which is developing, not that which disappearing. It wishes
    Ttherefore.Should we mimic the names TSEKP and TICSP
    the removal of private property, not its conservation. On account o
    which were chosen out of concern over legality? Absolutely not, for
    these characteristics history has placed the liberation of all toiling
    first and foremost, our party is not a"legal" party. It must be a party
    sections of society, and of all people suffering from this order on the
    that is founded and"exist'in spite of laws
    shoulders of the working class.
    Secondly, such a name, even if chosen out of a concern forlegal-
    As we are the vanguard of this class it is scientifically mistaken to
    ity, is mista ken. is it true that the name Tllkp will make our job eas
    add the adjective peasant in front of our party's name. The existence
    ler, that it will in particular facilitate our approach to and fusion with
    of one renders the other one impossible
    the peasantry? Perhaps such a facilitation is temporarily possible as
    There have been parties that have given themselves the name
    regards getting closer to peasants who have been influenced by the re
    Peasant Party, but these have generally been parties which have
    actionary conditioning of feudalism and the bourgeoisie. But even this
    wished to extend bourgeois democracy to its last boundaries, not par
    nay be at the cost of becoming separated from progressive workers

==========第37頁==========
    and poor peasants, for progressive workers, peasants and even Inte
    ing activity, subscribers, those making donations, everyone will be
    lectuals feel confidence in a movement that calls itself communist
    held responsible for the illegal party of the new period. In such a sit-
    fearlessly and is worthy of the name. The number of such workers and
    uation the best course of action is to conceal from the political police
    peasants is increasing by the day In our work amongst the peasants we
    ith great care the link between legal and illegal activity. It is an
    distinguish ourselves from the petit-bourgeois and bourgeois deinoc
    error because thle best elements in the ranks of the isci koylu move
    ats(HKO, TH KP, TIP, etc) by calling ourselves communist
    ment are already in the ranks of our movement and are increasingly
    This is the best term to separate is with a definite line from them
    being gathered. The thing that will really attract everyone of any use
    and this stance serves to gather the most determined revolutionary
    amongst themn is not a similarity of name but energetic, compre
    poor peasants in our ranks
    hensive and well-thought out organisational work. Such work will
    We said that while the Tllkp today takes us closer to the back
    lot only gather the useful elements in the Isci-koylu(IK)ranks but
    ward elements, it will distance us from the progressive elements. It
    also all the progressive and revolutionary elements of the people that
    may be said: why should we lose contact with the progressive ele
    were not in the ranks of the I-K. It is an error because today our
    ments? We wont hide the fact that we are communists, and in our pro
    movement should be distinguished from the l-k movernent qualita
    gramme it states that communism is our ultimate aim. In that case wh
    tively as well as quantitatively. The I-K movement was only a legal
    shouldn't we call our partvcommunist? To say we are communist in
    ctivity whereas our activity today should in essence be an illegal
    our programme does not break our links with the masses so why
    one. The work around the IK activity was only propaganda and agi
    should our party name! Either we remove all mention of communism
    tation based on a publication and organisation was in line with this
    from the programme and in every party communication to the masses
    task. Our movement today should be a party activity that is directed
    we have to gradually avoid all mention of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin
    towards the actual organisation of an armed struggle. Propaganda
    and Mao Tse-tung and abandon communist propaganda and distance
    and agitation should be carried out in accordance with this task
    ourselves from proletarian revolution by making concessions. or, w
    Those working around I-K were people who, to a great extent, main
    have to reject reactionary consciousness and conditioning and from
    tained their bourgeois links(or, in other words, their reaction
    the outset embrace the proletarian revolution without concessions
    Iinks). Today our Inovement should gather in its ranks those who
    unite with the most progressive elements and mnake the backward el
    have freed themselves entirely these ties, that is, workers, peasants
    ements progress. One of the two!
    and other revolutionaries. Those who have capitulated to backward
    The second opinion of those colleagues who approve of this
    links have left. What is necessary is to make a qualitative leap from
    name is that the TIKP name wi] ensure that the masses make a con
    every viewpoint. This leap should also make itself felt in the name
    nection between the Isci-koylu movement and our party and that
    of our mnovement. In this regard. to advocate the name Tllkp is an
    porters of that movement and elements influenced by it will
    effort"to protect the old", a position resisting a leap
    gather in the ranks of our new movement. In my opinion this is
    On these points I have mentioned I do not agree with the name
    wrong. First and foremost, the political police will make this link
    TIIKP
    Everyone working in this or that position around the legal publish
    The name TIIP is technically correct, but there are some practi

==========第38頁==========
    cal objections. Firstly, that it will be confused with the revisionist TIP!
    mankind to the brink of a precipice, to the brink of the destruction of
    a reformist bourgeois organisation far from Marxism-leninism in all
    civilisation, of the brutalisation and destruction of more millions
    fields. Marxism-leninism has been betrayed by the revisionist TP
    countless millions, of human beings
    clique on all the most fundamental points: the question of the state
    The only way out is through a proletarian revolution
    the questions of revolution internationalism etc. We must draw a thick
    At the very moment when such a revolution is beginning, when it
    demarcation line between us and them
    taking its first hesitant, groping steps, steps betraying too great
    The word revolutionary ihtilalci)is insufficient in drawing this
    confidence in the bourgeoisie, at such a moment the majority(that is
    line. Furthermore, in our country the special meaning this word has
    the truth, that is a fact) of the"social-democratic" leaders, of the"So
    gained amongst the people must be taken into consideration! Revolu
    cial-democratic "parliamentarians, of thesocial-democratic"news
    tion is generally taken to mean the bourgeois officers'coup. The
    papers-and these are precisely the organs that influence the
    bourgeois officers called themselves"revolutionary "and the people
    people-have deserted socialism, have betrayed socialism and have
    have become accustomed to knowing them in this way. For instance
    gone over to the side of "their own national bourgeoisie
    the revolution of 27 May' 'is a common utterance. I. Inonu is a"for
    he people have been confused, led astray and deceived
    mer revolutionary officer "etc. Popular uprisings are distinguished
    by these leaders
    from this kind of coup d'etat by the word"rebellion". The Sheikh
    And we shall aid and abet that deception if we retain the old and
    Bedrettin rebellion, Pir Sultan rebellion, Baba Ishak rebellion, peasant
    out-of-date Party name, which is as decayed as the Second Interna
    revolts. Dersim rebellion '. soldiers'rebellion etc We have to draw a
    tional
    thick bold line between the"active struggle"of the masses and bour
    Granted that"many "workers understand Social-democracy ir
    eois coup d' etatism
    an honest way: but it is timme to learn how to distinguish the subiective
    Another proof. While TIIP is technically correct, and contains our
    from the objective
    ultimate goal of communism within it, it does not express it openly
    Subjectively. such Social-democratic workers are most loyal lead
    Even if by adding (M-L)we remove this obstacle, the drawback of
    ers of the proletarians
    being confused with the TIP, which has become the symbol of re
    Objectively, however, the world situation is such that the old name
    formism, opposition to revolution and communism, opposition to
    of our Party makes it easier to fool the people and impedes the on
    armed Struggle, op
    opposition to Marx. Engels, Lenin, Stalin and Ma
    ward march
    Tse Tung (that is, opposition to the world leaders of the cause of com
    Just as this quote from Lenin indicates why our party's name
    munism), and the obstacle of the word revolution having a traditional
    should not be TLIKP, it also highlights why it should not just be TKP,
    meaning in colloquial speech will remain. Lenin said the following
    for in the present day world there are other parties and chiefs with
    regarding drawing a definite line between opportunists, revisionists
    the name communist that have betrayed the cause of the proletariat
    spcial chauvinists and all manner of traitors to socialism
    The masses have again been astonished by these parties and chiefs and
    .The objective inevitability of capitalism which grew into Impe
    been deceived. tumning back from their course
    rialism brought about the imperialist war. The war has brought
    After these comments it is clear that the correct namne will be TKP
    74

==========第39頁==========
    (M-L), a name that defines the character of our movement and ex
    Why are we not afraid of being confused with the Social-na
    presses mosr lucidly its ultimate aims and contributes in practice to
    tionalists, the Social-liberals. or the Radical-socialists. the foremost
    the gaining in awareness of the working class and other toilers. while
    bourgeois party in the French Republic and the most adroit in the bou
    distinguishing it from all other traitors to socialism
    geois deception of the people? (ibid
    First and foremost, TKP/MI is scientifically correct, and a com
    So, why are we not worried about being confused with TIP, TICSF
    lete and lucid expression of our ultimate goal. For
    and others like them? As it is, workers and impoverished peasants
    From capitalism mankind can pass directly only to socialism, i. e
    know the TKP less well than the TIP. Those who are familiar with the
    to the social ownership of the means of production and the distribution
    TKP are the nost progressive elements of the workers and toilers and
    of products according to the amount of work performed by each indi
    are areldy at a level whereby they are capable of distinguishing the
    vidual. Our Party looks farther ahead: socialism must inevitably evolve
    TPP(M-L) from the TKP. As for raising the remaining part of the peo-
    gradually into communism, upon the banner of which is inscribed the
    ple to that level that is our task. Let us conclude with the words o
    motto, "From each according to his ability, to each according to his
    Lenin
    needs" .(enin, The Tasks of the Proletariat in Our Revolution
    Yet we are afraid of our own selves. We are loth to cast off the
    Again, our party, while accepting the need for a state, such as the
    'dear old "soiled shirt
    Paris Commune type, or Soviet type, in order to proceed to commu
    But it is time to cast off the soiled shirt and to put on clean linen
    nism, Its ultimate goal is to abolish all manner of state. Whereas these
    ( ibid)
    other names are inadequate in expressing these points
    econdly, this name makes a definite separation between us andall kinds of traitors to socialism: social chauvinists, revisionists. orportunists, anarchists, reformists etc
    In this regard there is no substantial counter argument. Firstly, theclaim that peasants will not like the word communism, we have al-ready explained above why this was incorrect. To claim this is to express a reduction of the movement to a backward level and toaccept lack of awareness, reactionary conditioning ete. Also, to
    Ject this name on these grounds is, in our opinion, the beginning of abackward move from all aspects
    Second counter argument is; the idea that they will confuse uswith the revisionist TKP. Such a risk is much less with this name compared to the other names proposed
    Lenins reply to those who said: "They will confuse us with the anarchist communists'was thus

==========第40頁==========
    SECTTION 2
    world! This is the essence of imperialism and imperialist parasitism
    For that reason the term rentier state ( Rentnerstaat), or usurer
    3.... Foreign capitalists have exploited the labour of our worker
    tate, is coming into common use in the economic literature that deals
    and peasants, firstly by means of trade and subsequently in the impe
    with imperialism. The world has become divided into a handful of
    ialist era by making investments in Turkey
    usurer states and a vast majority of states. (Lenin, Imperialism
    The thing that distinguishes competitive capitalism from imperial-
    the highest stage of capitalism)
    isn is not that while the former exploits by means of trade the latte
    This quote from Lenin clearly indicates that the significant part o
    exploits"by making investments. While the distinguishing character
    the excessive profits gained by imperialism through capital consist of
    tic of competitive capitalism is the raw material export, the disti
    interest, dividends, bonds, commissions, etc, rather than profit on in
    guishing feature of imperialism is the capital export. First of all
    vestment. The ex pression"they have exploited our workers and peas
    exploitation"by means of trade "is a very general expression that does
    ants labour by making investments" is an insufficient statement that
    not characterise free competitive capitalism. Raw material export is
    conceals the character of imperialism and its pillaging with high inter
    a particular state of commerce. a face it gained in the era of free com-
    est loans. that is its parasitical nature
    petition. This is not any trae, but one in which foreign capitalists sold
    Let us look at the question from the point of view of our count
    manufactured goods and in return bought raw materials and agricu
    It played a significant role in the Ottoman Empire gradually becoming
    tural products. Secondly, the capital export and capital investment are
    a semi-colony, in its disintegration and collapse and in its sinking up to
    different things. Exported capital may be in the form of investment or
    its neck in debt. Low value exports, high interest loans taken on vari
    in the form of indebtedness (? ).And in the imperialist period the latter
    ous occasions had reached such a point that by 1883 the imperialist
    is the fundamental one. It is this which demonstrates the parasitical
    countries virtually established the Duyun-u Umumiye [Public Debt Ad
    rotten, decayed nature of imperialism. In the book Imperialism, Lenin
    ministration as a state within a state in order to recover what they were
    says the following
    owed. The Public Debt Administration, with up to 6,000 employees
    Further: imperialism is an immense accumulation of money ca,
    spread like an octopus to all four corners of the empire, and for long
    ital in a few countries . Hence the extraordinary growth of a class, or
    years a Public Debt Administration sultanate existed intertwined with
    rather; of a stratum of rentiers, ie, people who live by clipping
    the feudal sultanate. If bound the toiling people of Turkey to tribute and
    coupons, who take no part in any enterprise whatever; whose pro/es
    as debt increased the British-french and, increasingly, the German im
    ion is idleness. The export of capital, one of the most essential eco
    perialist political domination increased. As the pressure rose the debts
    nomic bases of imperialisn, still more completely isolates the rentiers
    rose too. The imperialist countries, their capitalists, ambassadors, con
    from production and sets the seal of parasitism on the whole coutry
    suls etc to a great extent took control of state influence and used it to
    that lives by exploiting the labour of several overseas countries and
    greatly increase their pillaging and profiteering. So for what were loans
    colonies
    used? For investment? No, on the contrary, for the most part they were
    he income of the rentiers is five times greater than the income ob-
    used to pay off old debts, that is, while one hand received the other was
    tained from the foreign trade of the biggest trading"country in the
    giving it away. As for the remaining funds, they were in general used
    78

==========第41頁==========
    to shore up the feudal aristocracy and dynasty and ensure the continu
    If what is meant is that imperialism wished"to increase its ex
    ation of the Sultanate of the pashas
    oitation "by"opening up an internal capitalist market", then this idea
    In short, this is the reality of our country. And this reality deimon
    has already been expressed by the sentence"it developed a capitalism
    strates how insufficient the above expression" they exploited by mak
    ependent on itself and ied to the dissolving of feudal relations".What
    ing investments"is, and how it serves to conceal a significant portion
    need is there for meaningless, illogical repetition?
    of the true stor
    Even when the sentence is corrected there is another problem. It is
    '4. Imperialism. which dominates our country. on the one hand
    as if imperialism is knowingly and willingly developing capitalism"in
    order to open an internal capitalist market and to increase its ex
    order to increase exploitation and leading to the dissolving of feudal
    ploitation, developed a dependent capitalism and opened the way to a
    relations! However, in reality, the development of capitalism and the
    dissolving of feudal relations
    partial dissolution of feudal relations is a consequence of the natural
    Firstly, the term"internal capitalist market'is an unnecessary rep
    inevitable and spontaneous function of imperialist exploitation. The
    etition. It is sufficient to say"internal market " For"intemal market'is
    capital exported by imperialism for the purpose of exploitation and pil
    a commercial economic category, emerging with a commercial econ
    lage, leads to a spontaneous partial dissolving of feudal relations. Lenin
    omy and reaching its broadest dimensions as capitalism progresses
    expresses this reality in his book Imperialism
    The social division of labour constitutes the entire basis of develop
    The export of capital affects and greatly accelerates the develop
    ment for the commercial economy and capitalism. The development
    ment of capitalism in those countries to which it is exported. While
    of the social division of labour, that is, the separation from each other
    therefore, the export may tend a certain extent to arrest development in
    of productive workings (the separation of raw material extraction from
    the capital exporting countries, it can only do so by expanding and
    manufacturing and agriculture etc)"it will make the products of these
    deepening the further development of capitalism throughout the world
    works each a commodity. each others mutual counterparts: it wi] make
    The"capitalism referred to here by Lenin is capitalism linked to
    each of this serve as a market for another"(Marx
    imperialism, which we call"comprador capitalism".The other and
    That is, the development of the market and the development of
    fundamental aspect of this is as follows: imperialist countries when ex
    capitalism are inter-connected and inseparable. The opening of in
    porting capital to underdeveloped countries, while building railway
    ternal market means the development of capitalism. The"internal mar-
    lines ctc, they consider high interest rates, low land prices, low wages
    ket opens up in line with the extent of capitalist development
    and cheap raw materials without competitors, and to colonise them and
    Secondly: this statement is illogical. A part by part analysis of this
    enslave the toiling peoples. This is the essential character and aim of
    tatement: Imperialism 1)in order to open up the internal capitalist
    imperialism
    market, 2)in order to increase exploitation " a)"developed a capital
    In the Programme this point should be strongly emphasised and
    ism dependent on itself, b)led to a dissolving of feudal relation
    given prominence. Let us move on to the matter of the dissolving o
    imperialism, "in order to open up an internal capitalist market, de
    feudal relations. How does this occur"
    veloped a capitalism dependent on itself. That is, in order to develop
    The old manorial proprietorship, which is tied to feudal serfdom
    capitalism, it developed capitalism (
    with thousand ties, continues and slowly the capitalist enterprise is be

==========第42頁==========
    coming theenterprise of landowners.. States agricultural regime
    ownership and land slavery must be demolished and jettisoned by the
    has maintained long-term properties of fiefdoms. The great mass of the
    revolution that sweeps it all awav
    great land property and certain basis of the old superstructure must be
    It is only possible to demolish and destroy feudalism in its entirety
    maintained. (Lenin)
    in this way. And only in this way is it possible to neutralise the vacil
    As a result. on the one hand the dominant role of imperialism and
    lation of the middle bourgeoisie and, in particular, the wealthy peas
    on the other of the comprador large bourgeoisie and landowner in
    antry, who are undecided or hostile to the revolution, and to ensure the
    creases
    leading role of the working class and peasant mass in the revolution
    Some affluent peasants also shift to their ranks. Whereas, the peas-
    Only in this manner will the"possibility to create the most favourable
    ant masses who besotted by the dominance of reaction and who lost all
    conditions'to 'society on a socialist basis"is the
    their property are totally collapsing"(Lenin)
    real, fundamental task of the working class', emerge
    This is imperialisms dissolving of feudalism in countries it enters
    4... On the other hand. in order to consolidate its economic and po
    enin puts it thu
    litical domination of our country it subjugated feudal relations and pre
    "It is the revisionists who have long been asserting that colonial
    vented their dissolution
    policy is progressive, that it implants capitalism and thaf therefore it is
    It subjugated feudal relations! A meaningless sentence. It united
    senseless to accuse it of greed and cruelty, for" without these quall
    with feudalism or established an alliance'"would have had a mean
    capitalism is"hamstrung".( Ler
    In China the Trotskyists lowered themselves to the extent that they
    5. Our working class began to appear in the mines in the 19th cen
    stated it was necessary not to oppose Japanese imperialism, claiming
    tury. It developed subsequently in Imines run by imperialism by gain
    Japanese imperialism brought the"socialist revolution " closer by de
    ing capitulations and in the communication and transport sectors in
    eloping capitalism in China. In our country Aren-boran and the TKI
    order to open the internal market which developed along with the in
    revisionists are endeavouring to portray imperialism In a sympathetic
    vestment it madt
    way with the same rationale. We must therefore draw thick, bold lines
    If the sentence had been as follows it would have bad a meaning
    between ourselves and the revisionist-trotskyist claim that imperial-
    in Turkish: subsequently, it developed in the mines worked by impe
    ism develops capitalism and dissolves feudalism, emphasising that the
    rialism that had obtained privileges and in the communication and
    fundamental role imperialism plays in backward countries is to colons
    haulage sectors in which it had invested in order to open the internal
    countries, enslave peoples, pillage them mercilessly, and, politically
    market, not to pillage the internal market
    to consolidate and support the reactionary dictatorship of the comprador
    7. In 1917 the Russian proletariat under the leadership of the Bol-
    bourgeoisie and landlords, and to impoverish the toiling peasantry by
    sheik Party, at whose head was the great Lenin, deposed Czarism
    making them even more impoverished. In the Programme this point is
    and established the first proletarian state. Tthe Great October Rev
    very vague and unclear. The commnunist revolutionaries and revolu-
    olution initiated the age of proletarian revolutions all over the world
    tionary masses (in particular the peasant Inasses)should have ab
    and became the greatest support for wars of national liberation
    solutely no doubt on this point: the system of large-scale property
    The I917 February revolution and the Great October Socialist Rev

==========第43頁==========
    olution have been mixed up one with the other. Czarism was over
    Age of Proletarian Revolutions! The same thing is repeated in arti
    thrown in the February revolution, whereas the proletarian state was
    cle II: "The age of proletarian revolutions and wars of national liber.
    established during the October Revolution. Such a crude error should
    ation that are the characteristic element of the era in question? Can such
    have no place in the programme of a communist movement
    a thing be said by looking at the fact that wars of national liberation
    More importantly, it should have been stated here that following
    took place in that ere? No, it cannot be said. In our era, too. although
    the Great October Socialist Revolution the bourgeoisie all over the
    there have been more widespread and intensive wars of national liber
    world were scared stiff of revolution and that the era of revolutions
    ation than in those years we do not say we are in the era of wars of na
    with bourgeois leadership closed, that revolutionary movements with
    tional liberation. We say: We are in the era of the total collapse of
    out proletarian leadership were bound to fail and would immediately
    imperialism and in which socialism advances to victory worldwide
    bave reconciled with reaction and take on a counter-revolutionary line
    For this is the most characteristic clement that differentiates our era
    From the point of view of our country and backward countries like ours
    from other historical periods. The whirlwind of nationa] liberation
    under the domination of imperialism and feudalism this is the impor
    movements in the East began in 1905 and affected the whole of A
    tant thing. However, this point has been glossed over with a vague for
    After the October Revolution in 19]7 the new characteristic thiny was
    mulation such as: lasting victories cannot be won in article I I
    the end of revolutions under bourgeois leadership, the sliding of the
    "8. Our people, fighting heroically against imperialism in 1919-
    bourgeoisie worldwide to a reactionary line, its becoming scared Of
    1922, won a victory of National Liberation with blood and soul. Our
    revolution, while in opposition to this there was a great increase in re
    people received great support from the Soviet Union, the first prole
    olutionary action by the proletariat, an end to the old type of bourgeois
    tarian state, during the War of Liberation. The people of Turkey wag
    democratic revolutions in the East, the beginning of new type
    ing the first liberation struggle of the age of proletarian revolutions ane
    democratic revolutions under proletarian leadership, and the uniting of
    wars of national liberation, earned the help and affection of all the op
    these with the Socialist Soviet Union
    pressed peoples of Asia. It gave them courage and hope
    This is the particularity of the new historical period that began with
    The first liberation struggle of the age of proletarian revolutions
    the 19 17 October Revolution. Thus, the historical period in question
    and wars of national liberation! In this expression admiration for Ke
    is" the age of proletarian revolutions",not""the age of national libera
    malism once again gives itself away. Despite comrade Mao Tse-tung's
    tion wars". Since our era is that of"proletarian revolutions and nationa
    clear and precise statement that: "While the Kemalist revolution took
    liberation wars and the Kemalist revolution is a national liberatio
    place in the age of proletarian revolutions, it was not part of those rev
    ar, then the Kemalist revolution was a typical example of the revol
    olutions, but a part of the old bourgeois democratic revolutions, and
    tions of that historical period. Comrade Mao Tse-tung was mistaken in
    although the author of the Draft Programme was repeatedly reminded
    describing the Kemalist revolution"as part of see above"as being an
    of this statement, the above formulation, which portrays the Kemalist
    exception. Look at the wonderful outcome! And the expression used
    evolution as if it was a part of the world proletarian revolution, found
    above seems to heap praise on the bourgeoisie, not the people. And the
    its way Into the draft
    general impression given by the expression is that the Kemalist revo
    Moreover, with the addition of"wars of national liberation to the
    lution was a popular revolution
    84

==========第44頁==========
    The peoples of Turkey gained the assistance and love of all the
    To sacrifice this clear reality to fancy words will only serve to ol
    oppressed people of Asia. It gave them courage and hope". Why is the
    cure the true nature of the Kemalist revolution and its dominant reac
    naked reality being sacrificed to fancy, conspicuous words? Our people
    tionary character even during the war and while taking power trom the
    took part in the war of liberation wholeheartedly and shed their blood
    working class and toiling people, and to blur the gulf between national
    and gave their lives! However, not as an independent force, but behind
    movements under bourgeois leadership and national movements under
    n unreliable, inconsistent, cowardly and two-faced bourgeoisie and
    proletarian leadership
    andlords! Therefore. although the revolution succeeded at the cost of
    9. Turkey's heroic workers and peasants, who did not hesitate to
    the people's lives, it was the bourgeoisie and landlords that gave it its
    Icrifice themselves in the long, bloody struggle for freedom and
    character, The revolution contained within it all the vileness and malaise
    the liberation of our country, were unable to seize the leadership of
    of these classes. It developed in opposition to the people, the workers
    the national revolution on account of lack of organisation and were
    peasants and possibilities of a land revolution. That is, the revolution
    Inable to carry on the revolution to the end
    contained the seeds of a counter-revolution within it, and these seeds
    Initially, we must point out that it is here we first encountered the
    were gradually germinating. For this reason, there is no question of
    fantastic idea of workers and peasants, leadership. What is leader
    there being a revolutionary movement that gave courage and hope
    ship? Leadership is ideological, political and organisational. There
    to all the oppressed people of Asia. The October Revolution gave
    fore, the leadership of one class renders that of another impossible
    courage and hope to the peoples. The Chinese Revolution did, and
    Did the workers and peasants have a single, joint political organisa-
    the Vietnamese Revolution is giving hope. For these concluded with
    tion that adopted this ideology? Did the peasantry and proletariat con
    the victory and liberation of the oppressed peoples and toilers, whereas
    stitute a single. united class in all respects? This is to confuse cor
    the Kcmalist revolution ended with the people again as an oppressed
    and chaff, apples and pears. It is obvious that the writer is not aware
    dominated and exploited mass Rather than giving courage and hope to
    of what he is saying
    the peoples of Asia. this outcome encouraged the timid bourgeoisie of
    What kind of organisation' did the"workers and peasants? need
    Asia. We learn from comrade Mao Tse-tung how the bourgeoisie in
    in order to seize the leadership, that they were unable to do so? Mass
    China were eager to carry out a revolution resembling the Kemalist one
    organisations like trade unions, village cooperatives, etc?
    in their own country. Another class finding courage and hope in the
    For instance, reformist mass organisations like DISK and TUTUS
    outcome of the Kemalist revolution was the financial oligarchy of im
    which Aydinlik and I-K so admire? If this is the kind of mass oryanjsa
    perialist countries. They were absorbed in the ' courage and hope of
    tio that is meant, then let us state iimmediately that these organisations
    manipulating the outcomes of national revolutions under bourgeois
    are only useful as a means for"economic struggle"against"the gov
    leaderships in backward countries for their own ends. They were hope
    ernment and the bosses, never as a means for leadership of a social rev
    ful of transforming the revolution into a counter-revolution. And the
    olution. This is the alphabet ( of Leninism. Not for the"leadership of
    point gradually reached by the Kemalist revolution demonstrated that
    the workers and peasants() but for the leadership of the workers
    they were right to be encouraged by the national movements under
    there is a need for only one organisation, the Communist Party, and that
    bourgeois leaderships and to have reactionary expectations
    existed. In this context the workers and peasants were not without an
    87

==========第45頁==========
    organisation"! But there was a significant shortcoming. The TKP did
    The new Turkish bourgeoisie mercilessly exploited the workers and peas-
    not have a correct policy. (Here I will put to one side the meaningless
    ants and wastefully spent the gains of the War of Liberation earned b
    debate regarding whether the objective conditions existed for proletar
    the people with great self-sacrifice and came to an understanding with
    lan leadership. This debate kept us very busy for a time. I am imagining
    the feudal landlords and imperialism. It undertook'to create a natio
    (2 ) that we all accept that following the First Imperialist World War
    bourgeoisie by means of the statein order to grow and become wealthy
    and the Great October Revolution the obiective conditions for the lead
    The new Turkish bourgeoisie wants to develop and accumulate wealth
    ership of the proletariat were in existence on a general global scale and
    out for this purpose undertakes 'the creation of a national bourgeoisie. It
    particularly from the point of view of Turkey. )If the TKP had been able
    as obvious that this analysis has been inherited from the Mihri current
    to follow a correct line it could have wrested the leadership of the rev
    According to Milri Belli revisionism, the Kemalist movement was a
    olution in a prolonged struggle, could have rendered ineffective the in
    movement of "the sharpest ()Section of the petit bourgeoisie, the mili
    decisive, inconsistent and cowardly bourgeoisie, could have organised
    tary, civilian, educated group. " On seizing power by leading the revolu-
    a people s army, established an alliance of workers and peasants and set
    tion they chose the capitalist way of development, not the non-capitalist
    up a united popular front based on this fundamental alliance! Ignoring
    way, on account of their lack of knowledge and inexperience (! ) " and
    the deviation in the TKP line, let us state the following briefly: the rea
    also due to the fact the revolution in the Soviet Union had yet to set a
    underlying reason for the vague expression"the workers and peasants
    course or achieve any visible success! For this reason they undertook
    were unable to wrest the leadership of the revolution due to a lack of or-
    the creation of a national bourgeoisie by utilising the state. In the pref.
    ganisation is that the writers feelings for Kemalism were also nour
    ace to S. Husnu's book Mihri Belli writes the following: The Ankara
    ished by the TKP. The author could not have criticised the rightist line
    government was seduced by the idea of achieving development by creat
    of the TKP regarding Kemalism as he shares the same rightist line
    ing a national bourgeoisie from Moslem Turks."(page 15)
    9. The bourgeois leadership of the War of Liberation, passing
    This is the conclusion of the chain logic of revisionism! And this
    through an arch of victory formed by the workers and peasants borne
    theory is not confined to M. Belli. Aren-boran [note needed] and TKP
    on their shoulders, established a dictatorship which repressed the work
    revisionists and all modern revisionists. first and foremost Soviet rev
    ers and peasants as soon as they were able to settle on their thrones
    sionists, play the same tune! They advocate that the revolution will take
    Which classes did the established dictatorship represent? Was it
    place in the same way today! "The military, civilian, intellectual class
    politically an independent national bourgeois dictatorship? O
    will take power, and since socialism (in reality they mean social impe
    the dictatorship of the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords? This is a
    rialism )is now powerful they will choose a non-capitalist mode of de
    very inportant point and erroneous things have been stated in the Draft
    opment, not a capitalist one, and our country will canter(? )along
    Programme. We shall attempt to answer the above question blow
    and achieve socialism(! )The critique of the Kemalist movement. i.e
    10. Following the demolishing of the Ottoman Empire and com
    the creation of a national bourgeoisie by the state" of those who hold
    prador bourgeoisie by the War of National Liberation the new Turkish
    this understanding of the road to"revolution", has found its way into
    bourgeoisie which seized power undertook"the creation of a nationa
    the Draft Programme
    bourgeoisie by utilising the state", in order to grow and become wealthy
    The above analysis, "the creation of a national bourgeoisie through

==========第46頁==========
    the agency of the state", emerged from an erroneous analysis of the
    collaborationist large bourgeoisie engaging in cooperation with im-
    Kemalist movement and a mistaken understanding of revolution(
    perialism and alliance with feudalism-subsequently this reactionary
    and is also a repudiation of the Leninist theory of the state. The state Is
    alliance establishes the DP and maintains power with this party.
    the repressive and exploitative vehicle of the ruling class or classe.
    These are the theories
    The class that possesses state power will use it for its own class pur
    These theories. firstly. conceal the fact that the Kemalist bour
    poses. Not in order to create a new class! o claim that state power has
    geoisie was in alliance with the landlords from the outset ofthe War o
    been used by those that wield it for the benefit of another class or group
    lliberation
    would be to forget the class nature of the state, its historical role and
    Secondly, they consider the Kemalist regime politically to be an
    function and to attribute to it a supraclass or beyond-class structure
    independent national bourgeois government. They do not realise that
    10 .. The bourgeois dictatorship over our people has surrendered
    Kemalist Turkey was economically a semi-colony and politically semt
    our country to the imperialist yoke. The large bourgeoisie, in league
    dependent, that is, that Turkey was from the beginning under the yoke
    with feudal landlords, has implemented a policy of national oppression
    of imperialism. They conceal the fact that it was under a dictatorship of
    and assimilation on the Kurdish pe
    the comprador bourgeoisie and Landlords
    17. The collaborationist Turkish bourgeoisie emerging Ir
    Thirdly, the Draft sees the alliance of the comprador be
    within the new Turkish bourgeoisie growing fat from the"national
    and landlords as a single, homogenous front. This reactionary aliance
    bourgeois creation " policy, developed rapidly in particular in the years
    initially takes place within the CHP(it is not clear when this happens)
    from the Second World War onwards and step by step intensified Its
    and later continues in the DP
    collaboration with imperialism
    Fourthly, the Kemalist bourgeoisies establishing of state monopo-
    18. American imperialism, under the auspices of the Truman Doc
    lies, removing competition and robbing the popular masses, thereb
    trine and Marshall Plan, intensified its control ( over our country
    creating great wealth and capital, is evaluated as "creating a national
    through"military and economic aid. The large bourgeoisie, which
    bourgeoisie by means of the state. The theories of modem revisionists
    grew rapidly due to profiteering during the war, moved under the wing
    have been adopted wholesale
    of international capital and consolidated its alliance with the landlords
    The Kemalist revolution. the class character of this revolution, its
    who developed through the policy of high agricultural prices during
    onsequences. the ruling classes in Kemalist Turkey and our views re
    the war years. This reactionary alliance put its weight behind the DP in
    garding the struggle between these classes have been detailed in an
    order to save itself from the bureaucratic obstacles of the CHP'S state
    other article. We shall therefore suffice here with summarising cetain
    capitalism, maintaining its power with this party
    key points of the text in question
    These theories are as follows: the Sultanate and comprador bour
    1 )The Kemalist revolution was the revolution of the Turkish Iner
    geoisie demolished in the War of Liberation under the leadership of
    cantile bourgeoisie, landlords, usurers, the small number of industrial
    the national bourgeoisie-national bourgeoisie period of power
    bourgeois, and the higher sections of these
    policy of creating national bourgeoisie"within the national bour.
    In this revolution the large Turkish bourgeoisie and the middle
    geoisie, the emergence of a collaborationist large bourgeoisic-the
    bourgeoisie of a national character participated

==========第47頁==========
    2) The leaders of the revolution, while still during the years of anti
    9) In the years after the War of Liberation the Kemalist regime was
    imperialist war, had commenced covert collaboration with allied im
    the chief enemy of the revolution. In that period the task of the com-
    perialism. The imperialists showed goodwill to the Kemalists
    unist movement was not an alliance with Kemalists against the clique
    accepting a Kemalist governmment
    of the old comprador bourgeoisie and landlords that had lost its domi-
    )After signing peace the Kemalists continued and consolidated
    nant position (such an alliance never came into being, in any case), but
    their collaboration with the imperialists. The Kemalist movement de
    to overthrow the Kemalist regime that represented the clique of con
    veloped"in essence in opposition to the peasants and workers and to the
    prador bourgeoisie and landlords, and establish the democratic popu
    possibility of a land revolution
    lar dictatorship based on the fundamental alliance of workers an
    4)As a result of the Kemalist movement, Turkey changed frombeing a colony, semi-colony and semi-feudal structure. That is, its semi
    10) In Turkey the big bourgeoisie and landlords dominated the ad
    colonial semi-feudal economic structure was maintained
    ministration from the end of the War of Liberation onwards. Howevel
    5) In the social sphere the new Turkish bourgeoisie which was in
    the Comprador bourgeiosie and landlords split into two large political
    collaboration with imperialism and emerged from the middle bour
    cliques. The clique that dominated the administration and state mech
    eoisie of a national character, and a section of the old comprador Turk
    anism initially collaborated with British/Prench imperialism and from
    ish bourgeoisie and a new bureaucracy, replaced the old comprador
    1935 onwards with German imperialism. Untt the Second World War
    large bourgeoisie, old bureaucracy and the ruling ulema elite. The dom
    the middle bourgeoisie in general followed this clique
    inance of a section of the old andlords, large landowners. usurers and
    II) In the Second Imperialist World War years the German collab
    profiteering merchants continued, while a section was replaced by new
    orationist dominant clique implemented a policy of fascism and prol
    comers. As an entirety the Kemalist regime did not represent the inter
    iteering. This clique joined the German fascist ranks, internally against
    sts of th
    ddle bourgeoisie of a national character. rather it
    the USSR and the British-ammerican-french bloc However the globa
    represented the interests of the above mentioned classes and strata
    balance of forces and the existence of the USSR prevented it parlici
    6) In the political sphere the bourgeois republic replaced the mes
    pating In the war In the German fascist ranks
    utiyet [constitutional monarchy] government whose interests were
    2) On the other hand, the opposition clique of the comprador large
    conjoined with those of the dynasty, it being the administration that
    bourgeoisie and landlords that subsequently organised in the DP and MP
    best corresponded to the interests of the new ruling classes. This yoy
    note necessary), was followed by the reformist middle bourgeoisie and
    ernment, While supposedly independent, was, in fact, politically semi
    other democratic elements that had previously been in the CHP as an
    dependent on imperialism
    cillary. The TKP also attached itself to the tail of this clique. These
    7) The Kemalist dictatorship was called democratic, but was in re
    formed an alliance with the global American-british-french bloc and
    ality a military fascist dictatorship
    ith the USSR. With the Second World War ending with defeat for the
    8)Kemalist Turkey, even, gradually became a semi-colony and a
    German Fascists and their allies this bloc consolidated itself in Turkey
    part of the reactionary imperialist world, eventually being forced to
    However, as soon as the war ended the imperialist bloc led by US im
    surrender to the embrace of British-french imperialism
    perialism took over the leadership of reaction and anti-communism under

==========第48頁==========
    the banner of"democracy. In Turkey, too, with the backing of Us im
    Our movement is the real heir of the revolutionary working class
    perialism and the expert use of the abhorrence of the people for the
    movement. 12 .. The TKP embraced the revolutionary movement
    CHP'S pro-german fascist dictatorship, the DP was brought to power
    of our working class all over the country.
    13 ) In this way, the government of the comprador large bourgeoisie
    What is meant by the terms" Revolutionary Working class move
    that was the lackey of US imperialism and landlords took over from the
    ment or" the revolutionary movement of our working class is the com
    government of the comprador large bourgeoisie that was the lackey of
    unist movement
    German imperialism and landlords. This is a question of the"wings
    We see here that care has been taken to avoid using the word com
    of US imperialism replacing the"wings of Gerinan imperialism, not
    munist. The same reluctance to use the concept of communism has
    of"the large bourgeoisie fattened by war profiteering"going under
    been demonstrated when it comes to the party name. This is to take
    the wing of international capital,, and of reactionary US lackeys re
    step back from the situation of Shefik Husnu and his comrades in the
    placing reactionaryGerman lackeys
    1920s. This is capitulation to the reactionary conditioning that affect
    14 )The fickle middle bourgeoisie, which strangled the resistance
    some backward sections of our people. Instead of taking them forward
    of the proletariat and the petit bourgeoisie, after attaching this oppost
    this is to adapt to their position
    tion to the tail of the DP for a time, following the fascist practices of the
    Secondly, the term"revolutionary working class movement brings
    DP, this opposition returned to the CHP bandwagon. The act that an in
    to mind the mass movement of the working class, not the communist
    dependent, powerful popular movement could not be created under the
    movement. In that case, the meaning that emerges is as if the TKP, as
    leadership of the proletariat led to a situation where the working class
    soon as it was established, took on the leadership of all mass move
    toiling people and democratic elements were used as leverage
    ments and demonstrations of the working class. For this reason, too
    15)The comprador large bourgeoisie and landlord cliques that be
    the phrase chosen is inappropriate
    haved like disciples of democracy "while in opposition, were the Inost
    [2.Just as it occurred worldwide, in our country our working
    ferocious enemies of the people once they came to power These are
    class established its own Leninist Party.. The TKP embraced the rev
    historical realities of our country
    olutionary movement of our working class nationwide and engaged in
    19. After 1950 imperialist capital had a freer rein
    the struggle as the vanguard of the international proletariat in Turkey
    As a matter of fact it was U'S imperialism that had a free rein
    13. The TKP participated in the war of National Liberation with all
    For the characteristic of the period after 1950 was not of imperialist
    its strength. The communists of Turkey fought loyally in the ranks of
    but of US imperialism dominating Turkey. It is correct that
    the people, struggling for the advancement of the interests of the work
    the capital brought in to Turkey by US imperialism in these years was
    ers and peasants and the national revolution. But the TKP was unable
    much more than the imperialist capital introduced in previous years
    to organise the workers and peasants and create a popular armed force
    This is the second facet of the issue Both in this article and the subse
    under the leadership of the part
    quent ones the word"imperialism " is used! This expression dominant
    14. The T KP was unable to overcome the severe repression of the
    in Turkey for a long time! The words"American imperialism"should
    bourgeois government in the years after the War of Liberation. It failed
    be used in place of"inperialism
    to fuse Marxism-leninism with the conditions of our country in a cre

==========第49頁==========
    ative way, to ensure it became rooted amongst the toiling masses and
    o be a"Leninist organisation, stay loyal to Marxism-lenin
    to mobilise the masses of workers and peasants for the armed struggle
    ism, always remain loyal to proletarian internationalism'' to con
    "Additionally, the TKP with leaders like Mustafa Suphi and She
    stantly struggle against treacherous currents such as opportunism and
    fik Husnu who were devoted to the cause of communism, endeavoured
    Trotskyism "are qualities of an absolutely exceptional communist
    to hold high the proletarian flag in the face of all lanner of repression
    movement
    Mustafa Suphi and 14 of his comrades were martyred. It always re
    However, according to the Draft Programme it is not possible to re
    mained faithful to Marxism-leninism and proletarian internationalism: It
    frain from proclaiming that the TKP is an opportunist and revisionist
    waged a constant struggle against opportunism and treacherous currents
    party. "" To be unable to meld Marxism-leninism in a creative way with
    such as Trotskyism and was undaunted in the service of our people
    the conditions of our country, "to fail to put down roots amongst the
    15. The administration of the TKP. which was broken up on ac
    masses, "to be unable to mobilise the masses for armed struggle after
    count of its failure to implement Leninist tenets of organisation, was
    over 30 years of legal and illegal activity, not to implement the tenets
    usurped after 1960 by Yakup Demir revisionists. Following this it was
    of Leninist organisation and to consequently"be smashed", are the
    turned into a bourgeois club that was a puppet of the Khrushchev
    qualities of an undiluted revisionist movement
    Brezhnev revisionist clique
    A party will, on the one hand, be crippled by all the ailments of re
    In reality this bourgeois club had nothing to do with the name
    isionism and opportunism, and, on the other, will"remain loyal to
    TKP, which it carried. For the Yakup Demir revisionist clique is a gang
    Marxism-leninism, will have"struggled against opportunism"and
    of frauds which betrays the revolutionary past of the TKP advocates
    continued as a Leninist Party. This, in the mildest words, is to not un
    revisionism in the name of communism and foster
    interests of (he
    derstand what Marxism-leninism is, what opportunism is, or what
    bourgeoisie
    Leninist party is A Marxism-leninisn that does not meld with the
    16. Our movement will announce to all our people its determina
    conditions of the country"! A Leninist party that"fails to take root
    tion to raise higher in the bands of the workers and peasants of Turkey
    amongst the masses", "that does not implement Leninist tenets of or
    the red flay it took over from Shefik Husnu and his comrades who
    ganisation', or cannot fuse theory and practice"! In a period of more
    waged a struggle on the revolutionary road of the great leaders of the
    than 30 years when the conditions for a popular armed struggle were
    international proletariat, Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stall
    mostly suitable, ' to fail to mobilise the Inasses for armed struggle or to
    .Our movement proclaims it is the true successor of the TKP'S rev
    create a popular armed force", to be unable to meld theory and prac
    ofutlonary pa
    to fail to put down roots amongst the masses to fail to im
    These are the things said about the TKP in the Draft Programme
    plement Leninist tenets of organisation< failure to defeat the sever
    We do not agree with these views from several points of view. To be.
    repression of this to be free from"opportunism. further more. to
    with, the views set forth in the Draft regarding the TKP are full of in
    have struggled constantly against opportunism! This is incredible. To
    credible contradictions. If we ignore the vague, demagogic expressions
    slip into such profound contradictions due to inheritance calculations
    the positive things said about the TKP are sufficient for it to be declared
    does not befit a commmunist movemen
    a" perfect communist movement
    These are my personal opinions of the TKP. When the party was

==========第50頁==========
    under the leadership of comrade M. Suphi it was a Leninist party. After
    continuing with the revisionism of Y Demir. M. Belli and H Kivil
    comrade M. Suphi had been brutally murdered by the Kemalists the
    cimli. The Yakup Demir clique really betrayed the TKP line of comrade
    party leadership passed into the hands of revisionists. Shefik Husnu
    Mustafa Suphi, but is in fact continuing the subsequent line ofthe TKP
    followed a revisionist line during his 30 years of leadership. At one
    without ch
    time during the leadership of Shefik Husnu the TKP established the
    The claim of being successor of the TKP is a futile one. A com
    revolution in Turkey as a"socialist revolution"and awaited this from
    munist movement would succeed the TKP of comrade M. Suphi. it
    the Kemalist administration. It subsequently abandoned the slogan of
    would be the successor of the profound belief in the cause of commu
    .socialist revolution but this time began to wait for the Kemalists to
    nism carried in the hearts and heads of the militant workers, peasants
    complete the tasks of the democratic revolution and to smooth the way
    and enlightened members in the ranks of the TKP. but. it could never
    for the socialist revolution, with an entirely Menshevik logic. The TKP
    be the successor of the revisionist line of the TKP leadership. The Draft
    rejected carrying out a democratic popular revolution under the lead
    Programme has been prepared with a middle of the road logic
    ership of the working class based on the peasantry, continuing on o
    20... Imperialism and its collaborators using the backward pa
    arla
    socialism without stopping, that is, the Marxist-ieninist theory of con
    ment as a means of domination
    tinuous. phased revolution. It was unable to combine the concrete re
    The above phrase is completely contrary to the Marxist-leninist
    ality of our country with the theory of M-L
    theory of the state. For the"means of domination "of"imperialism and
    Instead of an alliance of the workers and peasants it constantly gave
    its collaborators "is not"parliament, but the state apparatus. The e
    prominence to an alliance with the bourgeoisie. It rejected the path o
    stence or otherwise of parliament does not mean the existence or non
    armed struggle It demonstrated a slavish attachment to the Kemalist
    existence of the state apparatus that is the means of domination. This
    administration. It strayed so far from Marxism-leninism that it sup
    state apparatus is of this or that form, that is, parliament is an institu
    ported the Refik Saydam government. It approved all the national op
    tion of the state which is the means of domination. Hence, the ruling
    pression the Kemalist governemnt Imposed on all the minority
    classes, When they fling aside parliament they maintain theeir ooml
    nationalities, in particular the merciless persecution of the Kurdish peo
    nance, they do not throw to one side their means of domination. They
    ple, even the mass killings. In the 30-year period following the death of
    merely change the form of that rule
    comrade Mustafa Suphi the TKP was not able to progress beyond being
    et us learn what the essence and function of parliament is from
    a reform party. The writings of Shefik Husnu trample on even the mos
    comrade Lenin
    fundamental truths of what is deemed the alphabet of Marxisi-lenin
    To decide once every few years which member of the ruling clas
    ism. (see: Selected Writings, Sheik Husnu, Aydinlik Publications
    is to repress and crush the people in parliament-such is the rea
    The collapse of the TKP was the inevitable outcome of its revi
    essence of bourgeois parliamentarism, not only in pairliamentary-con
    sionist line. There is absolutely no difference between the line followed
    stitutional monarchies, but also in the most democratic republics
    by the TKP after the death of comrade Mustafa Suphi and hardened re
    lake any parliamentary country, fiom America to Switzerland
    isionists such as Yakup Demir, Mihri Belli and Hikmet Kivi]cimli
    from France to England, Norway and so forth-in these countries th
    Both as regards ideology and policy, and organisationally, the TKP
    real business of"state 'is performed behind the scenes and is carried

==========第51頁==========
    on by the departments, chancelleries and general stafis. In parliament
    The term"Turkish soldiers" is incorrect for two reasons. Firstly,
    this is just chatter for the pecial purpose offooling the"common peo
    those who were sent to war were not only"turkish', in fact, the ma
    ple. This is so true that even in the Russian republic, a bourgeois dem
    Jority were not"Turkish. The Turkish ruling classes took care to en-
    ocratic republic, all these sins of parliamentarism were immediately
    sure those sent to Korea were from minority nationalities, in particular
    revealed, even before it managed to set u a real parliament. ( Lenin)
    from the Kurds. Turkish chauvinism and national oppression showed
    So even in the most democratic bourgeois republics the throwing
    itself in this instance. We listened to peasants in Eastern Anatolia who
    ide of parliament by the ruling classes will change two things. Firstl
    told us of many Kurdish villagers who went to Korea and did not come
    for a time, in parliament, the decision as to which section of the di
    back. Secondly, the term"Turkish soldiers" does not explain what is in
    recting class will represent and repress the people may be removed
    tended in the Programme. What the Programme wishes to say is that the
    Secondly, the representatives of the ruling class will not be able to"de
    Imperialists and their lackeys wanted to pit our toiling people against
    ceive the people with idle chatter. But the means of domination of the
    another people fighting for a just cause for their own interests. I don
    ruling classes will not be removed
    know whether the colleague who wrote the Draft intended to point this
    Communists, certainly, will not think: " the form of oppression IS a
    out, but in my opinion that is what should ve made clear. However the
    matter of indifference to the proletariat
    word " soldier does not express this idea. It reminds one of the reac
    . A wider: freer and more open form of the class struggle and o,
    tionary army and its troops. Instead of this word it would have been
    class oppres sion enormous/y assists the proletariat in its struggle on
    better for both reasons to have used the term toilers that were re
    the abolition of classes in genera
    crusted or toilers of Turkey"or"workers and peasants of Turkey
    make use even of the pigsty'of bourgeois parliamentarism, es
    20.imperialism and its collaborators disseminated the ideology
    pecially when the situation is obviously not revolutionary; but at the
    and culture of their own collapse in order to subjugate the popular
    vame tine he knew how to subiect parliamentarism to gentine revolt
    Masses
    tionary-proletarian criticism. (Lenin)
    Collapse has no ideology or culture Ideology and culture is that o
    Since it is not relevant to the subject we shall not dwell on the char
    Imperialism and its collaborators. This ideology and culture may be an
    acter of parliamentarianism in Turkey and on whether it may be useful
    expression of collapse, "or"their decaying ideology that reflects their
    The Draft Programme has not understood the essence and function
    collapse " should have been used. This would have been more mean
    of parliament, putting what it calls the"backward parliament" in the
    ingful and logical
    lace of the state apparatus According to the draft It Is necessary to
    21. The political and economic crisis which intensified the ex
    see a fascist dictatorship without a parliament as a system where the rul
    ploitation and repression of the popular masses with every passing
    Ing classes bave no"means of domination", that is, no(!) state appa-
    day ended with the overthrow of the American lackey, DP govt. on 27
    ratus. This is entirely erroneous as regards Marxism-lennism state
    1ay1960
    theory and extremely hanmful for practical struggle
    Firstly, it was not the"crisis" that"intensified(see above )it was the
    20 .. Turkish soldiers were sent to fight the people of Korea who
    DP govt. The crisis leads to the intensification of this repression and ex-
    ere waging a war of liberation
    ploitation etc
    100

==========第52頁==========
    Secondly, the crisis did not end with"the overthrow of the DH
    ish the govt of imperialism and collaborators is an organised force
    government on 27 May 1960. If 27 May had been able to work the mir
    ander the leadership of the proletariat. "Along with this, our people
    acle of ending the crisis in today's system it would have meant ruin for
    gained some, if limited, democratic rights with the 1961 constitution
    working class revolutionaries and celebration for all reactionaries. Fvel
    brought in by 27 May and an environment emerged which revolu
    the middle bourgeoisie, as a way had been found to perpetuate the sys
    tionary ideas spread rapidly.
    ten it would have meant ruin for working class revolutionaries bour-
    It is true that the middle bourgeoisie participated in 27 May, but it
    geoisie, as a way had been found to perpetuate the system without the
    is absolutely incorrect to state that the class that gave this movement
    calamity of
    its character" was the middle bourgeoisie. For, this expression indi
    Socialism would have shouted"victory, victory as they un
    cates the class that led the movement and seized power. Since it is said
    furled their reformist utopias like a flag! The exploiting classes would
    that it left the administration to the collaborationist big bourgeoisie
    have proclaimed in a loud voice the entire world that the predictions o
    and landlords". it means that the middle bourgeoisie must have taken
    Marx Engels and Lenin had come to naught! All the reactionaries
    power after the coup of 27may. In order to leave power it must have
    would have taken 27 May as an example for themselves
    had it in the first place
    Thankfully, 27 May was unable to work such a miracle: the crisis
    In 1965 with the AP coming to power by itself. if it is meant that
    did not end. Today too, it is continuing with all Its intensity,. As long
    the middle bourgeoisie left power, this means that it is accepted that the
    as the means of production continue to be owned by aa handful of ex-
    MBK goverment and coalition government, represented the middle
    ploiters, neither the economic crisis nor the political crisis caused by
    bourgeoisie. if it is meant that the middle bourgeoisie govemment
    their will end. What will end the crisis Is a victorious popular revolu
    ended with the coalition government, it means it is accepted that the
    tion. The claim that the crisis ended on 27 May befits bourgeois with
    MBK government represented the middle bourgeoisie. However, in
    socialist masks like M. Belli and DAvcioglu. According to them. if thc
    reality, both the MBK government period and the period in which there
    army had kept power after 27 May and not held elections there would
    were coalition government were periods when the comprador big
    be no crisis or anything similar in Turkey! There would have been no
    bourgeoisie and landlords were in power. The clique of comprador big
    need for the 12 March memorandum! As the officers did not listen to
    bourgeoisie and landlords that lost power in 1950, in the face of fas
    their bright ideas they cannot free themselves of crises and confusion
    cist persecution from the DP government, adopted the pose of advo
    To preserve all the fundamental facets of the system, but on the other
    cating democracy, seized power again in 1960 by utilising the
    hand to save it from all its maladies and contradictions! A reactionary
    movement of the middle bourgeoisie and youth like a winch. Since
    utopia that only befits bourgeois reformist
    there was no communist leadership to show the way to the masses, the
    It would appear that the Draft Programme inherited this fron them
    popular opposition followed this or that reactionary clique and was
    21... The middle bourgeoisie that gave its character to
    squandered. The comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords clique
    27may operation had capitulated to imperialist from the start. It left
    which dominated the CHP, after seizing power, did not find it appro
    the administration to the collaborating big bourgeoisie and landlord
    priate to oppose the middle bourgeoisie which had played a signifi
    History demonstrated once more that the only force that will demo
    cant role in the 27 May movement. For this reason it accepted some
    102
    03

==========第53頁==========
    limited democratic demands of the middle bourgeoisie in the 17 May
    the same movement. If it is considered that by listing people one by
    constitution. The 27 May movement's leadership that seized power as
    one from all ranks that the support of everyone who sympathises with
    a result of the movement was the comprador big bourgeoisie and land
    them will be obtained then this is a basic political ploy and wil be prob
    lord clique that dominated the CHP. The middle bourgeoisie was the
    ematic. Everyone who dies fighting Imperialism and reaction is wor
    reserve force following behind it. In our opinion this is the correct
    thy of respect, but this should never lead to us not drawing a line
    analysis of the 27 May movement
    between the communists and the revisionists and anarchist elements
    22..Our working class, have written heroic epics in Its count
    Otherwise it will be disrespectful to communism, which is even more
    less struggles against the pro-american AP government, bosses and
    deserving of respect, and to the cause of popular liberation. The fact that
    domesticated trade unionism. The struggle which rose up on 15-16
    Ferdinand Lascelles was murdered by German reactionaries was no
    June 1970 struck fear into the hearts of the bosses. It gave many mal
    obstacle to Marx and Engels criticising him. In a letter to Bebel Engels
    tyrs, Mehmet Cavdar in the Kozlu mine and Serif Aygul in the Gamal
    said "The Lassalleans had sacrificed nothing, absolutely nothing,
    actor
    which they could have retained. To complete the latter s victory, you
    Firstly, the fact that the DISK leaders, controlled by the revision
    accepted as your Party song the moralizing rhymed prose with which
    ist-reformist TKP, had plugged the revolutionary struggle of our work
    Herr Audorf commemorates Lassalle
    ing class into reformism should have been exposed. The policy of peace
    Praise for the dead, love, respect and criticism have no place in a
    with DISK, that is, the policy of peace with reformism in the ranks of
    party programme. Special tracts may be published, leaflets distributed
    the TKP. this policy that has lasted for a long time, has also found its
    and articles written in party organs for this purpose. There is no need
    way into the Draft Programme. In the new period we are entering after
    to turn the programme into a commemoration!
    martial law, we have, alas, been unable to throw off the notorious poli
    10.... The big bourgeoisie in alliance with the feudal lords imple
    les of the past
    mented a policy of national oppression and assimilation against the
    Secondly, to name the workers who died in the Progranune is re
    Kurdish people
    ry. This weakens the Programme. Further on the names
    25. The 6-million strong Kurdish population living in our cour
    of the young people who died are also listed. This is also unnecessary
    try raised the banner of struggle against the bourgeois and landlords
    With every passing days workers, peasants, youth and enlightened peo
    policy of severe national oppression and assimilation. They stood up to
    ple will disappear from our ranks. The Progralnme will constantly be
    the severe tyranny and torture inflicted the Kurdish people. The Kur-
    behind. There is no possibility of putting them one by one in the Pro
    dish people's struggle for democratic rights, equality nations and self
    gramme! And it is not useful! On the contrary it can be harmful. It ma
    determination is rapidly gaining strength. All the workers and peasants
    lend to unproductive, sterile, unfortunate conversations as to why such
    Of Turkey support this struggle
    and such is mentioned while someone else isnt. Besides, in a pro
    The racist imperialist policy of pitting the peoples of Turke
    gramme where a more detailed explanation is not possible, lists o
    against each other and crushing them is bankrupt and the links bindin
    names from all ranks. communist. revisionist. anarchist. side by side
    the peoples on the path of revolution are becoming firm
    will confuse the masses. leading them to think they are all elements o
    .52. Our movement will declare that it recognises the Kurdish
    104

==========第54頁==========
    people's right to self-determination and, if they wish to establish
    pression. Intimidation of the people " is the policy implemented by
    separate sta
    reactionary governments against all toilers, regardless of nationality. It
    Our movement. will work for the Kurdish people's destiny to be
    is the policy applied to the Turkish people, too. Apart from this, the en
    resolved in a manner that is to the benefit of the Kurdish workers anc
    tire Kurdish nation (except a handful of feudal lords)is subjected to
    peasants
    yranny and torture", not just to intimidate but in order to realise
    Our movement will struggle against the reactionary ruling classes
    more substantial purpose. What is this purpose? In general tenns the
    of every nationality that is opposed to the revolutionary unity and fra
    aim is to have unrivalled possession of all the markets, mineral wealth
    ternity of the Kurdish, Turkish people, and against their divisive pol
    etc. To secure national privileges and hold state privileges in their possession. For this purpose the languages of minority nationalities are
    1) Policy of national oppression and assimilation! First of all
    banned, their democratic rights are usurped, massacres are carried out
    is contrary to logic and to grammar to discuss"national oppression as
    etc. The bourgeoisie of the domionant nation do all in their power to
    whole, then to mention "assimilation, which is part of lhat poli
    protect"territorial integrity", and"to ensure linguistic unity
    and to combine the two of them with an and
    The oppression meted out to the toilers of minority nationalities Is
    2)National oppression is not just implemented against the Kur-
    thus of a multiple character. Firstly, the class oppression carried ourt
    dish people, but against the Kurdish nation as a whole, including the
    In order to better suck the blood of the toilers,. Secondly, the national
    bourgeoisie. Furthermore, all minority nationalities are subjected to
    oppression meted out to all classers of the minority nationality for na
    national oppression, not just the Kurdish people. The Draft Programme
    tional
    umbones
    by claiming national oppression is only implemented on the Kurdish
    The programme, by presenting national oppression and class op-
    people closed its eyes to the democratic struggle of other minority na
    pression as one and the same thing, is either concealing (? )the strug-
    tionalities. Secondly, it makes one of the following two errors: either the
    gle of the Kurdish owrkers and other toilers against the bourgeoisie and
    Kurdish bourgeoisie and small landlords are considered to be included
    small landlords, or is denying the progressive quality of the struggle of
    within the scope of the term Kurdish people. in which case by con
    the Kurdish bourgeoisie and small landlords against national oppres
    cealing the bourgeois-feudal character of the Kurdish national move
    sion, The first outcome suits the Kurdish nationalists, the second the
    ment which is devoloping to oppose oppression, and seeing the national
    Turkish nationalists, but neither is of any use to the cause of the Kur-
    movement as the workers and peasants'class movement is to fall into
    dish Turkish proletariat and toilers
    the line of the Kurdish nationalists. Or, the Kurdish bourgeoisie and
    4)In the draft programme it is said that imperialism Is pursuing a
    small landlords are not included within the scope of the term Kurdish
    racist Policy with the atm of.pitting the peoples of Turkey against
    people In this case the progressive character of the Kurdish bourgeois
    each other and crushing them. It is true that imperialism wishes t"pit
    and small landlords struggle against national oppression is entirely re
    the peoples of Turkey one against the other", but it is mistaken to say
    jected, and the line of Turkish nationalism is adopted
    that it pursues a racist policy for this purpose. The policy of racism is
    3)The aim of national oppression is stated to br"to intimidate
    that of the most politically backword sections of the bourgeoisie and o
    the Kurdish people " This is incorrect. That is the aim of class op
    feudalism. Turkish racism is the policy of the most politically back
    107

==========第55頁==========
    ward sections of the bourgeoisie and of the Turkish landlord clas
    wish ti usurp the democraite rights of other nations, They will want to
    Racist policy also exists in the ranks of the Kurdish nation. And this
    dominate unconditionally their own markets and minerak wealth They
    olicy is that of(see above). The source racist policy is within the so
    will wish implement national oppression against these who are water
    cial basis. Imperialism supports the racist policy of these classes wher
    than them. They will want to separate proletarians and toilers of their
    It suits Its Interests and opposes it when it does not. In Turkey US in
    own nationalty from shore of other nationalictic with national fences
    serialism supports and incites Turkish racism as it is in its interests
    Instead of the international culture of the proletariat and democratic
    The policy of racism pursued by imperialism itself is an entirely
    politics, they will wish to impose their own national culture and con
    different thing. The crushing of small nations and states by meddling
    solidate their own nationalism and struggle for their own national de
    In their internal aflairs, interventions, the fuss(?)created by the fascist
    velopment and national culture. They will oppose the spontaneousl
    Hitler, for example, in order for the Germnan race to rule the world. the
    the historical tendency for the integration of nations etc... Within Kur
    interterence in the internal affairs of small states and nations by US
    dish national movement it is impossible not to see reactionary de
    and Soviet Social Imperialism are all manifestations of the racist po
    mands similar to those above from a section of the Kurdish bourgeoisie
    Icy Of Imperlallsi
    d a section of small landlords in alliance with themn
    The erroneous formulation of the Draft Programme assists the
    The Draft Programme. apart from confusing the class movement oi
    work of native racists for it ignores the strgulle to be undertaken against
    the Kurdish people with the national movement, ignores the actions of
    their racist policy
    as ofkb etc to strengthen their own nationalism
    5)The Draft Programme(DP)states: "the Kurdish people, has
    The Communist movement supports unconditionally the class
    raised the flag of struggle against the policy of severe national of
    movement of the toiling people of every nationality within a state and
    pression and asimilation. Again, the D P. says"the struggle
    provides leadership for this. The Communists movement also supports
    launched by the Kurdish people is for democratic rights, the equal-
    the struggle of oppressed nations within a state against national , a-
    ity of nationalities and for self-determination
    tional inequality, privileges and the to establish a state. However, the
    The Kurdish movement. first and foremost, is a national move-
    communist movement does not support the struggle of the bourgeoisie
    ment, not a popular movement, Therefore, it is necesary to distinguish
    and landlords of oppressed nation for their superiority, and will strug
    the class movement of the Kurdish proletariat and toilers, that is. the
    gle against those who attempt to combine the struggle against national
    Kurdish people, from the national movement engaged in a struggle
    oppression with efforts to strengthen the position of sheikhs, landlords
    against nationai oppression for democrtic rights", the"equality of na
    mullahs etc. The Draft Programme ignores this task on account of the
    tion and"self-determination'
    fact that it wrongly evaluates the national movement and sees it as the
    Secondly, in no national movement are the demand of the bour
    same thing as the popular movement
    geoisie and those land lords that participate in the national movement
    Thirdly, the struggle"for self-determination " means the struggle
    limited to the ending of NATIONAL OPPRESSIO N and for DEMO
    to establish a separate state. The Draft talks of the Kurdish people
    CRATIC RIGHTS AND EQUALITY OF NATIONS. They will go tul
    struggling for self-d", that is, to establish a separate state. This is
    ther and ask for inequality and privileges for themselves. They wi
    wrong for two reasons: first of all, a struggle to establish a separate

==========第56頁==========
    state would be in today's conditions, a national movement not a pop
    econdly, we cannot claim that "all Turkey's workers and peas
    ular movement: Also, the Kurdish national movement is not yet wag
    ants "today support the most just and progressive demands of the Kur
    ing a struggle to establish a separate state, some section within the
    dish people. This is something that is desired but is not the reality. To
    national movement may have such intentions, but this is not the salne
    make such a claim is to ignore the profound effect of Turkish nation-
    S a national movement being waged in order to establish a separat
    lism on Turkish workers and peasants such as claim means to forget
    state. In Northern Ireland today there is a national movenent being
    the task of counteracting the effect of dominant nation nationalism on
    waged to establish a separate state. but in Turkiey such a thinh has vel
    Turkish tollers
    to emerge. In Turkey the Kurdish national movement is waging
    7)The Draft Programme states: our movement.proclaims
    struggle for the right to self-determination", that is, the right to
    recognises the Kurdish peoples right to self-determination, and, if it
    establish ta separate state
    wishes to establish its own state
    And we support this unconditionally and will do so in every period
    The first mistake is this again. instead of Kurdish nation the term
    6)The Draft Programmme says: "all Turkeys workers and peas
    Kurdish people has been used. The right to self-determination of
    ants support the"struggle of the Kurdish people, that is, the"'struggle
    eople is entirely different to a nations right to self-determination. A
    against national oppression and assimilation, and the struggle"for
    nation' s right to self-determination means the right to found a sep
    democratic rights, equality of nations and for self-determination. Let us
    arate stateswhereas a people's right to self-determination means
    relterate
    that people's right to carry out a reyolution
    The communist movement will: a)unconditionally support the cla
    The formulation" People's right to self-det 'was advocated b
    movement of the Kurdish toiling people and provide it with leadership
    Bukharin to comrade Lenin. (see
    b)the communist movement will support everything that is progre
    To advocate"a peoples right to self-det"os. In reality, to advocate
    sive in the Kurdish national movement. everything that is opposed to
    the dominant nation's privilege to establish a state, and is dominant na
    national oppression, privileges and inequality, and wishes to provide
    ton nationalism
    leadership to this struggle, c)the communist movement will not sur
    Secondly, .. the self-determination of the Kurdish people'", is
    port actions, demands etc. within the natlonal movement that all to
    stated. This sentence is illogical and confused. To say " for the self-de
    strengthen Kurdish nationalism and will wage a struggle against these
    termination of the Kurdish people'"means the Kurdish peoples rey
    The above except from the Draft Programme is incorrect for two
    olution. In an article regarding the national question it is nonsensical
    reasons: Firstly, apart from all Turkey's workers_ and pe
    to mention such a thing. " If the sentence had read: the Kurdish peo
    Turkeys class conscious proletariat, too will not in all circumstances
    le's (right )to self-determination and if it wishes. It would have made
    Support the struggle ""for self-determination that is. the struggle to
    more sense and been a more grammatically correct
    establish a separate state. The communist movement, in each con
    Thirdly, "the right to self-determination "is nothin less than
    crete situation will support or not support accoding to an assessment oh
    the right to establish a separate state
    e benets [O SOCIial development and the proletariats class struggle
    The draft presents the"right to self-determination"as if it is some
    or socialism)
    thing else. The sentence would have been correct if it had been as fol

==========第57頁==========
    lows: "the right to self-determination, that is, the right to establish a
    The term divisive policy 'is extremely hamful and unfortunate
    separate state. ' In this case, again, it would be necessary to replace
    The ruling classes use this term as a label which they stick on anyone
    h.nation
    who oppses their chauvinist policies, as in"divisiveness, " dividing
    The article in the programme states: our movement proclaims that
    territorial integrity"and"establishing a seprate state. Communists ad
    it recognises the Kurdish people,'a(revolution ) right and it it wishes to
    vocate the "unity of workers and toilers of all nations. If the oneness
    establish a separate state, 'In this case the Programme is talking non
    of territory or the unity of the state serves the unity of toilers of all na
    sense rather than proposing a solution to the national question
    tions then they will defend it. If it does not then they will advocate the
    8)The Draft Programme states: Our movement will work for the
    division of territories and the state and secession. The slogan" unity of
    Kurdish Peoples destiny to be determined to the advantage of the Kur-
    territory or"unity of the state"is the slogan of the bourgeoisie and
    dish workers and peasants> This means to say absolutely nothing
    landlords of the dominant nation. Communists, have to distinguish the
    ven if the sentence had read“ Kurdish pation”' instead of“ Kurdish
    concept of"the unity of the working class and toilers"from the slogan
    people "it would still have been nonsense. For the phrase "determina
    "the unity of territories and state . Otherwise, they will find ther
    tion of destiny " of a nation implies that the"determination is going to
    selves on the same level as the nationalists of the dominant nation. I
    take place outside. That is, it means that"a separate state will be es
    this case they will fundamentally wreck the unity of workers and toil
    tablished by outside intervention. This, firstly, is a blatant annulment
    ers of various nationalities. The Draft Programme must abandon the
    of the"Kurdish nation' s right to self-determination. Secondly, the Prc
    term " divisive policy ""and make abundantly clear what kind of unity
    gramme has stated that without fail a separate state is a condition, which
    it favours
    is utter nonsense. The Kurdish nation will either exercise its rights to
    10)We shall not dwell on passages in the draft regarding the na
    self-determination, or not; this is something that nation will decide
    tional question which are not wrong but which do not need to be in
    This cannot be decided froim outside
    cluded in a programme
    Furthermore. in the event of the Kurdish nation wishing to establish a separate state, communists will of course wish it to be to the ben
    If we are to sum up:
    efit of workers and peasants. However, even if it would be contraryto
    a)The Draft Programme ignores the national oppression of other
    the interests of Kurdish workers and peasants. if the Kurdish nation
    nationalities. B) The Draft Programmme sees the Kurdish movement as
    wishes to establish a separate state the communists will never oppose
    a popular movement, not a national movement, and makes concesions
    this, will absolutely reject the use of force and will accept the wishes
    to Kurdish nationalism. C)The Draft Programme mistakenly analyses
    of the Kurdish nation
    the reasons for national oppression. D)The Draft Programme ignore.
    The above article is full of meaningless things. And it reslyts in re
    the profound efects of Turkish nationalism on Turkish workers and
    moving the Kurdish nations right to self-determination
    peasants. E) The Draft Programme, like Bukharin, changes the"nations
    9)The Draft Programme states: " our movement will wage a strug
    the right to self-determination"into peoples right to self-determin,
    gle against the reactionary ruling classes of every nation and their di
    and sees the"right to self-determination as something different from
    visive policies
    the "right to establish a separate state, "it upsets the concepts con
    12

==========第58頁==========
    cerning the national question and as a result removes the Kurdish na
    post-1946 period is that in Turkey there was a transition from the mil-
    tion's right to self-determnination
    itary fascist dictatorship based on the one- party absolute rule of the
    Conclusion: Turkish nationalism Inaking concessions to Kurdis
    comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords to a"multiparty(although
    nationalism! This is the esssence of the Draft Programine.
    Is all the parties were those of the big bourgeoisie and landlords they
    26. Between 1960 and 1970 various opportunist currents were ef-
    were as one)dictatorship And the domination of German imperial
    fective in breaking-off our peoples struggle from its historical roots
    Ism was replaced step by step by American imperialism. What is the
    and Marxism-leninism
    factor that renders theexploitation and oppression"more"merci
    "The opportunist administrators of the TI P sunk into the parlia
    less " M Belli sees"Philipino type democracy"in his words, as the
    mentary path and advocated reformism. They submitted to imperial
    mother of all evil. According to him the matter is of the utmost simm
    isn by taking refuge in bourgeois laws and turned the party into an
    plicity: transition should not have happened to"philipino-type democ
    inactive club of bourgeois intellectuals?
    racy, The Kemalist regime of the CHP should have continues. He
    We have seen what the " historical roots "are and how far the revi-
    prefers one reactionary dictatorship to another. Doesn,t the Draft Pro
    sionists of M.Belli. H. Kivilcimli and Y Delir have distanced then
    granme make the samme preference in a more"refined"and"expert
    selves fron"those roots " Instead of getting rid of those decayed roots
    way? It is also absolutely meaningless to include an unclear term such
    if you try to graft on the Thoughts of Mao-tse-tung the result will be
    as"in the last quarter century as the Programme will be preserved
    eird tree with a a puny trunk and sour fruit. Nowadays such trees are
    for long years the start date of thisquarter century "will move forward
    lled modern revisionism" in M-L literature
    as the years pass. It will become necessary to deem years that are cur
    Another meaning to emerge from the above tern is that the TKP
    rently included within the period of"mericless exploitation and op
    was not bom as'“ an inactive club of intellectuals”That“ opportunist
    pression " as reasonable
    administrators brought the TIP to this state afterwards. The same old
    30. .. With the establishment of the fascist dictatorship the lin
    sophistry is being continued
    ited democratic rights of the 1961 const. were abolished by the use o
    429. In the last quarter century imperialsim and reactions merel
    force. The state administration degenerated inyo bribery and corrup
    less exploitation and oppression of our people has made life intolera
    tion
    ble for the broad masses of toiler
    Firstly, "the democratic rights of the 1961 Constitution"were not
    Why"in the last quarter century Did the"merciless exploita
    abolished by the fascist dictatorship, but had been removed long be
    tion and oppression of oour people "begin in 1946 Were previous pe
    fore that, de facto and naturally, by force". The fascist dictatorship
    riods idyllic forour people". Let us say that the person who penned
    completed this process by abolishing that constitution. In this way, it be
    the Draft Programme has a particular fondness for the M Kemal pe
    came clearer that Constitution"were not abolished by the fascist dic
    riod And considers that"exploitation and oppression"were more"rea
    tatorship, but had ben removed long before that, de facto and naturally
    sonable". So does he consider the years of the Second World War in
    y force". The fascist dictatorship completed this process by abol-
    the pawx XXXX of German fascism to be like that So is that the way
    ishing that constitution. In this way, it became clearer that even the pro
    he perceives the Second World War years?. The characteristic of the
    tection of the thing we call "democratic rights "would only be possible
    15

==========第59頁==========
    by revolutionary violence against reactionary violence, that force wouldonly be overcome by a corresponding force
    be realised with socialism". AS is known different contradictions have
    econdly, athe degeneration of the state administ"and descent into
    different ways of being resolved. The contradiction not between"our
    bribery and corruption" are nothing new. Our people have been fed up
    country, but between our people and imperialism will be resolved by
    th bribery and corruption for decades. Bribery and corruption are the
    revolutionary national struggle(national revolution). The contradic
    characteristics of the bourgeois feudal state. Bribery and corruption ex
    tion between broad popular masses and feudalism will be resolved b
    ists wherever such a state exists. A bourgeois-feudal state free of bribery
    revolutionary civil war( democratic revolution ). In semi-colonial, semi
    and corruption is unthinkable. Even the most democratic bourgeois
    feudal countries the struggles against imperialism and against feudal
    state cannot abolish bribery and corruption; it can only reduce it. The
    ism, that is, the national revolution and the democratic revolution,
    Drafr Prog, by connceting"degeneration"and""bribery and corrup-
    cannot be separated one from the other: they are intricately and strongly
    tion to the development of martial law, is saying there was no"bribery
    linked. But according to circumstances sometimes one of these two
    and corruption in a previous period and accepting, if indirectly, that
    contradictions, and sometimes the other, may come to the fore In semi
    with the ending of"fascist dictatorship, that is, Martial Law, bribery
    c and semi-f countries under the indirect administration of imperial
    and corruption will en
    ism, although the contradiction between feudalism and the popular
    35..... The curs of imperialism are inciting racism and militarism
    lasses Is the major contradiction, In countries like this that are sub-
    and endeavouring to portray the oppression of the Kurdish people as
    jected to the military occupation of imperialism the national contra
    just and to incite hostility to the world's peoples
    diction comes to the fore and becomes the major contradiction: but in
    The phrase".the Kurdish people'"would be more correct if
    both cases the resolutions of these two contradictions cannot be sepa
    tered to "the Kurdish nation and other minority nationalities
    rated one from the other. This means that these first two contradictions
    36. The maior contradictions in our semni-coloniam, semi-feud
    will not"be resolved by socialism, but will be resolved with a dem
    society are these: 1 )the contradiction between our country and imperi
    ocratic popular revolution. Since the country in question is Turkey and
    a]ism:: 2 )the contradiction between the broad popular masses and feu-
    the"ruling classes " in question the ruling classes of Turlye, once their
    dalism; 3) the contradiction between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.
    ruling status is ended there will be no question ofa contradiction be.
    4)the contradiction within the ruling classes
    tween ruling classes". Today who are the ruling classes? The comprador
    37. The disappearance of all these contradictions and the libera
    bourgeoisie and landlords. When they are brought down from their
    tion of our people from exploitation and oppression will be realised
    "ruling positions by a democratic popular revolution who will be the
    with socialism.”2
    ruling classes? Essentially the working class, pesantry, urban petiti
    The formulation" the contradiction between our country and im
    bourgeoisie and the revolutionary wing of the national bourgeoisie
    perialism "is meaningless. Instead ofour country the words"our peo-
    As for the ruling class within this alliance, it will be the proletariat. It
    ple of Turkey of all ethnic groups.In that case the sentence would
    is apparent that the contradiction between the ruling classes of the democratic popular administration will be entirely different to the contra-
    have had meaning
    "The disappearance of all these contradictions (ABC
    diction between the former ruling classes. A:d it will be a contradictionthat will be able to be resolved by peaceful and non-hostile method

==========第60頁==========
    within the revolutionary people. The contradiction to be"resolved by
    letariaf of that country and imperialism, the whole bourgeoisie and the
    Clanism
    solely the"contradiction between the proletariat and th
    landlords (particularly in the ideological sphere ). But from that coun-
    bourgeoisie. In other words, the contradiction between labour and cap
    try's perspective the proletariat will constitute the fundamental aspec
    ital. Let us mention another point: in the draft the works resolution o
    of this contradiction while the others will constitute the secondary as
    a contradiction are not used: instead"the disappearance of all these
    pect. There will also e a continuing contradiction between the reac
    contradictions "is mentioned, neither the comprador big bourgeoisie
    tionaries that make up the secondary aspect. "The disappearance of
    the landlords or national bourgeoisie can be entirely removed by ei
    all these contradictions will be realised" with communis. not.social
    ther the democratic popular revolution or the socialist revolution. They
    ism"! From whichever angle we look the sentence in the draft is erro
    will maintain their existence in the ideological cultural sphere after the
    neous and contrary to Marxism-leninism
    coming into being of the dictatorship of the proletariat and even atter
    37.....our peoples liberation from exploitation and oppression
    the completion of the transformation of all the means of production to
    wil be realised socialism
    collective ownership. This is the reason for the continuation of the rev
    It is true that out people will be liberated"from exploitation by the
    olution under the dictatorship of the proletariat. Conrade Lenin pre
    realisation of socialism. In the period of democratic popular adminis-
    sented the source for this in his work Left Communs a Childhood
    tration exploitation, while not extremes, will exist, as the bourgeoisie
    Disorder. Without the eradication of imper and reaction all over th
    and its properly will exist: Even the existence of small-scale production
    world the reactionaries overthrown in a country where the proletariat
    means the existence of exploitation to a certain degree. Therefore. as
    has triumphed will maintain their existence and await the opportunity
    long as the transformation of the means of production to collective own
    to trausfforum the revolution into a counter revolution. The"disap
    ership is not completed exploitation will continue, partially
    pearance "of the contradiction between them and the proletariat w
    Once collective ownership of the means of production is completed
    only be possible with communism,. What is meant by the resolution o
    in all spheres it will not be possible to talk of exploitation. Finally, the
    a contradiction, oday in the first three contradiction, 1s the secondary as
    universal watchword of socialism: "from each according to their abil-
    pect of the resolution becoming the essential, and vice versa. AS for
    ty to each according to their labour! Will have become reality. The
    the"disappearance"of contradictions, for them to no longer exist, to
    possession of the means of production by a group of people, which is
    completely disappear means neither the cssential or secondary aspect
    the source of exploitation, will have ended and become the joint prop-
    playing a role. The democratic popular revolution will ensure that in
    erty of society. The source of exploitation will have beenn dried up
    erialism, the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords that constitute the
    But the second part of the sentence is a problem. Our people's liber
    essential aspect of today's contradiction will become the secondary as
    ation from oppression will be realised by socialism! ! This is to accept
    pect, while the proletariat and other popular classes that Inake up the
    that oppression will exist in the system of democratic popular dicta
    secondary aspect will constitute the essential aspect. But it will not"Te-
    torship. What is oppression Oppression is the persecution and force in
    move"this contradiction. Under the proletarian dictatorship and in the
    ficted on the people by the reactionaries, that usm the ruling classes
    period of the establishment of socialism, and even after the production
    It is reactionary violence. The reactionary classes have recourse to this
    to socialist ownership a contradiction will still exist between the pro
    violence and force in order to continue their exploitation and maintain
    8
    9

==========第61頁==========
    and preserve their ruling positions. In this respect, the violence the
    pression becomes the ultimate aim of our movement. That is. this re
    use agains the people is also unjust, What enforces thus unjust and re
    moval is postponed until communism, and"oppression "will exis
    actionary violence? The standing ariy and police which mnake it their
    both in the system of democratic popular dictatorship and in the system
    profession to guard the ruling classes, the prisons etc. As is known, the
    of proletarian dictatorship Furthermore, socialism is also protecting
    ruling classes have, for long wears utilised two weapons against the
    exploitation’”!. Either this socialism is of the“ Swedish socialism”
    people: executioner and priest. "The means of oppression is this"ex
    kind, or, the imperialists and reactionaries are right when they say"o-
    ecutioncr ". Since victorious popular revolution under the leadership ot
    cialism is system of the most exploitation and oppression". Or clse the
    the proletariat will throw out the executioner and the priest from that
    colleague who penned this Draft is unaware ofthe real meaning of th
    country where will the oppression remain? Yes. after the democratic
    concepts he uses
    popular revolution (and even after the socialist revolution)"violence
    Let us reitarate: in the socialist society while classes and the state
    will not disappear. But the nature of this"violence"eill be entirely dif-
    as a means of proletarian dictatorhip, exist, there is neither explitation
    ferent. This violence will be revolutionary violence used by the prol
    nor Oppression. Exploitation will disappear along with the construction
    ariat and popular classes against the reactionary classes that wish to
    of socialism. The principle is: From everyone according to his?.to
    bring back the old order. This violence form the historical point of view
    everyone according to his labour. "To mention exploitation in a society
    Is legitimate and just. Is this oppression? If you ask the reactionaries
    where everyone receives according to their labour shows that this prin
    is, but if you ask us it is the most natural, most inevitable thing, the
    ciple has not been grasped. As for oppression, it will disappear along
    most just and progressive thing and absolutely not oppression! On the
    with the realisation of the democratic popular administration (this is a
    contrary, it is punishment fiver by the people to those who wish to
    peoples republic). That is neither the system of popular democratic
    bring back oppression. Isn't the Draft Programme. by accepting indi-
    dictatorship nor the system of proletarian dictatorship does oppression
    rectly that oppression will exist in the system of democratic popular
    exist. Oppression is the crushing of the revolutionary people by a hand
    dictatorship, falling into a parallel position with the reactionaries?
    ful of exploiters and reactionary classes. If the dictatorship of the peo
    59. Our movement's ultimate aim is to remove al manner of ex
    le and the proletariat over the reactionaries is seen as oppression this
    loitation and oppression of humanity, and to take our people to com-
    is profoundly mistaken. This is the attitude of reactionaries
    munism, a world in which classes no longer exist and is the greatest and
    It is correct that the world of communism will be a world where
    happiest tuture
    classes no longer exist, But it is not just this. In the world of commu
    A similar phrase is also to be found in the fundamental'tenets
    nism along with classes the state, which is the means of oppression of
    on of the Draft Tuzuk???
    other classes by the ruling classes and the means of proletarian dicta
    Our partys ultimate goal is to realise a classless society, that is
    torship in socialism, will also disappear. For with the complete disap
    communism, by abolishing all kinds of exploitation and oppression
    pearance of classes the proletariat will no longer need a state. On the
    The above phrases are from article 37 of the Programme(and
    other hand at the stage of communism. that is. From each accord.
    Tuzuk). With the above expression the programme (constitution)fell
    ing to his ability, to each according to his needs(Marx
    even behind article 37. At a stroke the abolishing of exploitation and op
    o the particularity of the communist world is not just that clas
    120
    2

==========第62頁==========
    will disappear but that along with classes, class domination will dis
    of the people', "The democratic dictatorship of the people', An order
    appear and the slogan"from each according to his ability to each ac
    in which the people are in power, ' it is not clear which classes'ad
    cording to his needs, will replace"from each according to his
    ministration. Which classes will thepeople's
    ry frontin
    labour
    lude? The Programme says nothing on this subject. Our movement
    The Draft, with the articles we have highlighted, apart trom rati-
    will organise the peoples of Turkey, but which classes? Which of these
    fying the characteristics applied by the reactionaries to the system o
    will it be based on which will it trust and which will it not? While these
    popular democratic dictatorship and socialism, has broken off com
    are the fundamentals that need saying the Draft Programme leaves
    lnunism from its most important characteristics
    these questions entirely unanswered. (It suffices with listing literary
    37.of call the feudal and semi-feudal remnants .The term
    but empty, sentences side bu side. You cannot say: We know these
    semi-feudal remnant 'is meaningless. Semi-feudal'relationships are
    things what need is there to write them down? Many new revolu
    already a remnant. a remnant of feudalism."semt-feudal rennant''is
    tionaries who dont know these things are joining and will join our
    a"remnant of"feudal remnant.such a phrase is absurd. All feuda
    ranks. The Programme must shine a light on these fundamental ques
    and semi-feudal relations a feudal remnants or-teudalism
    tions for them. Furthermore. thousands. hundreds of thousands. mil-
    should have been used
    lions of toilers who pick up our programme will seek answers to these
    37... Our movement, in order to establish a popular democratic dic
    questions. The term people in Turkey is one used frequently by even tl
    tatorship under the leadership of the working class based on alliance ot
    most reactionary section of the ruling classes. Of course, we must not
    workers and peasants
    abandon this term, but let us give it content. Let us make clear its real
    With the founding of a revolutionary administration of the pec
    content. In this way, the difference between the real meaning of the
    Dle
    termpeople and the demagogues""people "will became clear
    39.Our movement .. will organise the armed forces of the peo
    .38.... The essence of the contradiction between feudalism and
    ple and wage a struggle to establish a popular liberation front on a
    the popular masses is the contradiction between the peasant masses
    worker-peasant alliance
    and the landlords and loan sharks. Only by grasping this contradic
    Our movement will establish an order in liberated zones where
    tion as the fundamental link of the revolution can we organise the
    the people are in power
    worker-peasant masses in a peoples army, succeed in carrying out a
    The word" has been used in combination with terms such
    democratic popular
    as revolution, power, armed forces. but, in the Programme we are u
    Revolution, the essence of which is a land revolution, and destroy
    able to learn who the people are and what classes they include. Yes
    the rule of imperialism
    what are the popular classes? Which of these classes will the proletariat
    . For this reason the main contradiction of the four main contra-
    absolutely trust with which of them will it establish a sound alliance
    dictions in our country today is the contradiction between the popular
    which ones wiu it render neutral and which ones will it endeavour to
    masses and feudalism In the determination of the main contradiction
    attract to its side. this is not clear. But all these are some of the most 1-
    logic has been turned on its head. Instead of going from cause to effec
    portant questions of the revolution. " The revolutionary administration
    the opposite route has been chosen. In fact, firstly the main contradic

==========第63頁==========
    tion is determined, then this is identified and understood as the main
    lance "in all circumstances ". They will establish alliances on condi-
    link. The method of the Draft programme is an idealist method, which
    tion that programme and that they "preserve their independence
    Thy it is absolutely not convincing
    rely on their own forces"" do not lose the initiative
    Why is the contradiction between feudalism and the popular
    Did the Chinese Communist Party comply with the Kuomintangs
    asses the main contradiction? In a process where there is more than
    call to"dissolve the Red Army, let's unite with
    ?If it had dis
    one contradiction one of them determines the development of the other
    solved the Red Army for the sake of unity this would have been a crush-
    contradictions and exerts influence. This contradiction is the main one
    Ing defeat for the CCP and the revolution. Communists of course wish
    The contradiction between feudalism and the popular masses will, il
    to"unite"with all forces that can possibly join the ranks of the revo
    our country, play a determining and directive role on both the contra-
    ution, but not at any price! Not under any circumstances! Not by abar
    diction between the bourgeoisie and proletariat and on the contradiction
    doning their principles and aims! Not by trusting in the power of
    between imperialism and the people of Turkey. To the degree that feu
    another, losing their independence and their initiative! Not as a tail of
    dalism unravels the contradiction between the proletariat and the bour
    the bourgeoisie
    geolsie will emerge and sharpen. On the other hand in broad rural are
    The phrase"always prepared to unite"in the Draft arouses a con
    the feudal forces are the social prop of imperialism. For this reason a
    trary opinion
    resolution of the contradiction between feudalism and the broad masses
    40.Our movement will mobilise the masses for struggle, for the
    will deprive imperialism of a significant prop and play a determining
    retreat of imperialism, the people's winning democratic rights and im
    role in the development and resolution of the contradiction between
    provements in living conditions, by advocating all urgent demands and
    imperialism and the people of Turkey. These are in short the reasons
    needs. It will endeavour to increase their awareness and win them to the
    why the contradiction between feudalism and the popular masses is the
    ranks of the armed struggtle". This article of the Draft Programme
    main contradiction
    shes to, firstly, make a completely reformist line, such as the advo
    40.Our movement is always prepared to unite with all demo
    cation of"urgent demands and needs""under all conditions. the line of
    cratic and patriotic forces against fascism and reaction. To unite means
    the party For communists will only advocate and support"urgent de
    to establish an alliance. This is a different thing to"temporary and
    mands and needs on condition that"partial demands do not replace
    partial agreements.”
    revolutionary slogans and that "we remain firmly tied to our general
    Firstly, as communists, we do not consider it possible to have an al
    political demands and revolutionary agitation amongst the masses
    liance with the national bourgeoisie under the leadership of the prole
    The moment they conflict with"general political demands and rev
    tariat without the construction of and organised popular army under the
    olutionary agitation""they will be rejected. For instance. it would be
    ship of the communist party and, this, without the realisation te
    blatant reaction to get up in front of the masses who have risen up to
    a certain degree of a worker-peasant alliance. We would certainly wish
    overthrow the present order and make a speech on"urgent demands
    or such an alliance in all periods, by to wish for something is differ-
    and this is the policy of the ruling classes. Furthermore, communists
    ent to that things coming to fruition. Today only temporary and partial
    never make the struggle for urgent demand the fundamental one
    agreements are possible-secondly; communists are not prepared for al
    Secondly, the theory of"raising the consciousness of the masses
    25

==========第64頁==========
    by advocating all demands and needs. "is entirely inspired by thethe
    gramme and the task of dissemination. Agricultural labourers and im
    ory of the economists"to make the workers aware"and promote
    poverished and middle peasantry will elect peasant committees in every
    workers actions " by putting forward concrete demands that promise
    village. These committees will consist in the main of agricultural
    practical results. "And in essence there is absolutely no difference be
    labourers and impoverished peasants
    tween the two!
    Forests, lakes, streams and pastures will pass into the direction o1
    42.state land will be distributed to the peasantry or be turned
    the peasant committees. These committees will organise alll work con
    into popular farms under the supervision of village committees
    cering their protection, development and the peasants benefiting from
    Are "peasant committees "village party committees, or organs o
    these in an equal way
    armed struggle、
    that d
    The entire question of organisation amongst the peasantry is, as
    nate publications, it is not clear? In the pamphlet of our Programme for
    can be seen, settled in a trice by means of the"peasants committees
    and Revolution is the following
    a remedy for all ills! This demonstrates that colleagues have not thought
    There is only one path to liberation from poverty and oppression
    seriously even once about how the peasants will be organised A peas
    In rural areas TO OVERTHROW THE DOMNNATON OFTHE ( EN
    ants committee that does everything Immediately, although noone
    TRY WTHTHEIR BOOTS AND WHIPS AND ESTABLISH THI
    knows what manner of committee it is! And these committee, regard
    PEASANTS'OWN RULE! With this aim we must establish PEAS
    ing which we have not a clue, have got into the programme. Their new
    ANT COMMITTEES to direct the struggle of impoverished and mid
    task: to supervise people,s farms
    dle peasantry in every village
    They should at least have been described as"revolutionary peas
    Let us be prepared for a struggle to eradicate thre landlords and
    ant organs of power ". The meaning will be clear. How they would be
    loan shark s one by one. Let us not allow the lackeys who serve the land.
    organised etc. is not a current task. The thing called"peasant commit-
    lords and loan sharks to remain in the villages Let us stop their, was
    tees "now merely serves to confuse
    er and end their domination The PEASANT COMTTEES will H e
    All debts to imperialists will be liquidated. "Instead of the
    such a struggle. ibid
    term"liquidated the word"cancelled should have been used as seli
    As can be understood from the above the peasant committees are
    undated " also means the payment of debts. which is erroneous
    organs of armed struggle And their task is to"implement"anddirect
    Our movement rejects absolutely the presence of foreign
    the struggle of the impoverished and middle peasantry. It is not possl
    military bases in Turkey, whichever the country
    ble to understand from the pamphlet what the for of struggle will be
    The phrase".whichever the country. " is wrong because it includes
    Popular war is mentioned but, today what is the for of this, is it guer
    the socialist countries. It is mistaken, as a socialist country ma
    rilla war, or is something else being considered. It is this struggle(what-
    send arms and volunteers to support a revolution in another country
    ever it is )that will be"implemented" and directed
    However, it will put these arms and volunteers under the command of the
    On the other hand, peasant committees are at the same time or
    revolutionaries in that country. It will leave their utilisation to the initia
    gans of power
    tive of the revolutionaries in that country. It will not intervene in their af-
    Peasant Committees will implement the Land Revolution Pro
    fairs from outside. This, of course, is not"having military units or bases
    12

==========第65頁==========
    The People's Republic of China gave the following answer at a
    has made it its profession to protect the ruling classes. consolidate the
    United Nations meeting to the USA and USSR imperialists demagogic
    peoples army based on the general arming of the workers and peasants
    Strategic Weapons,Limitation meetings and their accusations of ag
    in this way ensuring the guarantee of our national independence and de
    gression towards the Peoples Republic of China: "The Peoples Re
    fence of our country
    public of China [PRC] will never be the first to use nuclear weapons
    All manner of inequality and rank and title in the army will be
    And the PRC does not have military bases or units in any country and
    abolished and soldiers will have a say in the election of commanders
    this is the guarantee of its not being aggressive. On the other hand the
    The right og association will be the soldiers most natural right. Beat
    USA and USSR imperialists have military bases, nuclear fleets and
    ing and persecution of soldiers will be banned absolutely, and the army
    units in many countries and in seas. Empty words like"limitation"can
    will be made productive and in the service of the people
    not conceal the fact that they are the real aggressors. If they were really
    The first paragraph is vague It is not east to understand what it
    Sincere they announce like the PRC that they would not be the first to
    means and calls to mind this: It is as if the masses will rise up suddenly
    use nuclear weapons and would remove all their military bases and
    and take power, as in the Soviet Union, and that the revolutionary gov
    units from the territories and territorial waters of other countries. Only
    ernment will dissolve the old reactionary army by taking away their
    after that can sincere talks on disarmament take place attended by all
    weapons will arm all the people etc. However, the"abolishing of the
    countries, big and small
    army that has made it its profession to protect the ruling classes"is not
    The Draft Programme, in its above phrase, is rejecting In a cor
    something that can be done in a moment after seizing power. During a
    cealed way the reality" that socialist countries will not have military
    prolonged peoples war this reactionary army will be torn into pieces
    bases and units in a foreign country " and accepting indirectly that" so
    destroyed and will be disarmed etc. The revolutionary government will
    cialist countries will have bases and units in foreign countries".This is
    sweep away the final remnants of this reactionary army. This mean-
    nothing less than accepting the reactionaries"red imperialism dem
    ing does not emerge from the Draft Programme
    agogy. To think of the socialist countries with the logic of reactional
    Undoubtedly the development of the people,s army will proceed
    ies with the logic of reactionaries and then put pen to paper with thi
    Ider the revolutionary govt. the people,s army based on the gen
    logic! This is what has happened
    eral arming of workers and peasants, but neither at the outset of the
    .46.from neighbourhood administration to the highest levels a
    armed struggle (that is, today)nor when power is seized by a demo
    revolutionary government will be realised which the people will de
    cratic revolution will the peoples army consist of a general arming of
    termine and oversee by elections
    workers and peasants. That is the army and the people will not be the
    It should have been openly stated that public servants would be ap
    same thing. This will be possible in the future. On the one hand we
    pointed and dismissed from office by election. In the above article it is
    say: "the peoples army will grow from small to large and from weak
    clear that public servants would be elected but not that they would be
    to strong " and on the other how can the peoples army be based on the
    dismissed by election. If this is what is meant by"oversee" then this
    general arming of the people prior to the seizure of power, and the
    should be made clear
    peoples governments task is to strengthen it? According to the
    :47. A democratic popular government will abolish the army that
    draft when power is seized the army will already be based on the gen

==========第66頁==========
    eral arming of the workers and peasants"and the government will
    tion of democracy being given to the people In article 50 there is again
    consolidate this. How is this possible
    personal freedoms and freedoms of political thought, organisation. as
    In our circumstances in the prolonged war during which the peo
    sembly, press and speech to the people, Freedom of conscience and
    ples army will need to be constructed step by step these sentences are
    worship "is given! In article 47 there is recognition for the right of as-
    entirely wrong. The peoples army will of course emerge from the
    sembly to soldiers, part of the people.. That is, the draft states that
    bosom of the people and be a part of them and in their service. It will
    first the people are given the definition of"democracy "and subse
    participate in production but the army and the people will not be the
    quently its elements. The draft first gives people"democracy " entirely
    same thing immediately and in a short time. From the moment the army
    and then ensures"democracy " for the soldiers, who are a part of the
    and the people begin to become the same the anny will have begun to
    people! The draft first provides"democracy for all people, but then
    pass from being an army and the state from being a state. That is, con
    provides "democracy tor the soldiers, whom are part of the people
    munism will have been attained
    This is all unnecessary repetition. Furthermore, there is entirely ur
    On the other hand the people's army will not only be the'guaran
    ecessary detail such as"banks will be combined into a national bank
    tee "of our national independence and the defence of our country but
    torture will be banned capital punishment will be abolished"and
    will at the same time be the guarantee of the protection and consolida
    public spirited youth will be educated etc. There is no need for such
    tion of the democratic popular dictatorship, of the transition to social
    things in the Programme. Engels made a critique of the Erfurt Pro
    ism and the dictatorship of the proletariat
    grainne thus
    As for the "abolishing of all inequality. ranks and titles in the army
    The fear that a short, pointed exposition would not be intelligible
    since the army in question is a popular one, these will not occur at the
    enough has caused explanations to be added which make it verbose
    beginning. The Draft assumes these and the same mav be said for the
    and drawn out. To my view the programme should be as short and pre
    phrase: Beatings and persecution of soldiers will be banned. "It would
    cise as possible. No harm is done even ifit contains the occasional for
    have been correct if it had been stated that these never have a place in
    eign word, or asentence whose fitll significance cannot be understood
    a popular am
    fir
    The Draft Programme, with the above expression, rejects the factthat the peoples army will be constructed step-by-step during a pro
    Appendices and Corrections
    longed war. In its place it includes the dream of taking power with ageneral uprising, with a peoples army being formed under a revolul
    I concur with the following points made by other colleagues
    tionary govt and the reactionary army being abolished after the seizure
    1)It should have been stated that our movement is a product ofth
    of power. Furthermore, it confuses the democratic popular dictatorship
    treat Proletarian Cultural Revolution
    when the army has yet to become one with the people, and the com
    It should have been mnade clear that all over the world imperial-
    munist order when they become one and the same thing
    Ism is collapsing en masse, that socialism is progressing towards vic
    The section sub-headed"Democratic Popular Revolution(should
    tory and that there exists an excellent revolutionary situation on a global
    be state ) Programme "is full of repetitions. In article 45 there is me
    130
    13

==========第67頁==========
    3) There should definitely have been a mention in the Programme
    nper
    f th
    les and an
    to US
    4) There should have been mention of the revisionist Yakup Dembeing a lack
    Soviet Sociali
    ggle in the Middle East should have beel
    briefly and the importance of uniting with it touched upon
    6)There should have been an article regarding the workers in Gemanv
    7)The Programme should definitely have included mention of the
    The Theses of Shafak Revisionism
    fact that guerrilla war is the fundamental forms of the armed struggle
    Regarding the Kemalist Movement
    Kemalist Government Period
    Conclusion
    second World War Years, Post-wa
    WHETHER THE FLAG WE HOLD HIGH IN FRONT OF
    and 27 Ma
    EVERYONE WILL BE THE RED FLAG OF THE PROLETARIATDEPENDS ON WHETHER THE BLEMISHES WE HAVEINDICATED ARE CLEANED. WE WISH WITH ALL SINCERITY THATTHESE STAINS BE CLEANED
    Jjanuarv-1972
    1972
    132

==========第68頁==========
    hese people are branding the independence struggle[oaabeing waged by our people and being the heirs of the complete independence principle of M.Kemal with revisionism. This is undoubtedly the attitude of a spendthrift. Those who shirk the revolutionarystruggle are looking down on the struggles of the past and are unableto comprehend the importance of making history a weapon in thisgreat struggle. This attitude and class character of theirs stems fromtheir petit bourgeois ideology that looks down on everything
    As we all know our National Liberation war was carried outunder the leadership of the national bourgeoisie and the leader of thenational revotution was M. Kema]". M. Kemal's principle of complete independence and our liberation war is such a tangible inheritance that tens of thousands of workers and peasants gave their bloodand sacrificed their lives for its sake. They did not shirk freom arselff-sacrifice. But as the workers and peasants were not organised thenational bourgeoisie seized the leadership of the national revolutionand, being unable to complete the bourgeois democratic revolutionestablished a dictatorship that oppressed the workers and peasant.
    The new Kemalist bourgeoisies dictatorship over the people came toa compromise with feudalism and imperialism, as necessitated by itscharacter. A collaborationist big bourgeoisie subsequently emergedfrom this new bourgeoisie, surrendering our country to the clutches ofimperialism. To expect a consistent proletarian stance from M. Kemalthen when this was not forthcoming to label him an imperialist collaborator, suits the bourgeois idealists. But it is evident that such anattitude is not appropriate for the proletarian movement
    The analyses of Lenin, Stalin and Mao-tse-tung regarding M
    Kemal should show the way to us. Why is this question Important
    Because our stance on this subject will determine whether we giveaway our peoples progressive past to fascism and reaction. We cansee how fascist generals who are lackeys of the Americans have used
    135

==========第69頁==========
    parts of our peoples progressive history such as the War of National
    The bourgeois dictatorship over our people gradually surren
    Liberation, Yunus Emre and M. Kemal in their fascist demagogy ane
    dered our country to the imperialist yoke. The big bourgeoisie in al
    how they are trying to create mass support on this basis. What shall
    lance with feudal lords implemented a policy of national oppression
    we do? Shall we leave all this to them? The revolutionary inheritance
    and assimilation against the Kurdish people(ibid)
    of the people is a weapon in the class struggle. Very proper gentlemen
    "The collaborationist big bourgeoisie which emerged from within
    may not like some of these weapons because they are muddy and
    he new Turkish bourgeoisie growing fat from the policy of creating
    abandon them to the enemy as they do not want to get their hands
    a national bourgeoisie, developed rapidly particularly from the Sec
    duty. But a proletarian fighter waging a life or death struggle does
    ond World War years on and step by step intensified its collaboration
    not care if the weapon is muddy. He will grasp the handle tightly
    with imperialism. (ibid
    (Liquidationists Article
    The big bourgeoisie that grew due to profiteering during the
    The fascist government.has launched a contemptible campaign
    war, took shelter under the wings of international capital and con
    fo appropriate the revolutionary past of our people for itself. They are
    solidated its alliance with the landlords who had developed as a re
    endeavouring to make M Kemal a tool of fascist
    The fascis
    sult of high agricultural prices during the war years. This reactionar
    pro-american curs who are the most ferocious enemies of inde
    alliance supported the DP in order to liberate itself from the shack
    pendence presume they will be able to portray M. Kemal as part
    les of CHP state capitalist bureaucracy, maintaining its power witl
    of their fascist twaddle by distorting his principles (The political
    that party. (ibid)
    situation in the World and in Turkey after 12 March, page 4
    From 1950 onwards imperialist capital had free rein(ibid)
    In order to mislead the Kemalist sections of the middle bour
    After 1950 imperialism and its collaborators using the reac
    geoisie".(ibid p 45)
    ionary parliament as a means of domination".(ibid)
    The people of Turkey, who waged the tirst liberation struggle ol
    the political and economic crisis which intensified the exploita
    the age of proletarian revolutions and national liberation struggles
    tion and oppression of the people by the day resulted in the overthrow
    gave hope and courage to all the oppressed peoples of Asia". (Dratt
    of the Us-lackey DP government on 27 May 1960
    Programme
    The middle bourgeoisie which gave its character to the 27 May
    The bourgeois leadership of the War of Liberation.established
    movemnent surrendered to imperialism from the outset. It left power
    a dictatorship that oppressed the workers and peasants.(ibid)
    to the collaborationist big bourgeoisie and the landlords"(ibid)
    Following the destruction of the Ottoman Sultanate and com
    Let us summarise the theses of the Shafak revisionists
    prador bourgeoisie with the War of National Liberation, the new Turk
    Iour National Liberation War was carried out under the lead
    ish bourgeoisie that seized power endeavoured to create a national
    ership of the national bourgeoisie
    bourgeoisie by means of the state in order to grow and become
    2) Our Liberation War Was the first liberation struggle of the
    wealthy. The new Turkish bourgeoisie exploited the workers and
    age of proletarian revolutions and national liberation wars"(ibid)
    peasants mercilessly under this label and came to an agreement with
    Our Liberation War"gave courage and hope to all the op
    the feudal landlords and imperialism. ( ibid)
    pressed people of Asia
    37

==========第70頁==========
    4)With our National Liberation struggle. the Ottoman sultanate
    13)Kemalism is the ideology of the revolutionary section of the
    and comprador bourgeoisie was demolished
    middle bourgeoisie
    5)The Kemalist government was politically an independent dic
    M. Kemal's principles are in no way compatible with fascism
    tatorship of the national bourgeoisie.Those who claim M. Kemnal
    M. Kemal is part of the progressive history of our people"
    was an imperialist collaborator are bourgeois idealists
    14)We are the heirs of M. Kemal's principle of total independ
    6)The new Turkish bourgeoisie which took power endeavoured
    nce. We cannot abandon this inheritance to the fascists, we must
    to create a national bourgeoisie by means of the state. (ibid)
    cling to it fervently
    7)"The Kemalist bourgeoisies dictatorship over the people came
    15)"The analyses of Lenin, Stalin and Mao should be a beacon
    o agreement with feudalism and imperialism as a necessity of thecharacter of the national bourgeoisie.
    These are the theses of the Shafak revisionists Now let us begin
    8) The collaborationist big bourgeoisie emerged from within
    our critique
    the new Turkish bourgeoisie that was growing fat from the creationof the national bourgeoisie
    The collaborationist big bourgeoisie, in particular from the Second World War years developed rapidly and intensified its collaboration with imperialism step by step. (ibid)"During theit became wealthy from profiteering and went under the wing of international capital
    The collaborationist big bourgeoisie established an alliance withthe landlords who had developed during the war years
    This reactionary alliance, in order to firee itself from the conines of the bureaucracy of CHP state capitalism, backed the DP andcontinued its power with that party
    9)After 1950 imperialist capital in Turkey had free rein
    10)Imperialism and its collaborators used the reactionary parliament as a means of domination
    I I)The political and economic crisis resulted in the overthrow otthe American lackey DP government on 27 May 1960.(ibid)12)It was the middle bourgeoisie that gave its character to the27 May movement. "With the 27 May movement power passed to hemiddle bourgeoisie, but the middle bourgeoisie surrendered power tothe "collaborationist big bourgeoisie and landlords. " (ibid)
    139

==========第71頁==========
    --
    ular masses. (After the Young Turk revolution, too)Turkey preserved
    We shall present the character of the Kemalist movement and tl
    ts semi-colonial character. That is, it was in the position of a marke
    Kemalist government's practice with extensive reference to Schnurov
    from which capitalist countries bought raw materials and to which they
    For Schnurov is a reliable witness. a sound Bolshevik. The book frol
    sold industrial products
    which we shall quote was written to introduce the situation in Turkey
    Turkey was considered politically to be independent. But Turkey
    and the struggle of the working class to the Soviet working class. Tlere
    was a toy in the hands of the imperialists. For this reason Turkey was
    IS no reason not to accept the views expressed by Schnurov as being the
    pushed into the First World War by Germany, on which it was depend-
    views in those years of comrade Stalin and the other Bolshevik leaders
    ent economically to an exceptional degree, and on whose account itfought. With Germany losing the war Turkey was entirely pillaged. In
    I. The classes leading the Kemalist Revolution are the
    order to protect its territorial integrity a second revolution became e
    Turkish Big Bourgeoisie and Feudal Lord Classes
    sential. This time, the revolution known as thekemalist revolutionwas carried out against French and British imperialism
    Comrada Schnurov says
    The Turkish mercantile bourgeoisie took over the leadership o
    The Turkish national revolution. called Kemalist on account ol
    the revolution. Since Turkey was an agricultural country the merchants
    the revolution's leader M. Kemal, was directed by Turkey's national
    main trade was in agricultural products. The mercantile bourgeoisie
    bourgeoisie, that is merchants, landlords and at that time the very small
    thus established strong links with the feudal gentry and landlords. In
    number of industrialists in Turkey
    every Turkish village the lord and landowner was also a usurer and the
    (All excerpts from this book were taken from the Tiirkive' de
    main buyer and seller of the peasants products. These gentry some
    Kapitalistlesme ve Sumif Kavgalari book OFA Schnurov and Y Roza
    times owned flour mills or small factories processing oil or dried fruit
    iyev published by Ant Yayinlar in 1970 Schnurov's part of the book
    or other enterprises. The gentry also represented large firms that bought
    as republished by Yar Yaymnlarl under the title Turkiye Proletaryasl
    agricultural products wholesale
    Rozaliyev's part of the book was also republished by Yar Yayinlal
    Under these conditions if Turkey had been defeated by the Euro
    under the title Tiirkiye Sanayi Proletaryasl
    pean capitalists, foreigners would in a short time have seized all trade
    The Kemalist revolution is similar to, and follower of, the Young
    and industry. The Turkish bourgeoisie faced a life or death struggle. If
    Turk revolution
    the parts under the occupation of the capitalists did not exist, if the state
    Schnurov says: As a result of the domination of the large landown
    did not support them, if the privileges granted to foreigners continued
    ers who mercilessly robbed what is essentially a poor country. the re
    and Turkey remained entirely dependent on foreign capital the coun
    ]]ous men and, first and foremost, the sultanate. Turkey fell entirely
    try's trade and industry would sooner or later die. It was this threat that
    Into the hands of European capital, becoming the slave of European
    Inade the merchant, industrialist and large landlord and gentry that sold
    capitalism. In 1908 the rule of the Sultan was for the first time shaken
    agricultural products to foreign countries into revolutionaries. The peas
    to the roots by the combined force of the Turkish mercantile bour-
    ants, workers and small businessmens discontent with the capitalists
    geoisie, officers and nobles. This bourgeois revolution is known as the
    and landlords was expertly turned into a struggle against foreign capi-
    Young lurk revolution and was supported at the beginning by the pop
    4

==========第72頁==========
    talists. The revolution therefore spread all over the country and took
    and were lackeys of firstly Germman imperialism and, after the defeat
    on a national characte
    of German imperialism in World War one, moved close to British
    The Kemalist revolution was essentially led by the mercantile
    French imperialism
    bourgeoisie, but was a"national bourgeois revolution based on theil
    We know that the Turkish bourgeoisie initially organised around
    alliance with a section of gentry large landowners and usurers and at
    the Committee of Union and Progress and that this class along with the
    the beginning the bourgeoisie succeeded in gaining the support of
    officers and nobles led the Young Turk revolution in 1908. After the
    the people
    Committee of Union and Progress had come to power, due to global
    It is necessary to dwell briefly on the above concept of"national
    conditions and the continuing problem of Turkey's semi-colonial struc
    bourgeoisie.comradesLeninStalinandSchnurov,whendiscussing
    ture, it went into collaboration with German imperialism
    the Kemalist revolution used the term"national bourgeois" in the mean
    While on the one hand a wing of the bourgeoisie grew and flour-
    ing of bourgeois who were Turkish. The distinction between national
    ished, constituting the Turkish big bourgeoisie. on the other the com
    bourgeois and comprador bourgeois did not yet exist, We sce this con
    prador bourgeoisie, comprised of in general the minority nationalities
    cept later in its new meaning with comrade Mao Ise-i'ung. When com
    that had existed since the time of Abdul Hamit maintained its presence
    rade Lenin. Stalin and Schnurov call the Kemalist revolution
    The Committee of Union and Progress represented the interests of the
    national bourgeois revolution'they mean a"revolution of the
    former, and as the loyal lackey of German imperialism became the
    geoisie who were Turkish, not a"revolution of the bourgeoisie who
    swom enemy of the working class and other toilers. The growing com
    were not comprador. "In the booklet we are discussing comrade
    rador wing of the Turkish bourgeoisie( that is, the Turkish comprador
    Schnurov considers the landlords and usurers within the concept of
    big bourgeoisie )became fabulously wealthy during the First World War
    bourgeois". For instance, he says: "Turkey's national bourgeoisie, that
    on account of trading in military vehicles, railway monopoly and prof
    is, merchant, landlord"(ibid). We also find this use of the term bour
    iteering on essential goods. Signiticant wealth and capital was accu
    geois in comrades Stalin sand Dimitrov. Comrade Schnurov, when call
    mulated. With the collapse of German imperialism and the consequen
    iny the Kemalist revolution the"revolution of the national bourgeoisie
    threat to their domination they began to flirt with the allied powers and
    means the revolution of the mercantile bourgeoisie. landlords. usurers
    take necessary steps
    and small number of industrial bourgeoisie who were Turkish and
    It is these which comrade Stalin called the upper strata.
    mentions all these classes one by one
    Comrade Schnurov, in his book points out that the Turkish bour
    Were these classes"nationa], in today's meaning of the word
    geoisie had to participate in the National Liberation War, despite not
    comprador let us dwell on this: In his book New Democracy comrade
    being revolutionary In backward countries the bourgeoisie that is not
    Mao Tse-tung quotes comrade Stalin as saying Kemalist /evolution
    comprador that is, the national bourgeoisie has a revolutionar
    is a revolution of the top stratum, a revolution of the nationa/ mert/
    albeit limited. The class that is not revolutionary is the comprador bour
    bourgeois
    geoisie that is in a union of interests with imperialism
    The upper class in question were the Turkish comprador big
    Again Schnurov says that"the feudal gentry are also agents of large
    bourgeoisie that grew within the Committee of Union and Progress
    commercial firms that by agricultural products wholesale. It is known
    142
    143

==========第73頁==========
    that in those years the"large commercial firms'"were to a large degree
    The defeat of Armenia by the Kemalists. with the Entente
    Inder the control or in the possession of the imperialists. All this shows
    maining absolutely neutral, "the rumours of the contemplated
    that the leadership of the National Liberation War passed into the hands
    restoration of Thrace and . Smyrna to Tirkey, the rumours of negotia-
    of the comprador big bourgeoisie, landlords and usurers within the
    tions between the Kemalists and the Sultan who is an agent of the En
    Committee of Union and Progress from the very beginning. Comrade
    tente, and of a contemplated withdrawal from Constantinople, and
    Schnurov explained the reasons impelling these classes into the Libel
    lastly, the lul/ on Turkey s Western Front- all these are symptoms which
    ation War above
    indicate that the Entente is flirting fuu iously with the Kema-lisis. and
    let us stress another point: the middle bourgeoisie, which did not
    that the Kemalists are probably executing a certain swing to the Righ
    become wealthy, maintained its existence Committee of Union an
    How the Entente s flirtation with the Kemalists will end, and how
    Progress. It is evident that this wing of the bourgeoisie played a si
    far the latter will go in their swing to the Right, it is difficult to say. But
    nificant role in the War of Liberation. We were previously of the opir
    one thing is certain, and that is that the struggle for the emancipation
    ion that the middle bourgeoisie of a national character were the
    of the colonies, begun several years ago, will intensify in spite of ever
    leadership of the Liberation War. However, on examining comrade
    thing, that Riussia, the acknowledged standard-bearer of this struggle,
    Stalin and Schnurov in a more careful way we realised this view was
    will support those who champion it with every available means, and
    mistaken. The middle bourgeoisie of a national character did not lead
    that this struggle will lead to victory together with the Kemalists, if the
    the Liberation War. but it had a significant role in that war. Those who
    do not betray the cause of the liberation of the oppressed peoples, or
    organised in the Defence Associations were mainly the Turkish com
    in spite of them, if they should land in the camp of the Entente
    prador big bourgeoisie, landlords, usurers, town notables and the mid
    he Kemalists did not at the beginning join the ranks of the"allied
    dle bourgeoisie of a national character. These were the classes that
    powers but they did not neglect to carry out covert collaboration with
    provided the leadership of the Liberation War
    then) against the socialist Soviet Union externally and against communists, working class and other toiling people internally. M. Kemal
    2. The Kemalists, even during the years of the Liberation
    and his govemment pursued a hypocritical policy against the Soviet
    War, were embarking on collaboration with the Imperialists
    Union. On the one hand, while raining down the most extreme compliments in order to obtain aid, on the other were seeking a basis for se
    When the imperialists began to make a few minor concessions the
    cret agreements to be made with the US. Britain and France. Two
    Kemalist did not delay in signing agreements with the bourgeoisie o
    months after sending a request for aid to the USSR. M. Suphi and 14
    France. Britain and other countries
    of his comrades were brutally murdered. Furthermore, a campaign was
    .The Kemalists' fear was this: If the war continued the toi]ing
    launched against communists in Anatolia. For the Kemalist bourgeoisie
    masses might not have sufficed with struggle against foreign exploiters
    calculated that if they went to the London conference meeting on 23
    and launched a struggle against exploiters who were their own coun-
    February 192 I having slaughtered communists they would win favour
    trymen
    with their European patrons and that the deadly provisions of the Treaty
    00> Schnurov says this. As for comrade Stalin he wrote the following
    of Serves might be abandoned. Bekir Sami, the head of the delegation
    30 Nove]ber 1920
    144
    45

==========第74頁==========
    nt the conference, sought better conditions for agreement by saying that
    panies of Europe still today(that is, in 1929) work as they wish in
    Turkey would join the anti-soviet block. A gain, while the Conference
    urkey". Old loans were accepted under pressure from the imperialists
    was being held the Kemalist government demanded the Soviet Union
    Foreigners were ensured freedom of trade. Schurnov again
    leave Artvin and Ardahan and attempted to occupy Batum. However.
    It is true that foreigners no longer had any more or special rights
    when the efforts to ingratiate themselves with the Europeans failed and
    than Turkish citizens, but then this was equality amongst the unequal
    the Europeans insisted on the Treaty of Serves the Kemalists were
    That is, how can powerful European capital be equal to Turkish capi-
    obliged to again look to cosy up to the Soviet Union
    ta1? It is natural that there could be no question of equality. New in
    Immediately after the Greek armies were thrown out. as th
    stallations were being established by both Turkish and foreign capital
    mained no need for Soviet aid the Kemalists reintroduced the han on
    In the same book Schnurov wrote
    cominunisi
    Turkey's largest capitalists are foreigners. Apart from all the min-
    Izvestia of 14 November 1922 reported that
    Ing concerns, most of the railways and the factories that process agri
    The Kemalist governmment desires to win favour with the inner
    cultural products are in foreign hands. 1, 100 million francs in foreign
    alist states by having communists followed
    capital has been invested in the Turkish economy. 450 million of this
    So the Kemalist government had entered collaboration with the
    capital is German, 350 million French. 200 million British and 100 mil-
    European imperialist masters while the War of Liberation was contin
    lion from other countries(pages 72-73)
    uing. Not as the Shafak revisionists assume. after the death of Ataturk
    n another part of his book Schnurov states that Turkey is a semi
    Hence, the War of Liberation ended in a short time of four years. The
    colony
    Shafak revisionists say"a long and bloody war", but if compared t(
    Turkey is an underdeveloped, semi-colonial country. French. Ger
    the Chinese or Vietnamese Revolutions it was brief. No one can deny
    man and British capitalists are securing fortunes from the backs o
    that the positive feelings of the Allied imperialists towards the Kemal
    Turkish workers and peasants".(page 57)
    ist bourgeoisie played a significant role in th
    Both the Young Turks and the Kemalists came to power on thebacks of the toiling classes. But both of them maintained Turkey
    3. With the War of Liberation the colonised territories were
    semi-colonial structure untouched. While the Young Turk revolution
    Liberated. the Sultanate was Abolished but the semi
    conserved the sultanate, the Kemalist revolution abolished the Sultanate
    colonial and semi-feudal structure remained in place0
    and liberated the occupied territories, that is, the colonised territories
    The Kemalist revolution liberated the occupied territories. abolished
    In this way the colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal order became
    the sultanate and removed some of the privileges granted to imperialist
    a seint-colonlal and semml-reuaal order
    countries (for instance, higher tax and customs duties began to be ta ken
    4. After the Liberation War the Domination of a section of
    from goods imported from foreign countries, preferential rights forfor
    the Comprador Big Bourgeoisie and Landlords was replaced
    eign capital were abolished ). However, Turkey still remained a semi
    by the Domination of Another Section
    colonial country. Schnurov says: "The railways, factories and nremained in foreign hands for a further period. The large banks and coin
    We have indicated that the Kemalist bourgeoisie entered into col-
    47

==========第75頁==========
    laboration with the Allied imperialists during the years of conflict. A
    intentions of the Turkish bourgeoisie, but the natural rule of things. The
    for the alliance with landlords, this existed from the beginning of the
    Turkish bourgeoisie desires to be wealthy, but its capital is puny. Large
    war. Those who headed the war were the mercantile bourgeoisie, Jand
    and abundant capital is in the hands of Western Imperialist bourgeoisie
    lords. usurers and the industrial bourgeoisie, who at that time were
    To compete with them is fatal, so the most advantageous and profitabl
    weak who had strong links to each other, as pointed out by Schnurov
    route Is to cooperate with them for a suitable share. The Turkish bour
    Amongst these the dominant force was the mercantile bourgeoisie. This
    geoisie took this path, mercilessly exploiting and crushing the working
    alliance replaced some of the old mercantile bourgeoisie and bour
    class and toiling people as it endeavoured to increase its capital and
    geoisie of the minority nationalities(Armenian and Anatolian Greek
    maintaln its rule. Comrade Schnurov expresses this reality thus: n the
    Schnurov makes the same point thus: "The capital which owned the
    end many Kemalists became partners of various foreign companies
    new installations and enterprises had been brought into existence partl
    These foreign companies
    by the take over of Armenian and Greek enterprises, the owners of which
    also benefit from close contacts with government offices and from
    had fled the country, and partly from the pillaging of state institutions
    their partners (p. 49
    and bribery. Also, many Kemalist members of parliament and statesmentook advantage of being in power by taking over institutions abandoned
    5. The Comprador Big Bourgeoisie and Landlords were
    by Anatolian Greek, Armenian and the other foreigners with Turkish na
    divided into two political camps after the War of Liberation
    tionality in the First World War, working these enterprises and
    The Kemalist Dictatorship represented the interests of
    lishing new ones with money saved from their salaries.(page 49)
    one of these camps
    We have learnt from enquiries we have made in various regions o
    Turkey that a section of the landlords and large landowners emerged in
    In those years these two main camps amongst the ruling classes
    the same way, that is, by taking over abandoned Armenian and Greck
    were comprised of the following elements: on the one hand the new
    propert
    So the domination of a section of the old comprador bour
    Turkish Big Bourgeoisie that was increasing its collaboration with im
    geoisie(the majority consisting of the minority nationalities)was re
    perialisi, a section of the old comprador big bourgeoisie, a section of
    placed by another section of the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords
    the landlords and large landowners and the upper and most privileged
    Of course. a significant section of the old landlords maintained
    public servants and intellectuals. On the other, another part of the com
    their dominance. A part of the new Turkish bourgeoisie establishing
    prador big bourgeoisie, another section of the landlords and large
    power had from long before had a comprador nature. We have pointed
    landowners, religious figures who had been the ideological props of
    this out. The comprador nature of another part of the bourgeoisie began
    the Sultanate and feudalism and the remnants of the Ulema class. We
    immediately after the War of Liberation and gradually increased. The
    do not know which landlords were on which side for which interests
    covert collaboration between the Turkish bourgeoisie and imperialism
    This would entail a separate, detailed study. This has little importance
    that began in the war years developed in the economic sphere after the
    for the subject on which we are concentrating. What is important is the
    war and the semi-colonial structure that remained in place rendered this
    Incontrovertible reality that while some landlords were partners in the
    collaboration even more inevitable. This was certainly not due to the ill
    administration, and possessed influence, others opposed the Kemalistgovernment. For instance, the Kurdish landlords and tribal chiefs in

==========第76頁==========
    eastern Anatolia were generally in the second camp. They were sub
    been murdered or had fled Turkey. They thus split off from the other
    sequently to support the DP and AP and oppose the CHP. Bul, as we
    sections of the middle bourgeoisie of a national character. These splits
    haye mentioned. some of the landlords were in the Kemalist govern-
    and metamorphoses gradually became more apparent. A section of the
    tent from the very beginning and had a say and influence in the state
    comprador Turkish big bourgeoisie which was from the Committee o
    The CHP was the political party of the first camp and originated in
    Union and Progress and the new comprador Turkish big bourgeoisie
    the defence associations. As for the second calmp, while the one-party
    These were the dominant elements within the Kemalist government
    system existed it was within the CHP and the political struggle between
    The interests of the higher echelons of the Turkish bourgeoisie were
    these two camps took place within the party. With the move to a multi
    almost identical to those of European capitalists and they entered into
    party system they established their own political parties. The Ter
    close collaboration with European imperialists
    akkiperver Firka formed in 1925, the Serbest Firka established in 1930
    China after the revolution of 1924-1927 power passed
    and the DP and Apset up later on were all, essentially, political partie
    into the hands of the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords, a similar
    of the second camp. We say"essentially"for various conflicts of in
    event had already taken place in Turkey
    terest, new situations etc could always lead to people leaving One camp
    Comrade Stalin was of the same opinion, if expressed differently
    for the other, or new elements joining, With the transition to the multi
    A Kemalist revolution is a revolution of the top stratum, a revo
    party system in 1946 Many parties appeared from within the CHP. a
    lution of the national merchan bourgeoisie, arising in a strugg
    situation resulting from the fact that all sections of the ruling classes
    against the foreign imperialists, and whose subsequent development i
    were present in the CHP. The Kemalist government was not a politi
    essentially directed against the peasants and workers, against the very
    cally independent national bourgeois government, Instead it was a gov
    possibility of an agrarian revolution
    emment of the comprador big bourgeoisie, landlords and the upper elit
    The point we wish to emphasise here is this: the Kemalist govern
    of public servants and intellectuals who were part of the tirst camp
    ment did not represent the interests of the middle, that is the national
    semi-dependent on imperialism. The Kemalist dictatorship even, to a
    bourgeoisie. It represented the section of the comprador big bourgeoisie
    certain extent. crushed the middle bourgeoisie who were not in collab
    that emerged from this class and developed and became wealthy dur
    oration with imperialism. The division between the comprador big
    ing the era of the Committee of Union and Progress. The section of the
    bourgeoisie, whom the Kemalist govemment represented, and the mid-
    middle bourgeoisie that could not develop was still kept in the CHP
    dle bourgeoisie became increasingly clear. Just as in the era of the Com
    and supported against the workers and peasants. Just as after the First
    mittee of Union and Progress, in the Republican era, too, the part o
    Revolutionary Civil War of 1921-1927 in China the middle bourgeois
    the middle bourgeoisie that participated in the War of Liberation used
    took its place in the ranks of the Kuomintang, those in Turkey took
    the power of the state it had seized like a winch, in order to enrich It
    their place in the ranks of the CHP. The struggle within the ruling
    self, creating state monopolies, entering into collaboration with Impe
    classes was not between the national bourgeoisie, the comprador b
    rialism using their investments in their own interests, growing fat on
    bourgeoisie and the landlords, as supposed, but essentially, between
    bank credits and profiteering, and becoming inordinately wealthy by
    two wings of the comprador big bourgeoisie and the landlords. Th
    seizing the properties of Armenians and Anatolian Greeks who had
    middle bourgeoisie of a national character was a secondary force in

==========第77頁==========
    one of these wings. To grasp this point is of the utmost inportance Il
    21)Todays Turkish goverment is certainly a dictatorship(should be
    explaining both yesterday and today. The thing that gained the CHP a
    fascism). For the ruling Turkish bourgeoisie is weak and has to crush
    relatively progressive character was the middle bourgeoisie of a na
    the toiling people in order to develop. (page 2
    tional character that existed from the outset as a social force but was not
    Unions are immediately banned; associations and federations
    dominant in the party. The Kemalist government was not, as claimed
    permitted to open have to suffice with charity work and operate under
    by the TIP, D. Avcioglu, H. Kivilcimli, Shalak and Tkprevisionists(in
    state control. (page 24). all manner of trade association is prohib
    the past and today), a revolutionary and progressive government. To
    ited..(page 25). ".According to law, workers and public servants
    consider an alliance with the Kemalist government was to take refuge
    may leave a job, but all manner of demonstration or action that harms
    in the counter-revolutionary ranks, for the Kemalist government itself
    the freedom of work has been banned. "(page 26)
    represented the counter-revolution. For the revisionists the overthrow
    .The Kemalists too, like the Young Turks, were only able to
    of the republican order and a restoration of the Sultanate would have
    come to power through the support of the toiling masses. Like the
    been a counter-revolution. But this would not have suited the younger
    Young Turks, in the first months of the Kemalist revolution the nationa
    sections of the bourgeoisie, or even the old Turkish biy bourgeoisie
    bourgeoisie was unable to prevent the formation of workers'organisa
    Developments in the world have reached such a point that no one can
    tions. However, these unions were not of a solely class character: some
    dare to put on the crowns that have been thrown out of office. An a
    of them were under the influence of the bourgeoisie. (page 42)
    ministration with a crown can no longer meet the needs of the ruling
    Once the Kemalist bourgeoisie had signed the peace pact with the
    .r severely
    imperialists. the bourgeoisie no longer needed the support of the to
    The counter-revolution can only be a""democratic republic"with a tas
    Ing masses. It was necessary to prevent the class conflict growing; this
    cist mask. And this has occurred
    conflict was on the verge of becoming an open war against all explotters and capitalists, whether native or foreign
    6.The Kemalist Dictatorship is a Military Fascist
    The Kemalists harassed the Communist Party and the worker
    Dictatorship over the Workers, Peasants, Urban Petit
    movement. The Communist Party had to go underground. Many of its
    bourgeoisie, low ranking public servants and democrat
    well known members, such as Mustafa Suphi, were brutally murdered
    tellectuals:
    Those who survived were pursued and imprisoned. In 1923 the Istan
    Comrade Schnurov says: " Although there exists the appearance of
    bul International Workers'association was closed down. The pretextfor the closure was its distribution of leaflets to celebrate Mayday. The
    democratic forms(elected parliament etc. ) the essence of the existingorder in Turkey today (1929)is a dictatorship that is far from all
    leaders of the association were arrested and, just as the Young Turks had
    democracies. (ibid)(that is, fascism). There is no party apart from
    established their own so-called workers' organisations, now the Kemalists used their own bourgeois"unions as a tool against workers' ac
    the ruling party and no party is allowed to be formed. Even the Social-democrat party has been banned. Newspapers and magazines are under
    tions.(page 43)
    relentless control. Even the possibility of an article appearing in the fu
    Following the looting of the Amele Teali the Profintern Administration Council issued a statement
    ture in these publications is enough for them to be closed down(page52

==========第78頁==========
    The Popular Party governinent (the Kemalists) have for a lon
    the working class movement: In August 1927 the workers on the
    time been trying to seize the union action and turn it into a fascist or
    Adana-nusaybin railway owned by the French went on strike. The
    sanisation (page 47)"Turkey is one of the most brutal countries as re
    reason was simple: they had not been paid the advance they had re
    gards its treatment of the workers 'Inovement. At the 3rd Congress of
    quested on the eve of the religious holiday. Prior to this workers' rep
    the Profintern (in 1924 )a special resolution was passed protesting at the
    resentatives had drawn up a modest list of 3I demands and asked for
    oppression of the Turkish working class, and a statement issued: "The
    them to be implemented
    Third Congress of the Profintern vehemently protests at the persecution
    The capitalists did not respond for 6 weeks before rejecting the
    being meted out to the Turkish working class. Turkey is one of the most
    petition. The resulting strike lasted for 20 days with 850 workers tak
    oppressive countries towards the workers movement..(page 59
    ing part. No trains ran for 2 days. " Eventually, on the third day the
    After the Kurdish rebellion of 925 martial law was pro
    company(French capitalist firm)sent a train to assist the strike break
    claimed for two years, with"independence tribunals beug established
    ers. Hundreds of workers and their families lay down on the tracks
    On the pretext of this incident the workers, peasants and toiling masses
    and closed the line. In response the Kemalist government officials
    in general were subiected to severe repression. The Avdinlik and Orak
    dispatched a military unit which opened fire on the unarmed workers
    Cekic (hammer and sickle)newspapers were closed down. Turk ish
    and their families. The rails were covered in blood, 22 ringleaders
    workers'leaders. heads of workers'associations and publishers of the
    were arrested
    newspapers were sentenced to 10-15 vears imprisonment
    The strike was crushed by foreign capitalists, with the participa
    A recurrence of history! Just like this. the Young Turks, who had
    tion of thedemocratic Kemalist government. The class brotherhood
    come to power on the backs of the toiling masses, did the same thin
    of the capitalists mattered more than national enmity. Schnurov con
    t the end of the revolution. But what happened? The Young Turk
    tinued: This is not an isolated example. A strike at the Seyrusefayin
    ended up as an obedient tool of German imperialism. "(pages 59-60)
    company in 1926 was suppressed in the same way. The government
    he Kemalist government is resorting to all means in order to
    sent marines as strike breakers to end the strike".(pages 63-64)
    crush the workers movement, everything is permissible. The police
    Thousands of workers were sacked for the most basic reasons and
    take progressive workers from their homes in the middle of the night
    the Kemalist government supported the bosses. In many cases the gov
    and detain them for several days. The reason? Nothing. On such and
    ernment was itself the boss. Schnurov's book is fully of such exam
    such a date what colour was their tie? What symbols were on their caps
    les. We do not feel it necessary to list them all here. Let us take a look
    what did they discuss, I wonder?
    at the situation of the peasants. Our witness is again Schnurov
    Didnt the AP implement exactly the same policy to the letter
    Peasants who have been robbed and their house demolished are
    What difference is there between the above mentioned incidents and the
    reduced to being day labourers or moving to the cities to seek work. In
    arrest of the young Iman playing guitar under a red light? Isnt the fas
    the village the usurers, large landowners, landlords, wholesalers and
    cist Erim government following exactly the same path? Isn't it banning
    merchants rob the peasants mercilessly
    strikes and closing down publications
    The majority of peasant families in Turkey are poor. They do not
    An examnple of the cruelty of the Kemalist government towards
    have sufficient land, or machinery, or livestock. The impoverished
    154
    55

==========第79頁==========
    peasant leases land from the rich, that is, the landowner or landlord
    A strike by telegraph operators in 1924 for a pay rise was sup
    He obtains the vehicle with a loan and in return both works as an un
    pressed The government alleged that communists were behind it and
    paid day labourer on the owners land and hands over a third or a hal
    arrested the strikers. In Adana an order was Implemented and many
    of his own produce. Since he cannot afford to buy a vehicle or t0 get
    striking telegraph operators were sent to the Independence Tribunal in
    by he borrows money at extortionate interest rates froin the usurer. As
    Ankara. The offence: a plot against the government!(pages 68-69)
    the peasant does not own a horse and cart he cannot take his produce
    7. The Kemalist Dictatorship crushed the minorit
    to market and is forced to sell to a wholesaler for peanuts. The whol
    nationalities, particularly the Kurdish nation, with a polic
    saler is very often the landowner from whom the land is leased or the
    of mercilless national oppression, carrying out massacres,
    landlord or usurer. The poor peasant masses are therefore loaded down
    and with all its might fanned the flames of Turkish
    with debt, under which they fall and are reduced to working as day
    chauvinism
    labourers in the village or moving to the cities to find work.(page 35)
    Since exploitation in the villages is developed there is a village
    The Kemalist dictatorship usurped all the rights of the minority na-
    bourgeoisie class that lives on the labour of the toiling peasant. This is
    tionalities, in particular the Kurdish nation. It endeavoured to forcibly
    a landlord, usurer and merchant class(ibid)
    Turkicise them. It banned their languages. It crushed the Kurdish re
    N B. It is mistaken to call all these a village bourgeoisie. The Ina
    bellions that broke out from time to time, joining with some Kurdish
    jority of peasants are either on the verge of poverty or have to work
    feudal lords,. It then massacred thousands, women, children, young and
    day labourers for rich landlords and they swell the ranks of the prole
    old, and made life unbearable for the Kurdish people by declaring'mil-
    tariat.(page 76
    itary prohibited Zones and"martial law". After the Dersim rebellion
    The Kemalist dictatorship took the side of the landlords, large
    more than 60,000 Kurdish peasants were slaughtered At Lausanne the
    landowners, usurers and merchants against the peasants, the state forces
    Kurdish nation's right to self-determination was meanly trampled on
    mercilessly crushing the peasants in their service. The Kemalist dicta
    The Kemalists and imperialists, ignoring the wishes and views of the
    torship also crushes the lower sections of artisans and public servants.
    Kurdish nation, haggled and divided the region of Kurdistan amongst
    Strikes by clerks, customs officials and telegraph operators were vio
    various states. The minority nationalities, particularly the Kurds, were
    ently repressed
    subjected to humiliating treatment, all insults were considered accept
    Schnurov writes
    able. The Kemalist dictatorship endeavoured to fan the flames ofturk
    The activity of public servants is hard, because for them the
    ish chauvinism. It rewrote history, putting forward a racist and fascist
    government is a capitalist that directly employs a worker. And every
    theory claiming that all nations sprang forth from the Turks
    struggle for better pay and conditions is immediately classified by tl
    The nonsensical Sun Language Theory claimed that all languages
    Kemalists as a political crime against the government. On the other
    had derived from Turkish Chauvinist slogans such as"One Turk is
    hand the Kemalists are endeavouring to establish a state organisation
    equal to the world, "How happy is one who says I am a Turk"were
    thaf is loyal to the government and reliable
    ntroduced into every corner of the country, into schools, offices
    The Kemalists sack people with different opinions.(page 67
    57

==========第80頁==========
    In this way it sowed the seeds of national enmity and animosity
    these taxes. for a large proportion of the income of the poor goes on
    amongst the workers and toilers of various nationalities, sabotaging
    food and other essential goods. ( Schnurov, pages 31-32)
    lidarity and unity. It wished to use Turkish workers and toilers as an
    The Kemalist government protects the owners of the factories
    instrument in its chauvinist policy
    and installations, because the Kemalist mercantile bourgeoisie invests
    The line followed by the Kemalist dictatorship on the national
    its capital in the rapidly developing industrial sectors. Many enter
    uestion was Turkish chauvinism in the full meaning of the word
    prises and commercial concerns have been established with money
    And as is known. a characteristic of fascist dictatorships is to lan the
    obtained from government banks. The capital of many an enterprise
    names of dominant nation chauvinism by creating and inciting na
    may only be considered partially private capital. The large propor
    tional animosity to divide the toiling popular masses and pit them one
    tion of the capital is provided by the government as there is not much
    against the other
    capital in private hands
    "The Kemalist government has established a series of monopolies
    8. The Kemalists relentlessly exploited the popular masses
    tobacco processing and export monopoly, sugar, paraffin, matches, salt
    establishing state monopolies and removing competition to
    gunpowder, playing cards, ports etc
    a large degree. The government thus on account of these
    Due to these monopolies the government itself has become an en
    monopolies itself became an entrepreneur. The monopolies
    trepreneurial merchant. The railways are being constructed either from
    which combined membership of the government with
    the state treasury or by foreign capitalists. The government has to provide
    enterprise brought a bureaucratic quality to the bourgeoisie
    good working conditions for these foreign capitalists. The situation is no
    The Kemalists, who had entirely taken over the power OI the stale
    different for companies working with foreign capital. (page 49)
    So it is not a question of"creating a national bourgeoisie by the
    ed this power to enrich themselves as far as possible
    hand of the state. It is a matter of mobilising all the possibilities of the
    The government. having established several commercial mo
    state to enrich and develop the Kemalist bourgeoisie. The state mo-
    nopolies, is constantly increasing taxes on goods sold. A prominent
    nopolies also served this purpose. The Kemalist bourgeoisie, by creat
    journalist says: the word monopoly means legalised robbery (or the
    Ing state monopolies and utilising them in their own service. eliminated
    Turkish people): The German newspaper Berkwerk-zeitung published
    most competition in these spheres and thereby mercilessly exploited
    figures in its edition of 25 September 1927 demonstrating what a rob
    the workers and peasants for high monopoly profits
    bery the policy of monopolies is and the terrifying level of taxati
    On the other hand monopolist-state capitalism, as indicated by
    According to this the price of paraffin wholesale is 4.5 kurus (a litre)
    Schnurov, combining enterprise with membership of the government
    whereas the retail price is 16.5 kurus, nearly 4 times as much. The price
    added a bureaucratic character to the bourgeoisie, that is, it brought
    of petrol rises froin 7 to 11.5 kurus (for factories, workshops etc. ) The
    forth a bureaucratic bourgeoisie. When the global capitalist crisis o
    price of sugar increases by hall. These taxes with the monopolies con
    1929-30 made its presence felt in Turkey the CHIP clung even closer to
    stitute three fifths of the states income in 1927-28. The merchants and
    etatism and used it like armour in order to survive the crisis. This is the
    capitalists are not adversely affected by these taxes as it is the consumer
    essence of the CHPS etatism
    who pays them in the sale price. The toilers bear the entire burden o58

==========第81頁==========
    9. What is the essence of the struggle waged between the two
    the reactionary organisations nourished by the landlords, usurers and re
    political camps of the comprador big bourgeoisie and
    liglous men in the rural areas and the fascist and similar forces raised in
    landlords oven- etatism'”,“ Free Enterprise”
    the religious schools and Koran courses. Whereas the clique of comprador
    One Party'”,"Muti- Party”:
    big bourgeoisie and landlords that dominate the CHP constantly used thearmy as a threat against the AP. At this juncture let us point out that in re
    We have seen that the first camp that held power was in complete
    cent years the Aps in!luence in the army has increased significantly. But
    control of the state apparatus, creating state monopolies that served ifs
    still, while the AP on the one hand is calling for a continuation of martial
    aims, removing mnost competition by crushing its rivals and gradually
    law, on the other it is in favour of a retum to elections. It wishes for th
    developing and becoming wealthy
    because it wants to be in power alone, not because it is anti-fascist. And
    As for the section of the ruling classes that was in the second camp
    the origins of this are, as we have explained, far in the past
    since it was weak within the state apparatus and was unable to use it as
    We must remember this point: that absolutely no wing of the ruling
    it wished, and was rendered incapable of competing by the'etatism
    classes is eternally"etatist, or" pro-free enterprise", or"pro-one party
    of the first camp, while it struggled to utilise the state apparatus for its
    or"pro-multi-party". They will advocate whatever is to their advantage
    own ends it also hoisted high the banner of"free enterprise "in the eco
    The wing that has control of the state apparatus and utilises it in its own
    nomic sphere against"etatism
    interests will be"etatist as long as this situation persists, whereas th
    The struggle manifesting itself in the economic sphere as'etatisin
    wing that is negatively affected will be"pro-free enterprise " The reac
    versus"free enterprise " was carried on in a similar manner In the po
    tionary wing that dominates the army is in favour of a military dictator
    itical sphere
    ip that is camouflaged by cosmetic democratic forms, whereas the wing
    The first camp was in absolute control of the state apparatus and its
    that takes its strength from civilian fascist forces naturally opposes this
    main prop, the army. It had therefore maintained its dominance by means
    and advocates ways that will guarantee its own power. This is the crux of
    of the army. The Kemalist dictatorship was in reality a military dictator
    the question. This is the essence of the struggle between the ruling classes
    ship. As for the second camp while it endeavoured to utilise the state
    in Turkey that has been going on for a long time. The"socialist who di
    forces and army in its own service. as its real power came froin the land
    covers progressiveness and revolution in the etatism of the CHP is a blind
    lords, usurer merchants and religious leaders in rural areas and because
    Ignorant fool who cannot see that Hitler fascism was also"etatist
    through them it controlled the broad peasant masses, It was in favour ofthe"multi-party system "and"elections". Certainly, a proletarian party
    10. Kemalist Turkey, gradually becoming more and more
    was not included in the"multi-party system it wanted. What the second
    a part of the semi-colonial and reactionary imperialist world
    camp wanted was an election that forced the people to make a prefer-
    had to throw itself into the arms of British-french
    ence between reactionary alliances. This is how the struggle in the eco
    Imperialism
    nomic sphere between"etatism and"free enterprise"was reflected inthe political arena. We can see a similar struggle today. The DP, and sub
    How did"Kemalist Turkey progress and how far did it get? Let
    sequently the AP, has operated in the main by mobilising the backward
    us learn the answer from Comrade Mao-tse-tung
    civilian forces. When Demirel talks of arming 200,000 people he means
    Besides, even Kemalist Turkey eventually had to throw herself

==========第82頁==========
    into the arms of Anglo-french imperialism, becoming more and more
    colonial semi-colonial semi-feudal structure to a semi-coloial semi-
    of a semi-colony and part of the reactionary imperialist world In the
    feudal structure. That is, the semi-colonial and semi-feudal economic
    international situation of today, the"heroes"in the colonies and senr
    tructure continued
    colonies either line up on the imperialist fiont and become part of the
    6. In the social sphere the new Turkish bourgeoisie growing from
    forces of world comunter-revolution, or they line up on the anti-tmnert
    within the middle bourgeoisie of a national character and involved in
    alist front and become par of the forces of world revoluition. They mtst
    collaboration with imperialism, a section of the old comprador Big
    do one or the other: for there is no third choice
    Bourgeoisie and the new bureaucracy replaced the old comprador Big
    We have demonstrated above with quotes from Schnurov how the
    Bourgeoisie consisting of national minorities, the old bureaucracy and
    emalists, even during the war years, covertly were in the imperialist
    the ulema, Some of the old landlords, large landowners. loan sharks
    front, and afterwards openly and decisively became part of the globa
    and profiteering merchants maintained their dominance while others
    anti-revolutionary forces. Subsequently, in a similar way to how the
    were replaced by new ones. The Kemalists as an entirety do not repre
    chiefs of the Committee of Union and Progress became obedient tools
    sent the interests of the middle bourgeoisie of a national character: the
    of German imperialism, the Kemalists, too, became obedient Instru
    represent the interests of the upper classes and strata
    opment and nature of the Kemalist movemen/ short. the birth. develments of British-french imperialism. This is, in
    7. In the political sphere the constitutional monarchy administrationwhose interests were entangled with those of the dynasty was replacedby a bourgeois republic, an administration that best responded to the in
    llet us summarise:
    terests the new ruling classes. This administration was supposedly in
    1. The Kemalist revolution was a revolution of the Turkish Inel
    dependent but in reality was politically seini-dependent on imperialism
    cantile bourgeoisie, landlords, usurers, a small number of industrial
    8. The Kemalist dictatorship was so-called democratic. but in real
    bourgeoisie, a revolution of the upper sections of these. That Is, the rev
    ty was a Inilitary, fascist dictatorship
    olution's leaders were the Turkish comprador big bourgeoisie and lar
    9. Besides, even Kemalist Turkey eventually had to throw herself
    lords class. The middle bourgeoisie of a national character took part in
    into the arms of Anglo-french imperialism, becoming more and more
    the revolution as a reserve force, not as a leading force
    of a semi-colony and part of the reactionary imperialist world
    2. The leaders of the revolution were engaged in covert collabora
    10. In the years following the War of Liberation the Kemalist go
    tion with the Allied Powers during the years of the anti-imperialist war
    ernment was the main enemy of the revolution. In that period it was not
    The imperialists showed goodwill to the Kemalists, consenting to a Ke
    the task of the communist movement to go into alliance(such an al-liance was never realised )with the Kemalists against the clique of old
    alist government
    The Kemalists, after signing up to peace with the imperialists
    comprador bourgeoisie and landlords that had lost its dominant posi
    continued this collaboration in an intensified form
    jon, its task was to overthrow the Kemalist government which represented another clique of the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords and
    4. The Keinalist movement in essence developed agaiworkers and peasants and the possibility of a land revolution
    replace it with a democratic popular dictatorship based on an alliance
    As a result of the Kemalist movement Turkey changed from
    of workers and peasants under the leadership of the working class
    62
    163

==========第83頁==========
    to one of the camps. The struggle between revolution and counter-rev
    We have indicated that following the War of Liberation two polit-
    olution would now be between those who wished to maintain the dic
    ical camps emerged from amongst the ruling classes (comprador big
    tatorship of the comprador big bourgeoisie within the framework of a
    bourgeoisie and landlords)
    The first camp: the new Turkish bourgeoisie that was gradually de
    bourgeois republic, and those classes with interests in this, and these
    veloping its collaboration with imperialism and becoming wealthy, a
    who wished to establish a Democratic People's Republic and classeshho had interests in that
    section of the pro-committee of Union and Progress comprador bourgeoisie, a section of the landlords large landowners, merchants and
    On the one hand the struggle between the two camps of the rul-
    usurers and the elite of the public servants and intellectual
    ing classes, and on the other the struggle between the ruling classesas a whole and the popular classes continued. As the Second World
    As for the second camp it was made up of another section of the ocomprador big bourgeoisie, landlords, large landowners, usurers and
    War approached the reactionary clique that dominated the CHPand the government, which had hitherto collaborated with the
    profiteering merchants, palace members, relgious men and remnants
    British and French imperialists, from 1935 onwards with the
    of the old ulema class
    The middle bourgeoisie of a national character was in the first o
    changing world conditions embarked on collaboration with the
    German imperialists
    hese camps, as a reserve force in the CHP and government ranks
    At the outbreak of war the situation was that the fascist Grerman
    When members of the second camp found the opportunity to associatethey organised in the Terakkiperver Firka and the Serbest Firka, and
    imperialists had assumed total dominance of Turkey. The clique ruling
    hen they didn,t they found a place within the CHP. There were also
    the CHP had become a toy in the hands of German imperialists, a tame
    elements that were pro-caliphate and pro-sultan (former feudal bu
    slave. This clique attempted to implement the Hitlerite fascist methodsof government in Turkey. This clique took the side of German fas
    reaucracy, ulema remnants, religious men etc.)in the second camp
    cism in the global confrontation
    The dominant elements were the comprador big bourgeoisie and a sec
    Although it did not enter the war on the German side, for various
    tion ofthe landlords, usurers and profiteering merchants. The same procaliphate elements were also to be found in the DP and AP as a
    reasons, such as the global balance of forces, the pressure of the socialist goverment in the Soviet Union, the war turning against Ger
    secondary force. We all know that they subsequently established the
    man Imperialism etc., but if conditions had been favourable this
    MNP. The struggle between these two main camps was, from the beginning, essentially a power struggle between the comprador big boul
    clique would not have hesitated to enter the war on the German side,ust as their predecessors in the Committee of Union and Progress had
    geoisie and landlords on the basis of the republic. The struggle between
    oneThe global balance of forces prevented this. The establishment o
    those who wished to bring back the Sultanate and the caliphate and the
    Saracaoglu government was the natural and inevitable outcome o
    republican bourgeoisie was not between supporters of the counter-rev
    this development, of the steps that had been taken since 1935 towards
    olution and the revolution. That period was in the past!
    Let us reiterate: there were those with such aims, but they were
    collaboration with Germany. With this development, the realisation of
    reak and, as we have mentioned, were a secondary forced tacked on
    a German collaborationist government, it reached its peak. Sefik
    Husnu correctly said that; the Saracoglu governmenthas fully
    65

==========第84頁==========
    embraced the principle of protecting the interests of the profiteer
    his is the reason why members of the TKP and certain DP mem-
    ing layers of the Turkish bourgeoisie. most of which have German
    bers(or future DP members)and Fevzi Cakmak, the first president o
    capital, and the large landowners adding that it had adopted this
    the MP, were able to be in the same organisations
    principle"as a cornerstone from the beginning. Sefik Husnu again
    For a communist movement there is certainly no question of mak
    On the one hand the leading cadre of the Popular Party, first and fore
    ung a preference between two reactionary cliques. A communist move-
    most Saracoglu and his colleagues, is undoubtedly opposed to the so
    ment will see both as enemies and wage a struggle to overthrow both
    viet and openly hostile to Londons policy of friendship and
    of them; but will not turn a blind eye to the struggle between them. It
    cooperation with the Soviet Union. Consequently, the two large Anglo
    will make a good evaluation of the two of them in order to guarantee
    Saxon democracies have to support the democratic front within the
    maximum benefit for itself, isolating the more reactionary one and di-
    country by using their influence and not attempting to extend the life
    ecting the initial and most vehement attacks on it while not neglecting
    of the Turkish government by even one day". Although he was mis
    to expose the nature of the other reactionary clique and to preserve the
    taken in his evaluation of the character of the" democratisation, his
    line of hostility between itself and the clique. It will know that this
    diagnosis is correct
    uarrel amongst the ruling classes may at any time turn into unity
    We have now reached a very important point that the Shatakevi
    against the people and that the other clique may tomorrow take the
    sionists have been unable to grasp. Those who were subsequently to
    place of the more reactionary clique. This is dependant on the contin
    set up the DP were not the dominant pro-german clique in the CHP.
    ually changing balance of forces between the reactionaries, which
    but. on the contrary, were those who had been opposed to this clique
    clique is in charge of the government, whether there is a political and
    since the time of the Terakkiperver Firka and the Serbest Firka. The
    economic crisis and similar conditions
    slogans of"multi-party " and"free elections which they advocated in
    In the period from the beginning of the Second World War until the
    the new historical conditions in which the CHP became the firm col
    first years of the DP administration the developments that occurred are
    laborator of fascist German imperialism, gaining an even more fascist
    briefly as follows
    identity, became the best of a bad bunch. These demands, for a multi
    With the CHP going into collaboration with fascist German
    party system and for free elections, were also the demands of the re
    imperialism and shifting to an extreme fascism, the reactionary
    formist middle bourgeoisie in those years. The TKP too, which was
    clique opposing the CHP came to play a comparatively more pro
    unable to develop beyond being a middle bourgeois movement, also
    gressive role and the middle bourgeoisie broke away from the first
    desired similar things in those same years. In those new historical con
    camp and joined the second.
    ditions a new event occurred in our history. The majority of the re
    In those years in Turkey the DP and other variouds opposition rul
    formist middle bourgeoisie, which in the long-running battle of cliques
    ing class parties (while these parties did not exist, the circles that were
    between the ruling classes had been in the dominant, ruling wing ol
    to form them did ) opposed German fascism and the CHP, playing a
    the CHP moved over to the second camp. In this way a broad front
    similar role to that played by the Kuomintang in China against Japan
    came into being, stretching from the TKP to the DP and MP. This is
    ese imperialism and collaborators with the Japanese. Similar. we stress
    what Shefik Husnu called the Internal Democratic Front.
    because conditions in the two countries were quite different
    166
    167

==========第85頁==========
    The line up of forces in the country bore parallels to that in the
    a"multi-party dictatorship dependent on US imperialism with the sup
    world. The British, French and American imperialists, opposed to the
    port of more civilian reactionary forces, in place of a one-party military
    German and apanese fascist imperialists, had to forge an alliance with
    fascist dictatorship dependent on German imperialism
    the Soviet Union. Since the government in Turkey was in the hands o
    It is definitely mistaken to claim that all the profiteering mer
    the lackeys of German imperialism a natural alliance was bom be
    chants who became wealthy during the Second World War, contrac
    tween the opposition front in Turkey, British, French and American
    tors, landlords and large land owners who had benefited from the
    Imperialists and the Soviet Union. This alliance was, of course, a con
    policy of high agricultural prices joined hands and entered the DP to
    tradictory one. In Turkey the US and British imperialists were to sup
    gether. A section of these, even if they supported the DP were es
    port the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords, whom they
    sentially within the CHP. We ourselves are witnesses to the fact that
    considered closest to themselves, against the other forces of the al-
    many of those profiteers are today some of the most fanatical sup
    liance as in China they had supported the Kuomintang against the Chi
    porters of the CHP in the countryside. If this were not the case how
    nese Communist Party. During the Second World War and
    could we have explained the fact that the MGP was born and de
    immediately afterwards just as US imperialism became a global dis
    spite it leading the CHIP the continued existence of the represen-
    ciple ofdemocracy, so in Turkey the DP and its cadres did the same
    tatives of the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords in the CHP?
    The DP raised the banner against the CHPS fascist practices and suc
    After the DP seized power the reformist middle bourgeoisie re
    ceeded in winning over the middle bourgeoisie and some popular
    mained in its ranks for some time. Nadir Nadi was one of the in
    strata. The TKP'S mistaken policy bears the bulk of the blame for this
    tellectuals that participated in the election propaganda of the DP.
    In the same way that the TKP had previously tacked itself to the coat
    In those years many democrat intellectuals were supporters of
    tails of the ruling party, it now attached itself to the coattails of the
    the party. In publications that reflect the view of the reformist mid
    arge opposition party (DP). It was unable to create a popular move
    dle bourgeoisie one frequently comes across articles that state the DP
    mment! This played a role in the DP being able to win the support of the
    was"good at the outset and subsequently went wrong. When the DP
    middle bourgeoisie and a section of popular Layers in those years. The
    in the wake of US imperialism carried out an assault on the people and
    anger of the people at the puppet of German fascism, the CHP gov
    intellectuals similar to that the CHP had carried out. when it took
    ernment, flowed into the DPS lake. In this way the clique of the com
    Turkey into US ilnperialism's weapons of assault like NATO, when
    prador big bourgeoisie and landlords that was bound to German
    it sent our people to die in an unjust and reactionary war in Korea, the
    fascism was replaced in 1950 by another clique that was in collabora
    middle bourgeoisie of a national character and democratic intelli
    tion with American imperialism. The fact that German inperialism
    gentsia began to cool towards the DP and distance themselves from
    had been defeated in the War and that US imperialism was amongst the
    it, and began to steer towards the CHP. Since there was no independ-
    victors of that war played a highly significant role in this
    ent, strong popular movement the middle bourgeoisie and with them
    In 1950 the DP'S coming to power was neither a revolution nor a
    our toiling people were blown this way and that between two cliques
    counter-revolution. It was a change of power in an ongoing struggle
    of the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords. This is the historical
    between two political cliques. On the other hand this change introduced
    reality of Turkey. Although from time to time the middle bourgeoisie

==========第86頁==========
    has manifested itself as an independent political movement it has been
    ET US SUMMARISE
    unable to become a significant entity. Parties such as the Turkey"S0cialist Party of Esat Adil, founded in 1946, and other similar par
    1. From the conclusion of the War of Liberation onwards the com
    ties are reformist bourgeois parties with a socialist facade. The
    prador big bourgeoisie and landlords held sway over the government
    TSEKP reflects a different hue of the reformist middle bourgeois
    But the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords were divided into two
    parties, as does the Vatan Party, which emerged and declined i
    rge political cliques. The clique that held sway over the government
    1954. The communist movement, within thetkp, was stifled
    and state apparatus was initially in collaboration with British-french
    amidst the waves of bourgeois reformism. The petit-bourgeois op
    imperialism and from 1935 onwards with German imperialism. Until
    position, too, flowed into the pool of middle bourgeois reformism
    the eve of the Second World War the middle bourgeoisie was also in
    which was ready at any moment to sell itself dirt cheap to the com
    general in the ranks of this clique
    prador big bourgeoisie and landlords. The members of the cl
    2. In the years of the Second Imperialist World War the dominant
    which it was the political spokesman were anyway more than pre
    pro-german clique implemented a policy of intense fascism and prof-
    pared to use any opportunity that came their way in order to join the
    iteering. This clique took the side of German fascism against all dem
    big bourgeoisie ranks and a section of them did in time. The repre
    ocratic forces at home, including the working class, and abroad against
    Sentatives of such a class will of course be indecisive and weak. Let
    the USSR and the British-french-ammerican bloc But the global bal-
    us at this juncture make another point
    ance of forces and the existence of the USSR prevented the clique en
    ne comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords of course do not just
    tering the war in the ranks of the German fascists
    consist of two unchanging frozen political camps. Firstly. it Is always
    On the other hand the opposition clique of comprador big bour
    possible to move from one camp to another, and this takes place. each
    geoisie and landlords that was later to organise in the DP and MP was
    camp is also not homogenous. The reactionaries have become splin
    ioined by the reformist middle bourgeoisie and other democratic e
    tered by multiple contradictions, and all the shards are ready to gouge
    ments that until that time had been a secondary element in the ranks o
    out the eyes of others. But those with comparatively similar interests
    the CHP. The TKP also clung to the coattails of this clique, which
    unite against those with whom they have more profound conflicts of li
    forged a global alliance with the American-british-french bloc and the
    terest. Reactionary political camps are made up in this way. When talk
    Soviet Union. When the Second World War ended with the defeat of the
    ing of the existence of two reactionary political camps in Turkey w
    German fascists and their allies this bloc gained strength in Turkey
    bear this point in mind
    With the support of US imperialism and with skilful use of the peo-le,s and democratic forces loathing of the CHIPS pro-german fascistdictatorship the DP was brought into power in 1950
    4. In this way the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlord government which was the lackey of US imperialism replaced the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlord govemment that was the lackey ofGerman imperialism. It was not a question of"the big bourgeoisie

==========第87頁==========
    which grew rich from profiteering during the war, going under thewing of international capital, but a question of US imperialist"wings
    The fascist pro-hitler CHP of the 1940 s became from the mid
    replacing German imperialist"wings" and US lackey reactionaries re
    950s onwards a beacon of democracy and began to shout"rights
    placing German lackey reactionaries
    justice", freedom". On the other hand the discontent of the masses
    5. The indecisive middle bourgeoisie which drowned the opposit
    crushed and condemned to poverty by the pro-american DP and the
    tion of the proletariat and petit-bourgeoisie in its own pool, after at
    democratic intelligentsia and middle bourgeoisie who hadhad all their
    taching this opposition to the coattails of the DP for a time it returned
    democratic rights usurped was rising. As the masses did not have a rev
    to the opposition-chp caravan in response to the DP'S fascist-like prac
    olutionary leadership their opposition to the DP government was spo
    tices. The fact that it proved impossible to create a strong, independent
    radic and inconsistent. There was even amongst the masses a tendency
    movement under proletarian leadership led to the opposition of work
    of not trusting anyone and of hopelessness on account of every gov
    ing class, toiling people and democratic elements being used like a
    ernment showing hostility to them and crushing and robbing them
    winch to hoist sometimes one of the comprador big bourgeoisie and
    There was no communist leadership that would combine the rebellious
    landlord cliques into power, and sometimes the other
    anger of the workers and peasants in the same pot, create a great force
    6. The comprador big bourgeoisie and landlord cliques which pose
    and mobilise it. The TKP had been smashed. The Vatan Party formed
    as beacons of"democracy while in opposition, became determined
    by H. Kivilcimli in 1954 from the pieces of the TKP had turned its back
    enemies of the people once they attained power. These are in brief the
    on the masses, and was busy applauding the cur Adnan Menderes as
    realities of our country in the WWII years and in the post-war period
    our second national leader"! It was of course not possible to expect the
    (See critique of TILKP Draft Programme, articles 8-10-17
    masses deprived of leadership to carry out a spontaneous revolution
    They merely gritted their teeth and stored up their anger, which boiled
    from time to time
    As for the middle bourgeoisie, what they wanted did not go beyond very limited demand such as"freedom of speech,"freedom owriting. Despite the limited nature of these demands and their myopia, they were of course progressive demands. On the other hand. thecomprador big bourgeoisie and landlords clique in opposition wantethe same things, for themselves. In Turkey the middle bourgeoisie anddemocratic intellectuals who may be included in this class have considerable power. But they are short-sighted, indecisive and concilia-tory. They are predisposed to peace. but the big bourgeoisie andlandlord clique that attaches this force to itself has a significanttrump card to defeat its rival. The above conditions led to the emergence of an alliance around the demand for"partial bourgeois demo-
    72
    I73

==========第88頁==========
    cratic rights"between the opposition clique of the comprador big
    clashes were frightening for them. Their initiative and control is seri
    bourgeoisie and the CHIP and broad sections of the middle bout
    ously weakened. They do not want such periods to be prolonged. This
    geoisie. The CHP took the leadership of the opposition and expertly
    why the reactionary clique that led the 27 May coup did what it did
    channelled the enthusiasm of the middle bourgeoisie and youth for its
    The TIP movement, a current of the middle bourgeoisie. emerged
    own ambitions. It seized power with the military coup of 27 May. The
    In such an environment where the middle bourgeoisie had yet to lose
    leaders of the coup were loyal followers of Inoni. The people correct
    Its momentum. The reformist demands of this current. which was later
    identified who had come to power, saying: geli Ismet, kesildi kismet
    to attach the mask of"socialism attracted wide interest and support
    Ismet arrived, prosperity went
    from the masses, youth and intellectual circles. The CHP began to lose
    What the people meant was that the reactionary, anti-people clique
    the support of the youth and intellectuals, whereupon the reactionary
    symbolised in the person of Inonu had seized power. There were ever
    cliques became worried and began to trade accusations. The AP which
    amongst those who carried out the coup more extreme nationalists and
    had replaced the DP, went on the offensive. claiming all the problems
    would-be Hitlers like Turkes who represented a more reactionary clique
    has been caused by Inoni. As for Inoni, the master spokesman of the
    of the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords.
    ng bourgeoisie and landlords, he proclaimed, in his own words, that in
    They were subsequently removed by the Inonui grouping. This ta
    order to build a wall to the left the CHP was on the left of Centre and
    natical nationalist fascist group were supporters of the establishment of
    ad been there for 40 years"! It was in such an environment where the
    a fascist dictatorship by the army that took direct power and dissolve
    struggle between the reactionary cliques was raging, sometimes heat
    parliament. For our revisionists like M. Belli the removal of this group
    nng up and sometimes cooling, but flaring up in political and economic
    and a return to elections was a retreat of therevolution Inonii the e
    crises, that a new. fresh lively popular movement began to send out
    perienced, intelligent(! )enemy of the people and his supporters did not
    shoots in the factories and villages
    want to take this route for to do so would have meant the immediate
    The swiftly developing struggle of our heroic work ing class, self-
    loss of the support of the middle bourgeoisie, which they needed. A fas
    sacrificing peasants and brave youth, the rapidly spreading Marxist
    cist dictatorship would have had to sweep away the"partial bourgeois
    Leninist works, and world-shaking effects of the Great Proletarian
    democratic rights"for which the middle bourgeoisie had struggled. Such
    Cultural Revolution in China under the leadership of Chairman Mao
    a step would have deprived them of one of their strongest props. On the
    all prepared a suitable environment for the springing up of a young
    other hand, the middle bourgeoisie still had momentum. Those who
    communist movement that would provide leadership to the struggle of
    were expertly utilising their advance for their own power did not co
    the masses in our country. (Which is passionately needed by the
    front them directly after taking power, as that posed a risk of damage
    nasses
    Instead they slowed this advance by preparing a constitution that In
    It Is a communist leadership that will rescue the struggle of the
    cluded the limited demands of the middle bourgeoisie. thus preventing
    nasses from bein
    inch that brings sometimes one reactionary
    a further advance and preserving their power while maintaining the sup
    clique to power, and sometimes the other, and will transform this strug
    port of the middle bourgeoisie. Periods in which the ruling classes were
    gle into a victorious popular revolution
    split by political struggle and in which there were internecine arme
    174
    75

==========第89頁==========
    Ical example, a natural and normal part of the revolutions that tookplace in that era. That is, they are trying to disprove comrade Mao Tse
    The Points on which Shafak Revisionism is mistaken
    Tung. In this way the adulation and flattery for Kemalism ofthe Shafakrevisionists manifests itself.
    1. Our Nationa] War of Liberation was not carried out. as Shafal
    3. Our War of Liberation did not give"courage and hope" to the
    revisionism assumes, under the leadership of the national bourgeoisie
    oppressed peoples of Asia, but rather to the fearful bourgeoisie o
    but under the leadership of the comprador Turkish big bourgeoisie
    Asia and the financial oligarchy of the imperialist countries. The fear
    landlords and usurers. The middle bourgeoisie of a national charac-
    ful bourgeoisie of Asia saw that in the Kemalist revolution their own
    ter was not a leader in the War of Liberation, it participated as a
    reactionary ambitious were realised. To remove the colonialist struc
    reserve force of the comprador Turkish big bourgeoisie and land-
    ture that discomfited the bourgeoisie and landlords without a radical
    lords. It also lost its influence and prestige step by step after the War
    anti-imperialist and anti-feudal revolution, without the masses having
    of Liberation. the revolutionary power of the popular masses who bore
    a dominant role in the revolution, without the interests of the native
    the brunt of the war, its great potential, was feared like a bogeyman b
    ruling classes being harmed, while, on the other hand, maintainin
    the bourgeois and landlord leadership of the War, and was hampered
    collaboration with imperialist countries and the semi-colonial struc
    and stifled, and bloodily repressed at every opportunity after the War
    ture, looting the country together with the imperialists, and stifling
    2. Our War of Liberation took place not, as claimed by the Shafak
    and repressing the radical desire of the masses for revolution together
    revisionists, in the age of"proletarian revolutions and national lib
    with the imperialists. This was what the bourgeois and landlord
    eration wars", but in theera of proletarian revolutions." The Oct
    classes of Asia, that were trembling in fear of a radical revolution
    ber Revolution inaugurated this era all over the world. The
    wanted. Hence the bourgeoisie and landlords in China eagerly wished.
    bourgeoisie on a global scale including backward countries became
    to carry out a similar revolution to the Kemalist Revolution. But com
    terrified of revolution
    rade Mao Tse-tung indicated at that time that this path was a cul-de
    For this reason rather than the bourgeoisie leading any revolution
    sac. The financial oligarchy of the imperialist countries also took
    they actively endeavoured to stifle and prevent the progress of revolu
    courage from the Kemalist Revolution, for in this way the possibility
    tion. New-democratic revolutions and socialist revolutions began to
    emerged of preventing radical popular revolutions and of maintaining
    occur with proletarian leadership in the world. For this reason the era
    the semi-colonial dependence of backward countries. Why should the
    initiated by the Great October Revolution was"the age of proletaria
    oppressed peoples of Asia "take"courage and hope " from a"revo
    revolutions,", As comrade Mao Tse-tung has indicated, despite the Ke
    lution in which the working-toiling masses continued to be crushed
    Ialist revolution taking place in this era it was not part of the prole
    and exploited, where feudal exploitation and tyranny persisted
    tarian world revolutions but rather a part of the old
    stvie
    unchecked and semi-colonialism and dependence on imperialist states
    bourgeois-democratic revolutions. The Shafak revisionists. by adding
    continued? The revolutions that gave hope and courage to the c
    the words"age of National Liberation Wars"to the"age of proletarian
    pressed peoples were the Chinese Revolution and the Vietnamese
    revolutions", are trying to prove that the Keinalist revolution was a typ
    evolution. The Kemalist Revolution is an example of how the
    77

==========第90頁==========
    masses cannot be liberated. whereas the revolutions in China and
    ng point for all the counter-revohuttionaries of the world. The interme
    Vietnam have been and are giving an example of how to achieve
    diate classes are bound to disintegrate quickly, some sections turning
    the genuine liberation of the masses
    left to join the revolution, others turning right to join the counter-rev
    4. The Shafak revisionists claim that with the War of Nationa.
    olution, there is no room for them to remain"independent. Therefore
    eration the comprador bourgeoisie was entirely liquidated, which is
    the idea cherished by China 3s middle bourgeoisie of an"independent
    contrary to the realities of Turkey. As we have indicated, it was only
    evolution in which it would play the primary role is a mere illusion
    a section of the comprador bourgeoisie that was demolished, in
    The words of comrade Mao Tse-tung are generally valid for the
    particular those who belonged to the minority nationalities
    era of proletarian revolutions that commenced after the Great October
    Whereas another section of the comprador bourgeoisie (Turkish big
    Revolution. The Shafak revisionists by portraying something that is
    bourgeoisie who grew wealthy with the Committee of Union and
    futile dream " as if it is real, are shamefully trampling on the general the-
    Progress), along with a section of the landlords, seized the leadershipof the I iteration War and rose to high positions
    The thesis of the Shafak revisionists that"the Kemalist govern
    5. The Kemalist government, was not, as claimed by the Shalak
    ment was a politically independent national bourgeois governmentis
    revisionists a politically independent national bourgeois dictator
    also contrary to the realities of Turkey. The evidence of comrade
    ship but rather a dictatorship of a section of the Turkish big our
    Schnurov, which we have presented, proves that feudalism was an in
    geoisie of a comprador nature and landlords which was
    fluential partner in the Kemalist government that was also involved in
    semi-dependent on imperialism
    economic and political collaboration with imperialist. The Kemalist
    The claim of the Shafak revisionists is contrary to both the general
    government protected the interests of imperialist countries against th
    theory of socialism and conflicts with the realities of our country. It
    workers and peasants. It attacked revolutionaries to gain favour with the
    contrary to the general theory of socialism because as a general rule
    imperialists. Imperialist investment continued, with most of the capi
    politically independent national bourgeois dictatorships are not possi
    I in Turkey belonging to British-french and German imperialists
    ble in backward countrles
    Menbers of the government made joint investments with imperialist
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung said the following in 1926
    companies. This is the reality, whereas the claim of the Shafak revi
    They (middle bourgeoisie)stand for the establishment o/( stato
    sionists is"a futile dream
    under the rule of a single class, the national bourgeoisie.. But its ar
    The Shafak revisionists do not stop at claiming the Kemalist
    tempt to establish a state under the rule of the national bourgeoisie iv
    dictatorship was an independent national bourgeois government
    quite impracticable, because the present world situation is such thar
    They also consider it is possible in the present day for national
    the two major forces, revolution and counter-revolution, are loched in
    bourgeois governments to exist and even claim such governments
    final struggle. Each has hoisted a huge banner: one is the red hanne
    are increasing in number. We shall not dwell on this point here
    ofrevolution held alofi by the Third International a
    et us iust say that the Shafak revisionists are endeavouring with
    for all the oppressed classes of the world. the other is the white banne
    such claims as these to provide a basis for their covert military
    of counterrevolution held alofi by the League of Nations as the rally
    coup ambitions

==========第91頁==========
    6. The Shafak revisionists say: The new Turkish bourgeoisiethat seized power endeavoured to create a national bourgeoisie by
    could not be liberated from backwardness and was unable to succeed
    means of the state in order to grow and become wealthy ". If is not
    n development(!). This is the revisionists chain of logic. What the re
    a question of creating a national bourgeoisie by means of the state, but
    visionists call"attaining socialism by a non-capitalist path''is the re
    of the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlord classes in power using
    alisation of state capitalism by bourgeois governments based on state
    al! facilities of the state to develop and enrich themselves. The Sha
    ownership through the route of step by step forced nationalisation
    revisionists, with the above analysis, are both on the one hand mistak
    What they call socialism is state capitalism, where the means of pro
    enly evaluating the practices of the Kemalist government, and, on the
    duction and land is in state ownership. That is, the system that is in ef-
    other, trampling on the Leninist theory of the state by adopting word for
    fect today in the Soviet Union and all the Eastern European countries
    word the critique of the Kemalist government of all the modern revi
    Engels drew attention long ago to the difference between socialism andthis variety of capitalist
    sionists. TIP. D. Avcioglu and M. Belli. They are mistakenly evaluating the practices of the Kemalist government because what that
    What the revisionists call"the path of capitalist development"is
    government did was to consolidate the comprador big bourgeoisie and
    capitalism based on private enterprise. So the revisionists are in re
    landlord classes by mobilising all the facilities of the state, not"creat
    ity criticising the Kemalist government for"not adopting the thin
    Ing a national bourgeoisie". Thhey are trampling on the Leninist theory
    called state socialism", adopting capitalism based on"private enter
    of the state because the state is a means of oppression and exploitation
    prise " and putting state facilities in the hands of private enterprise andputtig state facilities in the hands of private enterprise. This is the rea
    for the classes that control it. It can never be used to create another
    essence of the"creating a national bourgeoisie by means of the stat
    Class: onthe contrary it is used to oppress, crush and exploit other
    critique. This critique is based on the supposition"that a national bour
    classes. The modern revisionists ' evaluation of the Kemalist movement
    geoisie did not exist", and the Shafak revisionists have indirect
    and their critique of the Kemalist government is as follows
    The military-civilian-intelligentsia class exercised the leadership
    adopted this. Secondly, this critique sees the state as something above
    of the War of National Liberation on account of the bourgeoisie not ex
    classes, and as something that may serve the aims of a class while in the
    isting()in Turkey. Some revisionists say"'progressive democrats
    hands of another. the Shafak revisionists have also adopted this
    . national forces or"Tobust forces"instead of 1lilitary-civllian
    Thirdly, this critique advocates state capitalism based on state owner
    telligentsia class. This class leading the War of Liberation seized
    ship instead of capitalism based on private enterprise, and the Shafak
    power(! ). This class, just as it might adopt the non-capitalist path of
    revisionists have also adopted this indirectly
    development, and might go by this path to socialism( ) it might also
    You can see how the Shafak revisionists, who constantly waffle
    adopt the capitalist path of development. The Kemalist government
    about the theory of the state, embrace the supra-class theory of the state
    of the military civilian-intelligentsia(!). instead of adopting a non-cap-
    when it comes to the resolution of a practical question. If they spent a
    italist path to go to socialism ( ) adopted the capitalist path of deve
    little less time chattering about the theory of state and put a little moreeffort into understanding it they would not come out with this nonsense
    opment and for this purpose endeavoured to create a nationalbourgeoisie by means of the state(! ) and for this reason our Turkey
    7. The Shafak revisionists say: "The Kemalist bourgeoisies dic-tatorship over the people compromised with imperialist and feudal

==========第92頁==========
    Sm as a result of its national bourgeois character". We have indi
    not have even a shred of revolutionary character. They benefit from the
    cated that the Kemalist dictatorship was not a national bourgeoisic
    pillaging of the country by foreign imperialists as they take an appro-
    government, but a government of the comprador big bourgeoisie and
    priate share from it. The contradiction between them and their imperi
    landlords. therefore it is a question of collaboration w'ith imperia!
    alist masters is not over the looting of the country but over the share thatshould accrue to them. They squabble with their masters to increase
    lsi, not compromise.
    As for the expression compromise with feudalism, this is con
    their share or join the ranks of the imperialist states or monopolies with
    lete nonsense. for the bourgeoisie was in alliance with feudalism Irom
    which they are collaborating against the imperialist states or monopo
    the beginning of the War of Liberation. The leadership of the War of
    lies that are cooperating with another section of the big bourgeoisie
    I iberation was in the hands of this alliance, and the admistration was
    The contradictions between them come into the category of contradic
    from the start a shared government of the bourgeoisie and feudal lords
    tions between enemies of the people. The contradictions between them
    The Shafak revisionists have consciously separated the words
    and the people are called antagonistic contradictions whereas the con-
    compromise" and collaboration"."compromise, as is known, is the
    tradiction between the proletariat and the petit bourgeoisie and national
    making of certain concessions by a revolutionary and progressive
    bourgeoisie, that, although their interests are on the side of the revolu-
    class. While compromise is correct and necessary In certain cir
    tion, baulk at a determined and courageous struggle, that are eager to
    cumstances, in some conditions it is mistaken and harmful. In his
    agreement, to make peace etc, that is, are compromising, is still in the
    look"Left Communism "Lenin separates these two varieties of
    category of contradictions amongst the ranks of the people
    compromise, advocating that according to the place and conditions
    The Shafak revisionists see the relationship between the Kemalist
    the working class will and should make certain compromises, crit
    bourgeoisie and imperialism as a compromise. It is not clear until when
    icising those who reject compromise in principle, while condemn
    t was a"compromise"and when it turned into"collaboration. There
    ing the second kind of compromise. In general the petit bourgeoisie
    fore, the contradiction between the Kemalist bourgeoisie and the pro
    and national bourgeoisie, when they play a progressive historical
    letariat and impoverished peasants is for a certain tie (or, rather, an
    role. often enter into such harmful compromises, as a consequence
    uncertain time)seen as being in the category of contradictions betwee
    of their class character. In such situations it Is necessary to wage a
    the people ( ) The task of the proletariat is thus not to struggle to re
    struggle against such a tendency, to draw the petit bourgeoisie and na
    alise the democratic government of the people by overthrowing the Ke
    tional bourgeoisie to a more decisive line and endeavour to establish an
    malist government, but to forge an alliance with the revolutionary (
    alliance with them and to protect this alliance. For these tendencies to
    Kemalist governmment against Imperialism and feudalism
    compromise delay or strike a blow against the success of the revolution
    This is the conclusion reached by the Shafak revisionists. This. as
    hich is contrary to the interests of the petty bourgeoisie and national
    we have pointed out before, is to attach oneself to the ranks of the
    bourgeoisie (or at least, a significant section of them). However, the
    counter-revolution
    way it is used in Turkey collaboration is another thing altogether. The
    8. We can see that the Shafak revisionists have adopted M. Belli's
    collaborationist bourgeoisie is the equivalent of the"comprador boul
    th
    of"counter revolution in Turkey". According to them the new
    geoisie'"in Marxist-leninist literature. The comprador bourgeoisie does
    growing and fattening Turkish bourgeoisie, thanks to the policy of"cre
    183
    182

==========第93頁==========
    ating a national bourgeoisie by means of the state"(!)after a time (not
    orld War free from the influence and exploitation of imperialism
    certain when)and having developed embarked on"collaboration(!)
    (look at this adulation of M. Kemal)"Imperialist capitals free rein was
    This developrnent and collaboration took place (! )in particular during
    after 1950. This determination is only correct in this respect: a lot more
    the Second World War and their alliance (the word ""alliance'"is now
    Imperialist capital entered Turkey after 1950 compared to previous
    being used instead of the word"compromise"with the landlords was
    years. But what the Shafak revisionists do not want to see, another truth
    also consolidated during these years. This"reactionary alliance " sub
    they deny, is that imperialist capital was in Turkey from the beginning
    sequently established the DP and maintained its power through this
    of the Kemalist administration. British, French and German imperial
    party. It therefore means that the CHIP and the administration were unt!
    ists had invested in many sectors. From 1935 onwards the influence
    a certain date in the hands of the national bourgeoisie and despite th
    and exploitation of German imperialism began to increase. This
    compromises" of this class, were revolutionary(). Furtherinore, the
    reached its peak with the coming to power of the Saracoglu govem
    collaborationist big bourgeoisie did not yet exist in Turkey. After a cer
    ment, whereas from the end of the Second World War onwards US im-
    tain time (probably the death of Ataturk )the growing and increasingly
    perialism stuck its nose into our country. From 1950 it was essentiall
    collaborationist bourgeoisie came to dominate the party and the gov
    the capital of US imperialism that had free rein in our country. (See
    ernment () Since they established the DP in 1946 the CHP was
    TIIKP Draft Programme Critique, article 13)
    cleansed of the collaborationist big bourgeoisie and landlords. T hose
    The Shafak revisionists resort to all means to exonerate the Ke
    who collaborated with the Germans and the Americans were the same
    manist government perlod
    Since that time the CHP should be the party of the national bour
    10. The Shafak revisionists say that after 1950"imperialism and its
    geoisie! Since the day it came into being the comprador big bourgeoisie
    collaborators used the reactionary parliament as a means of domina
    is a single indivisible bloc! The theses of the Shafak revisionists reach
    tion"(ibid). Here we are witness to the fact that, first and foremost. the
    these conclusions. All these are nothing more than the"counter-revo
    character of parliament has not been grasped, that is, that the Marxis
    ution" theories of M. Belli advocated in a more refined style. If what
    Leninist theory of the state has not been understood
    is being said is correct, it means M. Bellis theory of counter-revolution
    What is parliament according to the Marxist-leninist theory of the
    must be correct For. however compromising it is (and there is no othe
    state Let us learn from comrade Lenin
    way), if a national bourgeois government is replaced by a comprador
    To decide once every few years which members of the ruling class
    big bourgeoisie and landlord government this is a political counter-rew
    d crush the people through parliament- this is the real
    olution. M. Belli gives 1942 as the date of the beginning of the counter
    essence of bourgeois parliamentarism, not only in parliamentary- con
    revolution, when the Saracoglu government came to power. As for the
    stitutional monarchies, but also in the most democratic republic
    Shafak revisionists they leave the date unclear. While M. Belli advo
    Lenin(State and Revolution, page 61)
    cates his theory more clearly and bravely, the Shafak revisionists ad-
    from America to Switzerland, fiom France to Britain, Norway
    vocate the same theory in a more hesitant, confused and indecisive
    and so forth-in these countries the real business of"state" is per
    language. This is the difference between them
    formed behind the scenes and is carried on by the departments, chan
    9. According to the Shafak revisionists Turkey was until the2nd
    cele
    and General Staffs, parliament is given up to talk for the

==========第94頁==========
    special pupose fooling the "common people". This is so true thar
    Marxism-leninism or in particular from the point of view of Turkey
    even in the Russian republic, a bourgeois-democratic republic, all these
    Even in the most democratic bourgeois republics the hurling aside
    sins @ parliamentarism came out at once, even before it managed to ser
    of parliament by the ruling classes will alter two things: firstly, the pos
    lp a real parliament. (ibid, page 62
    sibility of"deciding once every few years which members of the rul-
    This is the essence and function of parliament. Parliament is not, as
    ing class is to repress and crush the people through parliament will
    the Shatak revisionists presume, a"means of domination. The state ap
    disappear. Secondly, the representatives of the ruling classes will not be
    paratus with its army, police, courts, police stations and prisons is the
    ble"to talk for the special purpose of fooling the"common people
    leans of domination. The existence or otherwise of parliament changes
    in parliament ". But the means of domination will not disappear, for
    the form of domination but never influences the existence of that dom
    parliament is not the ruling classes means to enforce their rule. Com
    inance. The Shafak revisionists, according to the above logic, are pre
    munists will, of course " make use even of the"pigsty" of bourgeois
    Dared to applaud a fascist dictatorship without a parliament as a system
    parliamentarism, especially when the situation Is obviously not revo
    ( )without the"means of domination of the ruling classes. If you re
    utionary
    call. this is the crude bourgeois logic of M. Belli. Gormless bourgeois
    Therefore they will make use even of the" of bourgeois
    such as M. Belli and D. Avcioglu see parliament as the Inother of all
    parliamentarism, especially when the situation was obviously not rev
    evil and think that once parliament goes everything will be fine. These
    olutionary (ibid page 61 )and make use of the possibility of"deciding
    gentlemen are even prepared to issue an invitation to a military fascist
    once every few years which members of the ruling class is to repres
    dictatorship without a parliament. A few words in the 12 March Mem
    and crush the people through parliament, therefore"when the situation
    orandum of the gang of pro-american fascist generals attacking parlia
    is not revolutionary" they will prefer and defend the democratic order
    ment excited them and they have all together called on the fascist
    to a fascist order, "but will be able to make a genuine proletarian and
    generals to"beat, beat "and"shut down parliament"For these gentl
    revolutionary critique of parliamentarism
    men the return to parliamentarism post 27 May was the"retreat of the
    As for"situations that are revolutionary, communists will hurl to
    revolution"(. ) These gormless bourgeois are ready to proclaim the pe
    one side even the most revolutionary of bourgeois parliamentarism
    riod of Kemalist government as"paradise on earth and have a profound
    they will mobilise the masses in order to demolish the existing bour
    yearning for that period. The Shafak roosters who are becoming fat on
    geois dictatorship, whatever its form
    the crumbs of theory on M. Bellis rubbish dump are now singing the
    These are the attitudes of communists to parliament. As for the
    same tune. Parliament is the means of domination of imperialism and its
    Shafak revisionists attitudes, they are those of the bourgeois M. Belli
    collaborators! If this is the case, if parliament disappears, the domina-
    and D. Avcioglu
    tion and order of the ruling classes will be destroyed (
    Let us make another point: bourgeois parliamentarism, in addition
    The basis of all this nonsense is. undoubtedly the anti-marxist
    to being an indicator of bourgeois democracy, is not something that
    eninist understanding of the state that has permeated to these gentle-
    irreconcilable with fascist dictatorship. Let us listen to comrade Dim
    mens very souls. Plus the fact that they have been unable to grasp the
    itrov on this sublect
    essence and function of parliament, either from the general theory o
    The development offascism, and the fascist dictatorship itself, as
    l86
    87

==========第95頁==========
    sume different forms in differenf contries, according to historical, o
    the interests of feudalism. For these two reasons bourgeois democracy
    cial and economic conditions and to the national peculiarities and hie
    in Turkey has possessed a fascistic and feudal character from the b
    nternational position ofthe given counin. In certain countries, prin
    ginning, including the period of the Kemalist government
    pally those in which fascism has no broad mass hasis and in which
    On the other hand the international situation is forcing the bour
    the struggle of the various groups within the camp of the fascist bour
    geoisie and landlord class to adopt parliament, since an open terrorist
    geoisie itself is rather acute, fascism does not immediately venture to
    dictatorship that abolishes parliament will expose its fascist visage both
    abolish parliament, but allow.s the other, bougeois parties. as well can
    to the popular masses domestically and world public opinion and be
    the Social-democratic Parties, to retain a modicum of legalin. In other
    isolated. In order to appear democratic to the masses and global dem-
    countries, where the ruling bourgeoisie fears an early outbreak ofre
    ocratic public opinion, and to deceive them, they have found"a crude
    olution, ascism establishes its unrestricted political monopoly, cither
    fabricated parliamentarism" that conceals their fascist faces as more
    inmediately or by intensifying its reign of terror against and per ectr
    appropriate for their class interests from the beginning. This is the func
    tion of all rival parties and grots. This does not prevent fascism. when
    tion of parliament in Turkey: to mask fascism
    its position becomes particularly acute, fiom irving to extend its hasis
    Parliament in Turkey existed in the period of Kemalist governmen
    and, without altering its class natuire, trying to combine open terrorist
    too. and was even more"crude and fabricated. In reality the deputies
    dictator ship with a crude ham of parliamentarism
    were appointed by the CHP administrators or even by M. Kemal him.
    So it means that in some circumstances fascism"may not dissolve
    self, rather than being elected. Of course, the assembly was packed
    parliament, "it may tunn a blind eye to other bourgeois parties. in
    with the most ferocious enemies of the masses, the richest and most
    cluding social democrat parties, gaining a little legitimacy
    prestigious landlords, usurers, notables and high ranking bureaucrats
    combine an open terrorist dicta with a crude and fabricated parliamen
    from every region. The parliament was constituted in this way. The
    tarism without changing its class structure
    afak revisionists"innocently(! )overlook these realities, seeing the
    Now let us look at the function of parliament in Turkey: the his-
    reactionary parliament, which they consider a"means(! ) of dom
    torical, social and economic conditions of our country have led to par
    nation, as something peculiar to the post-1950 period. Let us repeat
    liamentarism in Turkey being crude and fabricated from the beginnin
    the reactionary parliament in Turkey is not something that is peculiar
    In Turkey there is a weak bourgeoisie on account of the semi-colonial
    to the post-1950 period, rather, since the Kemalist period, even since
    semi-feudal structure. The weak bourgeoisie, In order to protect its
    the constitutional monarchy, it has existed and has always been"crude
    power, has always opted for the path of crushing the struggle of the
    and fabricated ademocratic',curtain to cover the face of fascism
    inasses with force and violence; more precisely, it is compelled to do
    The particularity of the post-1950 period is not the replacement of
    this in order to preserve its power and its existence. On the other hand
    In administration without a parliament by one with a parliament. While
    the wild landlord class, the remnant of the feudal period, is a partner In
    previously there had only been a party of the dominant clique of the
    power with the weak bourgeoisie. This class is constantly endeavour
    comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords, now the party of the other
    ing to replace bourgeois democracy with the cudgel and coercion. the
    cliques was permitted. This had in fact happened from 1946 onwards
    law of feudalism; for a consistent bourgeois democracy conflicts with
    Meanwhile, although reformist middle bourgeois parties like the
    188

==========第96頁==========
    TSEKP and TSP had briefly made an appearance they were immedi
    by step a semi-fascist or fascist dictatorship by trampling on all kinds
    ately crushed. And the"multi-party " system, in reality, had no other
    of democratic rights
    function apart from providing the opportunity to various political
    In Turkey parliament has been since the outset a mask for govern
    cliques of the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords to establish a
    ments, that is, for the semi-fascist and fascist dictatorships of the com
    party. In our country the reason there was a transition to a"multi-part
    prador big bourgeoisie and landlords. Today, too, Turkey is under a
    system fron the end of the Second World War was to give the DP clique
    asist dictatorship, but the "crude and fabricated parliament contin
    that presented itself as the collaborator with American and British iml
    ues and it is the fascist cliques themselves. with certain exceptions
    perialism the opportunity to organise and to bring it to power in place
    who wish this crude and fabricated parliament to persist
    of the pro-gerran fascist CHP clique. This is the essence of the Imat
    The Shafak revisionists, who have the ability to reconcile such ir
    ter. There was no"transition from fascism to democracy. or the"im
    reconcilable things as M. Bellis fondness of military coups with com-
    position of a "reactionary parliament and thus a"consolidation ol
    rade Mao Tse-tung, s theory of popular war(), have now managed to
    the counter-revolution''as some fools assume
    reconcile M. Belli and D. Aveioglu's nonsensical"parliament is the
    Let us state that in Turkey there have been three short period
    mother of all evils "with TIP and Ecevit's"parliamentary foolishness
    when there has been bourgeois democracy in which some crumbs. it
    The Shafak revisionists on the one hand see the"reactionary parlia
    limited, have been experienced. Firstly, the short period immediate
    ment as a means of domination of imperialism and its collaborators
    after the War of Liberation when the TKP was still legal; secondly, the
    while on the other hand they claim that parliament and fascism are i
    short period at the end of the Second World War when the T'SEKP
    reconcilable and that"despite everything parliament is a good thing
    and similar parties and trade unions were free to organise, and, thirclly
    and must be defended, (see PDA no 27 Editorial)In this way they be
    the short period following the coup of 27 May (1960. The reason
    come advocates of the"crude and fabricated parliament along with
    there was a comparatively democratic environment during these three
    the fascist cliques
    periods is as follows
    Let us summarise: first and foremost, parliament is not the
    The activities of the masses and democratic bourgeois circles that
    means of domination of imperialists and its collaborators. The re
    had participated in the War of Liberation continued for a time afier
    actionary apparatus is the means of domination. the ruling classes
    wards. In the same way the influence and momentum of the anti-la
    may continue their dominance by abandoning parliament. Secondly
    cist struggle waged against the pro-german fascist Chpclique during
    parliament did not emerge in Turkey after 1950. Parliament has ex
    the Second World War continued for a while after the demise of the
    isted since the constitutional monarchy period, but has always been
    Saracoglu government Again, the momentum and effect of the dem
    crude and fabricated affair, the democratic"facade of fascist and
    ocratic struggle against the fascist DP government continued after 2
    seni-fascist dictatorship
    May, but in all three cases the political cliques of the comprador big
    Thirdly, the particularity of the post-1950 period is not the transi
    bourgeoisie and landlords that held the Leadership. after using th
    tion ftom a dictatorship without a parliament to a parliamentary dicta
    struggle of the masses and reformist national bourgeoisie like a winch
    torship, but rather the attainment of political organisation by all the
    to attain power, first put a brake on the struggle and then realised step
    cliques of the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlord classes
    190
    19

==========第97頁==========
    The Shafak revisionists, just as they have not made a Marxist
    MBK government, and coalition governments represented the middle
    Leninist evaluation of parliament, have also never been able to gras
    bourgeoisie. In reality both the period of MBK government and the
    the function of parliament in Turkey. These narrow-minded bourgeois
    period of coalition governments were periods when the comprador big
    whichever question they get their hands on they make a mess of. (see
    bourgeoisie and landlords were in power. What changed was that while
    TIIKP Draft Programme Critique article 20
    one clique of the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords was de
    11. The Shafak revisionists say: "the political and economic cri
    sending the other was on the rise. This is the crux of the matter. The
    sis concluded with the overthrow of the American lackey DP govern
    sci-koylu masses, with their own experiences, made a more correct
    ment on 27 May 1960. This is a nonsensical claim not worth dwellin
    identification than the Shafak revisionists(see Critique of Tllkp Draft
    upon. The rule of the bourgeoisie and landlords is to continue, capital
    Programme article 21)
    Ism intertwined with feudal lords is to continue, but the political and
    3. Kemalism is the ideology of which class? According to the
    economic crisis concluded( ) The crisis stems from contradictions
    Shatak revisionists Kemalism is the ideology of the revolutionary wing
    that exist in the structure of today's economic order. and connected to
    of the middle bourgeoisie In the pamphlet"The Political Situation in
    that, the social and political order. Without this structure being over.
    Turkey and the World after 12 March it is said that" fascism wishes to
    thrown by a victorious popular revolution these contradictions will not
    mislead the Kemalist sections of the middle bourgeoisie. (see ibid
    end and neither the economic nor the political crisis will be concluded
    p45)By saying"the Kemalist sections of the middle bourgeoisie", it
    The Shatak revisionists assume that they will be able to be liberate
    is abundantly clear that the revolutionary sections of the middle bour
    from all the ailments of the system without touching the foundations ot
    geois are meant; that is, its left wing
    that order. All the reactionary classes and their"scientists"are seeking
    Again the Shafak revisionists claim that the tenets of M. Kemal
    such a recipe in order"to refute Marxism-leninism but they have yet
    ill never be reconciled with fascism, adding: "the fascists assume
    to find it. (See TLIKP Draft Programme Critique article 20
    that by distorting the principles of M. Kemal they will be able to por
    12. The Shafak revisionists claim that the middle bourgeoisie led
    tray themn as part of their own fascist twaddle., (ibid, p 45)
    the 27 May movement and that after the coup they seized power, but
    gain the Shafak revisionists say: M. Kemal is part of the pro
    ubsequentlyleft the administration to the collaborationist bi
    gressive history of our people.
    bourgeoisie and landlords. This is not true. As we have mentioned
    These claims bear not the slightest connection to the realities of
    before, it was the comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords represented
    Turkey. The Shafak revisionists are trying to put their own futile dreams
    by the Inonu circle CHP clique which led the coup and seized bowel
    in place of reality. In our country a whole heap of revisionist and op
    The middle bourgeoisie and youth played a significant rule in the re
    portunist cliques do the same thing, particularly regarding the question
    alisation of the coup, not as the leadership but by attaching itself to
    of Kemalism. The idealist opinions of the middle bourgeoisie that are
    the CHIP clique. If the Shafak revisionists see the Inonu circle,s CHP
    contrary to reality regarding Kemalism have established such a mo
    clique as the representatives of the middle bourgeoisie they are again
    nopoly in peoples heads that it has become virtually Impossible to
    mistaken. In 1965 with the AP coming to power if it is meant that the
    nake a communist evaluation of it. We know well that our opinions on
    middle bourgeoisie left office then it means that it is accepted that the
    the subject of Kemalism will bring all the bourgeois and petit bour

==========第98頁==========
    eois currents. from Cetin Altan. D. Avcioglu and tlhan Selcuk to M
    Kemalism means the incitement of Turkish chauvinism in al
    Belli, H Kivilcimli. TKP. TILKP-THKC THKO to the Shafak revi
    spheres, the implementation of merciless national oppression towards
    sionists, to their feet in anger. But rather than jumping up in anger Isn
    minority nationalities and forced Turkicisation and massacres
    it necessary for themn to look more seriously at Turkey s history, to c.
    The"Complete independence tenet of Kemalism means will
    deavour to grasp it correctly? The realities of Turkey tell us that
    Ingly consenting to semi-colonial conditions
    Kemalism means fanatical anti-communism. The Kemalists bru
    Kemalist Turkey is semi-colonial Turkey. The Kemalist govern
    tally drowned M. Suphi and 14 of his comrades. They mercilessly
    ment means a collaborationist government that was initially a lackey of
    crushed the TKP after the death of M. Suphi, although the party was not
    British-french imperialism and subsequently of German imperialism
    worthy of that name. What the pro-american fascist martial law courts
    As Schnurov pointed out, the Kemalists class brotherhood with the im
    are doing today the Kemalists did many times. E: very two years, very
    eerialists was stronger than their national animosities
    often at least once a year, there were general round ups, with hundreds
    The Kemalist government on many occasions, as it did during the
    tortured and left to rot in police stations and prisons. As long as it suited
    Adana-nusaybin railway strike, shot workers in order to protect the
    their interests they flattered the Soviet Union. the rest of the time they
    terests of British, French and German companies
    nourished an insidious and ferocious animosity towards it
    Now the revisionists who adulate Kemalism will ask us angrily: If
    Kemalism means the bloody and violent suppression of the class
    this is the case, then why did the USSR and Lenin support the Kemal
    struggle of the worker and peasant masses, of the urban petit boul
    ists? The answer is simple. In the same way that the USSR and Stalin
    geoisie and rank and file public servants. Kemalism means for work
    supported the Kuomintang against Japan, they supported them for the
    ers bayonets and gunfire, truncheon and rifle butf, court and prison nd
    same reason. The Chinese Communist Party and comrade Mao Tse
    a ban on strikes and trade unions For peasants it means the tyranny ol
    Tung are supporting the governments of comprador big bourgeoisie
    the landlords, beatings by the gendarme, courts. prison and a ban on all
    and landlords in the backward countries of Latin America for the same
    organisation. All colleagues should recall the examples given by con
    reason and for instance the fascism of Yayha Khan against the US im-
    rade Schnurov of how workers on the Adana-nusaybin railway line
    erialists and Soviet social imperialists. In that period the USSR and
    were shot
    comrade Lenin supported the Kemalists for that reason, that is, in order
    Kemalism means a chain being tied to all manner of progressive
    to isolate the more reactionary and bigger enemies, British-french im
    and democratic ideas. All publishing activity that does not praise Ke
    perialism, they supported the Kemalists
    malism is banned In future merely the possibility that an artice might
    That is, the USSR and Lenin expertly took advantage of contra
    emerge against the Kemalist government will be suflicient reason for a
    dictions between the reactionaries for the benefit of the revolution
    ublication to be closed down. Endless "martial lawis terrorising the
    The revisionists who admire Kemalism will shout angrily: " You
    country with every proclamation lasting for years. Parliament is a toy in
    are rejecting the national liberationist aspect of Kemalism. 'No! We
    the hands of a small coterie of administrators at the top of the CHP and
    merely correctly identify the"national liberationist"character of Ke
    their unchanging president M. Kemal. The Constitution and all laws are
    malism. What Kemalism sees as national liberationist is the removal
    also like this, though in reality it is the army that runs the country.
    of the colonial structure, but the preservation of the seni-colonialist

==========第99頁==========
    structure: the ending of the direct domination of imperialism, but thecontinuation of its indirect domination; economic and political collab-
    Kemalism means, at the same time, being arm in arm with the land
    oration with imperialism and political semi-dependence on it. Why are
    lord class, crushing the peasant masses with them side by side, unity of
    Interest, class
    the Kemalists opposed to colonialism? Let us read once again the answer to this question provided by comrade Schnurov
    fraternity. All these realities illustrate clearly the class character of
    K
    The Turkish mercantile bourgeoisie took over the leadership of
    emalism, the ideology of which class it is: Kemalism is the ideology
    the revolution. Since Turkey was an agricultural country the merchants
    of the right wing of the Turkish comprador big bourgeoisie and
    middle bourgeoisie
    main trade was in agricultural products. The mercantile bourgeoisiethus established strong links with the feudal gentry and landlords. In
    Leaving aside the non-reconciliation of Kemalism and fascism
    every Turkish village the lord and landowner was also a usurer and the
    Kemalism] itself means fascism. The Kemalist dictatorship was a mil
    main buyer and seller of the peasants products. These gentry some
    itary fascist dictatorship. According to a former revolutionary who
    tines owned flour mills or small factories processing oil or dried fruit
    listened to someone who had lived in the 1930s the TKP'S slogan in
    or other enterprises. The gentry also represented large firms that bought
    those days was"Down with the Kemalists'fascist dictatorship. But
    agricultural products wholesale
    this slogan was later, for whatever reason, abandoned. They say: "M
    nder these conditions if'turkey had been defeated by the Eu
    Kemal is part of the progressive history of our people. "The history
    ropean capitalists, foreigners would in a short time have seized all
    of our people is entirely progressive But M. Kemal is not part of our
    trade and industry. The Turkish bourgeoisie faced a life or death strug
    people,s history, he is part of the history of the comprador big bour
    le. If the parts under the occupation of the capitalists did not exist
    geoisie and landlords, and the right wing of the middle bourgeoisie
    if the state did not support them, if the privileges granted to foreign
    that united with them, that is, of the reactionary classes. For instance
    ers continued and Turkey remained entirely dependent on foreign cap
    however much Sultan Mehmet the conqueror is a part of our peoples
    ital the country' s trade and industry would sooner or later die. It was
    history(!), M. Kemal is a part to the same degree( ) The Shafak re
    this threat that made the merchant, industrialist and large landlord and
    Viistonists compare M. Kemal to Sun Yat-sen, but M. Kemal resembles
    gentry that sold agricultural products to foreign countries Into revo
    a Chiang Kai-shek of Turkey. Sun Yat-sen was in favour of an alliance
    lutionaries. The peasants workers and small businessmens discontent
    wilh the communists. Many communists, including comrade Mao
    with the capitalists and landlords was expertly turned into a struggle
    Tse-tung, were on the central committee of Sun Yat-sens party. Sun
    against foreign capitalists
    Yat-sen forged a sincere and close friendship with the Soviet Union
    The reasons that brought the Kemalists out against colonialist
    Sun Yat-sen was in favour of improvements in the standards of life of
    are those indicated by comrade Schnurov However national libera-
    the worker-peasant masses and of their being granted the maximum
    tionist and revolutionary Chiang Kai-shek and the classes he repre
    rights and freedoms that bourgeois democracy could give. He waged
    sented were for opposing the occupation of' Japanese imperialism then
    a struggle for this as long as he lived. Sun Yat-sen was an implacable
    M. Kemal and the classes he represented were national liberationist
    enemy of the landlord class, and in favour of the interests of the peas
    and revolutionary to the same extent
    ant masses. Sun Yat-sen was the spokesman of the peasant Inasses. notle capitalists and landlords

==========第100頁==========
    An intellectual spokesman of the militant and successful Chi
    made up of state, crown and monastery lands, and also of private es
    ese delnoc]ac
    that has attained a republic.although a progressive
    lattes where they exceeded the established labour norm, with provision
    Chinese democrat he thinks just like a Russian. He so resembles a Ru
    / compensation in the case of confiscated privale estate
    lan Narodnik, that in his fundamental ideas and in many ol his form:
    Comrade Lenin compares Sun Yat-sen to revolutionary democ
    of expression he is identical. "(National Liberation Movemnents in the
    rats that represent the peasantry. This similarity is such that Sun Yat-
    East, p. 62)
    sen, like the Narodniks, gave the name"socialism to his programme
    As is known, the Narodniks were members of a petit bourgeois
    lor a militant democratic revolution
    democratic movement that represented the interests of the peasan
    ontinue to read comrade Lenin
    masses in Russia
    Every line of Sun Ya-sen s platform breathes a spirit of militant
    Their aim was to end despotism, and for the large estates to be dis
    cmd sincere democracy: Ii reveals a thorough understanding of the in
    tributed to the peasantry. The Narodniks, error was in assuming that a
    de(luc] of a racial rero/utton
    consistent democratic programme of revolution was socialism
    ference to political issues, or even of underestimation of politica.liberty, or of the idea that Chinese "social reform, Chinese constitu
    B&inning with its distant and lone, forerunner: the nobleman
    Herzen and continuing right up to its mass representatives, the men
    tional reforms, etc, could be compatible with Chinese autocracy. It
    bers, of the Peasant Union 0/1905 and the Trudovik deputies to the
    Mands for complete democracy and the demand for a republic . It
    irst three Dumas of1906-12, Rus ian bourgeois democracy has hea
    presses warm sympathy for the toiling and exploited people, faith
    a Narodnik colouring. Bourgeois democracy in China, cs we non'see
    their strength and in the justice of their cause
    Comrade Lenin continues
    has the same Narodnik colouring
    And these are notes extracted from the same book
    In China, the Asiatic provisional President of the Re public [ Sun
    AI Russian Peasant Union-a evolutiona - aic ran
    Yat-sen] is a revolutionary democrat, endowed with the nobility and
    ded in 1905. Its programme and tactics were elaborated at
    heroism of a class that is rising, not declining, a class that does not
    isation f
    its first and second congresses, held in Moscow in August anid Novem
    dread the future, but believes in it and fights for it selflessly, a class
    her 1905..Its agrarian programme provided for the abolition ofp/
    that does not cling to maintenance and restoration of the past in order
    wate landownership and for transfer of the lands belonging lc
    to Safeguard its privileges, but hates the past and knows how to cast
    monasteries, the Church, the Crown and the goverment to the pecs
    off its dead and stifling decay
    ants without compensation
    Comrade Lenin clearly indicates on which social class Sun Yat
    Tiruudoviks-a group of petty-bourgeois democvuls in the Russici
    The chief representative, or the chief social bulwark, of thi
    Duna. he Irudovik Group was constituted in April 1906 from th
    dian bourgeoisie that is still capable of supporting a historically pro-ressive cause is the PEASAN
    peasant deputies to the First Duma
    The Tiudlovik agrarian programme proceeded fiom the Narodnik
    Comrade Lenin also pointed to another section of the bourgeoisie
    orinciple of equalised land tenure: the formation of a national find
    in Asia
    99
    198

==========第101頁==========
    And side by side with him there already exists a liberal bour-
    The Sun Yat-sen movement, as has been seen, was a genuine, rev
    geoisie whose leaders, men like Yuan Shih-hai, are above all capable
    olutionary, militant peasant movement based on the broad peasant
    of treachery
    Inasses, and which mobilised them
    We shall explain a little later what comrade Lenin meant by liberal
    he CCP was of course to embrace this inheritance. Is there a sim
    bourgeoisie. Now let us continue to read what Lenin wrote regarding
    ilarity between this and the movement of M. Kemal? There is not, but
    Sun Yat-sen
    there is a complete similarity between M. Kemal and the liberal bour
    The real emancipation of the Chinese people from age-long s/al-
    geois movement of Yuan Shi-kay
    ry would be impos sible without the great, sincerely democratic en
    What did comrade Lenin mean by the concept liberal bourgeoisie?
    thusiasm which is rousing the working masses and making them
    (One Step Forward, Two Steps Back p 156)
    capable of miracles, and which is evident from every sentence of Sun
    In Russia. as is known. the Social-revolutionaries were the con-
    Yat-sen 's platform
    tinuation of the Narodniks. Since Lenin saw the Sun Yat-sen move
    In the same piece comrade Lenin separates the three social forces
    ment as the same as the Narodniks it means he evaluated the Sun
    in China, explaining what sort of politics they pursued and what they
    Yat-sen movement as the most democratic section of the liberal dem
    ought pursue
    ocratic tendency, that is, it represented the middle peasantry. The Ke
    The emperor will certainly try to unite the feudal lordis, the but
    Inalist movement represented the liberal tendency, that is, the right
    reaucracy and the clergy in an attempt at restoration. Yan Shih-hui
    ing of the middle bourgeoisie and the comprador big bourgeoisie
    who represents a bourgeoisie that has only just changed fromn lifera/
    There is a great difference between these two movements and there is
    monarchist to liberal-republican(or how long?), will piir sue a policv
    no comparison. The Shafak revisionists are closing their eyes to this
    of manoeuvring between monarchy and revolution. The revolutional
    significant difference
    bourgeois democracy, represented by Sun Yat-sen, is correct in seeking
    14. The Shafak revisionists say: "We are the heirs to M. Kemal,'s prin
    ways and means ofrenovating China through maxinum develop
    ciple of complete independence, we cannot abandon this inheritance to
    ment of the initiative, determination and boldness of the peasant masses
    the fascists, we must embrace it very tightly. 'The reason communists
    the matter of political and agrarian reforms
    will be unable to embrace this thing called" inheritance has, we assume
    Eventually comrade Lenin identifies with great far-sightedness the
    become abundantly clear. M. Kemal,s comrade in arms, I Inonu, contin
    attitude a proletarian party to be established would adopt towards the
    ues this inheritance today, Nihat Erim does the same, those following his
    Sun Yat-sen movement
    example are maintaining it. You know which classes and which tendency
    'It Ithe proletariat/wil/ probably form some kind of Chinese So
    these persons and the organisations of which they are members represent
    cial-democratic labour party /that is. the Chinese Communist Party/
    Even Bulent Ecevit was attacked by the Kemal Satir gang for making a
    which, while criticising the petty-bourgeois utopias and reactionary
    mild criticism of theinheritance which the Shafak revisionists embrace
    wews of Sun Yat-sen, will certainly take care to single out, defend and
    The Shafak revisionists, embracing anything like greedy merchants
    develop the revolutionary-clemocratic core of his political and agar
    saying"inheritance, when evaluating the M. Kemal movement are to
    Ian programme
    the right of Ecevit and approaching the Kemnal Satir gang
    00

==========第102頁==========
    Communists know very well how to make history a weapon in
    Leninisi-mao Tse-tung Thought is just such a weapon. The revo
    the revolutionary struggle. But to embrace reactionary things by say
    lutionary experiences of the masses are just such a weapon
    ng"inheritance and joining the reactionaries in deceiving the pop
    There are some weapons that injure those who hold them. That is
    ular masses is to be their accomplice in crime. To embrace
    the weapon recoils and shoots those that are holding it. Kemalism is just
    eactionary things as"inheritance"will not enable us to luse with the
    such a weapon! The Shalak revisionists may accuse us as much as they
    masses, on the contrary it will tear us away from them
    like due to our not wanting to take up such a weapon. But we will r
    Tto embrace Kemalism as an inheritance will tear us away frol
    refrain from explaining to the masses and revolutionary cadre the real
    the worker-peasant masses that were brutally crushed by the Ke
    character of this weapon that they advertise left and right
    malist government Yes, there are worker and peasant masses whose
    15. The Shafak revisionists say"the analyses of Lenin, Stalin and
    heads have been stuffed with mistaken ideas regarding Kemalism by
    Mao Tse-tung regarding M. Kemal should show the way to us. Yes
    the ruling classes, and feel attracted to it. But if we do not wave a
    we are of the same opinion. They have a great need of such a beacon
    truggle against these mistaken ideas, if we do not uproot and throw
    of light. They are like blind people trying to walk in the dark by feel-
    away these incorrect ideas from workers and peasants'heads, then
    ing their way. But their blindness is a different kind of blindness: Po
    we will be unable to ensure unity, solidarity and confidence amongst
    litical blindness
    the various sections of toilers and toilers belonging to various pattionalities. Furthermore, in respect to today. we will not be able to
    N B: Written in January 1972. Following the split with rev
    wage a correct and successful struggle against the reactionary
    sionism it was rewritten in August 1972 remaining faithful to the
    classes. We will leave the masses without weapons against the mili
    original
    tary fascist dictatorships that advocate and implement the tenets ot
    Kemalism (we have seen what these tenets are). The Kemalist dietutorship is no different to the Yahya Khan dictatorship. We cannotportray such a regime as sympathetic. This is what the Shafak revslonists are dolng
    Communists know how to use history as a weapon in the revolutionary struggle. There were popular heroes who created legendswiih their lives and their blood in the War ofiiberation. For instancethiere was Karayilan. We are the heirs of their struggle. We are thheirs of their inexhaustible energy, their miracle-creating genius andtheir endless revolutionary power Not of those who attempted atevery opportumity to bloodily crush the struggle of the masses anddisplayed hostility towards them! Some weapons exist where thosewho hold them possess an invincible force. For instance. Marxism
    203

==========第103頁==========
    The National Ouestion in Turke
    December /977

==========第104頁==========
    I-the theses of Safak revisionism on the National Question
    The large bourgeoisie, toningan alliance with the feudal landlords, have implemented a policy of national oppression and assimilation against the Kurdish people. (article 10, draft programme)
    'The Kurdish population of 6 million in our country have raisedthe flag of struggle against the bourgeoisie and landlords policy of national oppression and assimilation. It has stood up to the serious tortureand oppression to which the pro-american governments have resorted
    The struggle embarked upon by the Kurdish people for democraticrights, the equality of nations and for self-determination is developingrapidly. All Turkeys workers and peasants support this struggle. Theracist policy of imperialism to pit the peoples of Turkey against eachother with the aim of crushing them is bankrupt and the links unitingthe people on the revolutionary path are becoming stronger"(Draft pro-gramme, article 25
    Our movement declares that it recognises the right of the Kurdishpeople to self-determination, and, if it wishes, to establish its own state
    Our movement. works for the determination of the destiny of the
    Kurdish people towards the interest of the Kurdish workers and peasants
    Our movement will pursue a policy of aiming for the uniting ofthe two fraternal peoples in Turkey possessing equal rights in a demo-ratic people
    Our movement will wage a struggle against the reactionary rulingclasses (of all nations )and their divisive policies that encourage animoity towards the revolutionary and fraternal of the Turkish and Kurdish peoples. Draft programme, article 52)
    The Marxist-leninist movement is the most unyielding defenderof the Kurdish peoples right to self-determination and at the same timeill struggle for the destiny of the Kurdish people to be determined ina ay that will be in the interests of the Kurdish workers and peasants
    207

==========第105頁==========
    In addition to this, the Marxist-leninist movement will pursue a pe
    downtrodden, dependent subject nations. In Turkey national oppres
    icy amig to bring about uniting of the two fraternal peoples in Turkey
    1on is the oppression applied by the ruling classes of the dominant
    possessing equal rights in a democratic peoples republic. " (The po
    Turkish nation on the entire Kurdish nation, not just the Kurdish
    litical situation in the World and in Turkey following the 12 march
    people, and also not solely on the Kurdish nation, but on all minor
    p)page 74)
    ity subject nations. People and nation are not the same things. The
    We will defend unyieldingly the Kurdish peoples right to self
    concept of people today generally covers the working class, poor and
    determination. "(page 72)"The Kurdish People' s right of self-deteu
    middle peasantry semi-proletarians and the urban petit bourgeoisie. In
    Inination(subsequent liberation )cannot be separated from the struggle
    backward countries, the revolutionary wing of the national bour
    or a land revolution based on the poor peasants or the struggle against
    geoisie, which takes its place in the democratic popular revolution
    imperialism. (page73
    against imperialism, feudalism and comprador capitalism, is also in
    The policy of national enmity and being implemented against
    cluded in the popular classes. However, the term nation includes all
    the Kurdish people. ( Regarding the question of establishing red po
    classes and strata, including the ruling classes. Quote from Stalin to
    litical power)"Struggle with national oppression of the Kurdish peo
    be checked ( it's an easy one! )All classes and strata that speak the
    ple. ("we must insistently continue to defend the right of the
    samle language, live in the same territory, and are in the same unity of
    Kurdish people to self-determination. These are almost all thethe
    economic life and psychological formation are included within the
    ses on the national q. put forward by the organisation formerly known
    scope of the nation. Within these are classes and strata that are ene
    as the Proletarian Revolutionary"Aydinlik(POA), now known as the
    mies of the revolution and counter-revolution, just as there are classes
    Safak Revizionists, in the new period; that is, since martial law was
    and strata in the ranks of the revolution and whose interests are served
    declared on 26 April 1971. We shall not dwell on the line followed
    by the revolution. The term people has, in every historical epoch.
    prior to martial law, as almost everyone concerned with the move
    meant those classes and strata whose interests are served by the rev
    ment knows that an intense Turkish nationalism. a ferocious domi
    olution and that take their place in the ranks of the revolution. The
    nant nation nationalism bequeathed by the ideology of Mihri Belli
    people are not a community that emerges in a particular historical
    was influential. Now more subtle and deceptive forms of nationalism
    epoch and then disappears, but are a community that exist in cvery
    have been developed, which most be struggled against and refuted
    historical age. However, the nation has only emerged along with cap
    Let us dwell upon these theories
    italisin" in the age of the rise of capitalism
    At an advanced stage of socialism it will disappear. The extent
    Z. To whom is national oppression applied
    of the term people changes at every stage of the revolution, whereasthe scope of the terin nation is not linked to stages of the revolution
    According to Safak Revisionism national oppression is applied
    Today Kurdish workers, Kurdish poor and middle peasants, urban
    to the Kurdish people. This is to not understand the meaning of na
    semi-prolelariat the urban petit bourgeoisie that will ioin the ranks o
    tional oppression, National oppression is the oppression imposed b
    the national democratic revolution are all included in the concept of
    the ruling classes of ruling, oppressing and exploiting nations on the
    Kurdish people. Whereas, apart from these classes and strata, the

==========第106頁==========
    other sections of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and Kurdish landlords are
    in practice, harmful, It is harmful on account of the fact that such a
    also included in the concept of Kurdish nation. Certain smart alec
    theory is only of benefit to the ruling classes of the oppressing, ex
    well-read persons claim that landlords cannot be deemned part of'a na
    ploiting and dominant nations. They will thus find justification for
    tion. They even go as far as to claim that, since there are landlords in
    the national oppression and cruelty that they inflict on oppressed, de
    the Kurdish region the Kurds do not yet constitute a nation. This is a
    pendent and subject nations and the privileges and inequality that they
    dreadful demagogy and sophistry. Dont the landlords speak the saule
    provide for themselves. In this way the struggle which the proletariat
    shared language? Don,t they live in the saune territory? Are they not
    should wage for the equality of nations, and the ending of national
    art of the same unity of economic life and psychological formnation?
    oppression, privileges etc, will come to naught. Nations'right to self-
    Furthermore, nations emerge at the dawn of capitalism, not when it
    determination will disappear. The colonisation of backward nations b
    reaches the ultimate limit of its development. When capitalism enters
    the imperialists and their interference in their internal affairs and bla
    a country, when it moves into a region to a certain degree and unites
    tant disregard for their right of self-determination will be legitimised
    the markets in that country in that region. to a certain extent, com
    by the argument that" they do not constitute a nation" In the same
    munities that possess the other characteristics of being a nation
    ay, in multi-national states, all manner of oppression and tyranny
    are then deemed to have become a nation. If this were not the case. it
    of the dominant nation towards the subject nations will be legitimised
    would be necessary to consider that all the stable communities in al
    Those that claim that in the event that there are landlords it is not pos
    backward countries and regions in which capitalist development is
    sible to talk of a nation are blowing the trumpets of imperialism and
    limited are not nations. Until the 1940s there existed a strong feudal
    dominant nations. Those who claim that the Kurds in Turkey do not
    division in China. According to this rationale it would have been nec
    constitute a nation are blowing the trumpets of the Turkish ruling
    essary previously not to have accepted the presence of
    tions I
    classes. As is known, the Turkish ruling classes also claim that the
    China. Until the 19 17 Revolution feudalism was very powerful in the
    Kurds do not constitute a nation. These, by defending the privileges
    broad rural regions of Russia. According to this understanding it
    of the Turkish ruling classes, are sabotaging in a despicable way the
    have been necessary not to accept the existence of nations In
    confidence, solidarity and unity of the toiling popular masses be
    Russian In Turkey, for instance. during the years of the War if Liber
    longing to various nationalities. A community living in entirely feu-
    ation feudalism was stronger than today. According to this logic it
    dal conditions cannot of course be classed as a nation. But in todays
    would be necessary to accept that there were absolutely no nations Il
    world where does such feudalism exist? Capitalism quietly entered
    Turkey during those years. Today feudalism exists in economica
    the life of oppressed eastern Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America
    ackward oppressed parts regions and countries of the world. in Asia
    at the end of the 19 century and the beginning of the 20, uniting
    Africa, and Latin America, to varying degrees. According to this ri
    the markets there to a certain degree; achieving common economic
    tonale it would be necessary to accept that nations do not exist in
    life and opening the way to the formation of nations. There exist today
    these economically backward regions and countries. It is abundantl
    in very limited areas of certain regions of the world tribal commun
    clear that the theory which claims that the Kurds do not constitute a
    ties that have not become nations. but these are so few as to not merit
    nation is nonsense, from beginning to end, contrary to the facts, and
    a mention
    210
    21

==========第107頁==========
    If we summarize
    Today, small landlords and a section of Kurdish religious figures are
    It is abundantly clear to all who have not been affected by fer
    in dungeons, or are being sought in order to be crammed into dun-
    cious Turkish chauvinism that in Turkey the Kurds constitute a nation
    geons. (See above note)As for the handful of large landlords, their
    N.B. This article was written in une 1972 at a time when the fa
    flatterers and the few large bourgeois; they have for a long time been
    cism of12 March Martial Law was continuing ar its violent heigh
    in alliance with the Turkish ruling classes. Allmanner of privileg
    Martial law had been officially declared in Diyarbakir and Siirt. but in
    open to them, as it is to the Turkish ruling classes. The army, gendarme
    reality it was implemented in the entire Kurdish region. The heaa
    and police are also at their service. Kemal Burkay puts it like th
    quarters of Martial Law in this region were in Diyurbakir
    Ihe feudal lords have abandoned their Old chains to sovereign
    Kurdish workers, poor and medium peasants, semi-proletarians,
    that is, they have given up their obstinate insistence on being the sole
    urban petit bourgeoisie, the entire Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords
    ruler of certain small kingdoms, Instead, they have established coop
    are included in the scope of the Kurdish nation. National oppression
    'ration with the bourgeoisie. In the economic and political spheres,
    is not only implemented against the Kurdish people, but the entire
    Landlords, religious leaders, even sheikhs, are involved in commerce
    Kurdish nation, with the exception of a handful of large feudal land
    they work their land with tractors, they also have the lion s share of
    lords and a few large bourgeois who have entirely coalesced with the
    bank credit. They are also becoming local councillors, mayors, MPS
    Turkish ruling classes. The Kurdish workers, peasants, urban petit
    and ministers. Political parties are at their command. There is not now
    bourgeoisie and small landlords suffer from national oppression
    a Sheikh Said pur suing the cause of Emirate of Kurdistan, but there
    Moreover, the real target of national oppression is the bourgeoisie o
    are"assistant professor sheikhs who undertake roles such as group
    the oppressed, dependent and subject nation, for the capita lists and
    spokesman in parliament. Now, there is no Seyit Riza ruling the nou
    landlords want to own the wealth and markets of the country without
    fains of Dersim, but there is his grandson who receives significant
    rivals. They wish to retain the privilege of founding a state. They wan
    aniounts in commission on the transportation of chrome ore fiom the
    to ensure"linguistic unity which is absolutely necessary for the mar
    same mountains to Iskenderun, then from there to Italy and then to
    ket, by banning the other languages. The bourgeoisie and landlord
    America. And the eastern feudal remnants now get on very well with
    belonging to the oppressed nation are a significant obstacle to these
    the bureaucracy. Since then they have became accustomed to ties and
    ambitions, for they wish to possess their own market, control it as they
    felt hats
    ish and exploit its material wealth and the labour of the people. These
    The points made by Kemal Burkay are correct as regards the large
    are the strong economic factors that set the bourgeoisie and landlords
    landlords and a few large bourgeois and the sycophants, but are ab
    of the two nations at each others throats: for this reason the boul
    olutely not correct as regards all the"feudal remnants and the en-
    geoisie and landlords of the ruling nation engage in ceaseless national
    tire Kurdish bourgeoisie, as he wishes to indicate. The small landlords
    oppression, which targets the bourgeoisie and landlords of the o
    and a very large proportion of the Kurdish bourgeoisie suffer the na
    pressed nation. Today, the fascist martial law authorities have filled
    tional oppression of the Turkish ruling classes. They also even suffer
    Diyarbakir prison with democratic Kurdish intellectuals and youth
    persecution by the large Kurdish feudal leaders. A handful of large land-
    who are the spokesmen of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords
    ords obtain significant tribute from small landlords by means of coer

==========第108頁==========
    cion and persecution. The reason sinall landlords and the Kurdish bour-
    oppression is being concealed, the national movement is being por
    geoisie feel anger towards the large feudal landlords and their hangers
    trayed as the samme thing as the class movement. and in this way the
    on is down to these two causes. The reaction displayed by Kemal
    ine of the Kurdish nationalists is being adopted. Moreover, apart from
    Burkay is also due to this. Kemal Burkay mentions a homogenous
    the Kurdish people there are minority peoples that do not constitute na
    Eastern people", aside from the"feudal remnants "integrated with the
    tions and national oppression is applied to them in the form of pro
    Turkish bourgeoisie", while expertly disguising the fact that the Kul
    hibiting use of their languages etc. The Shafak revisionists leave this
    dish bourgeoisie and small landlords are included in this.('i mean the
    point entirely to one side
    entire people apart from backward elements such as landlords. reli
    3. What is the aim of national oppression?
    gious figures and collaborationist bourgeoisie) In this way, the cortradiction between the Kurdish proletariat, semi-proletariat, poor and
    According to the Shafak revisionists the aim of national oppres
    middle peasantry and the Kurdish bourgeoisie and small landlords is ig
    sion is"to intimidate the Kurdish people. "The pro-american ad
    nored. The class objectives of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and small land
    ministrations have embarked on severe injustice and oppression in
    lords are shown as if they are the same as those of the proletarian
    order to cow the Kurdish people. "(my emphasis)Certainly one of
    semi-proletarian elements and the poor peasantry
    the objectives of the pro-american governments is to cow the Kurdish
    For now let us state the following in summary and move on; Kur
    eople. In fact, the aim of their oppression is to cow the Turkish peo
    dish workers, along with semi-proletarians, poor and middle peasants
    ple, Kurdish, Armenian, Greek, Arab, Laz etc. all the people of
    the urban petit bourgeoisie and the Kurdish bourgeoisie and small land
    Turkey. But is this the aim of national oppression? If this were the
    lords are all subjected to national oppression. And these classes cor
    case how could the oppression of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and smal
    stitute the ranks of the Kurdish national movement. All these classes
    landlords be explained? What meaning would banning Kurdish have
    that unite against national oppression have, naturally, their own as
    If this were the case what difference would there be between the op
    and goals. We shall point out later which of these we shall support and
    pression of the Turkish people by the pro-american governments and
    how far we shall support them
    the oppression of the Kurdish people? For the pro-american govern
    In claiming that national oppression is only applied to the Kurdish
    ments also wish to cow the Turkish people and they engage in severe
    people the Shafak revisionists fall into one of these two errors: either
    torture and oppression for this purpose. The Marfial Jaw tribunals are
    the term KURDISH PEOPLE is being used correclly and the entir
    full of hundreds of revolutionary Turkish workers, peasants and in
    Kurdish bourgeoisie and small landlords are not included in this in
    ellectuals. After the events of 15-16 June hundreds of Turkish work
    which case the national oppression being implemented against the Kur
    ers suffered torture at the hands of the police. Turkish peasants who
    dish bourgeoisie and small landlords is being concealed, thereby indi
    occupied land were beaten to a jelly in police stations. The leaders
    rectly approving this oppression, leading to
    e ne o
    were thrown into jail. In that instance the aim of the pro-american
    nationalism; or, the whole Kurdish bourgeoisie and small landlords are
    government did not consist of"cowing the KURDISH PEOPLE
    being included in the concept of the Kurdish people, in which case the
    This is a policy implemented by all reactionary governments against
    class oppression suffered by the Kurdish people in addition to national
    all toilers regardless of nationality. Beyond this, "oppression and tor
    214

==========第109頁==========
    ture is carried out against the entire Kurdish nation (except for a
    nation, but also in furtherance of the specifically caste aims, o to
    handful of large feudal lords), not just the Kurdish people and not just
    speak, of the ruling bureaucracy
    to Intimidate " but to realise a more fundamental obiective. What Is
    The national oppression used by the bourgeoisie and landlords of
    this obiective? This objective, in the most general terms, Is to domi
    the dominant nation for the"market " and by the dominant bureaucracy
    nate the material wealth of all the country's markets without rivals, to
    for"caste objectives "go as for as the usurpation of democratic rights
    gain new privileges, extend existing privileges to their limits and
    and mass slaughter(that is, genocide). There are many examples o
    utilise them. For this purpose the bourgeoisie and landlords of the
    genocide in Turkey. The oppression of the toilers of minority peoples
    dominant nation, in order to conserve the political borders of the
    in this way acquires a doubled quality. Firstly, there is the class op-
    country expend great efforts to prevent, at any cost, regions where
    pression utilised against the toilers in order to exploit and suppress
    different nationalities live splitting off from the country. One of the
    the class struggle; secondly, there is the national oppression imple
    necessary conditions for commerce to develop to the broadest degree
    mented for the above mentioned obiectives against all classes of mi
    is linguistic unity. With this aim in mind the bourgeoisie and land
    nority nations and nationalities. Communists have to distinguish
    lords of the dominant nation want their language to be spoken in the
    between these two forms of oppression, because, for instance, while
    Thole country and even use coercion to force its acceptance. In the
    the Kurdish bourgeois and small landlord oppose the second form o
    words of comrade Stalin: Who will dominate the market" This is
    oppression, they support the first. As for us, we are opposed to both
    the essence of the matter. The slogans"National unity
    forms of oppression. In order for national oppression to be removed
    visible unity and integrity of the state, its land and people and"ter
    we support the struggle of the Kurdish bourgeois and small landlords
    ritorial integrity "are an expression of the selfish interests of the
    but, on the other hand, we have to struggle with them in order to end
    bourgeoisie and landlords and their desire to dominate uncondition
    lass oppression. The Shafak revisionists portray national oppression
    ally the market " Comrade Stalin adds the following
    and class oppression as one and the same thing. There are two possl
    'But matters are usually not confined to the market. The semi-feur
    bilities: either the Shafak revisionists do not include the Kurdish bour
    dal, semi-bourgeois bureaucracy of the dominant nation intervenes in
    geoisie and landlords within the concept of the Kurdish people, using
    the struggle with its own methods of arresting and preventing. The
    this concept correctly, in which case they are reaching a conclusion, b
    ourgeoisie -Whether big or small- of the dominant nation is able to
    denying the democratic content of the struggle of the Kurdish bour
    al more 'swi/ and decisively with its competitor: Forces'c
    teoisie and small landlords against national oppression, that will be
    united and a series restrictive measures is put into operation against
    useful to the cause of Turkish nationalism. Or. the Shafak revisionists
    the alien bourgeoisie, measures passing into acis of repression. The
    consider, erroneously, the Kurdish bourgeoisie and small landlords
    struggle spreads fiom the economic sphere to the political sphere. R
    within the concept of people, in which case they are ignoring the strug
    striction offreedom of movement, repression of language, restriction of
    gle of the Kurdish workers and other toilers against the Kurdish bour-
    franchise, closing o/schools, religious restrictions, and so on, are piled
    geoisie and small landlords, thereby assisting the cause of Kurdish
    upon the head of the competitor: Of course, such measures are de
    nationalism. One of these two! In both cases the unity of Turkish and
    gned not only in the interest of the bourgeois classes of the dominan
    Kurdish toilers is sabotaged and their struggle harmed
    217

==========第110頁==========
    It is of the utmost importance to separate the class oppression in
    opposes Turkish racism, but in Pakistan it unhesitatingly incites
    flicted on the Kurdish people from the national oppression perpetrated
    Bangladesh racism. As for Turkey. if tomorrow it cannot possess the
    against the Kurdish nation. As we have painted out above, the charac
    whole of it, if it is able to break off a piece, there is no guarantee that
    ter of the two forms of oppression, and their aims, are different
    t will not support a reactionary Kurdish nationalism or racism underits control, in the guise of supporting nations right to self-detertnina
    4. The Racist Policy of Imperialism. The Racist Policy o
    tion or the liberation struggle of an oppressed nation
    the Indigenous Ruling Classes
    The racism policy pursued by imperialism itself is something en
    The Shafak revisionists confuse two different things. the racist
    tirely different. The twaddle peddled by the fascist cur Hitler, claiming
    policy of imperialism, with the racist policy of the indigenous ruling
    the German race was the most superior in the world and had been cre
    classes, one with the other. They talk about "the racist policy of im
    ated to rule the world, the"great state chauvinism"of US imperialism
    perialism aiming to create enmity between the peoples of Turkey and
    and Soviet social-imperialism, their belittling of the world's oppressed
    to crush them. " It is apparent that imperialism wishes to create hostil
    peoples and nationalities and their shameless interference in their in
    ity between the peoples of Turkey and crush them, and that it wants to
    ternal affairs. their interventions. these are the manifestations of the
    take advantage of every opportunity to achieve these vile ambitions
    racist pollcy of imperialist
    The policy of racism in Turkey is a policy of the indigenous ruling
    The Shafak revisionists have confused things. Who do they want
    classes, a policy of the political most reactionary sections of' the bour
    to rescue by concealing the racist policy of the Turkish ruling classes
    geoisie and feudalism; feudal and feudal-bourgeois tendency On ac
    Racism is not something brought in from outside, but it may be
    count of its character the policy of racism is even the enemy o1
    Supported from outside. There are classes and layers on which racism
    consistent bourgeois democracy. The most extreme representative of
    relies. When it suits imperialism it encourages and supports the racist
    this current in Turkey is the Hitler-clone Turkes and his party. The
    policy of these classes. These classes and layers do not just exist
    racist policy and support for it also exists substantially in the AP, MGP
    amongst the Turks, but also certainly amongst the Kurds, and as w
    and CHP and other similar parties. The racist policy is a policy of
    haye mentioned above, let there be no doubt that, when it suits it, im
    crushing, subduing and eradicating the other nations and peoples. Ir
    perialism will not hesitate to incite and support them. It is for this rea-
    Ikey those who pursue a racist policy towards the Kurdish nation
    on that the struggle to be waged against racism is first and foremost a
    and other minority nationalities are these feudal and feudal-bourgeois
    struggle against these classes and layers, and one of the most important
    classes and their political parties and governments. Imperialism, wher
    tasks of the proletarian movement is to expose them to the toiling peo
    It suits Its Interests, will encourage and support the racist policy o
    ple. Also, in relation to this, to expose the racist policy promoted b
    these classes, and, when it doesnt suit its interests, may oppose It. For
    imperialism itself; to expose how it has shamelessly instigated and sup
    instance, US imperialism, which is dominant in Turkey, having bound
    ported racism between various nations; and to spread"the international
    the Turkish ruling classes to itself, has an interest in encouraging and
    culture of democracy and the global workers movement
    pporting Turkish racism and it carries out this duty(! )willingly and
    herefore, it is not solely the"racist policy of imperialism"that is
    to excess. As Soviet social-imperialism is not dominant in Turkey
    failing, needs to fail and will entirely fail, but the racist policy of im-
    218

==========第111頁==========
    perlalismn and indigenous reaction
    their wives, and exposed which is an effective method. But this has not
    The wondrous formulation set out above will only serve to assist
    gone beyond a threat
    domestic racists, and to blunt the awareness of the proletariat
    In response to the crude chauvinism and vile accessory to crime o
    D. Avcioglu and others.M. Belli and other similar people raise high
    5. The champions of national oppression in Turl
    nd
    the banner of Turkish nationalism(attempting to mask it with Marxism
    their accomplices
    Leninism)in a more clandestine way(but, again, evident)and deemthis to be "the historic tasks of socialists
    The real champions of national oppression in our country are the
    M. Beli, who even finds a positive aspect in the racist-turanian
    comprador large Turkish bourgeoisie and landlord class. US imperial
    Ist backs their policies of national oppression and racism and encour
    fascism of Turkes, says the following regarding the Kurdish question
    ages them. But the Turkish medium bourgeoisie is also complicit in
    We have stated for ethnic communities in Turkey, in particular for the
    Kurds, that we see it is necessary for there to be a centralised, secular
    Is Crime, that is national oppression, with more insidious and subtlemethods. In the words of comrade Lenin they are: "The liberals ap
    revolutionary republican government education in order for there to be
    prouch the language question in the same way as they approach al po
    mother tongue and cultural education.. for the fraternity between
    litical questions-like hypocritical hucksters, holding out one hand
    Turks and Kurds, which has historical roots and the national and ter
    (openly)to democracy and the other(behind their backs) to the feuda
    ritorial integrity of Turkey to be sabotaged in whatever way, would
    ts and poli
    result in an outcome contrary to the real interests of both the Turks
    Look at Dogan Avcioglu, Ecevit and all our opportunists! Look at
    and the Kurds and consolidate the situation of imperialism in this
    Mihri Belli, I. Kivilcimli. How they fit this delinition of Lenins. While
    region of the world (my emphasis). Is this not dominant nation chau-
    on the one hand they oppose the feudal cudgel of government. saying
    vinisi? Isn't appearing to be in favour of the equality of nationalitieswhile in reality only recognising the privilege of founding a state to the
    itis useless; on the other they cannot resist recommending more subtle, polite methods of national oppression
    Turks and removing the Kurds right to found a state with demagogi
    D Avcioglu attempted to defend the commando
    bourgeois slogans such as"national unity and"territorial integrity
    repression that
    even the rabid, fanatical Turkish chauvinists who have firmly grasped
    advocating the most blatant inequality between nationalities and the
    the feudal cudgel have not dared to do, publishing a vile article entitled
    privileges of the Turkish bourgeoisie? Socialists are opposed to the tini
    A commando officer gives an account(Devrim newspaper). He de
    est privilege for any nation or any inequality. However, in Turkey it
    fends the repression thus: " The soldiers search women. A detector is
    has always been the privilege of one nation, the Turkish nation, to es
    used in the searching of women. It is nol true that everyone apart from
    tablish a nation state and this is still the case. We, as communists, just
    the landlord is publicly beaten. The allegations that the people have
    as we defend absolutely no privilege whatsoever, we also do not defend
    been made to strip and crawl on the ground en Masse are baseless. But
    this privilege. We defend, and continue to defend, with all our might
    people have been made to obey orders to lie down and get up. lt is also
    the right of the Kurdish nation to found a state. We respect absolutely
    true that suspects in places where weapons and fugitives have not been
    this right; we do not support the Turks privileged position vis-a-vis the
    handed over have been threatened with being forced to strip. along with
    Kurds(or other nationalities; we teach the masses to unhesitatingly
    221

==========第112頁==========
    recognise this right and to reject the right of founding a state being the
    applied to the Kurdish people, and that the objective of national op
    privileged monopoly of any single nation
    pression is to intimidate the Kurdish people, view the Kurdish national
    Comrade Lenin says
    movement developing against national oppression as a popular move
    If in Our political agitation, we fail to adrance and advocate he
    ment. The Kurdish people have raised the flag of struggle against
    slogan of theright to secession, we shall play into the hands, not on!
    the policy of severe national oppression and assimilation"The Kur
    of the bourgeoisie, but also of the feudal landlords and the abso/isn
    dish people's struggle for democratic rights, the equality of national
    of the oppressor natie
    ties and self-determination
    Our medium bourgeoisie and social opportunists of a national char
    However, popular movements and national movements are two en
    acter, while on the one hand giving the impression of being opposed to
    tirely different things, A popular movement is the name given to strug
    privileges, on the other they insidiously and jealously embrace the ex
    gles waged in every historical period by oppressed classes agains
    isting privileges that are in favour of the Turkish bourgeoisie. These
    higher classes that oppress them, bath for partial demands and in order
    hypocritical merchants, while opening extending one hand towards
    to overthrow these governing classes. A popular movement is a class
    democracy, they reach out with their other hand(behind their backs)to
    movement of the oppressed masses. There have been popular move
    reactionaries and police agents, ferocious and fanatical Turkes nation
    ments since the first epochs of history. In the age of imperialist and in
    alism and feudal racism, abetting their crimes
    te when"imperialism is headed for wholesale collapse and so
    In the same way that it is erroneous to suggest that national o
    cialism is moving towards victory throughout the world, popular
    pression is only implemented on the Kurdish people, it is also incorreet
    movements are uniting with the politically aware leadership of the pro
    to state that national oppression is only applied by the government o
    letariat and progressing towards the definite liberation of the masses
    the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords. The Turkish medium boul
    from exploitation and oppression. However, a national movement Is
    geoisie and their representatives of a national character(Dogan Av
    firstly, based within a historical area with clear boundaries. As com-
    cioglu. the Ilhan Selcuks and Turkish nationalists in general followin
    rade Lenin indicated, national movements in Western Europe cover
    In their footsteps and opportunists who are not in the least different
    rather clear period, roughly between 1789 and 1871. "It is this period
    (M. Belli, H. Kivilcimli, Aren-boran opportunists and more insidiously
    hich is the period of national movements and the formation of na
    the Shafak revisionists)are accomplices in the implementation of na
    tional states. "As for Eastern Europe and Asia, national movements
    tional oppression by the Turkish comprador bourgeoisie and landlord
    only commenced in 1905
    Without a struggle with the insidious nationalism of these people, with
    Secondly the natural tendency of national movements is towards
    out eradicating the traces of this nationalism, reciprocal confidence
    the formation of national states. Towards the end of the 1789-1871 pe
    unity and solidarity between workers and toilers belonging to variou
    riod Western Europe had been transformed into a system of established
    nationalities cannot be achieved
    bourgeois states, and these states(except Ireland)as a rule are statewith a national integrity (Lenin). The natural tendency of the national
    6-popular Movement ' and National Movement
    movements beginning in Eastern Europe and Asia around 1905 wasalso towards the formation of national states
    The Shafak revisionists, who claim that national oppression is onl222

==========第113頁==========
    Throughout the world, the period of the inal victory of capitalism
    is naturally stirred into movement. It appeals to its native folk an
    over feudalism has been linked up with nationa/ movements. For the
    begins to shout about the fatherland, ' claiming that its own cause is the
    complete victory of commodity production, the bourgeoisie must ca p)-
    cause of the nation as a whole. It recruits itself an armv from among its
    ture the home market. and there must be politically united territorio
    countrymen in the interests of.. the fatherland ' Nor do the folk'al-
    whose population speak a single language, with all obstacles to the de
    ways remain unresponsive to its appeals, they rally around its banner
    elopment of that language and to its consolidation in literature elin
    the repression from above affects them too and provokes their discontent
    inated. Therein is the economic foundation of national movements
    Thus the national movement begins
    Language is the most important means of human intercourse. Uni(
    he strength of the national movement is determined by the degree
    and unimpeded development of language are the most important com
    to which the wide strata of the nation, the proletariat and peasantry,
    ditions for genuinely free and extensive commerce on a scale com
    participate in it. (Stalin)
    mensurate with modern capitalism, for a free and broad grouping of th
    Alter comrade Stalin analysed the conditions under which workers
    population in all its various classes and, lastly, for the establishment of
    and peasants joined the national movement and after saying"The clas
    a cto.se connection between the ma/hef ana each and eery p/oprlelor
    conscious proletariat has its own tried banner, and has no need to rally
    big or litle, and between seller and buye
    to the banner of the bourgeoisie, continues thus
    Therefore, the tendency of every national movement is towards
    From what has been said it will be clear that the national strug
    the formnation of national states, under which these requirements O
    gle under the conditions of rising capitalism is a struggle of the bour-
    modern capitalism are best satisfied. The most profound economic fuc
    geois classes among themselves. Sometimes the bourgeoisie succeeds
    tors drive towards this goal, and, therefore, for the whole of Western
    drawing the proletariat into the national movement, and then the na
    Europe, nay, for the entire civilised world, the national state is typica
    tional struggle externally assumes a"nation-wide character But this
    and normo I for the capitalist pertod
    is so only externally. In its essence it is always a bourgeois struggle
    States of mixed national composition (known as muti nationd
    one that is-to the advantage and profit mainly of the bourgeoisie
    tates, as distinct from national states)are always those whose inter
    (Stalin Marxism and the national question pages 24, 25, 26)
    nal constitution has for some reason or other remained abnormal or
    As comrade Stalin immediately adds: But it does not by any
    underdeveloped(backward)
    means follow that the proletariat should not put u) a fight against the
    the natural tendency of national movements towards the
    policy of/ oppression. No, the conclusion to be drawn from
    formation ofnational states? Because national movements emerged to-
    this is that a popular movement and a national movement are not the
    gether with the development of capitalism. And they moved towards
    same thing
    meeting the needs of capitalism
    If we summarise, a popular movement is a class movement of the
    Thirdly, in its essence it, national movement, is always a hour
    oppressed and exploited masses. And in essence it always carries the
    geois struggle, one that is to the advantage and profit main/y of the
    mark of oppressed masses, it exists in every historical period, and
    bourgeoisie. (Stalin)
    today popular movements have moved towards realising the ultimate
    The bourgeoisie of the oppressed nation, repressed on every hand
    liberation of the masses by uniting with the leadership of the class
    225

==========第114頁==========
    conscious proletariat and through democratic popular revolutions and
    (some of them multi-national states were formed in Eastern Europe
    socialist revolutions
    and Asia and colonies generally took on a supposed independent con
    National movements emerged in the conditions of a rising capi
    dition. However, in reality a new form of dependency spread, with
    talism. In the West during the period between 1789 and 1871, whereas
    semi-colonised countries taking the place of colonies
    In Eastern Europe and Asia this began after 1905 and in places is stil
    The 917 Great October Socialist Revolution ended the period of
    continuing, National movements always bear the mark of the boul
    old-style revolutions under bourgeois leadership throughout the world
    geoisie and it is the natural tendency of every national movcment to
    opening the period of new-democratic revolutions under proletarian
    establish states with national integrity that best correspond to the needs
    eadership and the period of socialist revolutions. The bourgeoisie
    of capitalism. The movement today in Kurdistan of Turkey, which is
    began to fear popular movements all over the world. For this reason. na
    developing rapid
    both a Kurdish national movement led by the
    tional movements in Eastern Europe and Asia were unable to go beyond
    Kurdish bourgeoisie and small landlords and also a class movement
    changing the colonial structure into a semi-colonial structure, con-
    S, a popular movement of the oppressed and exploited Kurdish
    serving the semi-feudal structure intact. The bourgeoisie and landlord
    workers and peasants, increasingly showing a predisposition to unite
    classes established an alliance and collaboration with imperialism. At
    with a communist leadership. The former of these only aims to end the
    the conclusion of the 2nd World War. with the success of the neo-de
    national oppression of the Turkish ruling classes and at the same time
    mocratic revolution in China, the seizure of power by anti-fascist pop
    seize control of the" internal market ' on behalf of the Kurdish bout
    ular fronts with proletarian leadership in Eastern European countries
    geoisie and landlords, while the latter opposes both the exploitation
    and their immediate transition from democratic popular dictatorship to
    and oppression of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords, and national
    the dictatorship of the proletariat and the construction of socialism and
    oppression and the policy of oppressing nationalities. The Shafak re
    the regression of imperialism all led to the bourgeoisie in backward
    visionists portray these two entirely different movements. as regards
    countries becoming even more terrified of revolution
    their character and objectives, as one and the same thing
    In this new period, when imperialism is headed for complete collapse and socialism is moving towards victory all over the world the sit
    7. The Development of National Movements in
    Eastern Europe and Asia
    uation of national movements is as follows: the task of completing thenational and democratic revolution in semi-colonial semi-feudal coun
    We have already mentioned the fact that national movements
    tries, that is, the task of liquidating completely imperialism and feu
    eastern Europe and Asia only began around 1905 and that the natural
    dalism, is now on the shoulders of the proletarian class movement
    tendency of these movements was towards the formation of national
    The bourgeoisie no longer has the power or ability to carry ou
    states. I he period when national movements began in Eastern Europe
    these tasks, which are its own historical tasks. Only a wing of the na
    and Asia was the period when imperialism was formed, trade took on
    tional bourgeoisie, its revolutionary wing, may take its place as an all
    an International character and when the contradiction between interna
    In a united popular front, under the leadership of the proletariat. And
    tional capital and the international working class became prominent
    then only constantly limping and in a faltering manner. This is the gen
    Between 1905 and the end of the Second World War national states
    eral, widespread and typical situation for our era

==========第115頁==========
    On the other hand, the bourgeoisie of oppressed, dependent, sub
    Romanians. rebelled against the dominant nation of the Ottoman state
    ect nations and a section of landlords in a small number of old colonies
    the Turkish nation, on numerous occasions. History has, apart from the
    and multi-national states are embarking on national movements agains
    Kurdish movement. concluded the national movements with a certain
    national oppression and with the objective of establishing nation states
    resolution, Within today's borders of Turkey the only national move
    These national movements in both these colonies and in subjeet na-
    ment which is vet to be resolved is the Kurdish movement
    tions are singular occurrences that have been passed down to our era
    In Turkey the natural tendency of the national movement has al
    from the previous period, are not widespread and do not characterise
    ways been towards the formation of states with national integrity. Cap
    our age. but still have to be addressed by Marxist-leninists
    italism, which silently entered the life of Eastern Europe and Asia at the
    In both these types of nation the natural tendency of national move
    end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries, set in motion the
    ments is towards the formation of national states. If anything Is certain
    national movements in these regions, The other nationalities within
    it is that these national movements possess a progressive and demo
    the borders of Turkey separated from Turkey, organising within na
    cratic character. But on the other hand, another certain thing is that
    tional(or multi-national )states, in accordance with the development
    these national movements, whether they conclude in the founding of a
    of goods production and capitalism. With the exception of the Arme
    separate state or another for, they will not be able to complete the na
    ia movement, which suffered mass slaughter and forced exile in 1915
    tional and democratic revolution. The task of sweeping away and car
    and 1919. The Treaty of Lausanne divided the Kurds between various
    rying off imperialism and feudalism in these nations will again rest on
    states. The imperialists and the new Turkish government fixed the bor-
    the shoulders of the class movement of the proletariat. The proletarian
    ders by means of haggling, violating the Kurdish nations right to self-
    movement in both these kinds ofnation must know that on the one hand
    determination and ignoring its aspirations and wishes. In this way the
    it has the task of completing the national and democratic revolution
    region of Kurdistan was divided between Iran, Trag and Turke
    while, on the other, it must support the progressive and democratic
    At this juncture let us make another point: it is undoubtedly an ir
    character of the bourgeois national movement
    justice that Kurdistan's right of self-determination was trampled
    Turkey is today one of the multi-national states. And in Turkey
    upon and torn into pieces by the Treaty of Lausanne. And as comrade
    only the Kurds constitute a nation. In this respect, from the point o
    enin said on another occasion, it is the task of communist parties to
    view of Turkey's communists, the Kurdish question constitutes the
    constantly protest this injustice and shame all the ruling classes on this
    essence (not the entirety)of the
    al question. Now, let us take
    subject. However, it would be foolish to include the rectification of such
    look at the development of the Kurdish national movement
    an injustice in the programme, for there are many examples of histori-cal injustices that have long since lost their topicality. As long as they
    8. Kurdish national movement
    are not a"historical injustice that continues to directly impede social
    National movements in Turkey are not new and are not comprised
    development and the class struggle "communist parties cannot adopt a
    solely of the Kurdish movement. They began before the collapse of Ot
    position that would divert the attention of the working class from fun
    toman society and have continued until the present day. Bulgarians
    damental questions, by ensuring their rectification. The historical in-
    Greeks, Hungarians, Albanians, Kurds, Armenians, Arabs, Yugoslavs
    justice to which we have referred above has long ago ost its topicality
    228

==========第116頁==========
    no longer having a character that directly impedes social development
    /t diver s the attention of large strata from socia/ questions, ques
    and the class struggle". For this reason communists cannot be as fool
    tions of the class struggle, to national questions, questions" common
    ish or lacking in discernment as to demand a rectification of this. The
    to the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. And this creates a favourable
    reason we make this point is the request of a colleague during discus
    soil for lying propaganda about" harmony of interests. for glossing
    sion of a draft programme to put the unification of the Kurdistan region
    over the class interests of the proletariat and for the intellectual en
    into the programme. The communist movement in Turkey is only
    statement of the workers
    obliged to resolve in the best, most correct manner, the national ques
    All these reasons united the Kurdish feudal lords, young Kurdish
    tion within the borders of Turkey. If the communist parties in Iraq and
    bourgeoisie and intellectuals, and Kurdish peasants against the new
    Iran find the best solution to the national question from the point of view
    states ruling Turkish bourgeoisie, landlords and ruling bureaucracy. The
    of their own countries. then the historical injustice in question will lo
    Turkish bourgeoisie. the ruling classes of the new state, and the land
    longer have any worth or significance For us to include the unitication
    lords. attempted to spread and revive racism in every sphere. They
    of the whole of Kurdistan would be unsound for this reason: this is no
    rewrote history from the beginning, inventing a racist, nonsensical the
    something we shall determine. It is something the Kurdish nation will
    ory claiming that all nations came from the Turks. The source of all lan-
    determine itself. We defend the Kurdish nations right of self-determi
    guages was also Turkish () The Sun Language Theory was
    nation, that is the right to establish its own separate state. Whether
    manufactured in order to prove this. The Turks were the masters(in re
    will exercise the right or in what way we leave to the Kurdish nation 1t
    lity, the"masters "were the Turkish ruling classes ). As for the minori-
    self. Since we shall subsequently return to this point we shall move on
    ties, they were compelled to obey them. It was forbidden to speak any
    The Kurdish movemnent continued within the borders of Turkey es
    language apart from Turkish. All the democratic rights of the minority
    tablished by the Treaty of Lausanne. From time to time there were up
    nationalities were usurped. All manner of torture and insult towards
    risings. The most significant of these were the Sheikh Said rebellion ol
    them were permitted. Demeaning words were used for the Kurds. Efforts
    1925, the Ararat rebellion of 1928. the Zilan rebellion of 1930 and the
    rere made to create Turkish chauvinism amongst Turkish workers and
    1938 Dersim rebellion. In addition to the. character of these
    peasants, which were broadly successful. Martial law declared all over
    movements they also had a feudal character. Feudal lords that had had
    the country was doubly severe in the East. The Kurdish region was d
    If-rule until that time clashed with the ccntral authorities when the
    clared to be a"military prohibited zone". etc etc.. It was inevitable that
    government began to threaten this self-rule. This was the main factor
    all this would strengthen oppressed nation nationalism as a reaction to
    impelling the feudal lords to rebel against central government. I he Kur
    dominant nation chauvinism. It was inevitable that Kurdish peasants
    dish bourgeoisie, wishing to dominate" its own domestic market
    would be pushed into the ranks of the bourgeoisie and feudal lords of
    united with the feudal lords desiring self-rule, against the central au
    their own nationality. The Kurdish people, a large majority of whom did
    thority in the hands of the Turkish ruling classes. As for the reason for
    not even speak Turkish, in particular the Kurdish peasantry, natural
    the broad participation of the peasant masses in these movements. it
    reacted violently to the officials of the new administration which op
    was merciless national oppression As comrade Stalin pointed out, the
    pressed and tormented them like a colonial governor. This just reaction
    policy ot national oppression
    of the peasants inevitably combined with the reaction of the feudal Kur
    231

==========第117頁==========
    dish landlords and Kurdish bourgeoisie. The Kurdish rebellions emerge
    Said rebellion. In these circumstances what should the attitude of a
    In this way. Communists support the progressive and democratic aspect
    communist movement be? Firstly, to oppose absolutely the Turkish rul
    of these rebellions against tyranny, the policy of oppression of nations
    ing classes'policy of suppressing and crushing the Kurdish national
    inequality and privilege; but oppose the wish of the feudal landlords for
    movement, to actively struggle against this, and to demand that the
    self-rule and the struggle of the bourgeoisie for its own superiority. They
    Kurdish nation itself detenmine its destiny, that is, to demand that the
    do not defend-the privilege and superiority of the bourgeois and landlord
    Kurdish nation decide whether to establish a separate state
    lass of any nation. Since in those periods the TKP followed an erro
    Ictice, this means a plebiscite being held in the Kurdish re
    neous policy it unconditionally supported the Turkish ruling classes
    gion, without external intervention with the Kurdish nation itself
    policy of national oppression. Instead of uniting the strong and just re
    ciding, in this or in a similar way, whether or not to secede. A
    action felt by the Kurdish peasantry to the national oppression with pro
    communist movement would firstly have struggled for the withdrawa
    letarian leadership it attacked itself to the Turkish bourgeoisie and
    of all military units sent to suppress the Kurdish movement, the ab-
    landlords, thereby inflicting great harm on the unity of the toiling peo
    solute prevention of all Manner of intervention, the Kurdish nation iak
    ple of both nationalities. This sowed the seeds of lack of confidence to
    ing its own decision about its future, would have exposed the Turkish
    wards the Turkish workers and peasants amongst Kurdish toilers
    ruling classes policy of suppression, persecution and intervention, an
    Those who applaud the suppression of the Kurdish rebellions by
    would have actively fought against it. Secondly, it would have exposed
    the new Turkish state and the subsequent massacres as a "progressive
    British imperialisms policy of pitting nationalities against each other
    revolutionary movement against feudalism are, pure and siinple, In
    and how this haris the unity of toilers from all nations, and activel
    corrigible dominant nation nationalists. This sort of person ignores the
    fought the British imperialist policy of intervention in internal affairs
    fact that the new Turkish state did not only attack the feudal Kurdish
    Thirdly, it would have evaluated the secession of the Kurdish na
    chieftains but also the entire Kurdish people, women. children. men
    tion"as a whole from the standpoint of the interests of the proletariat's
    massacring tens of thousands of villagers. They forget that the new
    class struggle for social development and socialism 'and reached a de
    Turkish state was friendly towards the feudal chieftains that did not oj
    cision to support or not support secession. If it found not separating ap
    pose it, supporting and strengthening them. They ignore the significant
    propriate for the class interests of the proletariat it would have
    difference between the factors that impelled the Kurdish peasantry to
    propagandised for this amongst Kurdish workers and peasants; in par-
    rise up and the reason that impelled the Kurdish feudal chieftains to
    ticular, Kurdish communists would have propagandised for unity
    rise up. Also, there are so-called"communists"who attempt to defend
    amongst its own people and waged a struggle against those endeav
    the policy of national oppression of the Turkish ruling classes based on
    ouring to reconcile the struggle against national oppression with that of
    the allegation that the British were behind the Sheikh Said rebellion. We
    strengthening the position of landlords, mullahs, sheikhs etc. In spite of
    shall not discuss here whether British imperialism was behind the
    this. if the Kurdish nation decided to secede Turkish communists would
    Sheikh Said uprising. We shall discuss whether the policy of nationa
    have accepted this and definitely struggled against tendencies oppos
    oppression may be defended on the basis of such an allegation. Let us
    ing the desire to secede. As for Kurdish communists, they would have
    suppose that the hand of British imperialism was behind the Sheikh
    continued to campaign for unification amongst Kurdish workers and
    232

==========第118頁==========
    toilers, struggled against imperialist intervention and struggled with l
    French imperialists. The fundamental watchword of the proletariat re
    Kurdish feudal lords, sheik]s and mullahs and the nationalist aims of
    garding the national question is the same in all circumstances
    the bourgeoisie
    Not a single privilege for any nation or any language! Not the slight
    If the communist movement decided the secession of the Kurdish
    est oppression of or unfairness to national minorities! ( Lenin)
    nation was beneficial as regards the class interests of the proletariat
    Let us continue: the national oppression of the Turkish ruling classes
    for instance, if the possibility of revolution in the Kurdish region was
    has continued to the present day. In parallel with this the Kurdish na
    to Increase in the event of secession. in that case it would have defended
    ional movement has also persisted. With this exception: a section o
    secession. Both amongst Turkish workers and toilers and amongst Kul
    Kurdish feudal lords has joined the ranks of the Turkish ruling classes
    dish workers and toilers it would have campaigned for secession. I
    A very small number of Kurdish large bourgeois has also joined
    both these cases warm and sincere ties would have been established
    the ranks of the Turkish ruling classes. The Kurdish bourgeoisie has
    between Turkish workers and toilers and Kurdish workers and toilers
    strengthened considerably, and the feudal influence on the K urclish na
    The Kurdish people would have nourished great confidence and feel
    tional movement has weakened proportionately. Today the strength
    ings of friendship towards the Turkish people and communists, The
    ened Kurdish bourgeoisie, intellectuals who have adopted their
    unity of peoples would have been firmer and the success of the revo
    ideology and small landlords lead the Kurdish national movement. Be
    lution would have been easier to facilitate
    sides this, Kurdish workers and peasants are also proportionately less
    Let us repeat once more: those who endeavour to portray the Turk
    under the influence of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords than in th
    ish governments trampling on the Kurdish nations right of self-deter
    past Marxist-leninist ideas have begun to take root amongst Kurdish
    mination and carying out massacres etc as Just and progressive b
    workers, impoverished peasants and intellectuals and are spreading rap
    alleging that British imperialism was involved in the Sheikh Said
    idly. Under these conditions, what should the attitude of Turkish com
    movement are Incorrigible Turkish chauvinists. It is instructive that
    munists be to the Kurdish national movement? Now we are moving on
    Metin Toker, who is today the vilest defender (and unappointed advi
    to this point and we shall exhibit the erroneous line of the Shafak revi
    sor) of the gang of pro-american fascist generals, clings to the attribu
    Sionists which damages the unity of people
    tion of"British imperialist involvement in order to justify themassacres inflicted during that period on the Kurdish nation. It is again
    O-the Democratic content of the Kurdish National
    Instructive that Dogan Avcioglu, who attempts to blatantly defend th
    Movement
    commando cruelty that even fascist governments do not have the
    The Kurdish national movement possesses a general democratic
    courage to defend openly, clings to the same allegation
    content as one aspect of it opposes the coercion, tyranny, privileges and
    A nations right to self-determination cannot be restricted or taken
    selfish interests of the ruling classes of the oppressor nation. The re
    away on account of an allegation that it is, or may become a tool of im
    moval of national oppression. the securing of equality between na-
    perlallsm. On the basis of such an allegation a nation s oppression andmistreatment " cannot be defended. Besides, during the period in ques
    tionalities, the removal of the privileges of the ruling classes of thedominant nation, the ending of bans and restrictions on language, equal
    tion, the Turkish government was collaborating with the British and
    ity between nations in every sphere and the recognition of equality in

==========第119頁==========
    the right to establish a nation state are all democratic and progressive
    Comrade Lenin says the following
    demands. Comrade Stalin said
    The bourgeois nationalism of any oppressed nation has d gemerd
    Restriction o/freedom ofmovement, disfranchisement, repression
    democratic content that is directed against oppression, and it is th
    of language, closing of schools, and other forms ofpersecution aecr
    content that we unconditionally support, At the same tine we strictly
    the workers no less, if not more than the bourgeoisie. Such a state of
    distinguish it fiom the tendency towards national exclusiveness
    affairs can only serve to retard the free development of the intellectu
    But in no national movement do the demands of that nations bour-
    forces of the proletariat of subject nations. One cannot speak serious
    geoisie and landlords stop at the removal of national oppression and
    of a full development of the intellectual faculties of the Tatar or Jewish
    the equality of nationalities. Now let us come to this pount
    worker i/he is no/ allowed to use his native language at meetings and
    10-within the Kurdish national movement, the"positive
    lectures, and if his schools are closed down
    action of the Bourgeoisie and Small landlords aiming
    Let us recall Comrade Stalin's writings
    to strengthen nationalism
    But the policy of nationalist persecution is dangerous to the causeof the proletariat also on another. account. It diverts the attention o,
    In general in every national movement, and in particular in the Kur
    large strata fiom social questions, questions of the class struggle. to
    dish national movement, the fundamental objective of the bourgeoisie
    national questions, questions"commonto the proletariat and the
    is to secure its own superiority To dominate the market; to monopolise
    bourgeoisie. And this creates a favourable soil for lving propaganda
    the mineral wealth in its region etc. To secure privilege and Inequalit
    about harmony of interests, for glossing over the class interests of th
    for its own benefit and to guarantee its own national development. The
    proletariat and for the intellectual enslavement of the worker s
    bourgeoisie and to the degree they participate in the national move
    This creates a serious obstacle to the cause of uniting the worker s
    ment, the landlords, demand privilege and inequality for their own ben
    f all nationalities
    efit. They wish to usurp the democratic rights of other nations to their
    The policy of national oppression does not even stop with crush-
    advantage. They wish to implement national oppression towards those
    ing dependent nations, but also in many instances turns into a policy of
    ho are weaker than themselves. They wish to separate the proletari
    pitting nations one against the other. In this way, the seeds of enmity are
    ans of nations one from the other with national fences and to ensure
    sown amongst toilers of various nationalities. The ruling classes of
    that their own proletarians and other toilers unconditionally support
    dominant nations that"divide workers and toilers in this way find
    their nationalistic aims. They want to replace the democratic interna
    easter to rule
    tional culture of the proletariat with their own national culture, to
    The national movement of the oppressed nation, since one aspect
    velop this national culture(that is, the dominant bourgeois culture), to
    of it is directed towards the policy of national oppression of the dom
    nourish the proletariat and toilers with this culture, and by so doing
    nant nation, serves to secure unity between workers and toilers of val
    make them unconditional supporters of their own class ambitions. The
    lous nationalities, the free development of the moral strength of the
    bourgeoisie and landlords resist the historical tendency for nationalities
    workers and toilers of the oppressed nation and the removal of obsta
    to coalesce, Separate from forced assimilation, they resist this natural
    cles preventing this
    assimilation and natural disappearance of national differences, they re
    236
    237

==========第120頁==========
    sist the unification of proletarians from every nationality in the state in
    11-what should the attitude of the class conscious proletariat
    the same organisations: wishing to separate thein accordiny to their na
    of Turkey be to the Kurdish national movement
    tionalities and to unite their own proletarians in"national organisations, instead of class organisations to further their own class
    First of all let us point out that the conscious proletariat of Turkey
    ambitions
    regardless of nationality, will not take its place under the standard o
    Today it is not possible to fail to notice, alongside the general dem
    bourgeois nationalism. In the words of comrade Stalin: " The class-co
    ocratic character within the Kurdish national movement, reactionary
    scious proletariat has its Own tried banner: and has no need to rally to
    ambitions aiming to strengthen nationalism similar to those above
    the banner of the bourgeoisie
    These ambitions are those of the bourgeoisie and the landlords leading
    Secondly, the conscious proletariat of Turkey regardless of na
    the Kurdish national movement
    tionality, will endeavour to gather the workers and peasant masses
    The Shafak revisionists have entirely put to one side the"post
    around its own flag and will lead the class struggle of all toiling classes
    Taking the Turkish state as a basis it will unite the workers and toilers
    tive "action of the bourgeoisie and landlords within the Kurdish national movement aiming to strengthen nationalism
    from all nations in Turkey in joint class organisations
    According to the Shafak revisionists the movement developing in
    Ihirdly, the conscious proletariat of Turkey, regardless of nation-
    Turkey Kurdistan is not a national movement with its progressive and
    ality, will unconditionally support the Kurdish national movements
    reactionary aspects, but an entirely popular movement against a pol-
    opposition to the oppression, persecution and privileges of the Turkishruling classes and general democratic content aiming for the removal
    Icy of national oppression and assimilation for democratic rig hts.
    of national oppression and the equality of nations. It will also definitel
    the equality of nationalities and their self-determination(.)
    Thus, the Shatak revisionists support the nationalist and anti-pro
    and unconditionally support similar movements of other oppressed na
    letarian ambitions and efforts of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and small
    tionalities
    landlords, sabotaging the unity of the two peoples by attaching the Kur
    Fourthly the conscious proletariat of Turkey, regardless of na
    dish proletariat and toilers to the Kurdish bourgeoisie and small lanc
    tionality, will remain completely impartial as regards the bourgeoisie
    lords. The Turkish nationalist line of Shafak revisionism has becom
    and landlords of various nationalities waging a struggle for their own
    reconciled with Kurdish nationalism
    dominance and privileges. The conscious proletariat of Turkey wil
    If we are to sum up. as in all national movements the Kurdish na
    never support the tendency within the Kurdish national movement aim
    tional movement has two qualities. The first is its general democrati
    ng to strengthen Kurdish nationalism; and will never assist bourgeois
    content, opposing the national oppression, privileges, monopoly on es
    nationalism; it will definitely not support the struggle of the Kurdish
    tablishing a state, repression and persecution of the Turkish bourgeoisie
    bourgeoisie and landlords for their own dominance and privileges That
    annd Landlords
    S, it will only support the general democratic content within the Kur-
    Secondly, the reactionary content aiming to strengthen Kurdish na
    dish national movement, and not go beyond that
    tonalism, and thus to realise the dominance and privileges of the Kur.
    I hope that, in order to get a better grasp of the question, the readers
    dish bourgeoisie and landlords
    will be happy to put up with us quoting at length from comrade Lenin
    238
    239

==========第121頁==========
    Comrade Lenin states thus
    contrary, warns the masses against such illusions, stands for the fullest
    The principle of nationality is historically inevitable in bourgeois
    freedom of capitalist intercourse and welcomes every kind of assimi
    society and, taking this society into due account, the Marxist full
    lation of nations, except that which is founded on force or privilege
    recognises the historical legitimacy of national movements. But to pre
    The.proletariat cannot support any consecration of nationalism
    vent this recognition from becoming an apologia of nationalism, it must
    on the contrary, it supports everything that helps to obliterate national
    be strictly limited to what is progressive in such movements, in order
    distinctions and remove national barriers, it supports everything that
    that this recognition may not lead to bourgeois ideology obscuring pro
    makes the ties between nationalities closer and closer or tends to ner
    letarian consciousness
    nations. To act differently means siding with reactionary nationalist
    The awakening of the masses from feuda/ lethargy, and their
    hilistinisn
    struggle against all national oppression, for the sovereignty oy the peo
    Comrade Lenin continues
    ple, of the nation, are progressive. Hence, it is the Marx
    The bourgeoisie always places its national demands in the fore
    ist ' s bounden duty to stand or the most resolute and consistent
    fiont, and does so in categorical fashion. With the proletariat, however,
    democratis/ on all aspects of the nationa/ question. This tash is largely
    these demnands are subordinated to the interests of the class struggle
    C negative one. But this is the limit the proletariat can go to in su
    Theoretically, you cannot say in advance whether the bourgeois-de
    porting nationalism, for beyond that begins the"positive activit of
    mocratic revolution will end in a given nation seceding from another
    the bourgeoisie striving to fortify nationalism
    nation, or in its equality with the latter, in either case, the important
    To throw off the feudal yoke, all national oppression, and all pr
    thing for the proletariat is to ensure the development of its class. For
    ileges enjoyed by any particular nation or language, is the imperative
    the bourgeoisie it is inportant to hamper this development by pushing
    dutty of the proletariat as a democratic force, and is certainly in the in
    the aims of its own'nation before those of the proletariat. That is
    terests of the proletarian class uggle, which is obscured and retarded
    why the proletariat confines itself, so to speak, to the negative demand
    by bickering on the national question. But to go beyond these strictly
    for recognition of the right to/-determination, without giving guar
    limit ed and definite historical limits in helping bourgeois nationalism
    antees to any nation, and without undertaking to give anything at the
    means betraying the proletariat and siding with the bourgeoisie. There
    expense of another nation
    is a border-line here, which is often very light and which the Bundis/s
    This may not be practical', but it is in effect the best guarantee
    and Ukrainian nctiondlist-socialists completely lose sight of
    for the achievement of the most democratic of all possible solutions
    Combat all national oppression? Yes, of course Fight for an kind
    he proletariat needs only such guarantees, whereas the bourgeoisie
    of national development, /" national culture in general -Of Coir se
    every nation requires guarantees for its own interest, regardless of theposition of(or the possible disadvantages to) other nation
    he development of nationality in general is the principle of bour-
    Comrade Lenin continues
    geois nationalism; hence the exclusiveness of bourgeois nationalism
    On the plea that its demands are"practical, the bourgeoisie of
    hence the endless national bickering The proletariat, however; far from
    the oppressed nations will call upon the proletariat to support its aspi-
    undertaking to uphold the national development of every nation, on th
    rations unconditionally. The proletariat is opposed to such practi-

==========第122頁==========
    cality. While recognising equality and egual rights to a national state
    he interests of the working class and of its struggle against
    walues above all and places foremost the alliance of the proletarian
    capitalism demand complete solidarity and the closest unity of the
    2f all nations, and assesses an national demand, any national sepa-
    workers of all nctions they demand resistance to the nationalist po
    ration, from the angle of the worhers'class. struggle
    icy of the bourgeoisie of every nationalily. Hence, Social-democrats
    Yo the worters the important thing is to distinguish the principles oy
    Mould be deviating from proletarian policy and subordinating the work
    the two trends. Insofar as the bourgeoisie of the oppressed nation figh
    ers to the policy of the bourgeoisie if they were to repudiate the right
    the oppressor: we are always, in every case, and more strong/y tha
    of nations to selfdetermination, i.e, the right of an oppressed nation
    anyone else, in favor: for we are the staunchest aid the most consis
    to secede, or if they were to support all the national demands of the
    tent enemies of oppression. But insofar as the bourgeoisie of the oy
    bourgeoisie of oppressed nations. It makes no difference to the hired
    pressed nation stands for its own bourgeois nationalism, we stand
    worker whether he is exploited chiefly by the Grea-russian boun
    against. He fight against the privileges and violence of the oppressor
    qeoisie rather than the non-russian bourgeoisie, or by the Polish bour
    nation, and do not in any way condone strivings for privileges on the
    geoisie rather than the ewish bourgeoisie, etc. The hired worker who
    part of the oppressed nation
    has come to understand his class interests is equally indifferent to the
    I ourpolitical agitation, we fail to advance and advocate t
    state
    vileges of the Greaf-rilssian capitalists and to the promises of
    slogan of the right to secession, we shall play into the hands, nor onl
    the Polish or Ukrainian capitalists to set up an earthly paradise when
    of the bourgeoisie, but also ofthe feudal landlords and the absolutism
    they obtain state privileges
    of the oppressor nation
    In any case the hired worker will be an object of exploitation. Suc
    The bourgeois nationalism of any oppressed nation has a genera.
    cessful struggle against exploitation requires that the proletariat be
    democratic content that is directed against oppression, and it is this
    fiee of nationalism, and be absolutely neutral, so to speak, in the / ight
    content that we unconditionally support, At the same time we strict
    far supremacy that is going on among the bourgeoisie of the various na
    distinguish it from the tendency towards national exclusiveness
    tions. If the proletariat of any one nation gives the slightest support to
    We are fighting on the ground of a definite state, we unite the worh
    the privileges of its own"nationa/ bourgeoisie, that will inevitably
    ers of all nations living in this state, we cannot vouch for any particu
    yuse distrust among the proletariat of another nation,; it will weaken
    warpath ofnational development, for we are marching to our class goal
    the international class solidarity of the workers and divide them, to the
    clony a
    delight of the bourgeoisie.
    However: we cannot move towards that goal unless we combat a
    Let us repeat
    nationalism, and uphold the eguality of the various nations
    The Kurdish national movement, as the struggle of an oppressed
    propaganda against all state and national privileges, and for
    nation against the ruling classes of a dominant nation is progressive
    the right, the egual right of all nations, to their national tae. This(a
    and has a democratic content. We unconditionally support this demo
    present) is cut principal task in the national guestion. for only in this
    cratic content, We struggle in a decisive and relentless way against all
    way can we defend the interests of democracy and the alliance of all
    manner of privilege and inequality that benefits the Turkish bourgeoisie
    roletarians of a nations on an egual footing
    and landlords (including the privileged right to establish a state). We
    243

==========第123頁==========
    also unconditionally support the Kurdish national movements de
    On this subject comrade Lenin say
    mands in this regard. But on the other band, we also struggle against the
    n respect of the second kind of nationalism we, nationals of a
    reactionary and nationalist ambitions of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and
    big nation, have nearly always been guilty, in historic practice, of an
    small landlords. While fighting against the inequalities and privileges
    infinite number of cases of violence, furthermore, we commit violence
    that favour the Turkish ruling classes and the national oppression and
    and insult an infinite number of times without noticing it
    persecution targeting national minorities, if a struggle is not waged with
    That is why internationalism on the part of oppressors or'great
    the nationalist ambitions of the bourgeoisie and landlords. in this case
    nations, as they are called(though they are great only in their violence
    another nationalism, Kurdish nationalism. will be consolidated and the
    only great cas bullies), must consist not only in the observance of the for
    class consciousness of the Kurdish proletariat will be blunted by bour
    nnal equality of nations but even in an ineguality, of the oppressor na
    geois nationalism
    Kurdish workers and peasants will be pushed into the embrace of
    tion, the great nation, that must make up for the inequality whichbto
    tice. Anybody who d
    ot understand this h
    nationalism, and the unity and solidarity between Kurdish and Turkish workers and peasants will be sabotaged
    not grasped the real proletarian attitude to the national question, he is
    The Shatak revisionists, by presenting the Kurdish national move
    still essentially petty bourgeois in his point of view and is, therefore,
    ment, which has different elements within it. as a homogenous Kun
    sure to descend to the bourgeois point of view.
    Conrade Lenin continues thus
    dish peoples"movement, by portraying this movement as a whole and
    for nothing holds up the development and strengthening of pro
    entirely progressive, and by not indicating until what point and from
    letarian class solidarity so much as national injustice, offended na
    which aspects it is progressive, and after which points and from which
    tionals are not sensitive to anything so much as to the feeling of equality
    aspects the reactionary ambitions of the bourgeoisie and landlords
    and the violation of this equality, if only through negligence or- to
    begin( more correetly, by not differentiating between them). it reaches
    the violation of that equality by their proletarian comrades. That is wh
    the above conclusion that benefits the landlords and bourgeoisie. Thus
    in this case it is better to over-do rather than undergo the concessions
    it Is making concessions to the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords. tc
    and leniency towards the national minorities
    the detriment in general of the proletariat of Turkey and in particular to
    s what the Shafak revisionists are doing that which is advocated by
    the Kurdish proletariat! We are curious as to what the Shafak revision
    comrade Lenin? No, never! The Shafak revisionists are today basically
    ists will do in the future when the"positive action of the Kurdish bou
    following a Turkish nationalist line, defending the privileges of the Turk
    geoisie and landlords makes itself felt more strongly. But it is cleartoday what they will do They will unconditionally ioin the ranks of the
    ish ruling classes. As we shall see, they are trampling upon the Kurdishnations right of self-determination in a cowardly way and with a lot of
    Turkish nationalists
    demagogy, choosing representatives of Turkish chauvinism as their stan-
    Let us stress this point: Communists always differentiate absolutely between the nationalism of an oppressed nation and that of a
    dard bearers. What they are doing is something that is entirely differentfrom that advocated by
    Ide Lenin. On the one hand while follow
    dominant nation, between the nationalism of a small nation and thatof a large nation
    ing a dominant nation nationalist line, on the other they are erasing theline between Kurdish workers and toilers and the Kurdish bourgeoisie
    245

==========第124頁==========
    and landlords, taking a place on the standpoint of the Kurdish boul
    There are numerous factors that influence this situation. Power re
    geoisie and landlords. This is not going to the extreme In making cor
    lations. at the state level and on the international level the interests o
    cessions and behaving tolerantly towards national minorities against
    the bourgeoisie and landlords of different nationalities within the coun
    dominant nation nationalism, it is supporting the nationalist ambitions of
    try, the character of national oppression, tactical concerns etc. All these
    the exploiting classes of the minority nation as regards the dominant na
    factors determine the concrete obiectives formulated by a national
    tion nationalists against the workers and toilers of the minority nation
    movement. For this reason while the general tendency of national
    Another point is this: The Shafak revisionists state that the Kur-
    movements is towards the formation of states with national integrit
    dish people are struggling"against the policy of severe national op
    the concrete demands formulated by national movements vary greatl
    pression and assimilation", for democratic rights, the equality of
    Let us listen to comrade Stalin
    nationalities and for self-determination
    The content of the national movement, of course, cannot ever
    For the Kurdish people to struggle for self-determination means
    where be the same: it is wholly determined by the diverse demands
    the Kurdish people struggling to establish a democratic popular ad
    made by the movement. In Ireland the movement bears an agrarian
    ministration by overthrowing the ruling classes, for the people can only
    character,: in Bohemia it bears a language character; in one plac
    determine their own future by carrying out a revolution. To state that the
    the denand is for civil equality and religious freedom, in another for the
    Kurdish people are struggling for a revolution in an article dealing with
    nation sown officials, or its own Diet
    the national question really necessitates a nimble brain(! ) If the Kul
    The Kurdish national movement in Turkey has yet to openly for
    dish nation is being alluded to then what the Shatak revisionists are
    mulate a demand for secession. The demands that the Kurdish national
    saying is as follows: the Kurdish nation
    Ig a struggle for seces
    movement have formulated today are freedom for the reading, writing
    sion. For in today's conditions of forced unity the Kurdish people stru
    and speaking of Kurdish, radio broadcasts in Kurdish. the removal of
    gling for self-determination (take note, not the right of self-
    obstacles that prevent the free dissemination of"national culture"(in
    determination))only implies a struggle for secession
    reality the culture of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords), an end to
    We have stated before that the general tendency of every nationa
    the policy of assimilation, schools offering tuition in Kurdish, the
    movement is towards the formation of states with national integrity, that
    recognition of the right to self-determination etc. The various reasons
    these states best meet the needs of material production and the needs o1
    we have cited above prevent the Kurdish national movement openly
    capitalism and that the most powerful economic factors work in this way
    formulating a demand for secession. To state that not the Kurdish pec
    The general tendency of the Kurdish national movement too. 1s
    ple, but the"Kurdish nation is(struggling) for self-determination", is
    certainly towards the establishment of a state with national integrity
    for this reason, at least for the present, incorrect. While saying this we
    But the general tendency is one thing and the concrete demands for
    are not ignoring the strong desire to secede that exists amongst the Kur
    malised by a national movement are another
    dish bourgeoisie and small landlords. However, we are saying that this
    Concrete demands do not contravene this general tendency, bul
    ish has not reached the stage of becoming an open demand of the na
    every national movement will opt for this general tendency, that is es
    tional movement
    tablishing a separate state, as a concrete goal
    Today, for instance, the national mnovement in Northem Ireland has
    47

==========第125頁==========
    openly formulated a demand for secession. And in the past the Kurdisl
    gressive proletarian elements, let alone the peasantry. That is, it is
    national movement emerged with a demand for secession etc.. Because
    specific task of Turkish communists to dismantle Turkish nationalism
    today the Kurdish national movement has not openly formulated se
    and to cleanse the workers and peasants of all manner of the remnants
    cession does not mean it will not do so in the future But yarious forus
    of bourgeois nationalism. All determinations that lead to neglect or un
    of reconciliation between the bourgeoisie and landlords of the two na
    derestimation of the importance of this task are only harmful from the
    tions are possible. Let us not forget that. In Iraq the Barzani movement
    standpoint of the class struggle. What comrade Lenin said for Russia
    has been content to accept partial autonomy. Moreover, while one wing
    has the same validity for us
    of the Kurdish national movement advocates secession another wing
    Even now, and probably for a fair/v long time to come, proletar-
    may oppose this. For these reasons let us not jump the gun
    ian democracy must reckon with the nationalism of the Great-riassianpeasants (not with the object of making concessions to it, but in order
    12-let us not deny the influence of dominant nation
    to combat it)
    nationalism on Turkish workers and peasants
    The Shafak revisionists are not taking this reality into account and
    The Shafak revisionists say that all Turkey's workers and peas
    causing the communist movement to forget its task of waging a struggle with Turkish nationalism
    ants support the Kurdish people(! )'s struggle against the policy onational oppression and assimilation, struggle"for democratic rights
    3-A pcople's right to self-determination, a Nation's right
    equality of nationalities and self-determination.(my emphasis
    to self-determination
    The concrete reality here has been sacrificed to fancy sentences. Firstllet us correct this mistake: Apart from all Turkey's workers and peas
    The Shafak revisionists have distorted the most fundamental prin-
    ants, even Turkeys class conscious proletariat will not uncondi
    ciples of Marxism-leninism regarding the national question and ren-
    tionally support the struggle "for self-determination". It will onl
    dered them incomprehensible. They have distorted the tenet"nations
    support secession in a concrete situation when it is appropriate to the
    right of self-determination' into a people' s right of self-determination
    interests of the struggle waged by the proletariat for socialism. If it
    These are two entirely different things. Firstly, a peoples overthrowing
    not, then it will respect the Kurdish nations desire for secession and ac
    of the reactionary classes in power, seizing authority and dominating
    cept it, but will not actively support it. We shall retum to this point
    the state, means, in short, to carry out a revolution, whereas the latter
    later
    means for a nation to have the right to establish a separate state.
    On the other hand, we cannot claim that " all the workers and peas
    The Shafak revisionists are declaring that they recognise the Kurdish
    ants of Turkey "support today all the most just and progressive de
    people's right to carry out a revolution ( )Bravo
    mands of the Kurdish nation. This is merely something
    What is instructive is that the formulation of a peoples right to
    desired, but is, unfortunately, not true. The consciousness of Turkish
    self-determination was advocated at one time by Bukharin against com
    workers and peasants has been extensively and negatively affected by
    rade Lenin and criticised for this by comrade Lenin. Let us read com
    the nationalist ideology of the Turkish ruling classes. Dominant nation
    rade Lenin,s response to Bukharin
    nationalism has even negatively influenced the views of the most pro
    248

==========第126頁==========
    I have to say the same thing about the national question. Here
    4. 'Nations Right of Self-determination means nothing
    too the wish is father to the thought with Comrade Bukharin. He says
    less than the right to establish a separate state.
    that we must not recognise the right of nations to sell-dletermnination.4nation means the bourgeoisie together with the proletariat And are n'e
    The Shafak revisionists, by saying: .self determination and if it
    the proletarians, to recognise the right to sel/-determination of the de
    wishes the right to establish a separate state"see the"right of self-de-
    Spised bourgeoisie? That is absolutely incompatible Pardon ne. it
    termination as something different to the right to establish a separate
    compatible with what actually exists. If you eliminate this. the result
    state. The above expression would only be correct in the following
    will be sheer /antas)
    foru: the right of self-determination, that is the right to establish a
    de, I want to recognise only the right of the woring classes to sely
    separate state. " For the right of self-determination IS, In essence, the
    determination, says Comrade Bukharin That is to saw you wan to
    right to establish a separate state
    recognise something that has not been achieved in a single couniiyex
    Comrade Lenin stated on numerous occasions that the right of self-
    cept Russia. That is ridiculous
    determination was nothing less than the right to establish a separate
    Today in Turkey the Shafak revisionists, insistently, in their
    tate
    own words, defending the"Kurdish peoples right of self-deternina
    Ouofe inissing
    tion", are not only being ridiculous. at the same time they are the most
    Consequent/y: if we want to grasp the meaning of.self-determi
    expert theoreticians of a fearsome dominant nation nationalism. Today
    nation ofnations, not by juggling with legal definitions, or inventing
    Turkey the right to establish a state is a privilege of the dominant
    abstract definitions, but by examining the historico-economic condi
    Turkish nation. The Kurdish nations right to establish a separate state
    tions of the national movements, we must inevitably reach the conchu
    has been usurped. Communists defend absolutely no nationa
    sion that the self-determination of nations means the politica
    leges. They advocate absolute equality between nations. Certainly they
    separation of these nations from alien national bodies, and the Jorma
    are aware that under the conditions of capitalism absolute equality be
    tion of an independent national state
    tween nations cannot occur, but despite this, even if it is only hypo-
    'Later on we shall see still other reasons why it would be wrong
    thetical. they oppose all manner of national privilege and inequality in
    to interpret the right to sel-determination as meaning-anythting but the
    order to secure the unity of workers and toilers from various nation
    right lo existence as a separate state
    alities and come out in support of the broadest. most progressive and
    self-determination of nations"in the Marists Pro
    most coherent democracy possible. What are the Shafak revisionist
    gramme cannot. /rom a historico-economic point of view, have a
    doing They remove the Kurdish nations right to establish a state by
    other meaning than political self-determination, state independence,
    granting (. )the Kurdish people the right to carry out a revolution. They
    and the formation of a national state
    are insidiously and viciously defending the dominant Turkish nations
    relf determination ofnations has been understood to mean pre
    privilege to establish a state. This is what is"terrifying in addition
    cisely political self-determination, the right to form an independent na
    to being"absurd
    tional state
    lo accuse those who support freedom of self-determination, i. e

==========第127頁==========
    freedom to secede, ofencouraging separatism, is as foolish and hwo-
    Party (1898), which in turn had borrowed il fiom the decisions of in
    critical as accusing those who advocate freedom of divorce of encom
    ernational socialist congresses, it was given, as is evident from the de-
    aging the destruction of family ties. aust a
    ourgeois society th
    bate, the same meaning at the 1903 Congress as was ascribed to it by
    privilege and corruption, on which bourgeois marriage
    the Socialist International, i.e., political self-determination, the self-
    rests, oppose freedom of divorce, so, in the capilalist state, repudiation
    determnination of nations in the field of political independence. Thus
    of the right to self-determination, i. e, the right of nations to secede
    the formula: national self-determination, which implies the right to ter
    means nothing more than defence of the privileges of the dominant na
    ritorial separation, does not in any way affect the question ofhow na
    tron and police methods of adminis ,ation, to the detriment of demo
    tional relations within a given state organism should be regulated for
    cratic methods
    nationalities that cannot or have no desire to leave the existing state
    Socral-democrats would be deviating from proletarian policv and
    It is evident from this that Mr: VL. Kosovsky has teen the Minutes
    subordinating the workers to ihe policy of the bourgeoisie if they were
    of the Second Congress of 1903 and under:stands perfectly well the rea
    to repudiate the right of nations to elf-determination, i.., the right of
    (and only) meaning of the term self-determination
    an oppressed nation to secede
    What is the meaning of continuing to put concepts in confusion, de
    Let us state first of all that however meagre the Russian Socid
    spite these indisputably clear statements of Lenin? Rendering Marxis
    Democratic literature on the"right of nations to sel-determination
    literature incomprehensible and messing it up requires great talent
    may be, it nevertheless shows clear/y that this right has always been un
    On the one hand a nations right of self-determination is bein
    derstood to mean the right to secession
    turned into a people' s right of self-determination in the twinkling of an
    he reader will see that at the Second Congress of the Parn
    eye (we have seen that a peoples self-determination means nothing
    which adopted the programme, it was unanimously understood that
    apart from a people carrying out a revolution, for a people gaining the
    el-determination meant"only" the right to secession
    right to establish a separate state is only possible through overthrown
    As far as the theory of Marism in general is concerned, the gues
    reactionaries), and on the other the right of self-determination is
    tion of the right to sel-determination presents no difficulty: No
    deemed to be something apart from the right to establish a separate
    eriously question the London resolution of 1896, or the fact that sel/
    state
    determination implies onby the right to secede
    If we apply the real meanig of concepts the Shafak revisionists are
    to combat nationalism of every kind. above all Great-russid
    saying the following: "Our movement declares that it recognises the
    nationalism: to recognise, not only fully egual rights, for all nation
    Kurdish peoples right to (revolution )and, if it wishes, to establish a
    in general, but also equality o rights as regards polity, ie, the right of
    eparate state
    ations to self-determination, to secession
    Thus we have the wonderful solution(!)a Marxist-leninist mov
    This article had been set up when I received NO. 3 of Nasha
    ment has brought to the national question. It is clear that this solution
    Rabochaya Gazeta, in which Mr: PL. Kosovsky writes the followin
    )means nothing less than defending the dominant Turkish nation
    about the recognition of the right of all nations to self-determination
    existing privilege to establish a state
    Taken mechanically from the resolution of the First Congress of the
    253

==========第128頁==========
    15,self-determination' ,. Right of Self-determination
    socialism. However, communists are absolutely opposed to the organsation of large states being based on oppression and coercion of nation
    Self-determination " and the" Right of Self-determination"'are
    alities, as we have mentioned above. Unity between nationalities must
    different things. Self-determination "means secession, to establish
    be a unity based on free will and reciprocal trust. The duty of uncondi
    separate state. However. the right of self-deterimination ' mean. as
    tionally defending the nations' right of self-determination stems trom
    we have indicated above, the right of secession, the right to estab
    this. And what is the attitude of the Shafak revisionists regarding th
    lish a separate state. What communists defend in all circumstances
    important matter of principle? To advocate the peoples right(.)to carry
    unconditionally is the"right of self-determination. that is the right
    out a revolution, and to trample upon nations'night of self-determination
    o establish a separate state. The right to self-determination''should
    Furthermore, by saying"the Kurdish people's right of self-deter
    never be confused with self-determination or in other words. the
    mination cannot be separated from the land revolution struggle based
    right to establish a separate state with ""establishing a separate state
    on the impoverished peasantry and the struggle against inperialisin
    Communists in all circumstances defend the former while they defend
    they are attaching conditions to the right of self-determination. Do not
    the latter dependent on conditions. Although, communists uphold the
    forget that this nonsensical sentence is the solution ( )the Shafak revi
    first under all circumstances. the communist movement. in Comrade
    sionists have brought to the national question. The revisionists, after
    Lenins words, must decide the latter question exclusively on its me)
    criticism. were forced to substitute the word liberation''forright o
    its in each particular case in conformity with the interests of ocia
    self-determinatio but this is and has been no obstruction to continu
    development as d whole and with the interests of the proletarian class
    ing to defend dominant nation nationalism in the national question
    struggle for socialism
    The Shafak revisionists say: Our movement.works for the de
    Comrade Lenin compares"nations right of self determination"to
    termination of the Kurdish peoples destiny in the interests of the Kur
    the right of divorce. While the right of divorce is unconditionally de
    dish workers and peasants (my emphasis)
    fended in all circumstances, a personal question of divorce. as is known
    From whichever angle you look a sentence full of errors! Let us re
    is defended in certain conditions while in others it isnt. In the same way
    peat once again, first and foremost, it should be the"Kurdish nation
    as a family union is a forced union without recognition of the right of
    not the"Kurdish people', as the question of Kurdish people's self-de
    vorce, without recognition of the"right of selr-determination the unity
    termination is not related to the national question, and is something
    of' nationalities is also a forced unity. It is not a unity based on recipro
    with no connection to the subiect we are discussing. Also, if the Kur
    cal trust and will. It is a rotten unity based on reciprocal enmity and on
    dish people determine their own future it will certainly be"in the in-
    coercion. Communists cannot defend such a ulion. They wish for and
    terests of the Kurdish workers and peasants. It would not be possible
    advocate a sound unity based on reciprocal trust and friendship will
    to be otherwise, as a people determining its own future means a peo
    ingly entered into. Again, communists in general prefer to be organised
    ple establishing its own revolutionary state. A people will found
    in large states to being organising in numerous states, as large state
    own revolutionary state, that is, determine its own destiny and this
    founded in a broad area possess more advantageous conditions as re
    might not be"in the interests of the workers and peasants(!). This is
    gards the class struggle, large scale production and the construction of
    utter nonsense
    255

==========第129頁==========
    The determination.of the Kurdish peoples destiny"is men
    The Shafak revisionists, as a result, have, in general destroyed the
    tioned. This expression is more erroneous from another angle. Not"the
    right of self-determination of nations and, in particular, that of the Kur-
    determination of its destiny", it should be"they themselves deter
    dish nation. If you destroy this then nothing will be left of the princi-
    mining their own destiny. lt is abundantly clear that the expression
    ple of"equality of nations You will not only have extended your hand
    the determining of the Kurdish peoples destiny "implies that the de
    in friendship to the bourgeoisie of the dominant nation, but also to its
    termining will be carried out from outside. It means an external force
    police chiefs and fascist generals
    drawing the Kurdish peoples destiny. The Shatak revisionists haveturned the national question into a confusion. They have violated what-
    16-when will Turkeys class conscious proletariat support
    ever is progressive, revolutionary and correct in the concept"nations
    the secession of the Kurdish nation and when will it not
    right of self-determination They have made unbelievable distortions
    support it?
    to this coneept, turning it into a form that serves the interests of thedominant nation bourgeoisie and landlords
    Regardless of nationality, the class conscious proletariat of Turkey
    Ifin the above expression'nation', had taken the place of the word
    will address the question of the Kurdish nation founding a separate state
    people " the following two errors would still have been perpetuated
    from the standpoint of the development of the revolution. If the Kurdish
    the sentence: our movement works for the determination of the Kur-
    nations establishing a state will increase the possibility of the devel-
    dish [nations] destiny towards the interests of Kurdish workers and
    opment and success of a democratic popular revolution under the lead
    peasants. " In this case, too, the fate of the Kurdish people would be de
    ership of the proletariat in Kurdistan of Turkey the class conscious
    termined by"our movement not by the Kurdish people themselves
    proletariat of Turkey will support secession. If secession will delay and
    herefore, the most important aspect of the national question, a na
    hinder the development and success of such a democratic popular rev
    tions right of self-determination would be taken away from the nation
    olution then the class conscious proletariat of Turkey will not support
    and this fundamental right trampled upon. The above sentence would
    secession, Let us suppose that the communist movement developing in
    mean: Our movement works for a"separate Kurdish national state"in
    our country rapidly puts down roots amongst the peasantry in Kurdis
    the interests of Kurdish workers and peasants
    tan, that the struggle for land reform rapidly spreads and the revolu-
    It is abundantly clear that this expression takes the right to estab
    tionary movement develops faster in Kurdistan than it does in the
    lish a state away from the nation and gives it to the thing called'our
    Western region. Under these conditions, the Kurdish region remaining
    movement". Secondly, a communist Movement never includes the
    within the borders of Turkey will only lead to the hobbling of the rev
    question of whether or not a national state should be established in its
    olution by obstructions set up by the state of the dominant Turkish na
    programme. It never makes an advance judgement regarding the found
    tion's bourgeoisie and landlords. Or let us assume that red political
    ing of a separate national state. A con
    ment、 as we have
    administrations have emerged in various areas of the Kurdish region
    pointed out above, gives a guarantee of "a nations right of self-deter
    and that the revolution in the West is developing more slowly. Under
    mination and puts this in its programme. On the question of whether
    these conditions, again, the Turkish ruling classes and their state's op
    or not to secede it makes a decision according to concrete conditions
    pression would delay and hinder the development of the revolution in
    256

==========第130頁==========
    the East. In this case the secession of the East would speed up and
    the revolution. If in such a situation the Kurdish nation wished to se
    strengthen the development of the revolution. This would also add mo-
    cede, despite this, what would the class conscious proletariat of Turkey
    mentum to the revolution in both West and East and certainly positively
    do? The answer given by the Shafak revisionists to this question In
    affect the development of the revolution in other countries in the Mid
    verbal discussions is this: To prevent secession by all means, includ
    dle East. In such a situation the class conscious proletariat of Turkey, re
    ing force. The answer our movement gives to the same question: Coin
    gardless of nationality, would want and advocate the secession of the
    munists would absolutely reject the use of force in such a situation
    Kurdish nation and for the rapidly developing revolution in Kurdistan
    While disseminating propaganda in favour of"unity " amongst Kur
    to attain the possibility of progressing at a faster rate
    dish workers and toilers they would never use force in opposing the
    On the other hand. if the revolution in Turkev's other reyions were
    desire for secession. To recognise "nations'right of self-determina-
    to develop at a more rapid rate than in the Kurdish region and if the se
    tion" means to never oppose when a nation wishes to exercise this
    cession of Kurdistan were to slow the development of the revolution in
    right, that is, to secede, communists will entirely and absolutely leave
    this region and consolidate the dominance of feudal lords, sheikhs, mul
    the decision as to whether the Kurdish nation founds a separate state
    lahs etc,,,, and if the revolutionary struggle in the East were to be weak
    to the Kurdish nation itself. If the Kurdish nation wishes it will estab
    ened by being deprived of Western support, then in this case the clas
    lish a separate state, if it doesn't it won't It is the Kurdish nation that
    conscious proletariat of Turkey, regardless of nationality, would not
    will make this decision. not others. Just as communists will themselves
    support secession. If after the success of the revolution in Turkey a
    not obstruct a nation's desire to secede they will also actively struggle
    movement for secession under the leadership of the Kurdish bourgeoisie
    against the efforts of the government of the bourgeoisie and landlords
    began the proletariat of Turkey would not support secession etc
    to forcibly prevent this, They will also struggle against all manner of
    These things we are saying are obviously based on hypotheses but
    external intervention. If the Kurdish proletariat and toilers were aware
    there is great benefit in dwelling on these suppositions as regards th
    that secession would undermine the revolution they would do all they
    attitude to be taken by the communist movement, in which condition
    could to ensure unity. Even if they were not aware, no one has the right
    it would support secession and in which conditions it would oppose it
    to intervene externally on their behalf. External intervention, the use
    Moreover, these hypotheses relate to real, feasible things, not unreal
    of force, obstructing the desire for secession on whatever grounds, are
    possible things
    a]] in violation of"the right of self-determination of nations". Sucha violation would sabotage the unity of workers and toilers, shake their
    17-if the Kurdish nation decides to secede. how will the
    confidence in each other, stoke national enmity, and in the long term
    Class conscious Proletariat of Turkey react
    do great harm to the cause of the proletariat as a result. After the revolution had succeeded in the Soviet Union the Bolsheviks unhesitat
    n the event of secession two situations are possible
    Firstly, as mentioned above. in the event of secession favourably af
    ingly agreed to the secession of the Finns, at their request (3
    Dec. 1917). If the Finns hadn't wanted to secede and if Finland had or
    fecting the development of the revolution then it is a simple matter. Theproletariat of Turkey would definitely advocate and support secession
    ganised as a people's republic in the USSR this of course would havebeen better. but the Finnish nation wanted to secede. In this situation
    Secondly, the negative effect of secession on the development of258

==========第131頁==========
    it was necessary to either agree to secession or to adopt a really harm
    cal dictionary of chauvinistic nationalists and feudalists of the Turk
    ful policy of suppressing the aspiration by force
    ish ruling classes
    The Bolsheviks agreed to secession, not placing the smallest ob
    The ruling classes attach the label of"divisive to everyone who
    stacle in the way of the desire for secession. This attitude was to the
    opposes their nationalist policies. They call not only Kurds who wish
    benefit of both the Finnish people and the revolution in the Soviet
    to secede, but also all those who defend the right of secession or oppose
    Union This attitude consolidated the trust of the Finnish workers and
    national oppression to this or that degree"divisive. The meaning ofd
    peasants in the Soviet proletariat. In the year I918-20 when the civ
    visiveness in Turkey is" division of territory. the division of the
    war continued in the Soviet Union the imperialists plans to attack the
    states unity and its integrity
    Soviet Union through Finland met with the resistance of the Finnish
    In this sense, to say that the ruling classes and, even while being
    people. If the secession of the Finnish nation had been prevented de
    a little more progressive politically, the middle bourgeoisie, who
    spite their wish to do so this attitude would have only created a deep
    (openly ) extend one hand to democracy and the other (from behind )to
    rooted hostility between the peoples of the two countrie
    the ruling classes, are" divisive.is absurd. What divisiveness? They
    At Smolni commrade Lenin said
    are the merciless enemies of"divisiveness. Morning to night the
    very well recall the scene when, at Smolny, I handed the act to
    curse" divisiveness. They are in favour of the states unity and o-
    Svinhufvud which in Russian means"pighead -the representative o
    posed to the division of its territorial integrity at any price! That is
    the Finnish bourgeoisie, who played the part of a hangman. He amiabl
    they are in favour of forcibly keeping the Kurdish nation and other
    shook my hand, we exchanged compliments. How unpleasant that was
    minority nationalities within the borders of Turkey. Whereas commu
    But it had to be done, because at that time the bourgeoisie were de
    nists are opposed to such a "unity communists defend the union of
    ceiving the people, were deceiving the working people by alleging that
    workers and toilers from all nationalities. When it is in the interests of
    the Muscovites, the chauvinists. the Great Russians. wanted to crush the
    the revolution they defend non-separation of territories and organisa
    Finns. It had to be done
    tion in a single state( and even when defending this their fundamental
    Comrade Lenin's attitude on the Finnish question is a thoroughly
    goal is the unity of workers and toilers); when it is not in the interests
    instructive example. The attitude of the Shafak revisionists is diamet
    of the revolution they advocate the division of territory and the state
    rically opposite to that of comrade Lenin. Our attitude is in complete
    and secession. The slogans"unity of territory or"unity of the state
    accordance with that of comrade Lenin
    are slogans of the bourgeoisie and landlords of the dominant nation
    8.Divisiveness " Demagogy
    Communists have to distinguish with thick lines between their sloganthe unity of workers and toilers from all nationalities'and the slogan
    The Shafak revisionists say: "Our movement struggles against the
    unity of territory and state
    ruling classes of every nationality that is hostile to the revolutionary
    To attack"divisiveness with the language of the bourgeoisie and
    unity and fraternity of the Turkish and Kurdish people, and their divi
    landlords of the dominant nation instead of taking the above position
    sive policy. (our emphasis)
    will only confuse minds and make it easier for the Turkish rulin
    Their termdivisive policy" has been borrowed from the politi
    classes. You cannot oppose national injustice in a frighteningly dema-
    260

==========第132頁==========
    logic manner saying"they are the real divisive ones", attributing a
    forming a state, too, they want the equality of nationalities. The uncon-
    meaning to the concept of"divisiveness"that in reality does not exis
    ditional advocating of"the right of nations to self-determination stems
    People still remember how, in the newspaper"worker-peasant
    from this. Whereas the bourgeoisie wants at every opportunity inequal
    amongst a load of such demagogy and sophistry, under the headline
    ity in favour of its own nationality; wants privilege and tramples on the
    Who is Divisive? the Kurdish nations right to secession was ruined
    natural rlgthts of other nationalities etc. The bourgeoisie of the dominant
    and how the ruling classes slogan of"unity of state and territory was
    ation may recognise the existence of other nations and even grant some
    Insidiously supported. The Shafak revisionists in reality defend the
    rights to them when obliged to do so, such as the Arab bourgeoisie in
    unity of territory and the state "in an indirect way, by attacking"ivi
    Iraq. But at every opportunity they will trample on these rights and wish
    sive policy" with the vocabulary of the ruling classes; that is, they adopt
    to oppress other nationalities. It is not the recognition or non-recognition
    the official view of the state. The slogan of the class conscious prole
    of the existence of minority nationalities that separates communists from
    tariat, regardless of nationality, is this
    the bourgeoisie. And, anyway, M. Kemal, by discussing the existence o1
    Unconditional equality for all nationalities. right of nations to sel
    the Kurds in a spurious manner at the Sivas Congress. when central au
    determination; unity of workers and oppressed people of all coun
    thority did not exist or had entirely collapsed,wanted in reality to preventa possible separatist movement of the Kurdish nation. He wanted to ensure that they would accept the yoke of the Turkish bourgeoisie and land
    19 Shatak revisionism makes M. Kemal and 1. Inenu's
    lords. The whole of M. Kemal,s life is full of examples of oppression
    dominant nation nationalism a cornerstone
    and persecution of the Kurdish nation and other minority nationalities. If
    The Shatak revisionists approve of the national oppression inflicted
    there is someone in Turkey whose support cannot be secured that person
    on the Kurdish nation and other minority nationalities in history. Thev
    s M. Kemal. Furthermore, the nationalism that needs to be struggledwith first and foremost in Turkey is M. Kemal nationalism, which is dom
    applaud the fact that M. Kemal said: In Turkey there are Turks and
    nant nation nationalism. Inonu's claim to be the representative of the
    Kurds They greet fervently the fact that at Lausanne Ismet Inonu saidam the representative of the Turks and Kurds, 'and base their own
    Kurds at Lausanne was also an open attack on the Kurdish nations rightof self-determination. A despicable determining of the Kurdish nations
    views on this. It is as if they are saying to the Turkish ruling classe
    destiny from outside. The cunning to include the regions where the Kur
    ook, Ataturk and Inonu recognised the existence of the Kurds This what we are doing! What is there to be angry about in this?
    dish nation lives within the borders of Turkey, that is, of the field of dom-ination of the Turkish bourgeoisie and landlords, through haggling with
    The revisionist traitors assuine that they are resolving the national
    Imperialists! And the most ferocious manifestation ofturkish national
    question by recognising the existence of a people(even though the
    Ism. This is what the revisionist traitors use as a basis for their ideas
    are yet to recognise the existence of the Kurdish nation, only recognosing the existence of the Kurdish people(! )
    20-A summary of Shafak revisionists, theses regarding
    On the national question communists defend the absolute equalit
    the National Question
    of all nationalities and languages, and oppose all manner of inequalityand privilege between nationalities and languages. On the subject o
    The Shafak revisionists ignore the national oppression of other mi
    262
    263

==========第133頁==========
    nority nationalities and languages. The Shafak revisionists do not see
    tional question is an effort to reconcile Turkish nationalism, a nation
    the Kurdish movement as a national mnovement. They evaluate it as a
    alisn inherited fron the current represented by Mihri Belli [see note
    popular movement that merely opposes national oppression. Just as
    with Kurdish nationalism
    they are unable to distinguish between the class movement and the na
    The Shafak revisionists are, on the one hand. Turkish nationalist
    tional movement of the Kurdish people, they also do not distinguish
    while, on the other, they have extended the hand of friendship to Kur
    between the general democratic content of the Kurdish national move
    dish nationalism. It is as if the following message was being conveyed
    ment opposing oppression and persecution and its back ward content
    between the lines: Our brothers the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords
    strengthening Kurdish nationalism, thereby erasing the difference be
    Put aside this secession idea! Come, join forces with us! Look, we also
    tween the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords and the Kurdish prole
    oppose the persecution to which you are subjected. Those who oppress
    tarjat and toilers
    you are"divisive But if you wish to secede you will too become"di
    The Shafak revisionists mistakenly analyse the profound economic
    visive"! And, as you know, we are the enemies of"divisiveness" etc
    and political reasons for the nationa! oppression and persecution im
    A Turkish nationalism that makes concessions to Kurdish nation
    plemented against the Kurdish nation by the Turkish ruling classes
    alism! Here, a summary of all the prattle and charlatanism regarding the
    They portray national oppression and class oppression, and nationa
    national question!
    contradiction and class contradiction as one and the same
    The Shafak revisionists, ignoring the profound evidence of Turk
    21-A summary of the Marxist-leninist movements views
    ish nationalism amongst the Turkish workers and peasants are sacri
    regarding the national question
    icing the truth to fancy words! They are undermining the importanceof the activities we have to carry out amongst workers and peasants to
    The Marxist-leninist movement is today the most relentless and
    counter Turkish nationalism
    detemined foe of the national oppression inflicted on the Kurdish na
    By distorting the concept of" right of self-determination
    tion and minority nationalities by the Turkish ruling classes, and Is in
    In an unbelievable way, initially transforming it into a Bukharinite for
    the forefront of struggles against national oppression, persecution of
    mulation, then subsequently violating this Bukharinite formulation, the
    the other languages and national prejudice. The Marxist-leninist move
    Shafak revisionists are rendering impossible the Kurdish nations right
    ment unconditionally supports, and has always supported, the right of
    of self-determination and demolishing concepts regarding the national
    elf-determination of the Kurdish nation, oppressed by the Turkish
    question
    bourgeoisie and landlords; that is, its right of secession and to establish
    Using the demagogy of"divisiveness, the Shafak revisionists are
    an independent state. As regards the right to found a state, too, the
    defending the unity of territory and the state in an insidious way
    Marxist-leninist movement is opposed to privilege. The most funda
    They utilise M. Kemal and [. Inonu, representatives of dominant nation
    mental tenets of people's democracy render this absolutely necessary
    nationalism in Turkey, as props, assuming that by recognising the ex
    The unprecedented national oppression inflicted upon the minority na
    istence of a nation the national question will be resolved
    tionalities in Turkey by the Turkish bourgeoisie and landlords also ren
    The result is this: the line followed by the Shalak revisionists on the na
    der this imperative. This is at the same time made absolutely necessary

==========第134頁==========
    y the freedom struggle of the Turkish workers and toilers, for, if theydo not demolish Turkish nationalism, liberation will be impossible folthe
    The Origin And Development Of
    Nations right of self-determination should never be contused with
    he Differences Between Otursetves An
    the necessity for a certain nation to secede. The Marxist-leninist move
    Shafak Revisionism
    ment considers the question of secession concretely in every particularcase, "it judges and determines as a whole for social development andsocialism and from the viewpoint of the interests of the class struggle
    A General Critique of TIIKP(Turkey
    of the proletariat. " The Marxist-leninist movement rejects absolutelthe use of force and creating obstacles in the event of decisions of se-
    Revolutionary Worker Peasant Party
    cession of which it does not approve. Borders should be fixed by thewill of the nation. This is imperative as regards the reciprocal confidence, sound friendship and willing union of the working and toilingmasses belonging to various nationalities
    The Marxist-leninist movement supports the struggle of oppressednationalities in general and the Kurdish nation in particular against national oppression, persecution and privilege, and absolutely supportsthe general democratic content of the national movement of the oppressed nation
    The Marxist-leninist movement also directs and administers the
    June 7972
    class struggle of the Kurdish proletariat and toilers against the boutgeois and small landlords that make up the leadership of the Kurdnational movement. It warns the Kurdish workers and toilers auainst theactions of the Kurdish bourgeois and landlords that aims to consolidatenationalism. The Marxist-leninist movement remains indifferent regarding the struggles for supremacy of the bourgeois and landlordclasses of various nationalities
    The Marxist-leninist movement wages a struggle against the eforts of landlords, mullahs, sheikhs etc to reconcile the struggle againstnational oppression with their attempts to strengthen their own positons

==========第135頁==========
    The struggle continuing within the Shafak movement, previousthe PDA( Proletarian Revolutionary Daylight? ) between the two wings,sometimes in the open, sometines clandestine, sometimes hardeningsometimes softening, but continuing without a break has tinally reachedthe point where it is no longer possible for the two wings to exist withinthe same organisation. The proletarian wing has now cut all ties with therevisionist-bourgeois clique and embarked on reorganising on Marxist-
    Leninist bases. However, due to the talents of the revisionist clique thatis at the head of the movement, many comrades have been in the dark asregards the struggle between the two lines. The revisionists, hiding behind the curtain of"party discipline concealed the struggle from cadre
    They dishonourably opted to suppress correct revolutionary ideas, andwere partially successful in this. Today many comrades are shocked atthis"sudden, unexpected"".They are trying to find out what isgoing on from scratch. The revisionists, taking advantage of the bewilderment of the cadre are trying to fish in muddied water, trying toblacken our name with baseless gossip, slander campaigns, personal attacks, endeavouring to conceal the essence of the question and their owilow actions. They will of course cling to the method of struggle whichsuits them-slander, lies, gossip, persona] attack and vulgar criticism, andthere is no surprise about this
    Proletarian revolutionaries will also of course pursue the path whichbefits them. The path of giving prominence to the essence of the quetion while demonstrating the ideological, political, organisational andtactical line of the bourgeois clique. For two reasons there 1s an urgentneed for this. Firstly, to ensure that the militant cadre who are bewidered correctly grasp the struggle between the two lines and take theplace in the ranks of Marxism-leninism. Secondly, at this time when, wehave embarked on reorganisation, to ensure unity by establishing thecorrect ideological, political, organisational and tactical principles on
    ill be fomed
    for these reasons we consider it essential to summarise briefly the
    269

==========第136頁==========
    line of treachery which the revisionist clique has maintained, changing
    movement were, as regards class character, political currents of the na
    its outward appearance but without any essential change, and the past o
    tional bourgeoisie. They had covered their faces with the mask of so
    the struggle between us and this line
    cialism. Since the fate of these two currents is well known there is noneed to dwell on them. Present day Shafak revisionism appeared on the
    The Emergence of the Revisionist Clique
    scene at a time when the struggle between these two bourgeois clique
    dinlik Socialist magazine and Isci-koylu
    had intensified, with the Aydinlik Socialist magazine(ASD)in November 1968, tailing M.Belli. It followed a line faithful to M. Belli on every
    At the end of]@65 and the beginning of 1966 the struggle between
    question. It thoroughly developed the coarse theories and nonsense c
    the pacifists, parliamentarist TIP ruling clique and the clique of Mihr
    M. Belli, embellishing his revisionism with Isci-koylu literature
    Belli, which pinned its hopes on a military coup, was continuing In an I
    The publication of the Isci-kovlu newspaper is claimed to be evi
    creasingly intense way. There was absolutely no difference, In essence
    dence of a separate movement from M. Belli and of the following of
    between these two cliques. Both of them agreed basically with the"non
    evolutionary line. This is absolute nonsense. What determines the line
    capitalist path of modern revisionism. The single difference
    of a movement is not the publication of this or that joumal. What is In
    while one relied on elections and parliament the others hopes were tied
    portant is the content of a publication. "we inclined towards the work
    to a military coup. The TIP clique was making all its calculations on the
    ers and peasants. Yes. but like a bourgeois, not like a communist
    basis of the votes it would get in elections and was shamefully assailin
    Where do you get the idea that the bourgeoisie do not incline toward
    the active struggle of our working class, impoverished peasantry an
    the workers and peasants. The political line of the Isci-koylu newspa
    youth out of fear that the parliamentary path would close
    per which emerged with the pressure of the rising worker and peasant
    As for the bourgeois clique of M. Belli that was gathered around Turk
    movement was just like that of M. Belli. Its task was"to convey na
    Solu, in November 1967 they were concocting a plan along with Dogan
    tional consciousness(i.e bourgeois ideology )to the workers and peas
    Avcioglu to use the actions of university youth like a winch to trigge
    ants" and"to introduce the worker-peasant movements to the
    military coup. The M. Belli clique had turned its back on the broad toil
    military-civilian intellectuals. The bourgeois officers who took power
    ing masses, working class and peasants. It had turned its back on the
    must have been aware of the worker and peasant movements (1), and
    world communist movement and on Marxism-leninism-mao-tse-tun
    after coming to power they should have been so kind as to incline to
    Thought. It was confusing the consciousness of the working class. in
    their problemns! This was the wonderful logic which led to the launch
    poverished peasants and revolutionary intellectuals and youth with the
    of Isci-koylu! Everyone who examines the ideological line of Isc
    nonsense of"Algerian socialism. It was trying to palm off a reformist
    Koylu will see clearly that it is entirely the bourgeois line of M.Bell
    bourgeois dictatorship as a proletarian government and socialism. It re
    To the extent that the ban on socialism''of M. Belli also affected Isci-
    ected the independent political organisation of the proletariat and pro
    Koylu and great care was taken in the first editions of the paper to avoid
    letarian leadership. It was promoting dominant nation nationalism and
    using the word socialism
    descending to the extent where it claimed even fascist racism had a"pos
    Today, Shafak revisionism is endeavouring to conceal these real-
    itive "side, becoming an accomplice in the Turkish ruling classes po
    ties as a cat covers up its excrement
    y of national oppression. Both the TIP movement and the M Bel

==========第137頁==========
    Revisionism's First Change of Appearance
    and peasant masses would have been able to remove these weaknesses
    Proletarian Revolutionary Aydinlik
    and unite the struggle of the youth with that of the broad toiling massesbut a communist leadership did not yet exist. Various revisionist cliques
    With the deepening of the economic crisis and the intensification of
    irst and foremost the M. Belli clique, did all they could to use the youth
    contradictions amongst the ruling classes and connected to this the rise
    for their own ambitions and were influential in the youth movements!
    in violent actions by workers, peasants and youth. the revisionist clique
    With the natura] weaknesses of the youth movements combining with
    attempted to pacifise these actions by donning a new mask. A new con
    the shortcomings of the influence of revisionism, the revolution poter
    tradiction emerged in the M. Belli ranks. On the one hand youth leader
    tia] of our countrys heroic offspring was squandered
    who represented the spontaneous struggle of the youth and in this con-
    The PDA clique sufficed with watching from the sidelines as the
    text advocated activism, and on the other passive bourgeois elements
    youth suffered martyrs in the intensifying militant struggle against fas
    who rejected all manner of active struggle. M.Belli and the current
    cist persecution, and with cursing it. This led to it being completely iso
    Shafak revisionists constituted the leadership of the second group. At
    lated from its youth support
    the TDGF general meeting the struggle came into the open and this wa
    On the other hand PDA revisionism rejected the idea that the land
    followed by the publication dividing into two and the emergence of the
    revolution was the essence of the democratic revolution. It rejected the
    PDA magazine. PDA revisionism followed MBellis rightist line for a
    revolutionary role of the peasantry. It rejected the armed struggle on the
    long time against the petit-bourgeois leaders who interpreted the spon
    grounds that"conditions are not yet suitable". It rejected Marxist-lenin
    taneous actions of the youth In PDA,s first edition they wrote: "We have
    ist theories of the state and revolution. It rejected the right of nations to
    marched on the path opened by Turk Solu", and"Turk Solu and PDA are
    self-determination. Its bourgeois nationalism continued, but some of the
    two publications that meet the different needs of our movement. "In this
    crude theories of M. Belli, such as: " a proletarian party cannot be estab
    they openly proclaimed their adherence to the line of M. Bell
    lished in conditions of Philippine democracy", "proletarian leadershi
    As for MBeli, at one time he adopted a centrist stance. When the
    is not essential in the democratic revolution" it cannot be said that there
    majority of the youth mass came out against PDA revisionism with an
    ]] be a transition from a democratic revolution to socialism without a
    expert manoeuvre he adopted a position alongside the TDGF admin
    pause, were abandoned. Apart from these, M Bellis analysis of Ke
    trators which be considered more appropriate for his ambitions Ior a
    malism, of history and his theory of counter-revolution in Turkey were
    military coup". In such a way the alliance between M Belli and youth
    maintained
    leaders who were typical petit-bourgeois was born. They came to dom
    On the other hand, as happy as someone who has come into a for
    inate the youth mass. The PDA revisionist clique was betrayed b
    tune they embraced the revisionist ideas of Hikmet Kivilcimli in a wa
    M Belli, whose ideas they had faithfully embraced. They therefore had
    that would be appropriate for bourgeois politicians: They put his writings
    to make some minor changes in their views, but the Mihri essence did not
    n their publications and created a Kivilcimli-belli mixed anti-marxist
    change. Of course, the youth movements had a series of weaknesses and
    Leninist analyses of feudalism that would suit the thoughts of the
    drawbacks on account of their petit-bourgeois character. This Is natura
    Thinkers"column in Milliyet of Korkut Boratav appeared and the
    and only a commmunist party leadership that had roots amongst the worke
    reached the point of denying the existence of feudalism in Turkey
    273

==========第138頁==========
    In the international sphere they adopted a centrist position as regards
    peasants, urban petit-bourgeoisie, and national bourgeoisie should be re
    the situation between the world communist movement and modern re
    alised against feudalism, imperialism and comprador capitalism
    visionists. The fact that in the Soviet Union and Eastern European coun
    This united front may be established under the leadership of the
    tries the revisionists had once again taken power and that proletarian
    working class based on a fundamental alliance o! workers and peasants
    dictatorship had turned into bourgeois dictatorship was rejected. Thev
    The government that will be established with the resulting success of the
    particularly dismissed the idea that in the Soviet Union revisionism had
    opular war will be a popular dictatorship under the leadership of the
    turned into social-imperialism. They rejected the experiences of the
    proletariat, not a bourgeois dictatorship. After the democratic popular
    Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution. They adopted the path of main
    dictatorship has been realised the proletariat which holds the leadership
    taining friendly relations with both socialism and modern revisionism
    should go on to realise the dictatorship of the proletariat without a pause,
    led by the Soviet revisionist clique. It was accepted that the USSR and
    by uniting with the impoverished and middle peasantry, and embark on
    other revisionist parties had committed the occasional error(! ).(Like the
    the construction of socialism. These are the general outlines of what is
    ones they committed! ) The bourgeois club that was later to be called
    taught by Mao Tse-tung and the experience of the Chinese Revolution
    the TIKP emerged on this ideological basis. While on the one hand fol-
    The PDA revisionist clique rejected all of this. It used the correct
    lowing a modern revisionist line on main questions, the PDA clique sub
    idea of comrade Mao Tse-tung, i.e. " the revolution will be the work of
    sequently resorted to Mao Tse-tung Thought (MTTT) How was this
    the masses". to oppose the armed struggle, and accuse every wish to take
    possible? Of course, by putting the essence of MTTT' to one side
    Ip anns of:"losing contact with the popular masses" and rejecting the
    What is the meaning of MTTT in semi-colonial. senli-feudal coun
    idea that*the revolution will be the work of the masses This treacher
    tries? Comrade Mao Tse-tung reached the following conclusions by im-
    ous cliques's loyalty to Mao-tse-tung spread as hostility to the armed
    plementing the Marxist-leninist theory of permanent and phased
    struggle in Turkey. The PDA revisionist clique's(which made such a
    revolution to the conditions of semi-colonial semi-feudal countries. The
    fuss about" the revolution will be the work of the masses)attitude to
    struggle being waged against feudalism in these countries and the stru
    mass movements was as follow
    gle against imperialism are connected with unbreakable links. The
    To extol the spontaneous struggle of the worker-peasant masses
    essence of the democratic popular revolution is the land revolution
    prostrate themselves in front of the spontaneous struggle! To crawl be
    which will achieve success with a popular war under the leadership of the
    hind the worker and peasant masses! But what the popular masses and
    proletariat. Popular war is, in essence, a peasant war. The party of the
    especially the peasants need for an armed struggle for power
    proletariat should launch armed struggle in the rural areas based on the
    namic, decisive, consistent communist leadership advancing on a cor
    impoverished and middle peasantry, create liberated zones in these areas
    rect path. And this is what is lacking. The objective conditions were idea
    broadening these zones by means of a prolonged war, besieging the
    for launching a peoples war. The spontaneous struggle of the worker
    cities, and eventually seizing power country-wide by taking the big
    and peasant masses was mushrooming and reaching the level of armed
    cities. The party of the proletariat and popular army should be con
    clashes in places. PDA revisionism did not have the ability to take the
    structed step by step during this prolonged war. Also during this pro
    leadership of this struggle, uniting the spontaneous struggle of the peo
    longed war a united front of all popular classes. the working cla
    ple with a conscious political struggle. The treacherous clique had nei

==========第139頁==========
    ther the belief nor the preparation or ability to lead the popular masseswho wished to take up arms. This clique, first and foremost, did not be
    the political issues of the world and Turkey! These bourgeois gentlemen
    lieve that the armed struggle and revolution would develop in an unbal
    were stupid and pompous enough to assume in the warm corners in which
    anced way, growing in same places before others, and did not believe in
    they sat that they gave direction to global politics
    the prolonged armed struggle. This clique had established its task as
    Editorial commissions, committees, a heap of offices! Add the pol-
    preparing the social and psychological conditions of the revolution
    icy of taking over the TIP and these constituted the backbone of organ-
    In order to do this it was necessary to "organise and politicise'the
    isation. With this organisation not even a tree could be toppled, let alone
    massesThe workers and peasants should be organised in broad mass
    the govemment of the ruling classes
    organisations, trade unions etc! Their organisational policy consisted of
    Days passed in endless bureaucracy and stationery activity, in de
    this. More copies of Isci-koylu, which consisted of applauding ( ) the
    bater on revolution " with bourgeois gentlemen and ladies fleeing reac
    spontaneous movement of the masses, should be printed and distributed
    tionary attacks in the universities and the intensifying repression of the
    in order to "politicise"! The task of"politicisation consisted of this
    government, and educational meetings
    Mass meetings, demonstrations, strikes, etc should be organised to de
    Very few of the cadre were professional. Most of them continued
    mand reforms. This is all they understood by the terni class struggle. In
    their private affairs and maintained their lifestyles while attending edu-
    stead of revisionist organisations and armed struggle, legalism
    cational meetings and newspaper sales in their spare time. The content
    reformism, only peaceful forins of struggle were implemented. In real
    of the practical activity generally gathered the bourgeois cadre in the
    Ity organising mass meetings, demonstrations, strikes, establishing
    ranks of the movement. While activity was carried out with these cadres
    unions etc.remained on paper(they, of course, could not be rejected
    it was impossible to attempt a brand new, dynamic, revolutionary activ
    as serving the armed struggle and of being part of revolutionary organ
    ity. This bourgeois clique uttered squeals of"revolutionary unity of
    isation ). They went to movements of the masses own initiative, selling
    forces "as it was pressurised by reactionary attacks. It endeavoured to es
    newspapers, the events being written in the newspaper that was it..Most
    tablish a unity of forces with the CHP, independent senators(? ) TIP
    of the time the revolutionary rage of the Inasses was pacified on the ra
    DISK and other reformist bourgeois organisations, making the"front
    tonale: " Don't go into action before organising and politicising the
    policy a basis, and to revive the Mihri Dev-guc disgrace "Our weapon
    workers and peasants all over the country. This would be"adventurism
    is our revolutionary unity of forces"*** was the heading, putting to one
    This revisionist clique compromised completely with reformist bour
    side two of the weapons of the people, the party and popular army, and
    geois trade unions such as DISK and TUTUS and pushed our worki
    moreover, replacing the united popular front with a vague thing called
    class and impoverished peasants into the lap of reformism, extolling the
    unity of forces".This was a disgrace, as, for a communist party ad-
    struggle of these trade unions for a few kurus pay rise in their publica-
    vancing on a correct path establishing a stable alliance with the bour
    tion without even once criticising them
    geoisie is a futile dream, leaving to one side the construction of popular
    In reality, there was nothing as regards illegal activity. The member
    armed forces under the leadership of the party. Temporary and partial
    of the supposedly illegal party were busy from morning to night keeping
    agreements are only possible on certain concrete questions. The result oall the chatter in the name of unity of forces did not go beyond the pub
    an eye on the sales and distribution of the publication and chattering about
    lishing of the occasional joint signed statement. Even this is not an agree

==========第140頁==========
    ment between the proletariat and the national bourgeoisie. It consisted of
    geois state theories. It demonstrated clearly to what degree it was a fool-
    agreements between various bourgeois and petit-bourgeois cliques. The
    ish dream to expect the liberation of the people to come from the army
    PDA revisionists advertised their successes(! ) in this by exaggerating In
    of the ruling class, for the workers'resistance was suppressed with tanks
    their publications. It declared the struggle of revolutionary youth to de
    bayonets and martial law. The bosses, sheltering in the shadow of bay
    fend themselves against reactionary oppression as"arson against the
    onets, sacked hundreds of workers together with the martial law autho
    unity of forces
    ities. Hundreds of revolutionary workers and intellectuals were tried in
    The outcome of this revisionist line was this: to remain behind the
    the martial law courts. All this set forth the idiocy of the pro-coup dreams
    worker and peasant masses and to be unable to establish any serious link
    and anti-ma]xist-leninist state and army analyses of M.Belli, D Av
    with the masses. To be entirely isolated from the revolutionary youth
    cioglu and II. Kivilcimli
    To be stuck around a few legal publications in Ankara. Istanbul andi
    Thirdly, the Great Workers'Resistance of 15-16 June illustratedonce again that the real heroes are the masses. And dealt a serious blow
    Izmir! ** PDA issue no. 1
    To be unable to go beyond the bounds of amateur activity! To throw
    to the individualist petit-bourgeois currents that imagine carrying out
    themselves into the arms of the bourgeoisie in the face of ferocious re
    revolution based on an elite group of the intelligentsia
    actionary assaults
    Fourthly, the suppression of the 15-16 une resistance demonstratedthat the revolution will be unable to succeed at the outset in the cities
    The great Workers Resistance of 15-16 June
    and that the workers uprisings that break out from time to tiue in the
    The Taking shape of the struggle between Two Lines and
    cities are bound to be suppressed as long as they are not drawn to therural areas. It inflicted a severe blow on the dreams of the PDA clique of
    Another Change of Appearance by PDA
    Revisionism
    seizing power by means of a general uprising in the cities at an uncertaintime in the future
    On 15-16 June the spontaneous struggle of our working class
    Fifthly. the martial law that followed 15-16 June and lasted 3 months
    reached its peak. The workers defeated and left behind all the bourgeois
    demonstrated that continuing the struggle even under the harshest con-
    and petit bourgeois cliques. The 15-16 June Great Workers Resistance
    ditions would only be possible with a genuinely revolutionary organisa-
    and subsequent martial law created a significant leap forward in the con
    tion, having an illegal foundation on which it is constructed. It showed
    sciousness of some cadre. These colleagues learned important lesson
    that reliance on legality, and revisionist organisation, in circumstances of
    from the workers' inovement and the harsh days of struggle that fol-
    an intensifying class struggle would succeed in doing nothing more than
    lowed
    flicting harms on our people
    The workers movement demonstrated, firstly, that the revolution
    Sixthly, the 15-16 June Resistance was concrete evidence of how
    would be based on violence and that this was inevitable. It inflicted
    objective conditions for revolution in our country have matured
    A section of cadre who participated in the great workers resistance
    ere blow on the opportunism of Aybar-aren and all pacifists, parliamentalist vlews
    who maintained the struggle under the conditions of martial law and had
    Secondly, the workers' movement inflicted
    ere blow on bou
    experience of working amongst the masses, took the necessary lessons
    278

==========第141頁==========
    from the great workers' movement. They grasped the fact that the line
    in organisation. The struggle was not subject to the land revolution
    that had been followed previously was a rightist and capitulationist line
    etc... But in spite of all these significant weaknesses, for the first time an
    a revisionist line. But a section of bourgeois elements who watched the
    illegal path of organisation and struggle had been established. This, de
    struggle from afar and who do not know the m
    ere unable to draw
    spite everything, was a good thing, and it was necessary to leave the old
    the necessary lessons from the Workers movement. They even drew the
    path and advance on this track, defeating all the weaknesses with a con-
    wrong lessons. They were carried away by hopes of easy success In thi
    scious effort. But it didn't work out like that, With a slight relaxation of
    way a new contradiction began in the PDA rank
    martial law illegal activity also relaxed. Groups working clandestinely
    The bourgeois clements ensconced at the head of the movement. in
    came out into the open. They then became legitimised in the form o
    stead of entirely abandoning the previous rightist line and constructing
    Isci-koylu offices The entire cadre returned to the magazine and at just
    a movement on a correct line, endeavoured to conceal their taces with a
    that time the watchword became"Socialist Congress". Despite all ob
    new mask by making minor changes on some questions
    ections the decision was taken to once again publish the magazine on a
    The struggle between the two lines made its presence felt initially
    weekly basis. However, the monthly PDA and fortnightly Isci-koylu had
    an assessment of the future, The bourgeois elements claimed that mar
    absorbed the entire cadre. Right at that time the slogan"let's establish
    tial law would soon end and that a return would be made to the old. e
    Isci-koylu Working Committees"was coined
    mocratic"(! environment. A.N., in particular, championed this view
    These things were, of course, not coincidental. They were the bour
    The Marxist-leninist cadre advocated the position that even if martial
    geois class instinct and bourgeois class attitude expressing itself as soon
    law were to end fascist oppression would continue and increase, as the
    as conditions were seen to be favourable. The slogans and decisions were
    economic and political crisis would exacerbate the violence by the day
    wrong, for in reality a return had been made to the old ways of working
    and that comparatively stable periods would be temporary and short
    that had been shaken by martial law. They were based on the mistaken
    lived. The consequences of the revisionists analysis were to restore tl
    assumption that the"'democratic environment"would continue for a long
    rightist practice that had been shaken somewhat by martial law. As fo
    time. Even if this assumption had been correct the above slogans and
    the Marxist-leninist cadre they were of the opinion that previous activ
    d
    ould still have been wrong, for in every period and under all
    ity should be entirely and fundamentally changed, and that organisation
    circumstances the proletariat has to lay an ilegal foundation around
    and struggle should continue on the illegal path onto which martial law
    which it must construct all other organisation and work. When cond
    had partially impelled us
    tions for armed struggle have thoroughly matured and in parallel with
    In the days of martial law which followed the workers' resistance of
    this when the ruling classes have stepped up their fascistic measures the
    15-16 June we had engaged in no little revolutionary and illegal activity
    above slogans and decisions would be entirely mistaken
    based on our own forces, which superseded the old publication activit
    The revisionists were saying that a legal party provides countless
    More correctly, by force of circumstances we had been pushed into such
    advantages! At the head of these countless benefits was the distribution
    activity, particularly in Istanbul. This activity of course had many weak
    and sale of the legal publication, that is, the isci-koylu newspaper that ap
    ness and shortcomings. Cadres were not mobilised. All manner of ama
    peared with the permission of the ruling classes. Mr A, Z, the head of
    teurishness occurred in the illegal work. There was no clear perspective
    revisionism, said exactly the following in a debate during those days: If
    280

==========第142頁==========
    we dont found a legal party, in a month we won't be able to bring out
    have been possible in a comparatively lengthy process, not all at once
    sci-koylu. Did this gentleman assume he was going to bring out Isci
    It was seen in practice that the Socialist Conference would not be feasi
    Koylu for ever
    ble. It merely whetted the appetites of the unprincipled and pacifist ele
    The"Socialist Conference"that was to gather together all the revi
    ments who wanted peace between the revisionist cliques
    sionist cliques had become the cure of all ills. It was to resolve the pro
    Why was it necessary to bring out a legal weekly publication again
    letarian movements(! )problem of organisation! It was to liberate the
    n order to repeat more frequently the calls for a socialist conference
    revolutionary movement in Turkey by uniting all"proletarian circles
    Since the cadres were struggling to bring out the existing two legal pub
    (these gentlemen now called all reformist-revisionist cliques like them
    lications the revisionists subsequently were forced to turn the monthly
    selves by this name) from dispersion
    magazine into a weekly
    It was to create the pre-conditions(! )for"a peoples war"by en
    The task of the Isci-koylu working committees was to read the
    suring organisation on a National basis. In fact there was only one way
    magazine and newspaper, criticise them, and write articles for them
    to prepare for popular war: that was to send a significant proportion of
    and nothing more. "Every isci-koylu working committee should work
    the cadre to the rural areas, to organise the peasants for armed struggle
    like an editorial board(ibid)it was said. That is, all activity had the
    in guerrilla formations, and to make all other forms of illegal organisa
    purpose of strengthening legal publishing activity. They tried to persuade
    lon and activity subject to the armed struggle in the rural areas. Not to
    us they took"village work as primary "by sending a few spare cadres not
    consolidate with nonsense like the Socialist Conference already exist
    needed in publishing work to villages to write ostentatious village work
    ing legalism
    reports for the magazine. Village work consisted of temporary legal pro
    If the Socialist Conference had been feasible it would have been a
    pagandising and polling activity-still, a significant section of the cadre
    conference of betrayal, for it would have served the purpose of present
    participating in this work in time turned and are turning against the r
    Ing the entire cadre as if fruit on a tray to the growing appetites of the te
    visionist administrative clique
    rocious fascist assailants. Not to create the preconditions for armed
    Newspaper sales and distribution also constituted the essence of
    struggle or to lead it
    work amongst workers. The reformist DISK and unions affiliated to it
    As it was the Socialist onference slogan was at the same time a fi-
    were supported unconditionally. Those who opposed this policy were
    tile dream. The reactionary onslaught had pitted the revisionist cliques
    accused of sectarianism. The spontaneous struggle of the working class
    One against the other. Revolutionary Workers, peasant and intellectua
    was again being followed, lagging behind. There was no clear, definite
    cadre were vacillating in a perplexed manner between these cliques
    organisational plan, policy or activity. There was absolutely no thought
    Uniting the revolutionary cadre around a correct line and isolating revi
    of drawing promising workers into professional political work. Amateur
    sionism could not have been achieved by a discussion meeting like th
    work was primary. Students participating in work today were tomorrow
    Socialist Conference. Such discussion meetings occurred frequently in
    returning to their courses, with all the product of that work and all rela
    those days and did not go beyond intensifying arguments. Only a revo-
    tionships going with them. Due to unstable and amateur work relations
    utionary practice directed by a sound nucleus founded on Marxist
    established with many revolutionary workers and peasants were rup
    eninist foundations accompanied by an ideological struggle, could
    tured
    283

==========第143頁==========
    varnish of Marxism-leninism (see PDA, critique of Vatan Party Pro
    The revisionist clique. for the reasons we have mentioned above
    grammie, Issue no 24)
    had also become isolated from the youth
    They tried to read to everyone the"Socialist Conference fable that
    The bourgeois leadership had begun to shout the most radical slo
    Kivilcimli had whispered in their ears with a Mao Tse-tung impression
    gans in order to conceal its rightist practice and free itself from isola
    Together with him they shouted: No Anarchy, Great Gathering!" In the
    tion, and to repeat the most primitive truths of Marxism-leninism against
    magazine they launched a campaign to read and understand Kivilcimli
    the revisionism of M. Belli. Plentiful hot air was generated and chatter
    They became so Ludicrous as to proclaim he was"one of the worlds
    about the peoples war rose to the skies
    greatest Marxist-leninists
    This was the new mask of PDA revisionism
    On the other hand they continued to advocate the Boratavist non
    With what kind of organisation were the radical slogans and popul
    sense that all but denied the existence of feudalism in Turkey and, con
    lar war rhetoric engaged in to conceal rightist practice to be imple
    sequently, the land revolution. The theses of Kivilcimli denying
    mented? With editorial committees With isci -Koyu
    feudalism and the revolutionary role of the peasants and Boratav's the
    committees? With translation and I dont know what offices? The"party
    ory that there was five per cent feudalism corroborated each other.
    dominated by bourgeois intellectuals was not of any use apart from serv
    Initially they advocated the idea that the main contradiction was be-
    ing this legal publishing activity
    tween the ruling classes and the people. Later, they abandoned this idea
    The bourgeois leadership had abandoned its former rightist view
    with the masterpiece of artificial logic and idealism"imperialism, means
    on subjects that are the A, B, C of Marxism-leninism, such as the clas
    of Production and the main Contradiction. ' They supposedly adopted
    character of the stale, army and martial law. The revisionists had berun
    the idea that the main contradiction was between'feudalism and the pop-
    to criticise modern revisionism with a low voice and embarrassed lan-
    alar masses". We say supposedly because they had not grasped the
    uage. They had slowly begun to get used to the term Soviet social im
    essence of the question (we shall see this later)
    perialism. They appeared to accept as true the concept of power being
    By claiming that the working class and peasants were the funda
    achieved by peoples war directed from the rural areas to the cities. Bul
    mental force of the revolution they engaged in doublespeak and demon
    even this change was opportunistic and false. They avoided self-criti
    strated that they had not understood the essence of the democratic
    cism by adopting an arrogant attitude as if they had been advocating the
    revolution. Mr. R.T. was also championing these centrist theses. Today,
    same things since a long time ago
    shall see, they have not achieved clarity as regards the funda
    On the other hand they embarked on trying to prove that Kivilcimli
    mental force of the revolution
    ideas were compatible with Mao Tse-tung. that there were no contradic
    In particular on the question of Kemalism and in general as regards
    tions between the two; on the contrary, that Kivilcinli's ideas were the
    the evaluation of the history of Turkey, and on the subject of the national
    adaptation of Mao Tse-tung to the conditions in Turkey. They claimed
    front, they maintained their Mihriist views
    that Kivilcimli had grasped Mao Tse-tung since 1967 and, as evidence
    The revisionists were forced to step back when they were pres
    advertised his article" Red Guards" which swears at Stalin and shows he
    surised, but when they were forced to adopt a correct idea they only did
    never understood the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in PDA
    it in abstract
    They made great efforts to rescue the Vatan Party experience with the
    285

==========第144頁==========
    For instance, they said work in the villages was primary while con-
    aries in semi-colonial, semi-teudal countries by the experience of the Chi
    tinuing their bureaucratic activities in the cities. They said clandestin
    nese Revolution that"revolution would develop from the villages to the
    work was primary while swimming in the morass of legalism. They said
    cities"and that"power would be achieved bit by bit". The revisionist gen
    the armed struggle was primary while trying to stifle any desire for sucl
    tlemen called their line of making compatible()Peoples war" with en
    a struggle, labelling them"Guevarist They said peoples war was pri-
    couragement of a"military coup"as"cutting our cloth according to our
    mary, while trying to incite a"military coup
    own country, not another country's model", and praised it
    These disgusting bourgeois, while on the one hand sayin
    M. Belli. D Avcioglu and H. Kivilcimli openly proclaimed their re-
    ples war is primary, " on the other they would add: " But. and do all they
    Jiance on a military coup. In this respect they should be deemed more sin
    could to make the "Socialist Congress legal publishing activity, pac
    cere than the PDA revisionists, who were doing the same thing in a more
    fism and capitulation compatible with Mao Tse-tung and with the line o
    Insidious way.
    peoples war
    let us examine the circular in question
    I)"Ambitions for fascist dictatorship are increasing
    Circular of February 1971
    2) Opposed to this the reformist bourgeoisie is intensifying its ef-
    In February 197] a circular was sent to party members. In tis cil
    orts to seize power through a military coup or by the parliamentary
    cular the same hypocritical attitude was maintained: " The Central Committee condemns the metaphysical bourgeois perception that isolates the
    3)The moment it seizes power is fascisms weakest moment
    struggle in rural areas from that in the cities, placing a barrier between
    4)We must organise and mobilise popular resistance before fas
    then, and does not grasp the dialectic integrity between the two
    cist forces gain all key posts( that is, at the moment they seize power
    These scoundrels. while there was no serious work in the villages
    (Authors emphasis)
    and all activity was stuck in Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir. convicted those
    5)Let us be prepared to act speedily..to move into action im
    cadres who called for"work in the villages to be primary, and in the
    mediately
    cities to be seconda
    6)Where contradictions are at their sharpest, where we will ignite
    In the same circular they utilised comrade Lenins absolutely correct
    the fire of resistance amongst the most aware masses
    teaching, i.e."parties not restricting themselves to illegal work". in su
    7)It will spur on all the anti-fascist forces, including the deno-
    port of their entirely legal magazine activities. With grand Marxist
    cratic bourgeoisie and may mobilise the democratic forces
    enin]st posing they decided to consolidate legalism, saying: The
    8)In the event that the reformist bourgeoisie takes power: our
    Central Committee, in the light of these revolutionary principles, has
    partys response will be to mobilise the popular masses against the most
    leered it necessary to make known to the entire party organisation the
    reactionary and chauvinist enemies that are the most loyal to imperial-
    Importance of strengthening our publications that convey to our peo
    ism and to unite the concrete demands of the people with revolutionary
    le Mao Tse-tung Thought
    propaganda. (ibid
    The same circular also condemned(!)as a"reproducing tendencv"tl
    These are the theses
    Marxist-leninist wings championing of the lessons taught to revolution
    These theses are part of the theories developed at that time regard
    287

==========第145頁==========
    ing fascism and the struggle against fascism. What I what to mention in
    186 )Today in Turkey a revolutionary administration could be a joint gov
    particular is the question of encouragement of a military coup.
    ernment under the leadership of the working class of the revolutionar
    The above theses completely separated the anti-feudal, anti-innperi-
    wing of the national bourgeoisie, urban petit-bourgeoisic, working class
    alist struggle and the anti-fascist struggle one from the other. The anti
    and peasants. Since this is not the aim of the anti-fascist struggle the aim
    fascist struggle is seen as a struggle to be waged in the cities as
    must be to bring the reformist bourgeoisie to power. This real intention
    momentary struggle. By"where contradictions are at their sharpest
    that the bourgeois gentlemen are attempting to conceal with disgusting
    Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir are implied, for it is considered that fascism
    hypocrisy. There is other evidence that give away this intention. The issue
    will seize power with a coup that it organises in these cities. By the"most
    of Isci-koylu with the headline"Let us be prepared to take up Arms
    aware masses " the youth, workers and intellectuals are implied. The anti
    against Fascism was in particular required to be thrown into officers
    fascist struggle is therefore something entirely different trom a land rev
    houses. And for the first time this issue was sold to students at the mili-
    olution struggle that will develop from the rural areas to the cities. the
    tary high school. Also at a time when the possibility of a reformist mil-
    power of which peasants will constitute; it is a counter-coup movement
    tary coup had increased, a list of urgent demands in the character of
    to be developed against a fascist coup in the cities
    rogramme presented to the reformist bourgeoisie was published. There
    The theses have, secondly, separated the anti-fascist struggle and the
    was no other force that PDA revisionism could rely on apart from the re
    struggle for power one from the other. The anti-fascist struggle should
    formist bourgeoisie. It is even incapable of defending itself against
    have a programme for power, but this is not mentioned in the theses. The
    creasing fascist repression, let alone beat fascism. The reformist clique
    revisionist gentlemen are thinking of the following two options: either a
    has no independent power, or armed units on which it can rely. It does not
    fascist dictatorship or a dictatorship of the reformist bourgeoisie. So the
    work amongst the peasants. In the cities it works in an amateur way
    bourgeois gentlemens anti-lascist programmes for power are, in real
    amongst the workers but has no influence. The working class is domi
    ity, a reformist bourgeois government. They are making all their calcul
    nated by reformist and fascist trade unions. We have mentioned previ-
    lations according to the two above possibilities"to move into action
    ously that it was isolated from the youth. In that case with what
    immediately", "to organise and mobilise popular resistance ". This non-
    organisation and who is to be mobilised? In these condition isnt the ca
    sense has a single aim: "to spur on all the anti-fascist forces, including
    to take up arms absolute baloney or what? When Mr A Z was asked this
    the democratic bourgeoisie"and"to mobilise the democratic forces! By
    very question be replied: There are forces apart from us who will fight
    these means"the seizure of power by the reformist bourgeoisie will be
    fascism. As the most progressive revolutionaries we have the obligation
    secured. And in the event of the reformist bourgeoisie taking power
    of showing them the way, That is, the"obligation ' to"encourage the re
    struggle will be waged against"the most reactionary and chauvinist en-
    formist bourgeoisie by saying"Come on lads, lake up arms and beat this
    emies that are the most loyal to inperialism. Against the reformist boul
    fascism that is threatening us ". The"obligation"to invite a military coup
    geoisie that are in power"uniting with revolutionary propaganda",the
    If this is not relying upon the bourgeoisie instead of their own forces
    peoples concrete demands"will be championed
    then what is it?
    In the January 1971 edition of PDA they wrote: "The aim of the anti
    We recommend that these frauds read once again and more care
    fascist struggle is not to establish a revolutionary government. (Issue no
    fully these words of Dimitrov, whose name they constantly mention
    289

==========第146頁==========
    There are to ways ofsettling the present political crisis: the ca
    letariat with other anti-fascist parties, in the interests of the entire work-
    italist solution of the crisis and the popular one, ie, a solution indicated
    ing population, a government of struggle against fascism and reaction
    by the masses. There is no and there cannot be any middle road todav
    Obviously there is a radical difference between these two things
    E The capitalist solution of the politica/ crisis, however: is bound to
    Georgi Dimitrov: The Fascist Offensive and the Tasks of the Com
    to a military or fascist dictatorship, with all its incalculable inter
    munist Intemational in the Struggle of the Working Class against F
    nal evils for the people and the country, as well as externa/ perils for
    cism-main Report delivered at the Seventh World Congress of the
    their liberty and independence, and for peace
    Communist International
    The other the popular solution of the political crisis means hand
    In another article comrade Dimitrov says
    over power to the working people, to the great poplar majorit:, which
    The proletariat. will the movemen/ of the united proletarian
    alone has the right to govern itself. and the country and to dispose of its
    fion and the anti-fascist Popular Front at the particular stage be in a po
    fortunes. This solation means also to direct the economic, carura/ and
    sition only to suppress or overthrow fascism, without directly proceed-
    olitical life of the country, as well as the social development, in such ar
    1g to abolish the dietatorship of the bourgeoisie In the latter case it
    way as to satisfy the needs and secure the rights, liberties, life, well
    would be an intolerable piece of political shortsightedness, and not s
    being and peace of the working people, subordinating the selfish inter
    rious revolutionary politics, on this ground alone to refuse to create an
    ests ofcapital and the capitalistic minority to this great goal. (Dimitrov
    Support d united front or a Popular Front government
    the United Front and the Political Crisis
    (Georgi Dimitrov: The Fascist Offensive and the Tasks of the Com-
    What comrade Dimitrov means is the administration of the anti
    munist International in the Struggle of the Working Class against Fas
    fascist popular front. And in the article he goes on to point this out
    cism: Main Report delivered at the Seventh World Congress of the
    Communist International)
    Comrade Dimitrov, in a report entitled The tasks of the Third
    That is comrade Dimitrov does not see the defeat of fascism as suf-
    International regarding Fascist Assault and the struggle of the Toillllg
    ficient. He sees it as essential that the class that is the social base of fa
    class against Fascism ,he draws a definite line between the""social de
    cism (in Europe the bourgeoisie and in Turkey the comprador
    nocrat government' ofthe reformist bourgeoisie and the" united front
    bourgeoisie and landlords)be overthrown and a united front government
    government
    be established in its place
    We even prefer not Id
    In the same article comrade Dimitrov say:
    and speak ofa united firont government, which in political character is
    It would be wrong to imagine that the united front government
    something absolutely different, different in principle, fromn all the S
    is an indispensable stage on the road to the establishment of proletar
    cial-democratic governments which usually cal/ themselves workers
    ian dictator). That is just as wrong as the former assertion that there
    (or labour)government. While the Social-democratic govermnent is an
    will be no intermediary stages in the fascist countries and that fascist
    instrument of class collaboration with the bourgeoisie in the interests of
    dictatorship is certain to be immediately superseded by proletarian di
    the preservation of the capitalist order, a united front governmen is an
    tutorship
    in trument of the collaboration of the revolutionary vanguard of the pro
    (Dimitrov: The Fascist Offensive and the Tasks of the Communist

==========第147頁==========
    International in the Struggle of the Working Class against Fascism: Main
    Report delivered at the Seventh World Congress of the Communist In
    alise the anti-fascist front
    ternationa
    The revisionist leadership, by placing the anti-fascist struggle against
    These words undoubtedly applied to European countries where pro
    the anti-imperialist and anti-feudal struggle has distorted the tenets o
    letarian revolution was on the agenda. In Turkey an anti-imperial ant
    comrade Dimitrov. They have hobbled the realisation of the united frontand thereby assisted fascism
    feudal united front government, regardless of the existence of fascismis"an inevitable stage"on the path of forming an administration of the
    Secondly, the anti-fascist power struggle in Turkey is at the same
    proletariat. In the event of the existence of fascism this government with
    time an anti-imperialist and anti-feudal power struggle. Comrade Dim
    also have an anti-fascist character
    itrov favours: the second option of"fascist dictatorship or anti-fascist
    Let us summarise the passages we have cited from comrade Dim
    ted front government to either of the two options in"fascist dicta-
    trov
    torship or reformist bourgeois dictatorship
    I-anti-fascist struggle is at the same time a decisive struggle on
    The revisionist leadership, by endeavouring in reality to concoct areformist bourgeois government under the banner of anti-fascist struggle
    who seizes the power.
    have once more distorted the doctrine of comrade Dimitrov. They have
    2- Fascism and political crisis are related to each ofher. Rulingclasses strive to solve political crises shifting to fascism
    attempted to impose government that will be the means for collaboration
    3-the second solution to political crisis is that power is seized b
    with reactionaries instead of a war government against fascism and reaction
    anti-fascist united front. There is no third solution
    4- Government of Anti-fascist popular front and reformist bour
    On all the above points we have sumunarised-the Socialist Confer
    geoisie government are totally different phenomena. The former is an
    ence, prioritising legal publishing work, Isci-koylu organising in work-
    Istrument of the struggle against fascism and other reactionaries. The
    Ing committees and offices, the keeping village work secondary, the
    latter is an instrument of class collaboration with reactionaries to pro
    constant hobbling of the armed struggle, the pushing of illegal activit
    tect capitalism
    into the background, reliance on bourgeois democracy, mistaken identi
    Those who recall the doctrine on fascism of comrade Dimmitroy wi
    fication of the main contradiction and fundamental force. the advoca
    know that there is no place in the united front for the right wing of so
    tion of Boratavist views on feudalism and the land revolution vergingon denial, Kivilcimmist views, the adoption of the Mihri Dev-genc per
    mocracy
    The lessons we shall learn for our country from all these are as fol
    ception and Kemalism, the propagation of anti-marxist-leninist theo
    Ties of fascism, attempting to make compatible military coup and peple
    OWS
    Firstly, that the class content of the anti-feudal, anti-imperialist
    war, and similar subjects, that is, on the most important questions of our
    front in Turkey is the same as that of the anti-fascist front: Workers
    revolutionary struggle-there has been a constant struggle between the
    peasants, urban petit-bourgeoisie, and revolutionary wing of na
    bourgeois leadership and the Marxist-leninist wing
    tional bourgeoisie. The struggle to realise the united front between
    The struggle between the two lmes emerged once again two weeks
    these classes is at the samne time in our conditions the struggle to re
    before martial law, at a meeting held on 10-12 April, regarding all the im-portant questions of the revolutionary strugg
    292

==========第148頁==========
    April Meeting
    M. Belli line represented communism(!)against the TIP movement
    M. Belli subsequently deviated from the line of Turk Solu. So M Belli, of
    The agenda of the meeting was a self-criticism of the Jine of the
    whom these gentlemen were disciples, was a communist(!)in those
    movement up to that time and the Socialist Conference and the question
    years
    of publications On the question of self-criticism we analysed the past in
    The evidence of their fakery is the three large volumes of Turk Solu
    detail, indicating that PDA revisionism constantly changed appearance
    magazines. Their lack of sincerity in self-criticism has taken them as far
    and did not behave honestly.(See"let us be brave and sincere in sel
    as defending M. Belli
    criticism ) We wanted the past revisionist vileness to be thrown out with
    There were also debates on the theories on"fascism and struggl
    a detailed, sincere self-criticism. The revisionists defended their past er
    against fascism". The revisionist cliques theory was, in summary, thus
    rors in a systematic way. They stated that the isci-koylu working com
    I-IN Turkey fascism is the dictatorship of monopoly capital(PDA
    mittees and offices were the correct way of organising. They said the
    issue 27, pages 177-178
    temporary polling work carried out in villages was attaching importance
    2-fascisrn will take power by means of a reactionary militar
    o the villages. They claimed against Erdost that defending Boratav's
    coup (ibid)
    views was a revolutionary(! stance. They said that the sleogan ot
    3- Fascist dictatorship is never compatible with parliament. "Fas
    weapon is the revolutionary unity of forces not containing the tw
    cisi means the bourgeoisie removing the parliamentary order. (ibid)
    weapons of the people, the party and peoples army, was correct (revo
    4-the anti-fascist struggle should be carried on based in the cities
    lutionary unity of forces was not the peoples united front, a question on
    establishing unity of forces
    which we shall dwell later ) They defended the work amongst workers
    5. The moment fascism takes power proletarian revolutionaries
    that was amateur, lacking in perspective and unrevolutionary. and their
    hould spur on all the anti-fascist forces, including the democratic
    unconditional support of reformist trade unions. They even went so fa
    bourgeoisie. and " mobilise the democratic forces"(February 1971
    as to claim that the work carried out up to that time had been based on
    directive)
    illegality, distorting the reality. This lake bourgeois clique, faced wit
    The aim of the anti-fascist struggle is not to establish a revolu
    Kivilcimli's blatant cursing of comrade Mao Tse-tung and attack or
    lonary government".(PDA, issue no 27)
    them. and the coustant criticism of the Marxist-leninist wing, was forced
    7-the task""in the event of the reformist bourgeoisie taking power
    to abandon Kivilcimli At the meeting they told us without shame, look
    ns struggle with the reactionaries and to advocate the government o
    ing us in the eyes, that"they had never adopted Kivilcimli but had tried
    workers and peasants and the concrete demands of the people against
    to win him over. 'Mr A N. even boasted of struggling against Kivilciuli
    the reformist bourgeoisie ( February 1971 directive)
    despite the fact he had been at the head of those who had been as lova
    8-IF fascism comes there will be no possibility of working in the
    as a dog to the revisionist Kivilcimli Although they had previously ac
    villages. Our urgent task is to disperse the threat of fascism. "All pro
    cused those who criticised K ivilcinli ofartogant sectarianism. this
    gressive and democratic forces: we must realise as soon as possible the
    time they preferred to claim they had"struggled less
    democratic unity of forces against fascism. We must fight with all our
    They explained their past tailing of M. Belli thus: In that period the
    strength against the monopolist bourgeoisie, and isolate fascism.let us
    295

==========第149頁==========
    unite with all anti-fascist forces. Let us struggle determinedly against
    tives of the monopolist bourgeoisie that wishes to expand"(PDA, issue
    fascism. These are our urgent political tasks (ibid)without dispers
    pages 182)
    ing the threat of fascism the armed struggle of the peasants for a land
    The AP (ustice Party )administration, Demirel and the clique
    revolution cannot be organised. February 1971 directive
    around him essentially advocate the interests of the monopolist bour
    9-the reformist bourgeois administration that will emerge after
    geoisie"(ibid, p 184
    the dispersal of the threat of fascism will increase the possibility of
    he fact that the landlords were partners in the government was re
    work in rural areas. " Such periods may occur when priority will be
    jected: " The existing monopolist oligarchy is in power.(ibid, p 183)
    given to the cities which will dialectically affect work in the villages
    Secondly, it was thought that fascism would take power with a mil
    (This was a sentence frequently uttered by Mr A Z and implied that a
    itary coup, an extremely shallow view. Just as fascism might come to
    military coup planned in the cities would increase the possibility of
    power by means of a military coup, it could also happen in different
    work in the villages.
    ways. Hence in Turkey it came with the 12 March memorandum. In Italy
    In order to prove the views put forward in 8 and 9 the
    le of
    Mussolini took power with a coup from below. The"Yahya Khan For
    Iran was given. It was said that if fascism had been prevented in Iran the
    mula "is another example of how fascism can take power In Greece the
    land revolution struggle in the villages today would have been easier
    ruling party crushed all opposition with a military coup and realised fas
    From whichever angle you look this is a theory full of nonsense. FOL
    cism. The seizing of power by fascism varies according to the particular
    a start the class content of fascism in our country has been erroneously
    conditions of a country and to the period. It is the task of communists to
    identified. Fascism is not the dictatorship of the monopolist bourgeoisie,
    correctly analyse the particular conditions in their country. The PDA re
    It Is in any Imperialist country. In Turkey, and in semi-colonial and
    visionists were struck dumb at the 12 March Memorandum as they had
    semi-feudal countries like Turkey, fascism is the dictatorship of the con-
    not considered anything but a reactionary military coup. They applauded
    prador big bourgeoisies and landlords. The gentlemen, as a result o
    saying: "The reformist bourgeoisie appears to have strong influence
    their Kivilcimli and Boratavist perceptions, have completely ignored the
    PDA issue 34 page 4). This shallow understanding of fascisms coming
    landlords. Moreover, they have erased the dividing line between impe
    to power naturally saw the anti-fascist struggle as a counter coup (re
    rialist countries and semi-imperialist countries, putting to one side the
    formist bourgeoisies military coup
    comprador character of the monopolist bourgeoisie. The natural conse
    Thirdly, they disseminated the clain that fascist dictatorship was
    quence of this was of course to see the anti-fascist struggle as one to be
    completely incompatible with parliament. However, in many countries
    waged in the cities against the monopolist bourgeoisie and to deny ti
    today where fascism is in power, for instance in Indonesia, South Viet
    role of peasants in the anti-fascist struggle(or, at, least, to underestimate
    nam, Pakistan, India and Spain parliament exists. Fascist cliques consider
    The revisionist clique did from time to time mention the peasants but
    it to be in their interests to make parliament an instrument of fascism
    nderestimated the role of the peasants in the anti-fascist struggle)
    rather than abolishing it, both in order to deceive the masses at home and
    These gentlemen had forgotten the existence of the landlords to the
    to deceive world public opinion. Hence in Turkey, too, fascism has a par
    extent that they denied the existence of landlords within the CHP and
    liamentary mask. The function of parliament is to raise their hands ac-
    even the AP. The CHIP gathers within it some sections and representa-
    cording to the sign on the bayonets of the fascist generals ' gang. All the

==========第150頁==========
    fascist cliques of the AP, DP, MGP and CHP, while supporting the ma
    altering its class nature, tying to combine open terrorist dictatorship
    sacre of revolutionaries and the removal of all democratic rights on the
    with a crude sham of parliamentarism. (Dimitrov, United Front
    one hand, on the other want the preservation of parliament. The AP. DP
    against Fascism)
    and MGP fascist cliques even find the repression of the fascist generals
    The PDA revisionists have become so fixated on the idea th
    gang insufficient. They shout"more, more! at the tops of their voices
    cism is incompatible with the existence of parliament that their anti-ias
    Despite this they want to protect parliament carefully
    cism perceptions involve defending all manner of parliaments even those
    We do not deny the existence of the more ferocious forms of la
    that are masks for fascism
    ism that also abolish parliament. We are drawing attention to how non
    The toiling masses, youth and intellectuals possess certain limited
    sensical it is to see fascism as a for of administration that is completel
    rights and freedoms under the parliamentary dictator ship of the bour
    icompatible with parliament, and that such a perception Is contrary to
    geoisie despite everything. (PDA ibid)
    the realities of Turkey and the world and deceives the cadre and masses
    In that case"despite everything it is necessary to defend parliament
    It is not enough to look at whether parliament exists, to understand the
    even if it is the toy and veil of fascism (! ). This understanding, und
    existence of fascism, it is necessary to look at what kind of parliament
    certain circumstances, will bring a person to the same point as the fas
    exists. A parliament that is decoration for fascism or a democratic par
    cist cliques. Hence PDA revisionism, in defending the parliament that
    liament in the bourgeois sense?
    masks fascism. has united with the AP, MGP and DP fascist cliques
    Comrade Dimitrov described the forms of parliament that decorate
    The revisionist leadership was pressurising us to choose one of two
    fascism, or, in other words, the parliament-masked forms of fascism
    options: either a fascist dictatorship without parliament or a dictatorsh
    ears ago
    with a parliament(this may be a fascist dictatorship with a parliamentary
    he development of fascism, and the fascist dictator ship itse!/, (ls
    mask. which has been the case in Turkey since the very beginning
    ume different forms in different countries, according to historical, o
    Communists will defend the broadest bourgeois democracy against
    cial and economic conditions and to the nationa/ peculiarities, cnd the
    all forms of fascist dictatorship, whether with a parliamentary mask, or
    internationa/ position of the given counin: In certain countries, princi
    with the mask thrown to one side. They will defend a parliament elected
    pally those in which fascism has no broad mass basis and in which the
    with the most democratic systems even if it is bourgeois, and the right of
    struggle of the various groups within the camp of the fascist bourgeois
    the proletariat to free association etc, against fascist dictatorship. For
    itself is rather acute, fascism does not immediately venture to dolis/
    such a dictatorship will create better conditions for the proletariat to
    parliament, but allows the other bourgeois parties, as wel/ as the So
    achieve its ultimate goals in comparison to a fascist dictatorship
    cial-democratic Parties, to retain a modicum of legality. in other coun
    But when a bourgeois parliament's'time is up for the masses"com
    tries, where the ruling bourgeoisie fears an erly outbreak of revolution
    munists will hurl aside even the most democratic one
    fascism establishes its unrestricted political monopoly, either immedi
    Our bourgeois gentlemen, in the same article, deem the DP and th
    ately or by intensifing its reign o/terror agains/ and per section of all
    Inonu clique that was at the head of the CHP at the time as anti-fascist
    rival parties and groups. This does not prevent fascism, when its position
    and progressive, since they are in favour of the protection of parliament
    becomes particularly acute, from trying to extend its basis and, withont
    regardless of what kind of parliament It i

==========第151頁==========
    he rural agencies, merchants and profiteering elements that have
    sees today's Martial Law administration as the last form and bound
    become rich froin building and land speculation and have cooled to
    ary of fascist repression and persecution and endeavours to deceive
    wards the AP on acconnt of being treated badly as regards the distribu
    the people and its cadre in this way
    tion of bank loans, are gathering around the DP Since the economic
    Fascism may become more extreme and barbaric while, according
    interests of this wing conlict (! with that of the monopolist bourgeoisie
    to conditions, preserving or abolishing parliament. The way to prevent
    they now have a parliamentarism appearance. " There are significant
    this is not to defend the milder forms of fascist dictatorship against the
    contradictions between the CHP and monopolist capita/ circles plotting
    more severe forms, or to defend a reformist bourgeois government which
    fascism. The CHP leaders are essentially in favour of the protection of
    is a vehicle for collaboration with reaction as soon as conditions are
    parliamentary forms"(ibid, page 182)
    deemed suitable. It is to advocate an anti-fascist popular front govern
    However, we later saw that the Inonu clique at the head of the CHP
    ment against all forms of fascism, to wage struggle for this and to re
    was the dominant power in the first and second Erim governments that
    alise this government. This goal is also the goal of the anti-feudal and
    implemented Fascism. And the DP was the main supporter of all the fas
    anti-imperialist struggle, that is, the democratic popular revolution. In
    cist repression
    today's conditions in our country the democratic popular revolutionary
    Again our bourgeois gentlemen thought that the AP would cook
    struggle, the essence of which is a land revolution, also has an anti-fas
    a military dictatorship, and abolish parliament. However. we saw that
    cist character. The struggle, which will eradicate fascism along with feu-
    although the AP supported all the fascist repression joyfully, it advocated
    dalism and imperialism, is an armed peoples war, the main force o
    the preservation of parliament. Since the PDA revisionists were unable
    which the peasants will constitute, under the leadership of the proletariat
    to distinguish between fascist dictatorships they ended up defending fas
    The people have 3 weapons against fascism, just as against imperialism
    cist dictatorship with a parliamentary mas.k
    and feudalism; Party, peoples army and united peoples front. The peo
    In Turkey parliament has been from the very beginning the facade
    ple will defeat all their enemies, feudalism, comprador big bourgeois
    of the fascist and semi-fascist dictatorships of the landlords and comm
    imperialisn and fascism with these three weapons
    prador big bourgeoisie. Our country has never experienced a true bour
    Lastly, the PDA clique's perception of anti-fascist struggle con
    geois democracy; it has merely tasted a few crumbs of it. This is the
    tantly hobbles the struggle for a popular war. If"the anti-fascist strug
    case in the multi-party period, as it was in the one-party era. It is th
    gle's purpose is not to establish a revolutionary administration"then if
    same today. In AP government periods a semi-fascist administration
    is either to defend the milder forms of fascism or to defend the reformist
    existed. The economic and political crisis forced the ruling classes to
    bourgeois government. As we have mentioned above when it deems con-
    step up repression. Fascism advanced step by step. Martial Law was
    ditions suitable for a military coup PDA revisionism defends the second
    the natural result of this development and became a more advanced
    of these, when it thinks this is not possible it defends the first, Since in
    stage of this. It was not a transition from bourgeois democracy to fas
    neither the first nor the second situation can the danger of fascism be got
    cism, but from a milder fascism to a more extreme fascism, while pre
    rid of, the"urgent task is to get rid of the fascist threat; the land revolu-
    serving the parliamentary mask. According to PDA revisionists. since
    tion comes later " perception leads to the following consequences: the
    a parliament exists, today's system should not be fascism. But this
    organisation of the peasants armed struggle for the purpose of realising
    30

==========第152頁==========
    a land revolution, that is, the organisation of a people' s war, is postponed
    At the April Meeting the PDA'S anti-marxist- Leninist theories re
    indefinitely. The historic role of the working class is being reduced to
    garding fascism and the struggle to combat it were criticised for post
    upporting and encouraging a reformist, bourgeois government
    poring peoples war. The perception: "First let's get rid of fascism, then
    Why is the threat of fascism not a temporary threat? For firstly, in
    we ll engage in a peoples war in rural areas"was condemned. Mr. A Z
    semi-colonial, semi-feudal countries like Turkey the weak bourgeoisic
    accused us of seeing fascism as preordained. We do not believe that the
    always endeavours to crush the struggle of the people bloodily and to
    comprador bourgeois and landlord class will bring democracy or that
    stay in power in this way. That is, the weakness of the bourgeois impel
    even bourgeois democracy could exist under their dictatorship, espe
    it to fascism. Secondly, the existence of the landlords gives a feuda
    cially in today's conditions But the different hues of fascism are possi
    character to bourgeois democracy. The landlords who are partners in the
    ble. Communists will not force the masses to choose between tl
    administration constantly expend efforts to replace bourgeois freedoms
    different tones of fascism. On the other hand, the way to prevent the in
    ith violence and coercion. the law of"] clemocracy. These are the
    tensification of fascism is to embark on a peoples war under the lead
    reasons"democracy in Turkey has had a fascistic and feudal character
    ership of the proletariat, not to tail the reformist bourgeoisie in the cities
    from the very beginning. Comrade Dimitrov states that the"main Iea
    The revisionist gentlemen, as with other questions, insisted on their
    sons " for"the reality that bourgeoisie unavoidably drifted towards fa
    mistaken stance regarding fascism. On the other hand they did make a
    cism due to some specific historical, economical and political reasons
    cosmetic self-criticism." In some groups educational meetings were not
    and for "this to be more valid in Balkan countries and Hungary"is be
    held regularly, the question of proletarianisation-that is, the proletarian
    cause in these countries"bourgeois-democratic revolution has not vet
    isation of the cadre, the large majority of which are bourgeois(! )-was
    completed" and these countries being"semi-colonies of imperialism
    insufficiently grasped, errors in editing the publications were not cor
    he attributes to the presence of feudalism and the weak and powerless
    rected.. Secondary matters were thus given prominence. They also did
    state of bourgeoisie
    not fail to attack the proletarian revolutionaries struggling against revi
    Thirdly, in our era when inperialism is Inoviny towards total co
    sionism. They accused them of"completely rejecting urban work
    Ipse and socialism is advancing to victory all over the world, reac
    tirely rejecting legal activity "and"completely rejecting all forms o
    tionaries are being dragged from crisis to crisis and are dying and
    struggle apart from amed struggle". However, the Marxist-leninists had
    disappearing. Imperialists and reactionaries on the brink of ceasing to
    long before drawn the necessary line between the above nonsensical
    exist are stepping up their repression and assaults all over the world, and
    views. They presented their Marxist-leninist views to the meeting sum
    endeavouring to spread fascism every where. For these three reasons the
    marised in the form of II principles in response to the baseless accusa-
    threat of fascism cannot be got rid of without the foundations ofthe cul
    tions. They asked for a vote to see whether they were approved b
    rent order being demolished and without the administration of the classes
    everyone. We suffice here with listing these principles, the vote on whicl
    that are the social prop of fascism being brought down. It may be a pop
    was obstructed by the revisionists on the grounds that"they needed ex
    ular war struggle under the leadership of the proletariat that will ensure
    planation
    he government is taken over by the popular classes and end the threat
    I-activity in the viilage areas is primary: activitv in the cities is sec
    f fascism
    ondary
    302
    303

==========第153頁==========
    2-armed struggle is primary; other forms of struggle are se-condary
    morass of legality, and that at present there was absolutely no serious il
    3- Illegal activity is primary, legal activity is secondar
    legal organisation or activity
    4-AS long as the enemy is stronger than us on a national ievel strale
    The claims of the revisionists were as follows
    gic defence is primar
    In order for the armed struggle to commence it was necessary to or
    5-within strategic defence tactical attacks are primary, tactical de
    anise on a national level! " A spark will set the steppes ablaze"but "the
    fence is secondary
    steppes need to be dry" (!).The Socialist Conference was to sort out the
    6-in this period in the villages within the armed struggle the guer
    roblem of nationwide organisation and of drying out the steppes in a
    rilla struggle is primary; while other forms of struggle are secondary
    flash(!). And would create the most suitable conditions for armed strug
    7-in the cities ( large cities)in the strategic defence period consoli
    gle( ). Mr. B Y. championed all these views. These ideas had been set
    dation and awaiting opportunities is primary, organising uprisings is sec
    forth in many previous debates. These views went into the minutes of themeeting, but since we do not have a copy it is not possible to give foot
    8-in organisation party organisation is primary, other organisational
    notes. In order to justify his perception that"without nationwide organ
    work is secondar
    isation the armed struggle cannot be launched, to say otherwise is
    9-within the other organisational work armed struggle organisation
    Guevaraism', the traitor B Y distorted the condition of"a sound party or-
    Is prinary
    ung's"How can the Red Political Administra
    1o-rellance on our own force
    aliance on allies
    tion Survive in China? "article, into"a party organised on a nationwide
    condary
    basis ". At that time and even until very recently these gentlemen per-
    Ii-conditions exist for armed struggle in our country
    ceived the conditions for the survival of a red political administration
    Socialist Conference
    and the conditions for the commencement of the armed struggle as oneand the same thing. They thus, by changing comrade Mao Tse-tung,'s
    The Socialist Conference soup was cooked up once again at the
    condition of"a sound party organisation into"a party organised on a na
    pril Meeting and presented to us. The Marxist-leninists opposed it on
    tionwide basis", tied the launching of armed struggle to this condition
    the grounds that it would strengthen existing legalism, would serve to
    In this way the correct thesis that as a consequence of the unbalanced
    delay the armed struggle in an environment which was favourable, would
    economic, political and social structure of the country the revolution
    sacrifice the cadre to increasing fascist persecution; moreover, it would
    that is, the armed struggle, will develop in an uneven way. in some re
    not bring a solution to the problem of organising the proletarian party
    gions before others, was rejected
    furthermore, that the conference was a futile drealn. They demanded that
    The Question of Publications
    a significant proportion of the cadre be sent immediately to selected rurareas to organise the peasants and commence the armed struggle, with
    The question of whether it was necessary for legal publications to be
    other forms of organisation to be based on support for this. They pointed
    brought out was put to a vote after a debate. The Marxist-leninists voted
    out that with a Socialist Conference organising a legal party would not
    for the PDA to cease publication, while saying Isci-koylu could con
    be taking advantage of legal opportunities but would be sinking in the
    tinue to appear for a while. They also advocated the immediate com
    304

==========第154頁==========
    mencement of preparations for an illegal publication. Wasn't an ideo-
    stily their rightist errors with demagogy. These narrow-nninded, paci
    logical-political publication like PDA much more necessary than a mass
    fist and cowardly bourgeois would later descend to a level where they
    newspaper like Isci-kovlu? It was. In reality in those circumstances
    would claim that it was an unnecessary and even harmful intellectual ef-
    was much more correct to abandon Isci-koylu and produce a monthly
    fort to read Maix. Engels. Lenin and Stalin. They became ridiculous
    publication containing short, ideological-political articles. In this way
    claiming it would be harmful to organise a centralised proletarian party
    the best advantage would have been taken of the available legal posst
    in conditions of fascism. During a period when the persecution and re
    bilities and it would have been feasible to dispatch a significant section
    pression of the ruling classes was intense they went as far as to say"our
    of the cadre to work amongst the peasants in the villages. But since we
    current task is to disperse and forget ourselves". Just as they had aban
    were in the minority and our votes would be unable to alter the outcome
    doned the struggle with PDA revisionism they also abandoned the strug
    e found it more correct to use our votes as a sign of opposition to the
    gle with the ruling classes. In fact they became even more revisionist
    PDA, which had become a symbol of the rightist line of the revisionist
    returning to their homes. schools and own cosy corners. Their theoriesof betrayal came to the aid of many bourgeois elements. These elements
    The revisionists, at the meeting in question, that is, two weeks be
    embraced the above theories in order to abandon the rising class strug
    fore martial law, took their treachery to new heights by passing resolu
    gle, in the meantime confusing some militant colleagues. Taking advan
    tions on the Socialist Conference and to strengthen legal publishing
    tage of the turbid atmosphere of martial law they pacified them and tore
    However, their victory( ) over the proletarian line did not last lon
    them away from the struggle. We broke off relations with traitors SU
    The martial law declared a fortnight Jater closed down the publications
    Id L U., who were the ringleaders of this, prior to the April meeting
    and hurled the dream of a reactionary Socialist Conference into the rub
    As for traitor T N,, a trusted figure of PDA revisionism, whule previously
    bish bin. A new period was thus commenced, in which insidious PDA re
    he had opposed PDA revisionism together with us he subsequently com
    visionis again changed Its appearance
    promised with it. At the April Meeting he attached himself to PDA rev
    Before moving into the new period let us dwell on the"Liquida
    sionism, voting in favour of the convening of the Socialist Conference
    tionists question which is an inheritance from the previous period
    the formation of a legal party and for the strengthening of legal publications With the proclamation of martial law he vanished from the scene
    "Liquidationists question
    Now the PDA revisionists accuse us of having acted together withthese people. They are trying to claim their nonsensical theories are ours
    In the struggle in which we were involved against PDA revisionism
    This is taking falsification to the limit
    some"colleagues " subsequently separated from us both in theory and
    Because firstly, while in the ranks of the"liquidationists"there were
    in practice and opposed all manner of struggle. These cowards who ab
    those who at first acted with us there were also some who were with the
    sconded were for a time more dangerous than PDA revisionism. The en
    PDA revisionists and others who were in the middle
    tirely rejected struggle in the cities. They rejected legal activity on
    Secondly, we never agreed with the mistaken views of these peo
    principle. They rejected the principle of concrete analysis of concrete
    But since at the beginning we saw the struggle with PDA revision
    conditions, that is, the essence of Marxism. In this way they assisted the
    ism as more important we did not consider it appropriate to start an
    cause of PDA revisionism, by providing them with the opportunity to
    307

==========第155頁==========
    uncompromising struggle with them. Also, these persons took time to
    ings? Furthermore, weren't some of those who disappeared in Istanbul
    develop their nonsensical theories. The unity between us against the right
    n your ranks right to the end?
    ing line of PDA revisionism on certain points later turned into a part
    In that c
    hy did so many people flee from the arena of strug-
    ing of the ways as their erroneous theories and practice emerged. Just as
    gle when martial law came in? Because they were bourgeois clements
    the distance between two sides of an angle is small at the beginning and
    that were ensconced around legal publishing activity that did not neces
    gets larger the further one moves away from the angle, so did the distance
    state their abandoning the bourgeois way of life As we have mentioned
    between us and them grow as they moved on their track. We confronted
    above, the content of the activity gathered them around it. When martial
    them with their cowardness, treachery, telling them they were pacifist
    aw demolished with a single swipe the activity that resembled a hous
    narrow-minded, idealist bourgeois
    of cards their function ceased. While the bourgeois elements in Istanbul
    Now the PDA revisionists are attempting to conceal these truths. By
    found a theoretical cover for their fleeing the struggle, if those in Ankara
    attempting to apply to us views and attitudes we do not advocate or agree
    left, Saying, Tm not up for the struggle what is the difference? The
    with they wish to achieve positive results for their past Rightist line and
    essence of the question is the sneaking away from the arena of struggle
    on the other hand undermine our current critique. This fox-like cummin
    by the bourgeois clements grouped around the revisionist line on the in
    will only harm our bourgeois gentlemen, not us
    troduiction of martial law! As for you revisionist gentlemen you carried
    et us address the factors that led to the deviation in question. The
    out this sneaking away in a more insidious way. We will dwell on that
    tirst and determining factor is the class character of these abscondersfrom the struggle. Most of them are bourgeois, as regards their origin
    We have said that the first and determining reason for the deviation
    and life style. They are intellectual gentlemen who are disconnected fron
    that emerged particularly in Istanbul was their bourgeois character. The
    the class struggle, alien to the worker and peasant masses, who have de
    external cause that created a suitable environment for their emergence is
    veloped by learning by heart sentence by sentence books the essence of
    PDA revisionism. The deviation in question was born as a reaction to
    which they have entirely failed to grasp. It is natural that they should
    the PDA lie. as a punishment of it. If attention is paid it will be seen that
    abandon the arena of struggle when the class struggle intensifies. They
    the deviation of the gentlemen who fled from the struggle is on nearly all
    put forward the nonsense we have briefly listed above in order to nleet
    questions exactly opposite to the deviation of PDA revisionism. No slan
    the need for a theoretical cloak for their disappearance
    Mr. A Z holds us responsible for their disappearance on account of
    can alter thts reallly
    the fact it happened in Istanbul. He says: It is a warning that divisive
    26 April 1971 Martial Law and
    ness should emerge in particular where these mistakes were committed
    Organisational Separation
    The errors of the Istanbul administration are large. (See text on"Liquidationists'.No, Mr Revisionist! These are not the only ones to disap
    The Marxist-leninists were of the opinion that the bourgeois lead-
    pear! If you just look around you will see! Didn't lots of your follower
    ership was hopeless several months before martial law. But sufficient
    in Ankara totally abandon the struggle when Martial law came in? Ho
    struggle had yet to be waged in order to isolate the bourgeois leadership
    many people are left from the hundreds who attended he education meet
    and gather the militant cadres around Marxist-leninist principles. Moreover, the proletarian revolutionaries had not yet found the necessary op

==========第156頁==========
    portunity to implement their ideas. It was essential both to maintain the
    (For written criticism see: letter regarding"Liquidationist, let us Grasp
    struggle against the bourgeois leadership around correct principles and
    correctly the Red Political Power Ideas of Chairman Mao, DABK Fe
    to strive to put correct principles into practice. The Marxist-leninist
    ruary 1972 resolution
    cadre, too, were to emerge from within the struggle against revisionism
    The February resolution of East Anatolia Regional Committee
    and practical activity. Martial Law demolished the old style of work
    which was dominated by Marxist-leninists, thoroughly agitated the
    This coup could have knocked some sense into the heads of some cadre
    bourgeois leadership. They immediately decided to confiscate the cri
    and assisted the bourgeois leadership to comprehend the revisionist line
    ique and hurriedly published a circular in response to it
    For these reasons the Marxist-leninists concentrated their struggle
    A Circular that is an illustration of hypocrisy and opportunism
    against the bourgeois leadership around self-criticism. The only guaran-tee that the same rightist line would not be followed in the new period
    This circular was a new illustration of hypocrisy and opportunism
    was such a self-criticism
    The bourgeois leadership was writhing like a snake amongst various
    The bourgeois leadership constantly played for time, promising that
    ideas without recognition of anything like principle or stability. In this
    preparations were being made and that a self-criticism would take place
    circular it appeared to accept many of the things that the Marxist-lenin-
    But in verbal debates it became clear that they had absolutely no inten
    ists had constantly championed up to then, but had failed to get accepted
    tion of making a self-criticism. They were jealously embracing all the
    Moreover, it acted brazenly, as if it had maintained these from the start
    vileness of the past. For instance, in one debate A Z heatedly defended
    accusing the Marxist-leninists of"factionalism,, "careerism"Trot
    the Socialist Conference, saying "If you hadnt sabotaged it, the Soclalist Conference would have been successful and extremely useful. AL
    This circular was a model of hypocrisy and opportunism, for many
    the time he said this TIP had also been closed down, or was on the verge
    of the correct ideas in it had been taken. word for word from the cri
    of being closed down, and its activists had been thrown into prison
    tique of the Marxist-leninists. If they had sincerely adopted these it
    The bourgeois leadership attempted to place all the responsibilit
    would not have been necessary for them to attack the Marxist-leninist
    for the blow inflicted by the coup on the Marxist-leninist cadre. Fu
    cadres. and they should have been pleased
    thermore. they maintained their former ideological and political line
    For instance, some of the errors refuted in this cicular existed in the
    the new publication that came out, adapting it to new conditions. Prac
    February 197I circular, which was recommended to cadre in this circu-
    tical activity again, as before, followed a rightist and capitulationist path
    lar Ideas that conflicted with those in this circular were still being ad
    with this difference: it was to some extent illegal and although primari
    vocated in other publications. If they had been sincere then they should
    in the cities, relatively more activity was directed towards the villages
    not have embraced the vileness In other publications, and Instead cor
    That IS, PDA revisionism, adapting itself to new conditions, was
    rected it with a self-criticism. Since they did neither the forer nor th
    transformed into Shafak revisionism
    latter it demonstrates that the purpose in publishing the circular was to
    Verbal and written criticism was infuriating the bourgeois leace
    stifle criticism and thoroughly conceal their revisionism
    ship. They did not learn the necessary lessons from this criticism. They
    They had been forced to follow a new and more insidious revision
    were hostile towards it and tried to suppress it, concealing it from cadres
    ist line. for somme cadres who had read the DABK Resolution had we
    31

==========第157頁==========
    comed it warly. seeing in it an escape from their cul-de-sac. Mrc.X
    Those who are factionalist and divisive are those who encourage
    (A N), a disciple of the bourgeois leadership, and the cadre in his region
    blind obedience, flattery and fawning within the organisation. Those who
    had vehement debates. Due to this persons bureaucratic and passive
    are factionalist and divisive are those who endeavour to suppress inter-
    leadership the activity in the region was facing the threat of becoming
    nal criticism. those who conceal criticism of themselves from the cadre
    disconnected from the revolutionary peasants. Cadre in the region criti
    Those who attempt to wear down those cadres who criticise them with
    cised this person and the rightist line of the bourgeois leadership. They
    a campaign of slander and gossip and to isolate them from other cadres
    also made a self-criticism for participating in mistaken resolutions. This
    Those who are factionalist and divisive are those who prepare insidious
    was the factor that impelled the bourgeois leadership to hurriedly pub
    plots for such cadres. Those who are factionalist and divisive are those
    lish the above circular. The events in Mr A.N.S region could have been
    who wish to implement the most extreme democracy for themselves, vi
    repeated in another region. They attempted to prevent such an occul
    olating the principle of centralism, while wishing to implement the most
    rence with this
    which is an illustration of opportunism and
    extreme centralism on Marxist-leninists. The bourgeois leadership has
    hypocrisy
    demonstrated with all these particularities a typical example of faction
    Gentlemen! You are experts at lying, hypocrisy and fraud! But this
    alism and divisiveness
    expertise is worthless in the ranks of the proletariat! If you go and
    For instance. when there were arrests in a region where one of the
    demonstrate your talents in the parties of the bourgeois and landlords. be
    Marxist-leninist colleagues was active they made a fuss, saying: " dis-
    sure they will warmly take you to their hearts. Don't waste your talents!
    graceful but when there were arrests in a region where one of their dis
    Run as soon as you can to the side of those who will appreciate you
    ciples was in charge they say: "nothing much has happened, the
    Great successes and triumphs await you!
    revolution has its ups and downs", in an effort to save their disciples
    The latest circular also continues to defend certain long term errors
    For instance, when the Marxist-leninists asked for 3 thousand lira
    in addition to the opportunist denial and hypocrisy. This is the essential
    they caused a fuss, saying: "let us not rely on the membership fees of in
    character of the circular that they keep extending towards us
    tellectuals in the cities whereas on one occasion they did not hesitateto send 35 thousand lira to their own disciples
    Who is“ factionalist'”or“ divisive2
    For instance, they concocted insidious plans to expel Marxist-leninst cadre. and after separation was confirmed they explained this fac
    It is those who insist on the revisionist line that are the factionalistand divisive ones. Those who do not correct their mistakes and insist on
    tonalism by letting slip the words: "they were going to be thrown out
    not correcting them, despite all the criticism. Those who are factional
    anyway.
    and divisive are those who camouflage the revisionist essence with a
    They stooped as low as to organise a treacherous armed plot for two
    new form only when they are forced into a corner, instead of makin
    colleagues whom they called to a discussion on 26 March 1972"on pro
    sincere self-criticism
    tecting unity()
    They have given countless examples of factionalism and divisive
    Those who are factionalist are those who deny the facilities ofthe organisation to those cadres who criticise them while assisting in all ways
    ness. Today they pose innocently, attempting to convince the cadre that
    those who flatter them
    they always behaved with good intentions(!), did what they could to
    313

==========第158頁==========
    prevent a split, and that it was us who insisted on factionalism and divi
    waged against the bourgeois leadership is its constant wrecking of such
    siveness(! ) They make dramatic speeches on the subject of unity. The
    a unity, Its wish for a
    nity”'ontlpath of betrayal of the people
    rain curses down on us. All this is to conceal from the cadres the fact
    At the last discussion meeting at which organisational separation
    that they have committed the worst acts of hypocrisy, fraud and betrayal
    became final. the bourgeois leadership asked for a self-criticism from
    All this comes from the discomfort of guilt. In parties where incorrig
    the Marxist-leninists for"perpetrating factionalism". Marxist-leninists
    ble bourgeois are dominant it is not factionalism for Marxist-leninists to
    do not make a self-criticism for waging a struggle against revisionism
    unite amongst themselves and struggle against them. This is a historical
    On the contrary, they will make a self-criticism when they do not wage
    task, and an indispensable obligation towards the proletariat and tolling
    a struggle against revisionism or wage an insufficient struggle, or when
    people. It is the incorrigible bourgeois who are the factionalists, for on
    they fall into revisionist errors. For this reason the bourgeois leaderships
    behalf of the interests of their own small cliques they have turned then
    request was rejected. The accusation of factionalism was also rejected
    backs on the interests of the proletariat and the toiling people, and
    The bourgeois leadership demanded the Marxist-leninists uncon
    wrecked their unity. When the interests of the people and the interests of
    ditionally obey the results of a congress that would gather in the future
    the party conflict, Marxist-leninists take the side of the interests ol the
    In proletarian parties such things cannot even be discussed. But revi
    people. This is not factionalism. To oppose the interests of the people in
    sionism had ensconced itself around the head of our party. These revl
    the name of party interests is factionalism
    sionist bourgeois elements had selected the delegates of the congress In
    The Marxist-leninists wanted the peoples interests and the interests
    factionalist manner. Nearly all of them were themselves and their dis
    of the party to be the same. This was only possible by separating the
    ciples. Only one or two of the Marxist-leninists were to be able to attend
    party from the path of capitulation and betrayal on which it had been put
    the conyress. They wanted this factionalist stance to be changed, and fo
    by the bourgeois leadership, Since it was impossible to correct the bour
    the names they nominated to attend the conference. On this condition
    geois leadership by means of criticism and persuasion what had to be
    they said they would accept unconditionally the outcome of the con
    done was to isolate the incorrigible ones, leave them alone on the paths
    gress. Their proposals were rejected, The benefits expected from the
    leading to betrayal and unite the party and cadre on the path of revolu
    Congress by the Marxist-leninists were as follows: to convey revolu
    tion. Whoever deems this effort to be factionalism considers it as ac
    tionary ideas to all the cadre, and either to get rid of the incorrigible re
    ceptable to betray the people. Yes, we want unity: this is our most exalted
    visionist leadership and establish a revolutionary leadership, or go to a
    goal. But what kind of unity? A"unity " on the path of betrayal of the
    new organisation with cadres won to the ranks, because it was not pos
    proletariat and toiling people? We will not be part of such a"unit
    sible for two ideologies and policies separated by definite lines to live in
    However much such a unity is divided, the better for it. The more the
    peace under the roof of the same organisation. Either one was to domi
    ringleaders of such betrayal are isolated the better. If the revisions
    nate, or the other. As it was not possible to correct or persuade the devi-
    clique is accusing us of"divisiveness "for wrecking such a"unity we
    ationists, that is, as they had proved by their behaviour that they were
    will accept such an accusation gladly. We desire a unity that serves the
    incorrigible opportunists, there remained a single path to serve the peo
    proletariat and the people. We are the most relentless enemies of the
    le: that was to take the internal power of the organisation from the in-
    wreckers of such unity. One of the reasons for the struggle we have
    cortigibles and cleanse the organisation of them. This is a power strugg.

==========第159頁==========
    between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Those who recognise th
    The Main Points on Which We Disagree
    right to the bourgeoisie but not to the proletariat are open or covert ene
    With Shafak Revisionism
    mies of the people
    As the DABK February Resolution concisely expresses certain theoret-
    The congress would not have provided any benefit for the Marxist
    ical and practical questions regarding which we differ from Shafak re
    Leninists. The bourgeois leadership would have nade the revisionist line
    visionis and also since it led to long debate we are including it in full
    the final resolution of the Congress, relying on the majority it had ensured. The Marxist-leninists would not even have bcen able to express
    DABK February Resolution
    their ideas to such a noisy majority. Even if they had been able to theseideas would have been stifled and remained between the four walls
    The DABK which assembled on 7-8 February 1972 passed the
    Furthermore, the Marxist-leninists no longer had any nights within
    following resolutions
    the organisation. The revisionist leadership had perfected the art of tak
    1- In general in the world and particularly in Turkey objective
    Ing away their right of criticism, resorting to all means to prevent thi
    conditions are now ideal for the revolution. Imperialism and the re
    criticism reaching the cadres, plotting insidiously against them. tram
    actionaries are being dragged from crisis to crisis all over the world,
    pling on the principles of democratic centralism. What was called party
    as a result they are engaging in ferocious assaults on the working
    discipline was in fact bourgeois disciplining of the ideas of the prole
    class and all revolutionary peoples; as for the working class and the
    tariat
    revolutionary peoples, including the peoples of Turkey, they are ris
    Under these conditions it was both impossible and of no use to re
    ing to their feet and responding to reactionary violence with revolu
    main within the organisation and continue the struggle. The path of serv
    tionary violence. Many oppressed peoples in Asia, Africa and Latin
    ice to the proletariat and the pcople was to separate from the revisionist
    merica are waging armed struggles under the leadership of the
    clique organisationally And the Marxist-leninists did this. They rejected
    g
    bourgeois discipline and decided to struggle against it from the front
    2-in our country, too, the struggle of the workers, impoverished
    Bourgeois gentlemen who say we are"divisive and factionalist
    peasants, and other revolutionary classes and strata has rapidly
    First of all prove you are not incorrigible revisionists. Prove that the thing
    grown in the last few years, become increasingly violent and, in
    you call party discipline does not conflict with the interests of the pro-
    places, armed clashes have occurred. Now a large majority of our
    letariat and toiling people! As long as you cannot prove this your accu
    working class and impoverished peasantry have understood that
    sations of divisiveness and factionalism will be no more than slande
    their liberation will only come about through armed struggle. Today
    and your name will remain as common slanderers
    a communist movement that does not lead the peasant masses in the
    This is the challenge
    rural areas and organise a decisive, consistent and determinedarmed struggle cannot be worthy of the adjective communist andwill become isolated from the revolutionary masses. Today a current that does not take the revolutionary struggle in our country toa very significant point, the path of the armed struggle, will be iso-
    317

==========第160頁==========
    lated from the masses, even if by name if is a communist movemen
    balanced way, developing in some places earlier than in others, with
    3-IN thesc circumstances, our movement, instead of moving to
    power being seized bit by bit. It is also a denial of the stupendous
    the head of the peasant masses in a bold and decisive way and mo
    role of the armed struggle commencing in some rural areas in dry-
    bilising them for an armed guerrilla struggle, is continuing its right-
    ing out the other areas of the plains
    t errors, giving them a new form appropriate to the new conditions
    A disciplined party with roots in the masses, freed of subjec
    Since legal educational work at the magazine is no longer possible
    tivism, revisionism and opportunism, that implements self-criticism,
    this has been replaced by clandestine and semi-clandestine educa
    will develop and grow within armed conflict. In this way it will throw
    tional work which is becoming increasingly systemic. As for armed
    out the stale, take on fresh blood and free itself of bourgeois ele
    struggle, it is merely talked about, as before. The clandestine read
    ments In this way it will gather around it the most progressive ele
    ing activity is not developing as an activity that serves the armed
    ments communist leaders and militants.
    struggle, that strengthens and develops it, but as one that hobbles
    The peoples armed forces, from small to large, from weak to
    prevents and regress it. This is because the education groups, just as
    strong from irregular guerrilla units to regular army units, will de
    they are not organs to direct an armed struggle, are also not in a po-
    velop along with the armed struggle. On this subject comrade Mao
    sition to maintain their existence under counter-revolutionary at-
    Tse-tung says the following
    tacks that will occur with the commencement of the armed struggle
    In these years the development, consolidation and bolshevization
    on account of their flabby and semi-legal structure. In this case the
    of our Party have proceeded in the midst of revolutionary wars; with
    concern that they will be dispersed leads to a rightist error in the
    out armed struggle the Communist Party would assuredly not be what
    form of postponing the armed struggle. In this way we are weaving
    t is today. Comrades throughout the Party must never forget this er
    barbed wire in front of us with our own hands. In future we shall ci
    perience for which we have paid in blood.(Mao Tse-tung, Selected
    ther trample on this barbed wire and advance or be imprisoned be
    OTKS
    hind it
    5-the organisation of reading and peaceful education work also
    4-on the other hand this rightist error, the mistake of postpon
    hows itself in the policy of cadres. Instead of breaking the reac-
    ing the armed struggle to an unknown date in the future, is being
    tionary links of local militant cadre and drawing them into the pro-
    supported and consolidated with new proof. T his is reactional
    fessional struggle compromise is made with their reactionary ties
    proof such as: in order to launch the armed struggle"it is necessary
    such cadre are being blunted and their energies extinguished. Wi
    to organise nationwide", "to first dry out the steppes, then set them
    advice such as wait a little, also read this book or" make contact
    alight All this is a denial of the thesis that both the party and the
    with such and such a person people with the gift of the gab cut off
    army will be constructed, developed and may become steely within
    from the cla
    truggle are being produced. However, with the lates
    the armed struggle. An organisation that does not develop within
    martial law 90 per cent of these cadres have been discarded Conse
    the armed struggle will today be a hollow organisation condemned
    quently, neither these cadres developing sufficiently, nor can the
    to be demolished by a few reactionary blows. Again this proof is a
    cadre needs of our movement be met.
    covert denial of the thesis that the revolution will develop in an un-
    6-on the question of"people's United Front "the old rightist, ca
    318
    319

==========第161頁==========
    pitulationist perception is still current. The people's united front can
    Secondly, we should not fear suffering failure and accept this
    not be realised without a fundamental alliance of workers and peas
    risk
    ants under proletarian leadership and in one or in several areas the
    Thirdly, we should know how to take lessons from failures. To
    forming of red political power To argue to the contrary is to rely on
    avoid active struggle out of fear of failure is a passive position
    the bourgeoisie, lose independence and give the initiative to the reac
    S-revolution will be the work of the masses. This truth does not
    tionaries, instead of"being self-reliant, preserving independence and
    justify the rightist view that the armed struggle cannot be com
    holding the initiative". What is lacking in our country in order for red
    menced without all the masses along side us and does not mean
    polifical power to be born is "a strong party pursuing a correct line
    that every individual who participates in the revolutionary struggle
    and" a powerful red army " All the other conditions for red political
    entirely grasps the meaning, importance and all the consequences
    sower in the various rural areas of our country exist-a strong Inass
    of the revolution, and that they"consider all the possible outcomes
    base, economic resources for self-reliance and terrain suitable for mil-
    Lenin accused this perception of "being stupid and stuck up
    itary activity. In this respeet our main, primary task today is the con
    continuing:
    struction of the party and army within the armed struggle.
    So one army lines up in one place and says, "We are for socialism
    7-fight, fail, fight again, fail again, fight agtin.. till their v
    Id another, somewhere else and says, We are for imperialism,and
    tory, that is the logic of the people, and they too will never go againsr
    that will be a social revolution (Lenin collected works Vol 22
    this logic. This is another Marxist law: The Russian people' s revolution
    This is to make the social revolution impossible. Again Lenir
    followed this law, and so has the Chinese people' s revolution
    says that many of those who join the revolution will bring their petit-
    Tse-tung, Selected Works IV)
    bourgeois prejudices with them and that these will not disappear
    The revolution of the peoples ofturkey will also follow this law
    immediately after the revolution. He says that many different peo
    In our ranks there is a long-existing and still influential perception
    ple joined the 1905 revolution, those who received money from
    f achieving victory without any failure and without suffering even
    Japan, adventurers, all for difterent reasons but they all attacked the
    a nose bleed. This is one of the reasons for the view that: let us tirst
    same target. The vanguard role of the proletariat is to unite these var-
    organise nationwide, then commence the armed struggle, or else
    ious elements and to direct their joint attacks. he says. Whereas i
    we ll fail, or first let us dry out the plain, then set it alight "or else
    our ranks the perception exist of a"mass line "which makes the so
    well fail. This perception constantly drags our movement to the
    cial revolution impossible whereby it is expected that every individ
    right, constituting the ideological source of passivity, lack of action,
    lal who joins the struggle will know socialism and understand the
    inertia and the constant putting to the fore of peaceful methods. Ihe
    aims of the revolution and all its conseauences, and need to accept
    fact that people,s war is a long, harsh, difficulty struggle, although
    all possible results from the beginning just as Lenin criticised, and
    often repeated has, in reality, not been grasped. This also means that
    this is not a"revolutionary line, it is a line that",the re
    a series of defeats and failures is passed through. We should firstly
    olution and should not be permitted
    endeavour not to make mistakes and not to suffer failure emanating
    g-our urgent tasks should consist of: rural areas that have a
    from these mistakes
    strong mass base, self-sufficient economic resources and terrain that
    32

==========第162頁==========
    is suitable for military activity should be selected and most of the
    I Shafak Revisionism Defends in its Entirely the
    professional cadre of the party mobilised
    these areas. In these
    Rightist Line of the Past.
    areas the link to be grasped is that armed struggle organisationsthat is, guerrilla units should be established from the start. After a
    The Shatak Revisionists see the struggle between the TIP and
    hort propaganda and agitation activity, if necessary, guerrilla ac
    M. Belli cliques, the struggle between two revisionist cliques, as a strug
    tions should be embarked upon. All the other forins of organisation
    gle between opportunists and proletarian revolutionaries! According to
    illegal reading groups, cells printing, transporting and distributing
    the Shafak revisionists, M. Belli represented the proletarian revolution
    publications ete. etc.should be addressed in a manner that re
    ary line against the TIP(see: Our country Turkey is a semi-feudal, semi
    sponds to the needs of guerrilla activity and to support and consol
    dependent country under fascist Tyranny, pages 6-7-8). The bourgeois
    idate it. The most progressive elements in the areas selected for this
    eadership is thus trying to exonerate its Mihriist past
    purpose should immediately be disconnected from all reactionary
    The same pamphlet presents the rightist line being followed in sub
    ties and drawn into professional activity.
    sequent periods as a correct line. The same things are also being defended verbal
    Progressive workers and leading cadre in the cities (not uselwavering, dependent, backward and inexperienced elements), the
    What is clear is that Shafak revisionism has learned not even one
    great majority of them should be sent to the rural areas to organise
    tiny lesson from the past. It Is tied to its rightist and capitulationist for
    the peasants armed struggle. All of the movements means should be
    mer Ime by thousands of links. It is prepared to defend the same things
    mobilised for this purpose
    as soon as it deems conditions are right. It means that Shafak revision
    10-this meeting calls the attention of all party comrades and the
    ismn assumes it can make M. Bellis theory of a non-capitalist path com
    Central Committee to the rightist errors we have summarised. The
    patible with proletarian revolutionary ideas. It accepts M. Bellis
    committees under DABK and other comrades should re-evaluate
    dominant nation nationalism as correct and revolutionary. It deems his
    their activities in the light of the resolutions of this meeting, launch
    supra-class theories on the army and state to be revolutionary. It sees hi
    a relentless war against errors, defeat them and advance with deci-
    fforts to utilise the struggle of the youth for his junta ambitions as pro
    sive, bold, obstinate and appropriate steps on the correct path. This
    etarian revolutionism. It does not consider his reiection of the revolu
    is what our people expect of us
    tionary role of the peasantry, his rejection of people's war, rejection of
    As we have mentioned previously, the Shafak revisionists appeared
    the party of the proletariat and his applause of Soviet social-imperialism
    to accept a significant section of the above criticisms in the circular
    as socialism as contrary to proletarian revolutionism
    which constituted a response to this resolution. On the other hand, they
    It sees its former legalism, amateurishness, tailing of the bourgeoisie
    claim that all publications that conflict with this circular are correct. " Th
    belittling of activities in the rural areas, pacifist animosity to all active ac
    Shafak newspapers. publications. Party Circulars and other articles con
    tion, unconditional support of reformist trade unions, following of spon
    stitute our ideological and political line, " they say. In that case, when
    taneous Inass actions, Boratavism, rejection of land revolution and
    criticising Shafak revisionism we have the right to cite all these publ
    people's war, and slavish pursuing of Kivilcimli as the natural necessityof proletarian revolutionism(!)
    cations
    323

==========第163頁==========
    Shafak revisionism praises its anti-marxist-leninist analyses of fas
    ence. 4) The Socialist Conference is a barrier set down in front of the
    cism and its tactics(! )for struggle against fascism as"being entirely cor-
    armed struggle. 5) It is akin to serving up cadres on a plate to the swelling
    rect and also valid today"(see booklet p. 14)
    appetite of fascism. That is, betrayal. 6)To pass a resolution calling for
    Shafak revisionism finds the Socialist Conference and efforts lo
    a Socialist Conference two weeks before martial law is, at the very least
    form a legal party correct. We have indicated above how vehemently
    Jacking in far sightedness
    Mr A Z extolled the Socialist Conference. During the debate in which or
    The consequences that are to be attributed to Shafak revisionism
    ganisational separation become final Mr B Y said: " The Socialist Con-
    from all of the above are these: firstly, Shafak revisionism still carries in
    ference initiative was correct. if the same conditions return this slogan
    its body the microbes of its pre-martial law illnesses. These have not
    may again be used and a legal party may be established. Mr. L.R. also
    been got rid of. As soon as it sees suitable conditions it is inevitable that
    greed with them. In another debate Mr AN, going even further, main
    these will reactivate and the whole body will be disabled by its former
    tained that in the event of a return to pre-martial law conditions a legalparty could be formed and that this party could even go into parliament
    Secondly, Shafak revisionism shamefully trampled on one of th
    As is known the pre-martial law conditions were conditions where the
    primary tenets of Marxist-leninist parties, the principle of self-criticism
    revolutionary wave had swollen and, in parallel to that, fascist oppres
    The attitude a party takes to its own mistakes is a measure of that party's
    sion was out of control. That is, ideal conditions for the armed struggle
    loyalty to the proletarian cause. The Shafak revisionists, by jealously de
    In a rag attacking us the Socialist Conference clowning was de
    fending their errors, documented once again the fact that they saw their
    fended thus
    own small clique interests as more important than the interests of the
    The Socialist Conference was carried out for the purpose of gath
    cople, that they did not take seriously th
    de and that
    ering together revolutionaries and local cadres on the basis of Mao-tse
    they were not the party of broad working masses but the party of a smal
    tung Thought. In order to ensure this unity during a period when the
    interest network. The fate of such parties is to collapse and disappear
    working class and revolutionaries desired unity
    If the first sentence had read: The Socialist Conference was held for
    2. The Organisational Policy of the Shafak Revisionists is
    the purpose of rescuing revolutionaries and local cadre from the morass
    to organise the workers and peasants in the form of
    of legalism and stifling it "it would have been much more correct. The
    Study Groups
    second sentence is complete nonsense. In which period do the workingclass and revolutionaries not want unity? To attempt to justify the So
    The formerly legal educational work carried out at the magazine has
    cialist Conference on such grounds is equal to not defending it at all
    now commenced in a semi-clandestine way amongst workers and peas
    Since you still consider the Socialist Conference and attempts to form a
    ants. They have embarked on raising intellectuals disconnected to the
    party correct disproves the following allegations: 1)The Socialist Con
    class struggle by organising the workers and peasants in study groups
    ference is to sink into the morass of legalism. 2)The Socialist Confer-
    These groups cannot be organs of armed struggle and in the event of
    ence is a call for peace between opportunist cliques. 3)Unity amongs
    launching of the armed struggle will lack the strength to protect them-
    revolutionaries can never be achieved by means of a Socialist Confer
    selves against the increasing reactionary repression. For this reason, theconcern that these groups will disappear, they have constantly hobbled
    325

==========第164頁==========
    the armed struggle
    experience in struggle against the police should be ensured, they should
    The study groups will, on the one hand, ensure the Marxist-lenin-
    be tried out in these groups and only those who are deemed worthy
    Ist training of progressive elements of our people, supporters and back
    should be subsequently organised in guerrilla groups
    ward workers and on the other, fulfil the practical tasks necessitated by
    It's the limit From whichever angle you look it's a nonsensical the
    our revolutionary struggle
    ory. If one must adhere to this theory it means it will be necessary to re
    This is the organisational policy of revisionism In the new condi-
    ject peasants who are full of anger at their class enemies and wish to join
    tions! This is the manifestation in the organisational sphere of a percep
    the armed struggle, accepting party and organisational discipline say
    tion that constantly delays the armed struggle
    ing: "No! First learn Marxism-leninism, gain experience against the po
    The Marxist-leninists maintained the following. criticising this re
    lice! If hundreds of thousands of illiterate peasants, deadened by
    actionary organisational policy: the link we must grasp in organisation
    feudalism, wish to take up arms against the landlords, gentry and central
    is to establish guerrilla units under the leadership of the party. All other
    authority it will fall to us to immediately take their weapons, slap them
    groups and cells must take on a supportive role of the guerrilla activities
    about the face a few times for their insolence(!), and them drag them by
    And everyone must organise around clear tasks appropriate to the needs
    their collars to study groups. The reactionary essence of the above the
    of the movement and their own talents
    ory is evident. Furthermore, by means of pacifist education work ver
    An organisation that is not based on specialisation, where everyone
    few peasants will be developed in a few years time. Since a section o
    does everything, is contrary to the tenets of Leninist organisation. Such
    then will drop out very few will remain to join the guerrilla groups. Isn t
    organisations are of no use except for making a lot of noise
    this making the armed struggle impossible? If this is not standing in front
    Study groups, in addition to having a cumbersome and passive chat
    of peasants who wish to take up arms, calming their anger, blunting their
    acter that hobbles armed struggle, also possess this speciality: "On the
    resentment and pacifising them then what is it?
    other hand they will fulfil the practical tasks necessitated by our revolu
    Besides, it cannot be claimed that a person who is successful in study
    tionary struggle
    groups will definitely be any use in the armed struggle. That is, trying out
    In response to these criticisms the Shafak revisionists swerved
    in education groups is not a correct method of testing. In general literate,
    ing(names such as)Study Group and Education Group should be
    better off peasants, intellectual elements, teachers etc are prominent and
    abandoned. as such titles may awaken backward consciousness!). And
    the impoverished peasants are unsuccessful
    they suggested the title"peasant committees"instead of"study groups
    Because we reject this rightist, bureaucratic, cumbersome and passive
    The bourgeois gentlemen assume that the character of a thing will change
    organisational policy they claim we say"there is no need for revolution
    along with its name. Changing the form rather than the essence! Th
    ary mass work. We have learned that by revolutionary mass work they
    the policy Shafak revisionism has followed from the start
    understand having intellectual chats with well off peasants and the liter
    ome members of this revisionist clique make the following listing
    ate group which are disconnected from the class struggle. Yes, we are
    with a mechanic mind Fitting of bourgeois
    saying there is no need for such revolutionary mass work(
    Initially study groups should be established. Those attending these
    This bunch of frauds also claims that we reject the principle i.e. Po
    groups should be provided with a general grasp of Marxism-leninism
    itical work is the vital part of all work ". No! We reject intellectual gar.

==========第165頁==========
    rulousness that is disconnected from the class struggle. We say that ide
    peasants is clear. To organise village party committees in every village
    ological and political work should be linked to practical struggle, that it
    Also to organise armed struggle detachments, that is, village militias,
    should serve it and light up its path. There is no clear limit or end to ide
    linked to production, from revolutionary impoverished
    nts both
    ological and political work. Every task group, every cell, every guerrilla
    party and non-party. To organise various groups and cells that will serve
    detachment should on the one hand carry out practical activity in its
    the armed struggle from party and non-party elements linked to the vil
    sphere, and on the other be subjected to constant education. And this ed
    lage party committee. A]so, to organise professional guerrilla units con
    ucation should continue after the success of the revolution under the
    nected to the party committee in the area, not based on the village. The
    proletarian dictatorship and during the construction of socialism. Edu
    purpose of all this organisational activity is to construct the party and
    cation should not happen ust for the sake of it. The crude mechanica
    popular armed forces amongst impoverished peasants and agricultural
    logic of the bourgeois gentlemen may not be able to grasp this, but it is
    Pourer
    the truth
    This construction will be within the armed struggle, not withinpeace And the link that the party organisation should understand in or
    3. The Shafak Revisionists are turning the vague
    ganising the peasants is to organise guerrilla units and village militias
    Village Committees into a remedy for all ills
    Village organs of power are a completely different thing and are not aquestion for the present.
    Treasury land will be distributed to peasants or be made into pop
    The bourgeois gentlemen accuse us of Guevaraism, focoism and fol-
    dlar farms under the supervision of village committees"(Draft Pro
    lowing the THKP-THKC and THIKO
    gramme)
    In order to prove this they need to show a resemblance between our
    We should establish village committees to direct the peasants
    organisational plan and that of those organisations. If they cannot do this
    struggle in every village. ( Land Revolution Programme
    they will remain as low slanderers and we will have the right to spit in
    Village committees will direct the implementation of the Land Rev-
    their faces
    olution Programme and distribution work Farm labourers. impoverishedpeasants and middle peasants will elect village committees in every vil-
    4. The Shafak Revisionists make it a condition in order
    age.. Forests, lakes, streams and pastures will pass into the direction of
    to launch the armed struggle that there is nationwide
    the village committees
    organisation and that it is in command of all the masses
    Are the "village committees"village party committees, organs ofarmed struggle, study groups, distribution groups? It is not clea
    We have indicated above that Mr. B Y, one of the ringleaders of th
    The revisionists, as can be seen, are sorting out all the problems of
    revisionist clique, in an article summarising the experience of the Chi
    organisation by means of"village committees at a stroke(
    nese Revolution, distorted comrade Mao Tse-tung,s condition for the
    This demonstrates that the Shafak revisionists are completely igno
    survival of a red political administration"a sound party organisation
    rant on the subject ofhow to organise the peasants. On this most impor
    into a party organised on a nationwide basis". The bourgeois leadership
    tant question of our revolution they are helpless and in a pitiable state
    since it sees the existential conditions for red political power as one ane
    The Marxist-leninists policy regarding organisation amongst the
    the same thing as the conditions for the launching of the armed struggle

==========第166頁==========
    places the above distortion as an obstacle in front of the wish to con
    Eastern region. if it were not supported by a struggle of the peasants in
    mence the armed struggle. We have mentioned the fact that the thesis
    the Aegean and Cukorova regions and a working class movement in our
    without nationwide organisation the armed struggle cannot be
    nain industrial cities under the leadership of a proletarian party it could
    launched " was defended with emphasis at the April Meeting
    not realise red political power. For only a revolutionary movement grow
    The latest document of this rightist, pacifist perception which de
    nationwide will smash and defeat reactionary government and Its
    lays the launch of the armed struggle for years is an article headed"On
    main force, the army
    the Question of the Establishing of Red Political Power
    n conclusion we can say that red political power may only be es
    This article has been crammed with nonsense. distortions and con
    tablished by a struggle directed and united by the proletarian party on
    tradictions. There is the followin
    nationwide scale, not by a political struggle waged from emplacements
    In this article
    The Rise of the Revolutionary Movement Nationwide''
    1. One of Conrade Mao Tse-lung's conditions for the"existence of
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung points out that the survival of red polit
    red political power", the rise of the revolutionary situation(ibid)na
    Ical power depends on the nationwide development of the revolutionar
    onwide", has been deliberately distorted into the for of "the rise of the
    movement. " What we will dwell upon in particular at this juncture is the
    revolutionary movement nationwide
    Tise of the revolutionary movement on a national scale. Some colleaguesimagined that by dispersing the revolutionary movement and with work
    4 2-the expressionthe rise of the revolutionary movement na-tionwide "has been distorted a second time, into the form, "organisa
    in a few villages as if going into a mouse hole the revolution would b
    tion of the communist party nationwide. As is known, the term
    accomplished. However, the existence of a political cultent that make
    revolutionary movement includes the political movements of popular
    itself heard all over the country is essential. This can only be the politi-
    classes outside the proletariat and spontaneous mass actions
    cal party of the proletariat. The denial of the party means a denial of the
    3-conflicting views have been put forward regarding"organising
    necessity to unite the struggle on a nationwide basis and direct it to a
    nationwide". A nonsensical theory was invented in the form of both"not
    single goal. They assume that the people will spontaneously follow ar
    carrying out work everywhere in the country, "being heard nationwide
    armed struggle launched by a handful of intellectuals disconnected frol
    n to make its existence felt and demonstrated to all the people of the coun
    each oter
    try and to orient towards the goal of establishing a revolutionary gov
    The presence of a revolutionary movement nationwide does not
    ernment nationwide, and in reality with the examples given the idea has
    mean that it carries out work everywhere in the country or gives the
    been expressed of organising everywhere in the country
    same emphasis to each region
    4-the condition"organising nationwide and reaching the state of
    It is making its existence as a political party felt and demonstrated
    being in command of all the masses" has been set forth as a condition
    to all the people of the country and orienting itself towards the goal o
    both for the launch of the armed struggle and the existence of red po
    establishing a revolutionary administration on a national basis. For in
    litical power. In this way, comrade Mao Tse-tung,s doctrine on the
    stance, a peasant movement not supported by a struggle in the cities
    existence of red political power " has been distorted once more. There
    would be inevitably suppressed. For instance, a peasant uprising in the
    only one aim of all this distortion and nonsensical theories full o
    331

==========第167頁==========
    contradictions: This is to try to justify the rightist view"armed strug
    towards establishing political power country wide, as hardly any party
    gle will not be launched without nationwide organisation by relying
    will direct itself towards a different goal
    ()on comrade Mao Tse-tung. Since Mao said that red political power
    A party, even if it consists of only a handful of people, once it has
    could not exist without the communist party organising nationwide(!)
    been established, will"orient towards the goal of forming a political gov
    and since the condition for commencing the armed struggle is the same
    ernment Does our gentleman think that a party might orient towards
    as for the existence of red political power, it means that the armed strug
    any other goal?
    gle cannot be commenced without the communist party organising na
    According to the above recipe (in Turkey ) all groups"that have
    tionwide (!) This is the logic. However, what comrade Mao Tse-tung
    made known and demonstrated their existence, including a small group
    said was entirely different: he said: one of the conditions for the exis
    that carried out a four and a half million robbery, is organised ( )through
    tence of red political power is the continuing rise of the revolutionary
    out the country. Mr A.N. went as far as to claim that at the time the arti
    situation nationwide. The distortion we have pointed out in article
    cle was written"the Shafak movement was organised nationwide " in
    one and two are clear. Let us dwell on the distortion and fabricated the
    order to support this nonsensical theory. Revisionism is thus becoming
    ories in articles three and four
    ridiculous and pitiful
    The revisionists are now trying to worm their way out of this non
    What is nationwide organisation
    sense: The THK P and similar groups' voice has been heard in the form
    For Marxist-leninists"nationwide organisation" has only one mean
    wanted by the police. ' Let us accept that this is the case, what will it
    ing: that is organisation in every, or nearly every, province and district of
    change? We are debating in general what is meant by a party organising
    the country. For instance, it is said that the RSDIP was organised in this
    nationwide, not whether the THKP is organised nationwide. It is even be
    or that province on such an such a date, and in those provinces on sucl
    yond the subject of this debate whether a party is revolutionary or reac
    and such a date, and in those provinces on such and such a date. For in
    tionary, because the meaning of nationwide organisation is the same for
    stance, the TKP was organised in such and such places etc
    every party
    The person at the head of revisionism is capable of distorting even
    But the revisionists do not themselves believe what they say How
    such a clear truth. Organising nationwide is"not carrying out work
    ever demagogic the disguises they try to make up they do not conceal the
    everywhere in the country", "being heard nationwide","making its ex
    fact that by nationwide organisation they mean organising in every place
    istence felt and demonstrated to all the people of the country and to ori
    the
    ent towards the goal of establishing a revolutionary government
    The denial of the party implies a denial of the need to unite the
    nationwide
    struggle
    ide and orient towards a single goal
    This is such a nonsensical theory that, with this logic, in the event
    With this sentence it emerges that they see being organised in ever
    of half a dozen people publishing a joint statement it would be necessary
    part of the country within the concept of Party. "The uniting of the strug
    to deem them as organised nationwide For even a sigle statement Is
    le country wide"is only possible with organising in every part of the
    enough to "make heard or"make the existence felt''nationwide or even
    country and being in command of the masses. If denial of the party is de
    worldwide. Also, however organised any party may be, " it directs itselt
    nial of this it means it includes the concept of party, organising all
    332

==========第168頁==========
    over the country and being in command of the masses. This view is
    and in this way rejects that the party will spread to all parts of the coun
    at least as nonsensical as the above theory, because it is a denial of th
    try and become in commmand of the masses within a comparatively long
    party spreading to every corner of the country after a long period of
    struggle. He is thinking of the party in its most perfect state and thus re
    struggle and its being in command of the masses
    ecting the laws of dialectic development
    On the other hand look at these examples
    Following this accusation some of the revisionists will leap to their
    peasant movement withoul the support of the strug
    feet, pointing their fingers towards our eyes, and say, and try to mention
    gle in the cities is bound to be suppressed. For Instance, a peasant up
    evidence, that "We have written that the party will be constructed in
    rising in the Eastern region, if it were not supported by a struggle of the
    struggle. So, gentlemen, what does this demonstrate? That you are on
    peasants in the Aegean and Cukorova regions and a working class
    the right road? No! Only that you are vacillating in inconsistencies, bent
    movement in our main industrial cities under the leadership of a
    under contradictory ideas and are unable to distinguish the straight from
    proletarian party it could not realise red political power. For onl
    ne crooke
    olutionary movement growing nationwide will smash and defeat the re
    So what is the reason for this fabricated theory, which is not adopted
    actionary government and its main force, the army.
    y even the author of such nonsense as"organising nationwide and
    Demagogy cannot conceal the real meaning of these words. If the
    being heard nationwide, being put forward? It is this: an effort to ju:
    support of the struggle in the cities is necessary in order for a peasant
    tify the rightist and pacifist line that says: the armed struggle cannot bi
    movement not to be suppressed, then the party should be organised in
    launched without organisation nationwide and being in command of the
    the cities and furthermore should be in command of the masses
    masses. In this way, they wil] rescue themnselves from being responsible
    Again, in order for a peasant rebellion in the East to achieve success. it
    or the rightist theory that delays the armed struggle for years by saying
    is necessary to be organised in the villages of Cukurova and the
    We didn't mean this we meant that, when saying organisation nation-
    Aegean and in the main industrial cities and be in command of the
    wide". That is, the person at the head of revisionism wished to prepare
    masses. The conclusion reached by this series of logic is clear. For the
    an escape bridge for himself and his disciples in the face of intensive at
    success of any peasant movement it is necessary in all cities, in the
    cks by the Marxist-leninists on this point. But as you can see, this
    main industrial cities and in rural areas to be organised and to be
    bridge is so rotten that whoever crosses it will fal into the morass of re-
    come in command of the masses, However, if a revolutionary move
    visionis. As we shall see a little later Mr A.Z. realised how rotten the
    ment smashes the reactionary government and brings it down it should
    bridge was and abandoned it
    be organised in every corner of the country and be in command o
    Let us come to the fourth point: the condition of"organising na
    the masses
    tionwide and coming to command the masses has been set forth as a
    The person at the head of revisionism, however much he tries to
    condition both for the launching of the armed struggle and for the exi
    squirm and prevent the truth from emerging, with his phrase "organising
    tence of red political power, we have said In the article, it is sald that
    nationwide " he means organising everywhere or almost everywhere In
    they assume that the people will spontaneously follow an armed strug
    the country and becoming in command of the masses. He, even, as we
    le launched by a disconnected handful of intellectuals. " What is the
    have mentioned above, sees this meaning as within the concept of party
    question that our revisionist gentlemen are debating here? Isnt it the
    334

==========第169頁==========
    launching of the armed struggle? Yes, the people will not sponta
    will smash the reactionary government and its main force, the army
    neously follow an armed struggle launched by a handful of intellectual
    The revisionists do not consider that for a red political administra
    who are disconnected from each other. This is not a proper way of doing
    tion to be born, a protracted guerrilla activity, developing from small to
    things, but this is not the point the revisionist gentlemen are dwelling
    large, from weak to powerful, from simple to complex, involving the
    upon. By caricaturing the worst opposition view they are trying to jus
    step by step construction of a people's army, from guerrilla units to a
    tity their own dodgy theories and as can be understood from the ser
    regular army, IS necessary
    tence they are directly making" the launching of the armed struggle the
    They don't even think about this. For a red political power to b
    subject of argument
    born in a region they see it as a condition that there is a mass peasant up
    n the article it is said that"a peasant movement unsupported by
    rising in that region And in order for such an uprising to result in a"red
    struggle in the cities is doomed to be suppressed". What is meant by"a
    political administration" it is necessary to be organised in the other
    peasant movement? Of course an armed peasant struggle. In that case
    rural regions of the country, in the main industrial cities and to be in
    without organisation in the cities and becoming in command of the
    command of the popular struggle in all these places()
    masses"a peasant movement, that is, an armed peasant movement, "is
    Apeasant rebellion in a single region cannot"bring about red po
    bound to be suppressed". Since it would be stupidity to embark on an ac
    litical power(!).In that case peasants should on no account attempt re
    tion that was doomed from the start, there should never be a peasant
    volt (! )and we should not try to create a peasants'revolt(! )etc
    movement without organisation in the cities and command of the masses
    On the other hand it is a condition that there is a party in order to
    This is abundantly cle.
    launch the armed struggle. As for the party, "it is something that unites
    In the article it is said: For instance, a peasant uprising in the East
    the struggle countrywide and directs it toward a single goal. In that case
    ern region, if it were not supported by a struggle of the peasants in the
    without such a party an armed struggle cannot be launched. The author
    Aegean and Cukorova regions and a working class movement in our
    says this in an opportunist style
    main industrial cities under the leadership of a proletarian party it coul
    The revisionist logic that both claim an armed struggle cannot be
    not realise red political power
    embarked upon without"nationwide organisation and command of the
    The meaning of this opportunistic phrase is as follows
    entire popular struggle", and that connected to this red political power
    I-the revisionists are considering"a peasant movement only as a
    cannot exist. works like this
    total peasant rebellion
    The Shafak revisionists, since in the founding years of the party and
    2-they are thinking of an armed peasant rebellion immediatel
    for a comparatively long period there will not be organisation on a n
    leading to a red political administration and enabling it to survive
    tionwide scale and, consequently, the party will not be able to unite it
    3-they are laying down as a condition for a peasant rebellion im
    only being able to gain this quality during an armed struggle, therefore
    mediately leading to a red political administration and enabling it to su
    reject being able to launch an armed struggle in advanced rural areas in
    vive the support of peasants struggles in other areas and of the workers
    a period when this quality has yet to be attained
    in the main industrial cities under the leadership of the proletarian party
    Of course we wish for the party to be organised all over the country
    Because only a revolutionary movement rising on a country wide level
    and for it to come to command the masses
    336

==========第170頁==========
    The revisionist leadership, after defending the above rightist and
    The fact that our organisation has yet to spread all over the country will
    pacifist thesis for a long period both verbally and in writing, In response
    of course negatively affects the development of the armed struggle. But
    to the attacks of the Marxist-leninists began to seek escape routes. AS W
    to embark upon armed struggle without being organised nationwide will
    have mentioned before it wanted to save its neck by distorting the con
    not. as the revisionists claim. lead to the inevitable destruction of our
    cept of"nationwide organisation". It didnt work. Now it has found an
    forces. On the condition of following a correct poliecy we mav commence
    new route, with a "circular that is an example of opportunism and
    mmed struggle while our organisation is still very limited and expand
    hypocrisy“
    and consolidate both our forces and our organisation within the armed
    In the circular in question is said: "To wait for an organisation to be
    struggle. A sound organisational form will come into being in this way
    established countrywide in order to embark on armed struggle is not a
    Organising in peace is hollow. Such an organisation, even were it to em
    Marxist-leninist position".If they have begun to think like this isnt
    brace the whole country, would be unable to provide leadership to the
    necessary for them to make a sincere self-criticism? No! On the one hand
    popular struggle or direct the armed struggle and would collapse like a
    they say this and on the other they claim the views in the article we are
    house of cars when the white terror intensified
    examining are entirely correct
    With their above expressions the revisionists accept that without a
    What disgusting falsification!
    struggle in"other places and cities, that is, without organising in other
    We wish to ask these gentlemen with the above sentence do they
    places and cities and coming to command the popular struggle the de
    mean that"it is not a Marxist-leninist position to wait until it is heard
    struction of an armed struggle embarked upon in certain advanced re
    of on a countrywide basis before embarking on an armed struggle
    ions is inevitable Like a fox that wanders off and returns to the fur
    The revisionists have in reality not changed their ideas. The rag that
    shop the revisionists too, are hung up on the idea that the armed strug
    they published in order to criticise us is proof of this. In this rag they
    gle cannot be launched without nationwide organisation and command
    claim we support a"localised"struggle: since the ruling classes wil
    of the masses
    mobilise all their forces to that area and as these force bave not been
    The revisionist frauds claim we have said: "professional cadre ever
    smashed by the struggle in other places and in the cities it will lead
    where. should be mobilised to one place and put these words in quo
    to the destruction of the struggle being waged
    tation marks as if we expressed them. Such a thing has never been said
    For a start we are not in favour of waging a regional struggle, it Is
    anywhere. They possess written texts. Why are they scared of quoting
    that the conditions in which we find ourselves render such a struggle
    our views honestly?
    obligatory. Today, since it is not possible to organise In every corner of
    We said that a significant proportion(not all)of our cadre should
    the country and since it will do more harm than good to disperse out
    e mobilised to rural areas not a single area)with a strong mass base
    orces to regions where the revolution will be unable to develop initially
    self-sufficient food resources and terrain suitable for military activity
    we advocate organising are far as our strength permits in areas wher
    The number of our cadre and our possibilities will determine how many
    the revolution will develop first and embarking on armed struggle. W
    areas we will be able to work in. The more active cadre we have the
    have explained this many times. Being organised on a countrywide scale
    more areas they will be mobilised to. We have not given a figure on
    will of course positively affect the development of the armed struggle
    this subject. And of course it would be a good thing to have numerous

==========第171頁==========
    areas being worked in. But even if we mobilise the entire cadre today
    the continuing upsurge of the revolutionary situation. ' The Shafak revi-
    we cannot became organised in the entire country and cannot command
    sionists have turned this thesis into the following state: " Without the
    all the masses. Are we not to commence the armed struggle because
    commumist party organised nationwide and in command of all the masses
    this is the situation? This is the question. We say that however many
    neither
    armed struggle can be launched nor red political power exist
    areas we have managed to mobilise to we should launch the armed
    Has such loyalty(: )to Mao Tse-tung ever been seen before?
    struggle there. As for the Shafak revisionists, despite all their squirm
    et us read what comrade Lenin said about the"revolutionary
    ing, they have come back to saying"without nationwide organisation
    situatio
    and command of the masses the arimed struggle cannot be launched
    Defining the revolutionary situation, Lenin said: "What, generally
    In this way they are postponing the armed struggle for years. This is the
    speaking, are the symptoms of a revolutionary situation? We shall cer
    essence of the question
    tainly not be mistaken if we indicate the following three major symp
    5. The Shafak Revisionists are Distorting the Leninist
    toms: ()when it is impossible for the ruling classes to maintain their rule
    Doctrine of"Revolutionary Situation'
    without any change, when there is a crisis, in one form or another, amongthe 'upper classes, a crisis in the policy of the ruling class, leading to a
    The Shafak revisionists, in order to prove their thesis that" wlthout
    tissure through which the discontent and indignation of the oppressed
    nationwide organisation and command of the masses the armed struggle
    classes burst forth. For a revolution to take place, it is usually insufficient
    cannot be launched have committed distortion after distortion
    for the lower classes not to want to live in the old way; it is also nec
    1)They distorted comrade Mao Tse-tung,s condition for the"exis
    essary that the upper classes should be unable'to live in the old way; (2
    tence of red political power "i.e. "the upsurge of the revolutionary situ
    when the suffering and want of the oppressed classes have grown more
    ation nationwide" the upsurge of the revolutionary movement
    acute than usual; (3)when, as a consequence of the above causes, there
    nationwide". 2)This was then distorted a second time into"the com
    is a considerable increase in the activity of the masses, who uncom
    munist partys organisation nationwide".(See"On the Question of E.
    plainingly allow themselves to be robbed in 'peace time, but, in turbu
    tablishing Red Political Power").The concept of "Revolutionary
    lent times, are drawn both by all the circumstances of the crisis and by
    movement "includes the political movements of popular classes outside
    the upper classes themselves into independent historical action
    the proletariat and spontaneous mass actions. In this way, the condi
    Without these objective changes, which are independent of the will
    tion: upsurge of the revolutionary situation nationwide " has been made
    The totality of all these objective changes is called a revolutionary sit
    In a trice: " organisation of the communist party nationwide
    uation. Such a situation existed in /905 in Russia. and in al revolution
    Moreover, they have set forth the thing which comrade Mao Tse
    ary periods in the West. (Lenin collected works Vol. 21)
    Tung put forward as a condition for the"existence of red political
    As can be seen the'revolutionary situation "and the revolutionary
    power", as a condition for the launching of an armed struggle and the
    movement are entirely different things. The"communist movement " in
    condition for the existence of red political power, after subjecting it to the
    particular is a completely different thing. It is only possible to confuse
    above distortion. Comrade Mao Tse-tung said: " One of the conditions for
    revolutionary situation and"communist movement in two ways
    the emergence and survival of red political power on a national scale Is
    Firstly, to be completely ignorant of Marxism-leninism; Secondly, to

==========第172頁==========
    Before the vanguard sections of the fundamental worker
    ant
    be a low distorter. Let our bourgeois gentlemen decide to which category they belong In our opinion it is the second, because in response to
    masses are prepared for the armed struggle and before the idea of armed
    criticism how they change colour in order to justify their absurdness
    struggle has gained certain prevalence an armed struggle cannot be
    If the revolutionary movement (you may understand communist
    launched, even if it is directed to correct targets. (ibid)In order for
    party )is not organised nationwide the revolutionary situation wil! not
    the plain to be set alight it must be dry. ' This expression cannot be mis
    rise nationwide. "The revolutionary situation is the objective conditions
    represented or denied. Our gentlemen are laying down the condition that
    of the revolution. The revolutionary situation is an objective factor in
    in order to launch the armed struggle all the land must be dried out. Th
    dependent of groups, parties and classes. For this reason 1t is not linked
    is another theory invented in order to delay the armed struggle for years
    A
    to the existence of the communist party or its organisation In the coun
    gainst this rightist theory the Marxist-leninists maintained the fol
    try. The party's existence and level of organisation is only related 10 the
    lowing: the plain should be set alight from the dry regions (we are not
    subjective conditions of the revolution, and influences the revolutionary
    saying from one region. ) That is, the armed struggle should be launched
    situation but does not determine it. This is the alphabet of Marxism, b
    fromm the regions where conditions are suitable and launched immedi
    the Shafak revisionists are trampling on these truths. They resemble so
    ately. The regions of the plain that are not yet dry will be scorched by the
    much a liar who in order to conceal one Jie resorts to new lies and atter
    fire of the ared struggle in other regions. And as our organisation grow
    every lie has to utter more. In the rag they penned in order to criticise us
    and gets stronger it will extend its arms into these regions and commence
    they say: They are exploiting the fact that in some places the term' rev
    armed struggle there, too. It is wrong to wait until the whole plain is dry
    It is also contrary to the reality that" revolution will develop In an uneven
    olutionary movement ', which is synonymous, has been used Instead orevolutionary struggle " in the sentence"the upsurge of the revolutio
    way": Furthermore, the armed struggle will be a hundred, a thousand
    ary struggle(!〕”. What a correction"!So
    ather it is not revolu
    times more effective than peaceful propaganda and education work. Both
    tionary situation it is"revolutionary struggle This is not distortion, it
    comrade Lenin and comrade Mao Tse-tung have pointed out many times
    blatant chicanery! Or the struggle of someone floundering In a swamp
    how the armed struggle leads to leaps in the consciousness of the masses
    After these criticisms the revisionists ate their words: In order to
    Our gentlemen are becoming ever more sunk In the morass the more
    embark on the armed struggle it is not necessary first for all the people
    they struggle
    to become aware and organised, they wrote. Were these bourgeois
    6. The Shafak Revisionists are laying down the condition
    frauds that change colour more than chameleons sincere in the above
    that all the plains be Dried Out in order to Launch
    declaration? No, they said this only to stifle the criticism directed at them
    the Armed Struggle.
    If they were sincere it would have been necessary to correct their mistakes with self-criticism. It is proof of their insincerity that they both de
    This thesis, which they put forward at the April meeting held two
    fended their explanations in the Long Live the revolutionary Mass Line
    weeks before Martial Law, in order to justify their Socialist Confe
    booklet and said the above. On the other hand. these brazen scoundrels
    ence initiative, they subsequently put in writing In the masterpiece o
    who attempted to defend themselves with sentences they had taken wore
    false logic, idealism and idle talk calledl.ong Live the Revolution-
    for word from our criticisms, accused us of saying, "as soon as the guns
    ary Mass Line
    342

==========第173頁==========
    go off the people will organise spontaneously. Such a thing has never
    To hobble the peasants who are ready for armed struggle with the
    been advocated anywhere. It has only been maintained that armed strug
    logic: first learn Marxism-leninism, and then you can ioin the armed
    gle will be a lot more effective in making the masses aware than pacifist
    struggle, will of course lead to becoming disconnected from them and
    propagandising and educational work. This is stated openly in the writ
    falling to the level of backward elements. We saw with our own eyes
    ten criticism texts which they possess
    how in work in village region A they hobbled the advanced peasants. As
    Why dont they show the courage to quote honestly? Despite al
    these treacherous bourgeois gentlemen opposed the peasants who wanted
    their squirming the revisionists defend their rightist thesis"without the
    to Immediately destroy their class enemies they became disconnected
    drying out of the entire plain the armed struggle cannot be launched
    from them and were dallying with the backward and passive elements
    And their distorting of our ideas is in order to justify these theses Afier
    Such a mass line is undoubtedly one that hobbles the revolution, "it
    saying: "the views regarding our revolutionary struggle's launch c
    is not revolutionary. The revolutionary mass line is as follows: to unite
    armed struggle are entirely different from these adventurers and are as
    with the most advanced regional people amongst all the regions, to raise
    follows", the third paragraph and furst sentence of the fourth paragraph
    the level of the middle regions and endeavour to win over the back ward
    they quote have been taken word for word from the criticism we directed
    regions. In the most advanced region to unite with the most advanced el-
    at them. If the gentlemen had adopted these ideas there would have been
    ements. to raise the ]] of the midlevel elements and endeavour to win
    no need of all this debate. But no, they trample on the ideas they quote
    over the backward elements. That is, to always be at the head of the most
    from us at every opportunity. They just keep then in storage and use
    advanced masses, while not becoming disconnected from the masses be
    them from time to time to stifle our criticism
    hind and to draw them forwards
    7. The Line of the Shafak Revisionists is not a
    8. The Shafak Revisionists are Defending Reformism under
    Revolutionary Mass Line,. it is a Line that Hobbles the
    the Name of Urgent Demands.
    Revolution
    In article 40 of the Draft Programme is the following: Our move-
    The Shatak revisionists are adapting themselves to th
    ment, championing all urgent demands and needs towards the regres
    backward regions, not the people of advanced regions. Let us say that
    sion of imperialism, people gaining democratic rights and an
    today in some rural regions of Turkey the peasants are ready for armed
    improvement in living conditions
    struggle, whereas in other regions the peasants are not yet ready. The
    It is clear that this understanding will, in certain conditions, drag a
    mass line perception of the revisionists requires conforming to the back
    person to the lowest depths of reformism. If tomorrow the reactionaries
    ward region and becoming disconnected from the people of the advanced
    attempt to implement a partial land reform in order to stifle the peasants
    region. This is the conclusion of the theory of drying up the whole plain
    armed struggle the Shafak revisionists will support this, because such a
    In regions where the peasants are impatient to take up arms the re-
    thing will be a step back by inperialism-for the purpose of not being
    viisionists are trailing the advanced peasants and adapting themselves to
    thrown out of all deployments. This would provide a partial improve-
    the backward elements
    ment in life conditions. When the ruling classes see that their power is
    344

==========第174頁==========
    under threat they often go for partial improvements that do not harm the
    culnstances. Marxist-leninists will defend and support urgent demands
    system(they obviously will not do such a thing). Most of the peasant re
    on the condition of linking them closely to our general political de
    volts in our history have been suppressed in this way. Today in Turkey
    mands and our revolutionary agitation within the masses and on con
    the fascist martial law emerged with the slogan"land reform"and in
    dition that partial demands never take priority over revolutionar
    order to protect itself from greater dangers it may distribute a little land
    slogans
    A reactionary government under the influence of Soviet social imperial
    Firstly, urgent demands should not be contrary to our general po
    Ism may do more than this. This is not impossible; in fact there is a strong
    litical demands and revolutionary agitation. That is, while the masses
    possibility. Why shouldn,t the reactionaries sacrifice a part in order to
    are waging a struggle for more advanced goals they should not be pushed
    ave the whole? Why shouldin't they sacrifice a small portion of their
    back for the sake of"partial improvements
    privileges, capital and wealth, land and property, in order not to lose the
    Secondly, the struggle for urgent demands should always remain
    entirety In conditions and places where the masses have taken up arms
    secondary and not replace revolutionary slogans. These are the criteria
    to overthrow the present systern, to hide behind a showy slogan like"to
    that separate revolutionaries and reformists one from the other, on con
    champion urgent demands and needs would be a blatant reformist anc
    dition that they are appropriate to these principles communists will cer
    reactionary stance. It would be to fall into parallel with the reactionaries
    tainly defend and support"demands that will improve the conditions of
    by giving the people a spoonful of honey in order to calm then down and
    the people in general and the working class in particular
    to save all the bee hives. On the other hand in conditions in the cities
    Not like the revisionist. reformist traitors do, under all conditions
    where conditions are suitable for masses of workers to rise up, to take uparms etc, to tell the workers such tales of"urgent demands"would be
    9. The Shalak Revisionists Defend the Phased Consciousness
    blatant reactionary fraud. It would be like standing in front of peasants
    Theory of Economism
    who have grasped the evils of the system of slavery and set out to destroyt saying: "your conditions of life will be improved! The class aware
    In article 40 of the Draft Programme it states: Our movement
    worker will push aside such know-it-all charlatans with the back of his
    will, by advocating all urgent demands and needs, dispatch the masses
    hand, saying"Out of my way!!
    to struggle, raise their consciousness and endeavour to win them for the
    The revisionist traitors, on the eve of martial laws, with demagogy
    ranks of the armed struggle
    of"urgent demands", creating the impression that the Erin government
    The sophistry that the consciousness of the masses will be raised by
    would meet these, supported Martial Laws efforts to appear as"friends
    championing"urgent demands and needs"is, in comrade Lenins words
    of the people". When the cur Erim's reform"cabinet "was established
    an old folk song", a song of economism. The lyrics of this folk song
    they behaved like real reformists, saying"we support all kinds of re
    emerged at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century and
    forms that benefit the toiling people".(PDA, issue no 40, page 2 )Despite
    belon to the deceased Russian economists that went to the other world
    all the Marxist-leninist varnish the same understanding, the same righ
    with the anti-venom of comrade Lenin's"What is to be Done? Our
    ist line continues
    friends ( ) adapting the song to present conditions, are again putting
    Urgent demands should never be defended and supported in all cin
    on the market

==========第175頁==========
    What a pity! What a waste of their energy! Because no one gives
    But the Social-democratic worker, the revolutionary worker (and
    them any credibility By championing"urgent demands and needs "o
    the number of such workers is growing )will indignantly reject all this
    the masses for"their dispatch to the struggle. raising of their con
    talk about struggle for demands"promising palpable results", etc, be
    sciousness and winning for the ranks of the armed struggle"is really the
    cause he will understand that this is only a variation of the old song about
    stage by stage raising of awareness "theory of economism. In th
    adding a kopek to the ruble
    the revisionists defended a cruder version of this theory thus: "In our
    Later Lenin gives this response from an aware worker to the Econ
    opinion the gaining of awareness by the masses will occur stage b
    Omit gentlemen
    stage. (PDA, "The Proletarian Revolutionary Line and certain Erro
    The aclivity'vou want to stimulate among us workers, by advanc
    neous Tendencies”)
    ing concrete demands that promise palpable results, we are already dis
    Let us also Say, in order not to do an injustice to them: economists
    playing and in our everyday, linited trade union work we put forward
    claim that they will make the masses aware(! )by championing only eco
    these concrete demands, very often without any assistance whatever fiom
    nomic demands, that is, concrete demands" Our revisionists claim they
    the intellectuals. But such activity is not enough for us, we are not chil
    will raise the awareness of the masses by championing "urgent demands
    dren to be fed on the thin gruel of"economic"politics alone, we want
    and needs"that are a little broader in scope than economic demands
    to know everything that others know, we want to learn the details of all
    But they are not aware of the difference in scope between"economic
    aspects of political life and to take part actively in every single politi
    demands" and"urgent demands and needs "and in many places use the
    cal event. In order that we may do this, the intellectuals must talk to us
    two concepts in the same meaning
    less of what we already know: 49 and tell us more about what we do not
    le gaining of consciousness of the masses will not come about
    vet know and what we can never learn from our factory and ' economic
    through the championing of either"urgent demands and needs "or co
    experience, namely, political knowledge. (ibid)
    crete demands". The masses can only be made aware by exposing all
    Let us summarise: The theory that" by championing all urgent de
    political realities, with campaigns that expose every aspect and sphere
    mands and needs the awareness of the masses will be raised"is entirely
    of social life
    inspired by the economists theory of"Elevating Workers actions " and
    Comrade Lenin, in his work"What is to be Done? Treats with con
    making them aware""by putting forward concrete demands that prom
    tempt the Economists perception of raising consciousness, saying: "the
    ise tangible results", and there is not the slightest difference between
    hased theory of awareness is an opportunist stance, adding
    them in essence
    Why do the Russian workers stil/ manifest little revolutionary activity in response to the brutal treatment of the people by the police, the
    10. The Shafak Revisionists are also following a Rightist lineadre Policy
    persecution of religions ects, the flogging of peasants, the outrageouscensor ship, the torture of soldiers, the persecution of the most innocent
    The Shafak revisionists compromise with the reactionary ties of the
    cultural undertakings, etc. 7 is it because the economic struggle does
    cadre. Instead of breaking all the reactionary ties of progressive worker
    not stimulate them to this, because such activin does not promise pu
    peasant and intellectual cadres and drawing them into active political
    pable results, because it produces little that is positive
    struggle, they preserve these backward tie

==========第176頁==========
    Comrade Lenin Said: "we should not permit a pronising worker to
    of it etc. The same idea was continued. The perception of initially train
    work for 10 hours in a factory. We should draw them into active pol
    ing cadre who have grasped Marxism-leninism in study groups, then
    cal struggle and turn them into professional revolutionaries
    endeavouring to organise them in armed groups was a reflection in prac
    However. the Shatak revisionists are followung a completely con-
    tice of the above idea. The Marxist-leninists criticised this understand-
    trary path Rather than withdrawing advanced workers and peasants from
    ig of the revisionists relying on Lenin. Comrade Lenin said
    production and turning them into professional revolutionaries. they place
    To imagine that social revolution is conceivable without revolts by
    their small number of professional cadre into work here and there, mak-
    small nations in the colonies and in Europe. without revolutionary out
    ing them amateur revolutionaries devoting their spare tine to the revo
    bursts by a section of the petty bourgeoisie with all its prejudices, wi
    lutionary struggle. We do not deny that for specific aims professional
    out a Inovement of the politically non-conscious proletarian and
    cadre may be put into various jobs, but this cannot be made the general
    semi-proletarian masses against oppression by the landowners, the
    policy of a communist movement. If this happens, amateurishness an
    church, and the monarchy, against national oppression, etc -to imagine
    instability will affect all activity. The general policy will be to draw all
    all this is to repudiate social revolution. So one anny lines up in one
    pronising people into professional political activity as much as possible
    place and says, "We are for socialism, and another, somewhere else and
    The person at the head of the Shafak revisionists invented the fol
    says, "We are for Imperialisn, and that will be a social revolution
    lowing theory of betrayal to justify his being on very friendly terms with
    Only those who hold such a ridiculously pedantic view could vilify
    bourgeois cireles instead of the worker-peasant masses: "there are also
    the Irish rebellion by calling it a"putsch
    sound working class revolutionaries that do not have personal links with
    Whoever expects a"pure"social revolution will never live to see it
    the masses on account of particular revolutionary tasks"(Liquidatic
    Such a person pays lip-service to revolution without understanding what
    sts article). Which "particular revolutionary tasks "does the gentleman
    revolution
    think will conflict with amass link? There is no such thing! On the
    The Russian Revolution of 905 was a bourgeois-democratic revo-
    contrary, every revolutionary task will demonstrate a need for a broad
    lution. It consisted of a series of battles in which al/the discontented
    strong "link to the masses". It is obvious that our bourgeois gentleman
    classes, groups and elements of the popppulation participat
    norg
    has invented this theory in order to exonerate himself. His position is the
    there were masses imbued with the crudest prejudices, with the vaguest
    clearest evidence that persons without a"mass link"cannot be*sound
    slid most fantastic aims of struggle; there were small groups which ac
    workig class revolutio
    cepted Japanese money, there were speculators and adventurers, etc
    But objectively the mass movcment was breaking the hack of tsarism
    11. The Sha fak Revisionists are making Revolution
    and paving the way for democracy; for this reason the class-conscious
    Impossible
    workers led it
    In one of the issues of Aydinlik, in an article entitled"The percep-
    The socialist revolution in Europe cannot be anything other than
    tion of Scientific Socialist Revolution'' was a view that every individ
    an outburst of mass struggle on the part of all and sundry oppressed
    ual who takes part in the revolution should be aware of all the potential
    and discontented elements. Inevitably, sections of the petty bourgeoisieand of the backward workers will participate in it-without such par-
    outcomes of the revolution and have grasped the meaning and character

==========第177頁==========
    ticipation, mass struggle is impossible, without it no revolution is pos
    revolution impossible. This is entirely correct and corresponds to th
    sible-and just as inevitably will they bring into the movement their
    thoughts of comrade Lenin
    prejudices, their reactionary fantasies, their weaknesses and errors
    Since these brave (! ) gentlemen have attempted to criticise com
    But objectively they will attack capital, and the class-conscious van
    rade Lenin by attacking us it means they maintain the same ridic
    guard of the revolution, the advanced proletariat, expressing this ob
    lous stuck
    tew. When it comes to who may join the guerrilla
    jective truth of a variegated and discordant, motley and outward
    groups, gentlemen, even if they have yet to grasp Marxism-leninism
    fragmented, mass struggle, will be able to unite and direct it, captur
    those who have hate for the reactionaries and wish to fight against
    power, seize the banks: expropriate the trusts which all hate (though
    them, who accept organisational discipline, who comply with se
    for different reasons! ) and introduce other dictatorial measures which
    crecy, whose age and health are appropriate militant worker
    in their totality will amount to the overthrow of the bourgeoisie and the
    intellectual, whoever may join. And they are a lot more worthy of
    victory of socialism, which, however, will by no means imnediately
    the guerrilla detachments than ignorant intellectuals like you who
    purge"itself of petty-bourgeois slag
    have digested many books. What is important is initially to ensure the
    (Lenin collected works Vol 22
    leadership of the organisation. Secondly, to ensure the Marxist-
    The view of our revisionists is just as comrade Lenin Said: so
    eninist ideological education of those who join these groups in a
    ridiculous, so stupidly stuck-up
    constant, systematic way within the course of the armed struggle
    Our revisionists are just as comrade Lenin said: nominal revolu
    serving it and casting light on it
    tionaries who have not understood what revolution is
    Thirdly, to mobilise the worker and peasant masses for the war
    As we criticised them summarising the above lines of comrade
    As for you, you expect a "pure social revolution. You will never
    Lenin regarding their'ridiculous and"stuck up" views, the revi
    attain your desires
    sionists went on the offensive against us, with lies and slanders, Theyclaimed that the Marxist-leninists had said: "It is unnecessary that
    12. The Shafak Revisionists oppose the armed struggle with
    those who join the first guerrilla units have knowledge about the pos
    the Political struggle. Under the banner ofpolitical
    ible outcomes of the revolution. People from various classes with
    Struggle they reject the armed forms of the political
    varying ideas may join.
    struggle. They reject armed propaganda and Agitation.
    The criticism of these gentlemen in fact targets comrade Lenias they knowingly criticise the quotes we have made from comrade
    Since we advocate that the link that the party will grasp while or-
    Lenin. But since they possess not a trace of revolutionary honesty they
    ganising the peasants should be guerrilla groups, that it is necessary for
    attribute them to us and moreover. distort them. The above statement
    the other groups and cells to meet the needs of the ammed struggle and in
    has not been used anywhere. It has been said a condition that"in gen
    order to develop this should be addressed within the course of the armed
    eral, everyone who Joins the revolution must have a complete grasp ot
    struggle, they accuse us of rejecting the political struggle. They say we
    Marxism-leninism and know the possible outcomes of the revolu
    have a solely military point of view
    tion, could not be laid down as such a condition would render the
    According to them, since the ideological and political aspect of the
    352

==========第178頁==========
    question has been grasped by our people this has been dealt with and
    This means that they consider that armed struggle conflicts with propa
    now the entire question is military operation
    ganda and agitation activity. No, bourgeois gents! Armed struggle does
    This nonsense they are attempting to attribute to us has never been
    not conflict with propaganda and agitation activity. They are not oppo-
    defended anywhere or at any time. Since the revisionists have drawn this
    sites. Comrade Mao Tse-tung says
    conclusion from our championing of the armed struggle as primary. they
    The Chinese Red Army is an arned body for carrying out the po
    give away the fact that they see the amed struggle as the antithesis of the
    litical tasks of the revolution. Especially at present, the Red Army should
    political struggle. They give away the fact that they consider the armed
    certainly not confine itself to fighting, besides fighting to destroy th
    struggle and political struggle as things that conflict one with the other
    enemy s militar strength, it should shoulder such important tasks as
    The"solely militarv point of view is that of those who have the view o
    doing propaganda among the masses, organizing the masses, arming
    fighting for the sake of fighting. We want to fight in order to fulfil the
    them, helping them to establish revolutionary political power and setting
    political tasks of the revolution. We champion the armed struggle in order
    u Party organizations. The Red Army /ights not merely for the sake of
    to create a peoples army in rural areas under the leadership of the party
    fighting but in order to conduct propaganda among the inasses, organ
    smashing the local and central authority step by step, and to realise a
    ize them, arm them, and help them to establish revolutionary politica
    es administration. Comrade Mao Tse-tung says
    power: Without these objectives, /ighting loses its meaning and the Red
    Some people ridicule us as advocates of"omnipotence of wa
    Army loses the reason for its existence. (Mao Tse-tung, Selected Works
    are advocates of the omnipotence of revolutionary war that is
    good, not bad, it is Marxist. The guns of the Russian Commnunist Part
    In our country too, the guerrilla groups that will constitute the nu
    created socialism. We shall create d democratic republic. Experience in
    cleus of the peoples army will not suffice with merely fighting. At 1H
    the class struggle in the era of imperialism leaches us that it is only br
    same time it will also fulfil important tasks such as carrying out propa
    the power of the gun that the working class and the labouring masses can
    ganda and agitation amongst the masses and organising and arming the
    feat the armed bourgeoisie and landlords, in this sense we may av
    masses. These gents, as they see the armed struggle as opposed to the po-
    that only with guns can the whole world be transformed. (Mao Tse
    litical struggle and as they see the political struggle only as publishing
    ung, Selected Works II)
    house activity, they accuse us of rejecting political activity, mass work
    Is there a"solely military "point of view here? Don't these gents
    and propaganda and agitation activity. Actually, it is they who only ac
    know that the armed struggle, that is, war, is a form of the political struy
    cept the pacifist forms of political activity, and in particular propaganda
    le? The armed struggle is not the only form of the political struggle
    and agitation. They reject the armed fonns of political activity and armed
    but it is a form. "War is politics continued through special tools and
    propaganda and agitation activity
    'since old times there is no war that did not cary a political chara
    If we summarise, we advocate that it is necessary in the relation
    teristic(Mao Tse-tung )These are the alphabet of Marxism-leninism
    ship between armed struggle and other forms of struggle for armed
    The Shafak revisionists also reject armed propaganda and agitation
    struggle to be primary and other forms of struggle to be secondary. As
    They also deduce from our wishing to make the armed struggle primary
    for the revisionist clique it appears to accept this, but accuses us of re
    that we reject propaganda and agitation activity amongst the masses
    jecting other forms of struggle. In this way it is attacking the idea of
    354
    355

==========第179頁==========
    armed struggle in reality. And in practice it rejects anything other than
    large, from weak to powerful, from simple to complex, involving the
    other forms of struggle
    We consider armed struggle in general as a form of political strug
    step by step construction of a people's army, from guerrilla units to aregular army, is necessary. They don' t even think about this. They see it
    gle and in particular as a form of propaganda and agitation. As for the re
    as a prerequisite that in order for red power to emerge in a region there
    visionist clique it places the armed struggle in opposition to politicastruggle, propaganda and agitation. In this way it rejects the armed forms
    must primarily be a mass peasant revolt there
    of the political struggle and rejects armed propaganda and agitation
    Yes, when talking of an armed peasant struggle we are always usinga different language to the revisionists. What they have understood by an
    13. The Shatak Revisionists Reject Guerrilla W
    armed peasant struggle is for any period a total peasant rebellion in anyrural area. Out of concern that such a revolt would be suppressed im-
    In the collection of distortion entitled"on the question of the Estab
    mediately they have claimed that without organisation in other regions
    lishment of Red political Power"is the following
    and command of the masses an armed peasant movement will not be
    For instance, a peasant movement without the support of the
    commenced. Their organisation is suitable for this perception. Instead
    struggle in the cities is bound to be suppressed. For instance, a peasant
    of organising peasants in study groups in order to prepare them for a
    uprising in the Eastern region, i!it were not supported by a struggle of
    total revolt
    the peasants in the Aegean and Cukorova regions and a working class
    The revisionist gents have got so carried away with these views that
    movement in our main industrial cities under the leadership of a pro
    in the past; too, they have based all their plans on these dreams. They
    tarlan party it could not realise red political power
    nourished great hopes of a military coup concocted by the reforms
    We previously noted above three points from this vague expression
    bourgeoisie
    specitic to opportunism
    The bourgeoisie seizing power in a coup was to embark on land re
    The revisionists are considering"a peasant movement"only as a
    form etc. The peasants were to seize the landlords'land Since the re
    total peasant rebellion
    ormlst bourgeoisie would be involved in struggle with the landlords
    2- They are thinking of an armed peasant rebellion immediately
    they would not oppose this, and would even assist (!)the arming of the
    leading to a red political administration and enabling it to survive
    peasants. In this way the peasants rebelling en masse would take power
    ey are laying down as a condition for a peasant rebellion im
    in the rural areas under the leadership of the revisionists(!). The gents
    mediately leading to a red political administration and enabling it to
    nourished such dreams of easy success. For this reasons they eagerly
    survive the support of peasants struggles in other areas and of the
    awaited a military coup along with M. Belli, H. Kivilcimli and D Av
    workers in the main industrial cities under the leadership of the prole
    cioglu. They even developed the theory of encouraging a coup under the
    tarian party
    name of struggle against fascism in order to create the environment for
    We have dwelt on the third point. A little later we shall dwell on the
    such a coup. Today the same understanding continues in a slightly more
    second point. Let us look at the first point
    efined way. For instance, in the TILKP Draft Programme there is not
    The revisionists do not consider that for a red political administra
    one word regarding guerrilla activity. It is impossible to come across the
    tion to be born, a protracted guerrilla activity, developing from small to
    idea that today the primary form of armed struggle will be guerrilla war

==========第180頁==========
    fare. There is merely mention of a vague struggle that village commit
    guerrilla warfare will certainly continue, but will no longer be the pri
    es ( ) will manage and direct
    mary form of struggle
    Revisionism, which is pressed into a corner by the constant system
    Until a regular army
    stablished guerrilla warfare will be the pri
    atic criticism of the Marxist-leninist wing, deigned to mention guerrilla
    mary fom of struggle of the armed peasant struggle. All other forms of
    war in a circular in which they quoted verbatim from the Marxist-lenin
    this struggle will be subject to it. The regular army will be established
    Ists written critique
    after a relatively long struggle as a result of guerrilla units transforming
    The Shafak revisionists behave like a greedy merchant who has
    into regular units step by step. The revisionist clique dreams of found
    every sort of wares In his shop. If a product on the market does not sell
    ing a regular army at an indefinite date in the future after organising na
    or is found to be fake, they immediately withdraw it and replace It with
    tionwide, gaining command of the masses and drying out(! )the plain,
    something new. Their appearing to accept guerrilla war is a precaution
    and of establishing red political power linked to this, all at a stroke. This
    ary measure of this kind. In reality they have never believed in the ne
    is the actual product revisionist wishes to put on the market, marked
    cessity and importance of guerrilla war. The sentences we have quoted
    fraudulently as Mao Tse-tungs Thought
    above are evidence of this, Marxist-leninists reject no form of struggle
    4. The Shafak Revisionists Reject Protracted War.
    either eternally, or provisionally. They merely separate primary forms ostruggle from secondary forms of struggle, rendering the secondary de
    We quote in a summarised form article 47 of the Draft Programme
    pendent on the primary. Today we see guerrilla war as the primary for
    and our critique of it: 47. A democratic peoples government will abol
    of struggle within armed struggle. Guerrilla war is the form of struggle
    ish the army whose profession is to guard the ruling classes, and con
    of a weak force against a superior enemy. At the same time peasant yuer
    solidate the peoples army based on the general arming of workers and
    rilla war is the natural conclusion and highest form of the peasants'class
    peasants.. All manner of inequality, rank and title in the army will be
    struggle. Peasant guerrilla war, in the region where it is carried out, is a
    abo ished
    Persecution and beating of soldiers will be definitely
    means of preparing the peasants for uprising And is one of the most in
    banned
    portant means
    It is as if the masses will in a moment rise up and takes power, the
    Ultimate victory cannot be won with guerrilla warfare, Guerrilla
    revolutionary government will take the old reactionary army's weapons
    warfare wears down and weakens the enemy and destroys his morale
    away and arm the people etc. However, the"abolishing of the army
    The final blow will be inflicted on the enemy by a regular army. Guer
    whose profession is to guard the ruling classes, is not something that
    rilla war is also a means of transition to a regular army. Peasant revolt
    will happen over night after the seizure of power. During a protracted
    should be transformed into guerrilla war in situations in which there is
    people' s war the reactionary army will be destroyed bit by bit and wiped
    as yet no regular army and in which conditions are not suitable for its
    out, divested of its weapons etc . The revolutionary government will get
    emergence Rebellious peasants should be organised in guerrilla units
    rid of the last remnants of this reactionary army. This meaning does not
    If conditions are suitable for the emergence ofregular units or ifa re
    emerge from the draft programme
    ular arny has been organised, rebellious peasants may be organised in
    People s army based on the general arming of the workers and
    units. After regular armies have been established in various regions
    peasants"! Undoubtedly, the people's army will advance in this direc

==========第181頁==========
    tion under revolutionary power, but neither at the beginning of armed
    15. The Shafak Revisionists are trimming the Armed
    struggle that is, today ) nor when power is seized by the democratic
    Struggle.
    revolution will the peoples anny be made up by a general arming oworkers and peasants. That is, the army and the people will not become
    The mechanic bourgeois mentality and false logic shows itself on
    one and the same thing. This will be possible in the future. On the one
    the question of armed struggle, as it does on many questions. The Shafak
    hand, we say that the peoples army will develop from small to large
    revisionists assume they will be able to make the popular masses ad-
    from weak to strong, and on the other, that the people's army, even
    vance on the path of armed struggle by showing them where to step lik
    prior to the seizure of power, will be based on the general arming of the
    trained monkeys! It's forbidden to step there! Don, t touch there! Don
    people and the task of the"peoples government "will be to consolidate
    strike this! Dont break that! Not armed struggle, walking on a high wire
    it? How is this possible? It is abundantly clear that the writer drearns ot
    The revisionist clique rejects bank robbery (the words"appropriate
    the entire people rising up at one moment, arning and organising the
    money should be used instead of"robbery )in principle. Without look
    people's army
    ing at which politics this action serves it rejects the action itself. How
    In our conditions where it is necessary for the people's army to be
    ever, just as both working class revolutionaries and representatives o
    constructed step by step during a protracted war these sentences are en
    the bourgeoisie may publish magazine, bourgeois revolutionaries too
    tirely wrong,. The army and the people will not be one and the same
    may rob a bank, as may representatives of the working class
    thing even in the socialist order, let alone prior to the revolution. From
    The revisionist clique claims that representatives of the working
    the moment the army and the people begin to emerge the army will have
    class may never rob a bank and that whoever carries it out"bank rob
    begun to lose its status as an army and the state its existence as a state
    bery ' is a mistaken thing
    That is communism will have been attained
    Because, first and foremost. such actions are not in themselves rev
    As for"All inequality, ranks and titles in the army will be abol-
    olutionary actions. (YIKC, page 20)
    ished", since the army in question is a peoples army these will not have
    These actions do not respond to the real needs and demands of the
    existed since the beginning any way. The draft assumes they exist and
    people. This is the reason such acts are always destined to be discon
    the same is apparent in the phrase"Persecution and beating of soldiers
    nected from the masses. (ibid, page 37)
    will be prohibited
    organisations such as the THKP-THKC and THKO. are attack
    It is evident that the author of the draft does not consider that the
    ing the wrong targets. (ibid, page 40
    peoples army will be constructed earlier during a protracted war, step b
    Such actions are an expression in fact of a spontaneous perception
    step, far from inequality, rank, title and persecution and beatings. He
    of struggle which is the exact opposite of the Marxist-leninist method
    thinks that the revolutionary army will be established after the reac
    of work.(ibid, page 49.
    tionary amy is destroyed, after power has been seized, under a revolu-
    Such actions waste, spoil and divert the revolutionary strength of
    tionary administration. In this way he rejects the protracted war and th
    the masses and cadre". There is nothing surprising about the defeat of so-
    step by step construction of the peoples army during this wal
    called military actions such as bank robbery and kidnapping by the ruling classes. This is the natural consequence of these actions remainin
    360

==========第182頁==========
    entirely disconnected from the popular masses, because these actions
    cadre? Did they in this way attack"wrong targets Did they get car
    are not real revolutionary actions. They express an ideology, a petit
    Tied away in an anarchist and spontaneous form of work? Is this what
    bourgeois political line.
    the revisionists are saying in a covert way? They say that"back rob
    " Actions that are not directed at the target of political power: that
    bery "does not respond to the real needs of the people and that it re
    are not directed at the ruling classes; that do not assist the masses to
    places thern with false demands. We ask these gents: Isn't becoming
    clearly understand their real enemies and the goal of political power
    armed a real demand of the people? Why shouldn't arming by appro
    (ibid, pages 75-76)
    prating the money in the bank serve the struggle for power? Doesn't
    As can be seen. the leaders of the revisionist clique accuse the action
    it serve the struggle for power more directly than the struggle they are
    itself. There is no way of misrepresenting these sentences. They are cleal
    waging instead of the revolutionary struggle for"concrete demands
    and definite! These gents have gone so far that they have even distorted
    that is,"wages. working hours. iob security etc
    conrade Lenin
    We are asking these gents: arent the bankers part of the native rul-
    ' It is not possible to find even one word in Lenin that supports the
    classes that are currentlypower? Wh
    attacking them assault
    idea that revolution mav be perpetrated with actions such as bank rob
    ig the"wrong targets Or do you see them as friends of the
    bery and kidnapping. (ibid, page 19)
    revolution? However grateful the bankers are for your favour it wi
    Comrade Lenin certainly does not say that revolution may be carried
    not be sufficient
    out with these actions, but he does not reject these actions in principle
    As for"kidnapping(it would be more correct to call this taking the
    either. He even defends them. Revolution cannot be accomplished with
    enemies hostage or seizing them), proletarian revolutionaries do not re
    strikes but can strikes be rejected? These gents are not aware of com
    ect this either! Such and such a robbery may be mistaken, just as certain
    ade Lenins article on Partisan War This artcle is in their own list
    kidnapping incidents may be considered wrong but as a principle"kid
    of translations. Also the head of revisionism quoted these sentences fron
    napping cannot be rejected. For instance, to abduct and take prisoner an
    this article
    important officer of the enemy army, or to abduct landlords who deserve
    Marxists do not reject any form of struggle provisionally. let
    it and similar enemies of the people and shoot them etc. s not wrong, it
    alone eternally. They render all forms of struggle dependent on the path
    Is correct, revolutionary and conforms to the Marxist-leninist line
    of revolution
    What is mistaken is not the form of the action itself. Those who are
    These scoundrels who choose to utilise these absolutely correct
    carrying out that action, that is, THKP-1HKC and THKO, have entirely
    sentences of comrade Lenin in order to justify their own activity con
    mistaken Ideologies and political lines. It is wrong that the actions in
    sisting only of publishing. have not seen that comrade Lenin supports
    question Jave replaced the struggle for power, that these actions consti
    bank robberies"in the samne article? Did comrades Lenin and Stalin
    tute the backbone of the stru
    follow"a petit-bourgeois political line, an ideology foreign to Marxism
    In our country the armed struggle should primarily be directed to
    Leninism, when they supported and put in train bank robbery? Did
    wards the overthrow of local and central authority in rural areas and
    they take a non-revolutionary path contrary to the mass line? Did they
    its replacement with peasant domination under the leadership ot the
    waste, divert and spoil the revolutionary strength OT the masses and
    proletariat. At the present phase the form of this struggle is guerrilla
    362

==========第183頁==========
    war. Guerrilla activity includes the elimination of landlords, bureau
    Is inevitable. Secondly there is the subjective cause. Even if objective
    rats who are enemies of the people, informers, usurers. their punish
    conditions are favourable as regards achieving success, the one that
    ment in various ways, appropriation of their money and weapons, raids
    makes mistakes, that is, fails to grasp the laws of the outside world and
    on military posts and seizure of their weapons and attacks on a broad
    adapt its ideas and behaviour to it, that is, acts contrary to reality, will be
    range of targets. But all the attacks have a common goal, to undermine
    defeated. Whichever class, group, organisation or person is defeated; the
    the reactionary authority, smash it and in its place impose revolution
    cause will be one or both of the above. The defeat of petit-bourgeois in
    ary authority! This is what armed struggle should be essentially about
    tellectuals and of workers and peasants will come from these two caus
    in our country today! But as we have stated above, actions such as
    What is entirely different?
    bank robbery and kidnapping'"in support of this struggle cannot be re
    Secondly, "the defeats of the people contain the seeds of victory
    jected on principle
    within them" they say. Yes, but why? Because the workers and peasants
    The revisionists gents say: "the reason for defeat is class based and
    have the possibility of winning objectively. Once they have grasped re
    ideological. Being unable to mobilise the popular masses and being de
    ality and waged the struggle appropriate to that then subjectively there
    feated by the ruling classes is the inevitable result of having an oppor
    Is no reason they should not prevail, Defeats help the people understand
    tunist petit-bourgeois ideology".So, gentlemen, is every movemnent that
    the reality and to think and act according to it
    achieves success Marxist-leninist Does it have proletarian ideology?
    As for petit-bourgeois intellectuals, they do not objectively possess
    With this logic you are ready to prostrate yourselves in front of every
    the capabilities of defeating the enemy alone. But their defeats also serve
    successful bourgeois movement! To only look at the result without look
    the grasping of realities and our adapting our ideas and behaviour to
    ing at the ideology of that movement which manifested itself in variousspheres in order to decide whether it was Marxist-leninist is very apt
    For instance, we understand this reality from their defeats: Work
    for bourgeois minds like vour
    ers and peasants do not have the capability of defeating the enemy be
    Look at this logic
    fore being pressed into action. In this context their defeats contain
    The people's armed struggle will be strengthened by defeat and
    ithin themn the seeds of victory. because they lead to an understand
    overwhelm the enemy. But it will be entirely different (2 )from the
    ing of the objective reality and to the uniting of petit-bourgeois intel
    defeat of our angry petit-bourgeois intellectuals. The defeats of the
    actuals with the people
    peoples struggle contain the seeds of victory within them. The masses
    The idealist gentleman reaches an entirely different conclusion
    learn to win by learning lessons from every defeat. But the lesson we
    that banks should no longer be robbed! Moreover, he creates a brand
    shall learn from the defeat of petit-bourgeois movements, is to not
    new theory, to the effect that petit-bourgeois intellectuals are not con
    engage in such movements again. (ibid, pages 84-85
    sidered part of the people
    Is it possible to spout such nonsense!
    The THKO and THKP-THIKC are two petit-bourgeois currents
    For a start, every defeat has two causes. The first is the obiective
    Since they wish to replace the class struggle of the masses with the plot-
    cause If objective conditions are weighted in favour of a certain force
    ting of a handful of angry intellectuals and their ideologies are in all re
    and against another then in these conditions defeat for the weak force
    spects contrary to proletarian ideology and the universal tenets of
    364

==========第184頁==========
    Marxism-leninism they are not communists! To say they are not com
    may be carried out at certain military bases and headquarters, police
    munists because they rob banks and are unsuccessful is to apply le
    headquarters, fascist organisations, main buildings etc
    lancet to the wrong place! For a communist movement too, as we have
    Our revisionist gentlemen reject all of these. Is there a better ex
    pointed out above, may engage in bank robbery to support the struggle
    ample than this of the fact that they understand the armed struggle in
    for power, and may be unsuccessful on account of making mistakes or
    the manner criticised and condemned by comrade Lenin as"stuck
    for other reasons. But your brains which have become accustomed to
    and stupid?
    thinking mechanically cannot take this in
    Let us repeat once more in order not to give an opportunity to
    Again the revisionist clique, in the masterpiece of nonsense and
    demagogy: while we adopt the above actions in principle, we never
    chatter that is the YT C (Long live the Revolutionary Mass Line), re
    torget that the armed struggle to be carried on in the rural areas
    iects embarking on guerrilla struggle in the cities in principle! Cuer
    for the land revolution must be primary and that the struggle in
    rilla activity to be initiated in the cities should be dependent on the
    the cities and all other forms of struggle must be bound to it
    land revolution struggle in the rural areas and be carried on in a man
    But the revisionist clique is constantly neutering the armed strug
    ner that supports that struggle. But to rejecl guerrilla activity in thc
    le by making all sorts of excuses to hobble it, seeing it not as a com-
    cities in principle is an expression of a perception that pours the armed
    plex, colourful, up and down thing, but as a simple, straight forward
    struggle into molds(a), (b)or(c). As long as the enemy is stronge
    thing like their writing an article at their desks
    than us as an entirety on a country-wide scales our policy in the ciliewill be primarily"to gather force and to lie in wait for an opportu
    <sy "There can be no question of banning this kind of action when itIS necessary to meet certain requirements of the communist move
    nity".And from time to time organise uprisings and withdraw to the
    ment ". These revisionist traitors recognise nothing of revolutionary
    countryside
    morality, stability or principle. After slamming the actions them
    Apart from this, firstly, in order to support the struggle in the
    selves they now appear to accept that they may be perpetrated"in
    rural regions; secondly, as a means of active defence against reac
    order to meet certain requirements". Have they begun to think cor
    tionary assaults! Thirdly, as a means of building up strength guerrilla
    rectly on this question? No, (because if that were the case they should
    actions in the cities may and should be initiated. For this purpose. Just
    have burnt the rag called"Long Live the Revolutionary Mass Line")
    as banks may be robbed, that is, the government or reactionaries
    Only in order to protect their tender bodies from the arrows of criti
    money may be appropriated, class enemies may be eliminated. For it
    Ism! Furthermore, they have still not grasped the meaning and im
    stance, police agents, fascist officers, police torturers, ringleaders of
    portance of guerrila activity in the cities. As we have mentioned, the
    fascist organisations, brutal bosses and their lackeys, scabs. agent
    aim of guerrilla actions in the cities does not consist of meeting cer
    provocateurs, informers, those who shoot revolutionaries and Im)ose
    tain requlrements. Guerrilla activity to be undertaken in the cities has
    death sentences on them, agents of imperialism etc.may be shot.
    importance as one of the means of supporting the struggle in the
    Also communication lines may be sabotaged, ammunition stores and
    rural areas, of active defence against reactionary attacks and of
    military depots may be raided or sabotaged, important documents ap
    building up strength. The revisionists gents have still not grasped
    propriated or destroyed. People may be sprung from prison, Sabotage
    the essence of the question

==========第185頁==========
    16. The Shafak Revisionists are distorting the Red Political
    wars. Comrade Mao Tse-tung, too, complying with the new conditions
    Power doctrine of Chairman Mao
    made changes in his views regarding the survival of red political power
    We may express comrade Mao Tse-tungs first necessary condition for
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung links the possibility of the existence of re
    the survival of red political power thus
    political power in China to the conditions below
    Red political power is possible in all backward countries,
    1. China being economically backward, a semi-colonial country and
    whether they are colonies or semi-colonie
    consequently there being conflict between the warlow
    It is only impossible in imperialist countries. We also understand
    2-THE existence of a strong mass base
    from comrade Mao Tse-tungs article on struggle in the Chingkang
    The continuing rise of the revolutionary situation nationwide
    mountains that once red political power has emerged, on condition of
    4-A strong, regular red army
    following a correct policy, that it may survive even in periods where the
    A strong communist party following a correct polic
    revolutionary situation regresses relatively, where a relative peace is st
    6- Self-sufficient food resources
    cured amongst the ruling classes, that is, when comparative stability re
    7-A terrain suitable for military action
    places economic and political crisis, and as long as there are no other
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung previously saw the fact the white regime
    obiective causes that lead to defeat. Comrade Mao Tse-tung does not
    was involved in internecine conflict as the most important condition tor
    link the August defeat to the fact the revolutionary situation was no
    the emergence of red political power in China. He linked this internecine
    longer rising. On the contrary, he links it to the fact some people in the
    conflict to Chinas semi-colonial structure, because the quarrels between
    party Implemented the tactics of the crists period during the period of
    imperialist countries over domination of China led to conflict between
    stability. That is, he says that if a correct policy had been followed for a
    the warlords cliques linked to various imperialist countries. Whereas In
    temporary period there would not have been defeat, despite the regres
    countries that were colonies under the direct domination of imperialism
    sion of the revolutionary situation. And he indicates that while in peri
    since only one imperialist country was dominant there would be no
    ods where there is a continuing upsurge in the revolutionary situation a
    armed conflict between reactionary cliques In the country
    clatively more"adventurist "policy is necessary, in periods when the
    During the Second World War conditions changed. Imperialism su
    revolutionary situation regresses it is necessary to have a policy of con
    fered a severe blow and new socialist countries emerged. The periodic
    solidating the liberated zone rather than gaming more territory
    crises of the imperialist system became more frequent and severe. In the
    The upsurge in the revolutionary situation nationwide will facilitate
    Far Fast peoples going into armed struggle inflicted heavy blows on im
    the suivival of red political power and the broadening of the liberated
    perjallsm and established armed forces. As a consequence of all this, the
    zone. The temporary and relative regression of the revolutionary situa
    balance of forces worldwide changed completely to the disadvantage o
    tion will adversely affect the"survival of red political power. But b
    Imperialism and reaction
    pursuing a correct policy red political power can be protected and even
    In the new conditions in colonised countries it became possible to
    extended
    create liberated zones in the rural areas of the country, from there be
    In the event of the revolutionary situation not existing for a long
    siege the large cities and seizes power nationwide by waging protracted
    time red political power cannot survive. But"in our era where imperial-

==========第186頁==========
    Ism is advancing towards victory all over the world for imperialis
    without disruption. Whereas the encirclement of regions that are closely
    and reaction prolonged periods of stability are now a dream. The rev
    linked to the markets, that is, that sell their products in the large markets
    sionists accuse us thus: "They claim that comrade Mao Tse-tuny aban
    and secure necessities for consumption there, and cutting off of relations
    doned the condition of the revolution rising nationwide in his article on
    with the large cities, would lead to economic paralysis and collapse of red
    struggle in the Chingkang Mountains.
    olitical power
    First of all. it is not the rise of the revolution nationwide'' but the
    In addition to the possession of self-sufficient economic resources by
    Tise of the revolutionary situation nationwide". Secondly, the above clain
    the economically backward regions, these regions are also those where
    is a slander. First of all. it has been stated that after the establishment oh
    central authority is weak and communication networks are limited. Local
    red political power, despite the temporary regression of the revolution
    feudal authority dominates in these regions. The military concentratio
    ary situation and its adverse effects, red political power may be kept in-
    ntelligence networks etc of the reactionary government and imperial
    tact as long as a correct policy is pursued. This is one thing: the claim
    Ism are In the large cities and economically developed regions
    being made is another thing
    Revolutionaries should withdraw to primarily economically back
    What is the situation in our country as regards the"existence of red
    ward areas, rely on them, turn them into revolutionary bases and
    political power?
    fortresses of the revolution and attack the economically developed re
    Our country is a semi-colonial and semi-feudal country. Therefore
    gions where the enemy is based and the big cities from there. This point
    the possibility exists for red political power
    Is a significant element of the theory of people, s war developed by com
    2-in many regions of our country, but not every region, there i
    rade Mao Tse-tung and of the experience of China and Vietnam
    strong mass base. The peasants have experienced many democratic
    The Eastern and South-eastern regions of our country, in particular
    struggles in recent years, In our rural regions an unprecedented accu-
    are ideal as regards"self-sufficient economic resources". Although this
    mulation has come into being. In this regard the conditions for red po
    condition exists partially in other rural areas it is weaker than in the East-
    litical power in our country are unprecedentedly idea
    ern and South-eastern regions
    3-the revolutionary situation is ideal both worldwide and nation
    Terrain suitable for military operations. This is one of the fac
    wide. Despite temporary and short periods of stability essentially the u
    tors, although not determining that influences the existence of red
    surge of the revolutionary situation continues. This is the most obvious
    litical power. And our country has endless possibilities in this regard
    typical characteristic of our era"in which imperialism is heading for tota
    Today in Turkey what is lacking for the existence of red political
    collapse and socialism is advancing to victory all over the world". In this
    power Is"a strong communist party following a correct policy and a
    regard conditions for red political power are ide
    regular red army". In that case the conclusion to be reached by a com
    4-sell-sufficient food resources primarily exist in the economically
    munist examining the question of the existence of red political power in
    backward regions of our country which have vet to become an insepa
    our country is this: in order to establish red political power it is our task
    able part of the capitalist market. Even in the event of these reyions
    to construct"a strong communist party that pursues a correct policy
    being encircled and relations with the large cities, that is, the markets
    and a"regular red army". Essentially, in the regions where the other nec
    being severed relations of production and consumption can continue
    essary conditions for red political power exist, i.e. a sound mass base

==========第187頁==========
    sufficient food resources and terrain suitable for military operations. in
    regarding our country while examining these conditions are as follows
    the event of a party and army being constructed by embarking on
    I- Instead of saying that in our era red political power Is possible in
    armed struggle from today, red political power may be established
    li backward countries, both colonial and semi-colonial, and only im
    That is, the party and army should be constructed within the armed struy
    possible in imperialist countries, they have attempted to implement com
    le. During the process of armed struggle, which will be a relatively long
    rade Mao Tse-tung,s thesis on"War between the warlords in Turkey
    process, when the party attains certain strength and the peoples armed
    They have not taken into account the fact that the new situation that
    forces are substantial and are transformed into regular units, red politi
    emerged after World War Two led to comrade Mao Tse-tung making
    cal power will become a reality in some regions in our country. And once
    changes to his views in accordance with the changed situation. In the
    red political power is established, even in periods of temporary and pa
    collection of distortion entitled"On the Question of the Founding of Red
    tial stability, as long as a correct policy is pursued it can be kept intact
    Political Power, the author tries really hard sweating buckets as he at-
    They say red political power may be established by carrying out
    tempts to make Turkey's conditions fit this view abandoned by Mao, and
    struggle based on emplacements. The Marxist-leninists have never
    to make this view fit Turkey's conditions. He also lists the contradic
    claimed such a thing anywhere at any time
    tions that are natural in all semi-colonial countries and endeavours to
    But they also have not set forth a condition thus: Unless there is
    prove that the condition of"war within the white regime has manifested
    struggle under the leadership of the proletarian party In every corner o
    itself in Turkey in this form
    the country, in all the vilages and towns, red political power is impos
    The revisionists, by insisting on the conditions which comrade Mao
    also not put forward by comrade Mao Tse-tung. They
    Tse-tung abandoned and trying to make Turkey fit this condition, are
    only said that in the event of the seven conditions listed above all being
    arousing doubts regarding the emergence and survival of red political
    met red political power would be possible.
    power in our country. It is also arousing the same doubts for other semi
    As for the revisionists, they have put forward conditions that make
    colonial countries, not just Turkey, and particularly for colonial coun
    it impossible for red political power to exist in our country by distorting
    tries
    the doctrine of chairman Mao Tse-tung on this question. These are the
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung said the following which is valid for all
    conditions the revisionists put forward
    semi-colonial and colonia] countries: one ol the conditions for red po
    I-divisions within the reactionary regime
    litical power is for the white regime to be in pieces and in conflict
    2- Peasant revolts having occurred in the pas
    This expression is entirely of the revisionists,own manufacture
    3- Mass struggle having commenced in every corner of the coun-
    because comrade Mao Tse-tung did not see in colonial countries divi
    all villages and towns, under the leadership of the communist
    sions in the white regime and war like in China as being possible. Later
    part
    on the possibility of red political power in colonial countries was not
    4- A regular red army
    due to wars breaking our within the white regime in these countries
    5-A strong comunist party
    but due to the worldwide weakening and collapse of imperialism
    The revisionists transformed comrade Mao Tse-tungs doctrine on
    and reaction. Tthis situation has created ideal conditions in colonia
    red political power into this form. The conclusions they have reached
    countries for revolutionary forces. Also, whether in colonial or in
    373

==========第188頁==========
    semi-colonial countries. another characteristic that renders a red
    To be organised nationwide and to have the communist party's lead
    political power encircled by a white regime possible in these coun
    ership accepted by the masses of workers and peasants, and to direc
    tries is their having an economically backward structure. This Is
    their struggle is obviously a good and desirable thing, and the victory o
    one reason why red political power can survive despite being con
    he revolution nationwide will only be possible when we have secured
    pletely encircled. Since these conditions do not exist in imperialist
    this. If the above conditions existed, both the armed struggle and the
    countries (even when there are divisions within the reactionary regime)
    birth and survival of red political power in suitable regions would be a
    red political power is not feasible
    t easier: But to claim that red political power cannot exist without na-
    2)Comrade Mao Tse-tung states that in regions where red political
    tionwide organisation and command of all the worker-peasant masses is
    power emerged and survived there had previously been peasant revolts
    equivalent to making red political power impossible. Today Marxist
    Ind that the peasants participated en masse in the democratic revolution
    Leninists are not Organised nationwide. Workers and peasants in all
    The essence of this condition is this: red political power may come into
    towns and rural areas do not yet follow the Marxist-leninists. But if the
    being in regions with a sound inass base. This is because in regions
    party and army are constructed within the armed struggle, if"a strong
    where there are peasant movements a strong mass base exists meaning
    party pursing a correct policy and"a strong red army" is built, in a pe
    that red political power may exist there. The revisionist author pushes the
    riod when the party has yet to gain the most excellent characteristics
    essence of the question to one side and remains bound to form. fle Iists
    listed above, In regions where other conditions are present red politi
    peasant revolts from the Seljuk and Ottoman periods like a historian, but
    power is possible. Firstly, in order for red political power to be bor and
    does not address the essence of the question, which is whether a strony
    survive, if is a good thing to be organised in all rural regions and to com
    mass base exists today in the regions where these peasant uprisings look
    mand the masses, but is not obligatory. "If a strong party pursuing a
    lace! The revisionists have really not grasped the conditions for the
    correct policy and"a strong regular army "have been constructed, then
    birth and survival of red political power. They have renoved the essence
    red political power may emerge and survive In suitable regions in a pe
    of the question amongst a heap of verbiage
    riod when the party has yet to cover the whole country and embrace all
    The revisionists, as we have indicated above. transformed the con
    the masses. Secondly, to lay down the condition of gaining support from
    dition"upsurge of the revolutionary situation nationwide "Into"upsurge
    ill the big cities in order for red political power to exist in certain rural
    of the revolutionary movement".Subsequently, they have turned thi
    regions, or to lay down a condition for support under party leadership in
    condition into one where a party is organised nationwide and commands
    the main industrial cities, is again to render red political power impo
    the masses, and there is mass struggle under the leadership of this party
    sible. Such support is a good thing but not essential. Peasants, under the
    in every corner of the country, and all towns and villages. They have
    leadership of the communist party, may establish red political power
    claimed that without this the birth and survival of red political power are
    solely relying on their own forces and maintain it, but cannot seize power
    impossible. They have also put forward this condition for the launching
    nationwide. According to the claim of our revisionist gentlemen, unless
    of the armed struggle. This theory must be our bourgeois gentlemen
    support under the leadership of the party in the main industrial cities has
    pathetic contribution()to commrade Mao Tse-tungs doctrine of red po
    en gained, red political power cannot exist. Just think, the main in
    itical power or they must be"correcting"Mao
    dustrial cities are always the biggest cities of a country. They are the

==========第189頁==========
    cities where the enemy is strongest and retains power until the last pe
    cept that on the question of red political power they have failed to gai
    riod of the revolution. The reactionaries may be able to have donina-
    le point
    tion for a long time here and be able to suppress the workers' struggle tea certain extent. In this way they may be able to deprive the peasants
    7. The Shafak Revisionists are Voluntary Missionaries fo
    armed struggle of this valuable support to a degree. In this case it will no
    the Ruling Classes Theory that! The State is Strong!
    be possible to establish red political power in rural regions(]). This is one
    Turkey, having a tradition of a relatively strong central state and
    of the theses of the revisionists that render red political power lmpossi
    the existence of a strong army compared to other semi-colonial coun
    ble. In reality the revisionists, however much they say the opposite, seethe existence of red political power encircled by the white regime as one
    On the Question of the Forming of Red Political Power)"The rel
    and the same thing as seizing power nationwide. They deem the condi
    atively strong central state edifice and ruling classes army
    tions necessary for the seizure of power nationwide and certain victory
    he fact that the centre ( Of the state of the ruling classes is stron
    as also obligatory for red political power
    on account of the characteristics of our country, is a reality that these ad
    4 ) The revisionists completely ignore the condition"self-sulficien
    venturers are constantly trying to overlook
    food resources" one of the conditions for the existence of red political
    These are ideas that the bourgeois agents have endeavoured to ad
    power. They do not understand that"revolutionary ranks turning back
    vocate with the zeal of a pious missionary. These sentences borrowed
    ard villages into advanced, strong bases making them great military
    fromm the statements of Martial law commanders are extremely mistaken
    political, economic and cultural fortresses of the revolution and relying
    and definitely harmful. They are mistaken because the measure of an
    on these to engage in long wars with the enemies based in the cities, and
    armys strength is not just its numbers. The army's armaments, other
    taking the revolution to total victory"is a condition. In order to maintain
    equipment, morale, mass support, experience of war and ability, unity
    the war, to develop and consolidate the revolutionary forces, and to avoid
    and solidarity in the ranks, all these may be the criteria of an army
    war with the enemy when the forces of revolution are still insufficient it
    strength or weaknes
    is essential to make economically backward regions bases and to rely on
    In Turkey the reactionary army is, yes, numerically large. But its
    these. This possibility does not exist in the big cities and the econom-
    arms and ammunition are generally junk, leftovers from American im
    cally developed regions
    perialism. They are not for long term use and the morale of the army is
    Since the terrain suitable for military action is not of great impor
    zero. They try to back it up with an inoculation of nationalism, but the
    tance we shall not dwell on it. But. the revisionists are ignoring the fac
    effect of this inoculation has almost worn off. Conscripts. NCOS and
    that the link to be grasped in order for red political power to be es
    lower ranking officers in general carry out their duties with fascist dis
    tablished in Turkey is the construction of the party and army within
    cipline, not belie
    the armed struggle, and that these two conditions for red political power
    In particular amongst conscripts who are from worker or peasan
    in Turkey today are lacking. The bourgeois gentlemen accuse the Marx
    backgrounds there is a rapidly rising tendency of reluctance to use
    ist-leninists of""being poor copiers of the Chinese Revolution. We
    weapons against workers and peasants. The barbarities of martial law
    dmit that we are not as good at copying as them. But please let them ac
    and the amy's blatant protection of the tycoons against the worker and
    376
    377

==========第190頁==========
    peasant masses have rapidly isolated the army from the masses, On ac
    and the stale is strong
    count of it being a means of national oppression it has become com-
    One of' the reasons FOT their constant hampering of the armed strug
    pletely isolated from minority nationalities. The Kurdish people in
    gle, and their theories that see red political power in Turkey as impossi
    particular. On the other hand the army in Turkey has not seen warfare
    ble, is the fear of the army that has penetrated to the very marrow of the
    since the war of liberation. Even the highest ranked and most experi-
    evlsionsts
    enced officers developed at a desk and amongst books without s
    In fact. even the latest armed clashes. most of which concluded in
    ing combat. The reactionary army was most recently found wanting
    failure, created a collapse in morale and fear. Troops cannot sum up the
    n Korea, where itsheroism nonsense was deflated like a balloon
    courage to search caves or enter houses from the front. In order to cap
    There is no unity or solidarity in the ranks of the reactionary army. It
    ture two people they have to bring a whole military detachment. The
    was previously split between various reactionary cliques. Then then
    peoples armed struggle under the intelligent leadership of the proletar
    Is Intense dislike between conscripts and officers. The rapidly gro
    ian party will be much more frightening and destructive of morale for the
    ing revolutionary struggle in our country in recent years has shaken the
    eactionarles
    masses considerably. Many conscripts join up having already grasped
    The revisionist clique's exaggeration of the strength of the reac
    revolutionary ideas. Democratic tendencies amonst NCOS and low
    tionary army drags it into the morass of opportunism froln another as
    ranking officers are increasing with the influence of the developin
    pect. It leads it to put its hopes in a military coup plotted by the reform
    revolutionary movement etc
    bourgeoisie, rather than the strength of the popular masses. for the de
    All these and similar factors are evidence that the reactionary army
    struction of the reactionary army-(since we dwelt on this matter when
    Is not strong, as revisionism would like to portray it, and that despit
    addressing the questions of fascism and the struggle against fascism we
    Its appearance of strength is in reality hollow. Despite all this. the re
    shall not do so again here
    actionary army Is not going to tall apart spontaneously. What willsmash it is the active struggle of the popular masses
    18. The Shafak Revisionists are Rendering Invalid the
    Certainly, Marxist-leninists, while disdaining the enemy strate
    Strategy of encircling the cities from Rural Areas.
    gically, take them seriously from a tactical view point. But they do notdo as the revisionist clique does and declare it is"strong", merely by
    The Revisionist traitors, while on the one hand apparently accepting
    ooking at its numerical strength. They also look at the morale, whether
    this strategy, on the other are endeavouring in an insidious way to un
    it has ensured mass support, whether there is unity and solidarity in the
    dermine its importance and value and wreck it
    anks and combat expetience and ability, which is much more impor
    According to them, the strategy of encircling the cities from the rural
    tant than numerical strength. This is what taking the enemy seriously
    areas is only dependent on peasants constituting the majority of the pop
    all is ab
    ulation and their being within feudal and semi-feudal relations of ex
    The revisionist clique speaks like disciples of the reactionary army
    ploitation
    of the ruling classes! It is trying to frighten the people with demagogy
    "However. the reason the revolution has developed from the rural re
    that would grace the language of fascism, such as, "the army is strong
    gions, where 70% of the population live is the existence of millions ooppressed peasants who constitute the essence of the people's army. Th

==========第191頁==========
    situation comes directly from the fact that Turkey is a backward agri
    war unilaterally as something that develops from the village to the
    cultural country".The Political situation in the World and Turkey after
    city.They claim that they see the question"multi-laterally,that cities
    March)
    have great significance and that particularly in Turkey it is impor
    "Since the land revolution is essentially a strategy that emerges fron
    tant to be active in the cities.(see: on the Question of the Forming o
    the fact that the social structure, that is, that the large majority of op
    Red Political Power, page 8)
    Dressed and exploited popular masses live in feudal and semi-feudal re
    We learn and take as a warning self-criticism by the Politburea of the
    lations in rural areas and not as a solely military obligation arising from
    Central Committee of the Indonesian Communist Party that the same
    the relative weakness of state authority in rural areas compared to the
    laim was made before the massacre by the revisionist leadership en
    cities." (On the Question of the Forming of Red Political Power
    sconced at the head of the party. They are trying to justify with this non
    On the one hand. the encircling of the cities from the countryside is
    ense regarding the importance of work in urban areas their moving o
    being linked to the peasant population being in the majority. and on the
    everything to the cities and their rightist pacifist practice in the form o
    other the anti-marxist-theses Boratav inherited from Arenism are pre-
    magazine work. They are trying to justify their attempts to concoct acoup under the banner of anti-fascism. And they are still trying to justify
    This quote from an issue of the PDAon the question of youth com-
    their amassing most of the cadres and all the material property of the
    mittees is instructive: " The make-up of Turkish society Is changing rap-
    movement in the cities while treating the rural areas unfairly. The basi.
    idly. If this change continues at this rate, it is inevitable that within 10 o
    for all this is the mistaken perception which we have summarised above
    Irs the proportion of the population of Turkey living in urban areas
    in two sentences. As long as they do not rid themselves of this percep
    will be well above 500
    tion it will be inpossible to do away with the inevitable consequences o
    The youth committee then asks this question: " What form will the
    thIs In practice
    fundamental arena of struggle and its fundamental force take?
    The revisionists are now trying to immunise themselves against crit
    The reason the revisionist gentlemen have rendered the strategy o
    icisms and save the situation with a new wriggle. " Yes, the land revolu
    encircling the cities from the countryside"invalid and cast a shadow
    tion is a strategy that will be determined by the social structure. But let
    on it is now clearly understood. Because according to them
    us not see this as a basis that will lose its truth as soon as the peasant
    1 In order for the cities to be encircled fron the countryside the
    population falls to 49%. Let us not slip into a point of view that forgets
    peasants should constitute a majority of the population; 2)In Turkey"the
    the remaining factors in the second situation, they say. Who else apart
    economic and social structure is changing rapidly, i.e. the peasant pop
    from you sees things like this, I wonder? And as long as your above the
    ulation is rapidly shrinking
    ories continue is it possible to see any differently? If you consider that
    In that case the strategy of encircling the cities from the villages
    the strategy of encircling the cities from the countryside will still be cor
    is naturally, from the point of view of Turkey, "rapidly "losing its sig
    rect when the peasant population falls to 49%, isnt it necessary for you
    nificance and validity. This is really how these gentlemen think! But
    to explain the reason? All your theories justify the opposite view. Should
    they do not possess the courage and honesty to champion th
    n't you first throw away these theories with a self-criticism and then ex
    views they opt for demagogy! They accuse us of addressing"'people
    Plain what the"secondary factors"are? As long as you dont do this th
    38

==========第192頁==========
    poisonous seeds you have sown will continue to bear fruit and poison the
    These gentlemen see strength and weakness not as a relative thing
    envionment
    but as something absolute. They see them as immutable, not things that
    The strategy of"encircling the cities from the rural areas is not only
    changes. To say "The belly of imperialism is weak in the countryside
    dependent on the existence of feudalism and peasants constituting a ma-
    implies at the same time, that in rural areas the people are stronger
    jority of the population. It is at the same time linked to being a sen
    These gentlemen state one aspect of a contradiction while rejecting the
    colony or colony of imperialism. In a country under the actual occupation
    other. They accept that"the revolutionary movement is strong in these
    of imperialism the national revolution(regardless of the existence of feu
    areas due to millions of peasants, but reject the fact that"imperialisms
    dalism or the peasant population in that country) will develop essentially
    belly is weaker in the countryside! In fact, one's strength is relative to
    from the countryside to the cities, as the occupying imperialist forces
    the other, and the latters weakness is relative to the former. There
    will initially seize the countrys large cities. main roads and communa
    no such thing as absolute immutable criteria of strength or weakness
    cations etc . but will not be able to control the broad rural areas
    The revisionist gents imagine in the above expression that"the bell
    Semi-colonial countries are countries under the semi-occupation o
    of imperialism is soft in the countrysidein imperialist countries. too
    imperialism. In such countries, although imperialism maintains its com
    However, this is not the case, for"softness-hardness", " strength-weak
    ination primarily by means of native reactionary classes, It offers support
    ness"Is relative terns. In imperialist countries the strength of the
    to them through its bases, facilities, troops, fleets, weapons aid.. For this
    counter-revolution is higher in the cities than in the villages. but the same
    reason the strategy of"encircling the cities from the countryside in
    is also true for the strength of the revolution. The situation regarding th
    semi-colonial semi-feudal countries is not just due to the existence of
    balance of forces is that compared to the villages it is favourable to the
    eudalism and to the fact that peasants constitute the majority of the pe
    revolution in the cities. But this situation is not immutable. Since this
    ulation, but also to the semi-occupation of imperialism. What is peculiar
    question is not relevant to the matter in hand we shall not dwell on it
    to semi-colonial semi-feudal countries is that the national revolution
    If we summarise: the thing that determines the strategy of"enci
    against imperialism and the democratic revolution, the essence of which
    Ing the cities from the countryside it is that the relationship of forces
    is the land revolution against feudalism, are united. The degree of exis
    between the revolution and the counter-revolution is. relative to the
    tence of feudalism and the proportion of the population consisting of
    cities. more in favour of the revolution in the villages. The weakest
    peasants(these things are interconnected )will influcnce the programme
    link in the chain of counter revolution is in the rural areas. Con
    of the democratic revolution but will not change the strategy of"enci
    sequently, the revolution front is stronger in these areas. A countrys
    clement of the cities
    containing feudal relations within it influences this force relationship
    Rather than it being a question of the belly of iperialisin being
    In the following way: the existence of feudalism leads in general to a
    soft in the rural regions it is Inore one of the revolutionary movement
    large peasant population and as an entirety to the peasant mass being
    being strong there on account of millions of peasants. If the fact that vil-
    revolutionary. Thissituation affects the balance of forces in the rura
    lages are the primary sphere of struggle was due to the attributes of the
    areas in favour of the revolution(democratic revolution). Also, the ex
    countryside, then the villages would also have"needed to be the primary
    istence of feudalism, Since it will lend to industry, and, consequently
    arena of struggle in imperialist countries too
    the working class, being weak, it affects the relationship of forces in
    382
    383

==========第193頁==========
    the cities adversely for the revolution. A countrys being semi-colo
    19. The Shafak Revisionists are putting forward
    nial or colonial also adversely affects the relationship of forces in the
    contradictory views on the main Force of the Revolution
    cities for the revolution. These two conditions together necessitate therural regions being the primary sphere of struggle and the pursuing o
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung listed the classes that take part in a revolu
    the strategy of"encircling the cities from the countryside".Even I
    tion In a semi-colonial, semi-feudal country thus
    the event of a gradual dissolution of feudalism and the shrinking of
    The leading force in our revolution is the industrial proletariat. Ou
    the peasant population linked to it, this strategy will still be valid, be
    closest firiends are the entire semi-proletariat and petty bourgeoisie. As
    cause the conditions of semi-colonialism (or colonialism have
    for the vacillating middle bourgeoisie, their right-wing may become our
    changed the relationship of forces in the big cities un favour of counter
    enemy and their left-wing may become our friend but we must be con-
    revolution. Instead of looking at the question with a dialectical mate
    stantly on our guard and not let them create confusion within our
    rialist eye from the point of view of the balance of forces. these gents
    ranks. (Mao Tse-tung. Selected Works I)
    are looking at it from the perspective of a formula with no meaning In
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung also stated that the peasantry(that is, poor
    certain conditions (for instance, in Tsarist Russian conditions)like"the
    and middle peasants )was the main force of the revolution. The meaning
    peasant population being a majority and rejecting situations that do
    of the peasantry being the main force of the revolution is as follows: the
    not comply with this formula. And as a result they are creating the Im
    democratic popular revolution is in essence a peasant revolution. The
    pression in cadres' minds that in the event of the peasant population
    asants constitute the primary human source of the backbone of the
    shrinking the strategy of"encircling the cities from the countryside
    struggle against feudalism and imperialism. In the democratic popular
    will not be correct! The Youth Committee's question is entirely tl
    revolution the proletariat must rely principally on the peasants. The ques
    duct of th
    ds
    by these gents
    tion of the peasantry being the main force is one of the most important
    The theories of the revisionists are also defective in this respect: they
    elements in comrade Mao Tse-tung,'s theory of the democratic popular
    say "the structure of Turkish society is undergoing rapid change", but
    revolution. It is impossible to achieve victory in the struggle against feu-
    this is not the case. This claim is that of the Arenists in Turkey and the
    dalism and imperialism without grasping this question. What is the
    Trotskyists worldwide. According to them, imperialism rapidly deve
    stance of our bourgeois gents on such an important question? They pre
    ons the productive forces in countries it penetrates, dissolves feudalism
    viously disseminated the sophistry that the proletariat was the main force
    strengthens the working class and matures the conditions for the social
    In the period of martial law following the Great Workers Resist
    st revolution. This revisionist-trotskyist claim has been put forward
    ance of 15-16 June, when a struggle began against revisionism in the
    against the Marxist-leninist wing in debates on the question of giving
    ranks, the revisionists made a quiet manoeuvre and, with bourgeois jug
    primacy to work in villages in order to justify concentrating on the cities
    gling, endeavoured to claim that on account of the peculiar conditions (!
    to reject the fact that the peasants are the fundamental force and to reject
    of Turkey both the proletariat and the peasants were the main force
    that the principal contradiction is between feudalism and the popular
    What is the situation now? The revisionist gents are now on the
    masses. The revisionists have abandoned soine of the results of this claim
    question of main force in a state of uncertainty, vagueness and lackin
    but have not abandoned the claim itself.
    principles, as they are on many questions. On the one hand they write in
    385

==========第194頁==========
    some publications that the peasantry is the main force, while on the othel
    geoisie and landlords in this concept of nation. Later on the contradiction
    they write in other publications, or even the same publications, that the
    between the"native ruling classes ()And the people of Turkey became
    workers and peasants are the main force! Let us read from Lon
    the principal contradiction! And they defended this against the Marxisteninist wing for a long time! On being pressurised, in an article that
    Revolutionary Mass Line
    The main force of the revolution the worker peasant masses"(page
    was a masterpiece of idealism. mechanical materialism and false logicentitled Imperialism. mode of Production. Classes and the Principal
    The main force of the revolution is the workers and peasants(page
    Contradiction, they declared the contradiction between feudalism andthe people to be the principal contradiction! But the person who is the
    'The worker peasant masses that are the main force of the revolu
    head of revisionism and some of his disciples objected to this for a longtime! They continued to claim that the principal contradiction was be
    tion (page 35)
    Their insidious attitudes that reject the fact the peasants are the main
    tween the native ruling classes and the people. They now appear to have
    orce of the revolution also manifests themselves in other forms. At th
    accepted that the contradiction between feudalism and the popular
    10-11 April Meeting the person who is the head of revisionism claimed
    masses is the principal contradiction. However, they have stil not
    the thesis he had put forward in an article that"in a party of the prole
    grasped the essence of the question. They have only changed their tune
    tariat the proletariat has an absolute majority was correct. On this ques
    because they were no longer able to defend their former idea
    tion he rejected as"unjust' "a cosmetic self-crlllcism stuck in a cornerof
    We read these sentences from the Draft Programme
    the magazine. According to this person workers should have all absolute
    Only by grasping this contradiction (the contradiction between feul
    majority in the party of the proletariat. This idea is directly related to the
    dalis and the people) as the principal link of the revolution can we or
    question of the main force of the revolution In semi-colonial, semi-feul
    ganise the broad worker-peasant masses in the peoples army, accomplis
    dal countries where the peasants are the main force of the revolution it
    the democratic people's revolution and destroy the domination of impe
    is inevitable that the peasants will constitute the majority in the prole
    cialis
    tarian party. To reject this is in reality to reject the fact that the peasants
    For this reason, amongst the four main contradictions in our coun
    are the main force of the revolution. This is the point these gents have
    try today, the contradiction between the popular masses and feudalism is
    eventually arrived at after much meandering! But insidiously! But b
    the principal contradiction
    A shameful wretchedness ofideas! The gents are even incapable of
    hiding behind a subtle(!)bourgeois politics
    separating the cause from the effect. The contradiction between feudal
    20. The Shafak Revisionists identify the Principa/
    ism and the popular masses"the principal link to be grasped"is the ef-
    Contradiction in an Idealist Way
    fect, the outcome of the contradiction between feudalism and the popularmasses being the principal contradiction. It is not the cause of the prin
    The revisionist cliques line on the question of"principal contradic
    cipal contradiction as they are trying to portray it. The gents are moving
    tion zigzags like a snake. In the period when they were tailing Mih
    from effect to cause from the end to the start. They are trying to reverse
    hey saw the pricipal contradiction as being between Imperialism) and
    dialectical development! In this way a link will be grasped, saying this
    the nation. They uncluded a significant section of the comprador boul

==========第195頁==========
    is the link of the revolution to be grasped, then"so this is the principal
    the proletariat- bourgeoisie contradiction depends on feudalism being
    contradiction'"will be announced! This is their logic and method o
    completely uprooted and swept away by the popular masses. This is why
    thinking
    the proletariat is determinedly in the vanguard of the struggle against
    omrade Mao Tse-tung says
    feudalism, because as feudalism is swept away by a determined peasant
    Hence, if in any process there are a number of contradictions: one
    struggle the bouryeois-proletanian contradiction emerges and ideal con
    of them must be the principal contradiction playing the leading and de
    ditions for the proletarian class struggle and for socialism come into
    cisive role, while the rest occupy a secondary and subordinate position
    being. It is this idea that is the basis for the Marxist-leninist theory of
    Therefore, in studying any complex process in which there are two o
    continuous and phased revolution
    more contradictions, we must devote every effort to finding its principal
    In semi-colonial, semi-feudal countries the contradiction that plays
    contradiction. Once this principal contradiction is grasped, all problen
    a"directing and determining role over the contradiction between im
    can be readily solved. " (Mao Tse-tung, Selected Works I
    perialism and the people of the country is"the contradiction between
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung says in complete contrast to the thinking
    eudalisn and the popular masses. "Imperialism maintains its existence
    methods of the revisionist gents that it is first necessary to lind the prin
    and dominance in such countries by relying on principally feudalism
    cinal contradiction and then to understand it. Two logics! ""As I have
    Imperialism continues its existence and dominance by supporting and
    grasped this contradiction it is the principal one", "as this contradiction
    consolidating feudalism particularly in political and ideological spheres
    Is the principal contradiction I have grasped it". The former is the logic
    and by slowing the dissolution of feudal property relations. The social
    of revisionism. the latter the logic of Marxism-leninism
    prop of imperialism in the cities is the comprador bourgeoisie, whereas
    What is the principal contradiction? In any process in which nu
    in the rural districts it is landlords, usurers, tribal leaders. semi-bour
    merous contradictions exist. the contradiction" which plays a directing
    geois, semi-feudal land owners and the ideological supports of feudalism
    and determing role " is the principle contradiction. In his book New
    such as sheikhs, religious teachers etc.. That is, members of the feudal
    Democracy comrade Mao Tse-tung says the following, which has the
    classes. Although feudal property relations, that is, essentially the system
    same meaning "*Quote from New Democracy this was formulated
    of landlordism, are slowly dissolving, they have still preserved their
    in your draft .please insert here
    forms of feudal exploitation for ]ong years. Forms of exploitation such
    In our country today since the contradiction between feudalism and
    sharecropping, feudal forms of letting, usury and other such semi-feu
    the popular masses"has an influence and determining effect on the res
    dal methods of exploitation continue Usury is encouraged by means of
    olution of other contradictions " and"plays a directing and determining
    imperialist banks. Feudal relationships are particularly prominent in the
    role it is the principal contradiction. The development of the labour-cap-
    superstructure, where they continue violently. Bourgeois democracy is
    ital contradiction, or, in other words, proletariat-bourgeoisie contradic
    always arm-in-arm with the whip of feudalism. Democracy always pos
    tion, depends on the development and resolution of the"contradiction
    sesses a feudal character. A significant section of the bourgeoisie has a
    between feudalism and the popular masses", to the degree that this con
    semi-bourgeois, semi-feudal quality. All these feudal relationships fa-
    tradiction develops and is resolved the proletariat and bourgeoisie
    cilitate the indirect dominance of imperialism and become their prop
    emerge and develop. The falling into place, sharpening and maturing o
    The step by step cleansing of feudalism, that is, the resolution of the con
    389

==========第196頁==========
    tradiction between feudalism and the popular masses will deprive im
    geolsie. It means having the cuming to utilise these forces as a winch for
    perialism of a significant prop. It will affect the contradiction between
    a bourgeois coup! it means acting for, in the name of proletarian revo
    imperialism and the people of the country and lead to the step by step res
    unionism (representatives of the reformist middle bourgeoisie, and
    olution of this contradiction. But the principal contradiction is not Im
    even of the comprador bourgeoisie such as Inonu and a section of anti
    mutable. The principal contradiction within a process containing more
    communist elements like Kadri Kaplan
    than one contradiction may become secondary with a change of condi
    ust as Dev-guc was not a people,s united front under the lead-
    tions and a secondary contradiction may become the principal contra
    ership of the proletariat, it was also not a provisional and partial
    diction, For instance. in a semi-colonial, semi-feudal country that suffers
    agreement thaf may be made from time to time between the proletariat
    an actual imperialist occupation and colonisation the contradiction be
    and the bourgeoisie. It was bourgeois tailing and capitulationism. The
    tween imperialism and the people of the country will become the prin
    evisionists declared such a treacherous initiative to be a people' united
    cipal contradiction that determines and influences the process o
    front. They publicised il, saying: "we can not say that some CHP ad
    development. But in the event of the Imper/alists mounting an attack on
    ministrators may not join the common front. Let anyone who is pro-na
    ocialist China the contradiction between the socialist system and the
    tional join ( The revolutionary unity of forces which is an interclass
    imperialist system will become the principal contradiction, as it will be
    alliance has made headway (see ASD.no.7, page 18)
    this contradiction that determines and influences the process of change
    Revolutionary Force Dev-guc), as the first concrete unity of forces
    and development worldwide. The other contradictions will become sec
    movement of socia lists and Kemalists since the War of Liberation has
    ondary and dependent on the principal contradiction
    an historical significance. (ASD no 13, page
    If we summarise the leaders of the revisionist clique have not been
    The Dev-guc initiative did not survive. but the DEV-GUC mentalit
    able to grasp the reason for one contradiction in a process containing
    survived in the heads of a section of hardened revisionists. When the
    multiple contradictions being the principal contradiction. They have not
    revolutionary cadre grasped the fact that the people's united front would
    been able to understand why in our country the principal contradiction
    essentally be an inter-class alliance, and that worker-peasant alliances
    is that between feudalism and the popular masses. Since they have had
    should constitute the main force of this alliance, the revisionists changed
    to they give the appearance of accepting it, but they are not aware of it
    direction and tried to use a new mask to conceal their bourgeois tailing
    real meaning
    and capitulationism, saying: "The peoples united front is one thing, therevolutionary unity forces is another thing. "(See ASD, nos12-14). In
    2t. The Shafak Revisionists are maintaining the Dev-guc
    this way they tried to revive the moribund Mihriist Dev-guc Hurling to
    Perception
    one side the three weapons of the people, the communist party, peoples
    The revisionists at one time were in the forefront of the Mihrist Dev
    armed forces under its leadership and the people's united front, alsounder party leadership, with the slogan"our weapon is revolutionary
    Guc perception, which rejects the independent political organisation of
    unity of forces".(see PDA, no19, ) As we mentioned above while ex
    the proletariat, that is, it rejects the proletarian party, the peoples atmythe alliance of workers and peasants, and makes the working class, poor
    amining the theories invented by the revisionist chique on the question of
    peasants and revolutionary youth into docile instruments of the bou
    fascism and struggle against fascism, they made the slogan of"revolu

==========第197頁==========
    tionary unity of forces"into a prop for encouraging a military coup. Tlhat
    to portray it. That is the"people's united front". That is, an alliance of all
    is, 'revolutionary unity of forces"had the meaning of support for putting
    revolutionary classes and strata founded on a fundamental worker-peas
    the reformist bourgeoisie in power
    ant alliance under proletarian leadership. There is not a word in comrade
    The revisionists are stil] maintaining the same perception today
    Dimitrov's works on the anti-fascist struggle being waged by a vehicle
    Under the banner of anti-fascist struggle they are still endeavouring to
    of tai]ing and capitulation called'revolutionary unity of forces".Com
    tail the reformist bourgeoisie in the cities. Let us summarise the mental
    rade Dimitrov always talks of an anti-fascist popular front and this is
    ity of the revisionist clique in order for it to be better understood: revo
    the people,s front itself under the leadership of the proletariat. And the
    lutionary unity of forces (they sometimes call this"democratic unity o
    aim of the anti-fascist struggle is to realise popular front power
    forces )is a vehicle of struggle against fascism. This will happen in all
    The second error is this: Proletarian revolutionaries have a single
    periods. Revolutionary unity of forces is not based on a fundamental
    front policy and that is the people,s united front under the leadership of
    worker-peasant alliance. It is carried out with bourgeois and petit-bour
    trhe proletariat. Apart from this communists and the proletariat have no
    geois organisations and individuals
    time for sophistries like democratic unity of forces or revolutionary unit
    We are always prepared to engage in unity of forces
    orces". The invention of the slogan of"revolutionary unity of forces
    (YIKC p105)."Unity of forces can occur in every period. It is mistaken
    Is in order to justify the Dev-guc initiative as we have indicated above
    to say unity of forces cannot be entered into before becoming stronger
    In order to justify marching behind bourgeois democrats in the name of
    Political Situation in the World and Turkey after 12 March, page 95)
    alliance'"(! )without taking into account the main masses, party, peo
    The peoples united front is a vehicle for anti-imperialist and anti-feudal
    ples army and people's united front. To justify their policy of tailing and
    struggle. "The peoples revolutionary front is founded and develops on
    capitulation with the sophistry and demagogy of"this is not the people's
    the basis of a worker-peasant alliance. (Political Situation in the World
    united front, it is revolutionary unity of forces. It is to find justification
    and Turkey after 12 March, page 95)
    for becoming subject to the reformist bourgeoisie by pushing the work
    Views such as without red political power being established in one
    ing class leadership and fundamental alliance of workers and peasants to
    or several areas a front is not feasible'are remnant of one-sided bourgeois
    one side. These are the reasons for inventing"democratic unity of forces
    thinking and by their very nature are erroneous. The front may materi
    as a separate and contrary slogan to the"people's united front
    alise from today, because"the front expresses the correct identification
    The emergence of this slogan came after it had been understood that
    of the friends and foes of the revolution. It is a fundamental question at
    the Dev-guc initiative has absolutely nothing to do with the"peoples
    every stage of the revolution to correctly identify friend and foe and pul
    united front". The revisionists thus invented a theory that would justif
    sue politics that comply with that.(Example of opportunism and
    their policy of tailing and capitulation, saying yes, Dev-guc was not the
    from the circular)
    eople's united front but it was a revolutionary unity of forces". And
    These are the views of revisionism on the question of democratic
    they are maintaining this theory, developing it further. In this way they
    unity of forces and front
    have masterfully made compatible ( )Mihriism and Mao Tse-tung
    The first error is this: The sophistry of"revolutionary unity of forces
    Thought, the"dev-guc"perception of"united people' s front", two com
    is not the"vehice of struggle against fascism", as the revisionists wisl
    pletely opposite perceptions. And these revisionist traitors accuse us of
    392

==========第198頁==========
    saying" unity of forces is only engaged in when we are strong.And they
    long as classes and strata with interests in the revolution do not actually
    also slander us by calling us"Trotskyist". Trotskyism in fact exists ir
    unite the front will not come into being. As the revisionist traitors say,
    abundance in your Boratavist analysis of 5%o feudalism in Turkey. it
    the front does not materialise with the identification of friends and foes
    your attitudes looking down on the revolutionary role of the peasants
    ofthe revolution. If this were the case then once they had been correctly
    and the perception that places the worker-bourgeois alliance ahead of
    identified all would be accomplished. And as long as this dentification
    the worker-peasant alliance. "Trotskyisi"is essentially to reject the rey-
    were preserved the front would not have collapsed().Chinese Com
    olutionary role of the peasants or to look down on it, as you do. It is to
    munist Party comrades correctly determined the friends and foes of the
    reject the worker peasant alliance and give prominence to the alliance of
    revolution way back in 1927. Did the front materialise immediately
    the workers and bourgeoisie( that is, to have the Dev-guc outlook). It is
    How many times did the people's front break down and be reformed in
    to have dreams of total uprising. Those who are most worthy ol being
    the process of the class struggle? To say that the"front signifies the cor
    Trotskys agents in our country, who are most suitable, are you. who
    rect identification of the friends and foes of the revolution"1s as non
    have pursued a senni-trotskyist line until today
    .nical as saying that once the goal of democratic people's dictatorship
    We do not recognise a thing called"revolutionary unity of forces
    has been identified this goal will be spontaneously and immediafely at
    Therefore, it is not possible for us to have said"revolutionary unity of
    tained. In order for the front to come into being it is not sufficient to
    forces "Is only engaged in when we are strong". And we have never ad-
    identify the friends and foes of the revolution correctly; at the same time
    vocated such a thing anywhere either verbally or in writing. We have
    is necessary to wage a relatively long struggle towards uniting the
    adopted and pursue the policy of establishing a
    le,s united front
    friends of the revolution under the leadership of the proletariat,
    the only correct policy of alliance. We identify our task as beiny to con
    which will necessitate a patient and hard struggle. Without such a
    struct the three weapons of the people: the communist party, the peo
    struggle it will not be possible to bring the working class together, let
    ples army under the leadership of the party and the peoples united front.
    alone unite the different strata. The revisionist gents sort out everything
    also under the leadership of the party. Apart from this we do not recog
    with one designation! They assume that once this is done all the classes
    nise a"revolutionary unity of forces". As for you, you are constantl
    and strata wil] take their place and await our gentlemens orders.
    hampering the realisation of the people's united front with your tailin
    It is as if it is not class struggle but a ceremony, and those opposite
    and capitulationist policy under the name of"revolutionary unity o1
    us are an honour guard!
    forces". Have you understood bourgeois demagogues?
    "It is a fundamental question at every stage of the revolution to co
    The revisionists third error is this: The firont signifies the correct
    ectly identify friend and foe and pursue politics that comply with that
    identification of friends and foes ofthe revolution". No, gentlemen! The
    Example of opportunism and hypocrisy from the circular
    front does not signify this. What you have done is incredible demagogy
    We have nothing to say regarding this correct sentence. But let us re
    The front signifies the fact that ALL REVOLUTIONARY
    mind the revisionist gents that this is not the subject of debate. Just as it
    CLASSES AND STRATA have united against imperialism, feudal
    an incontestable truth that at every stage of the revolution It Is neces
    ism and comprador capitalism under the leadership of the commu
    sary to correctly identify friend and foe and pursue politics that comply
    ist party and based on the fundamental worker-peasant alliance. As
    with that' so too is it an incontestable truth that the peoples united front
    394

==========第199頁==========
    cannot be realised as soon as the friends and foes of the revolution are
    who do not understand what they read and those out of spite who havebad intentions can claim this
    established. To wish for something is one thing, for it to be realisedanother. The revisionist gents are making a tiny( )error in confusing
    The meaning of the above phrase is this: let us struggle from now on
    the subiective intention with the objective fact. In order for the sub
    in order to realise the people's united front, but let us be aware that with
    jective intention which is not contrary to the laws of nature and societ
    out reaching the point of attaining red political power in one or several
    to become an objective fact there is a need for a process. At the end o
    areas the united front of the entire people cannot be achieved
    this process certain conditions will come together and ensure the emer
    You ask: "Arent the activities we are carrying out today in rural
    gence of the objective fact. The realisation of the peoples united front
    areas in order to realise the worker-peasant alliance that is the basis of the
    is like this. Today we wish for this front to be realised. This is our sub
    peoples front? " This question is only proof of your bad intentions and
    jective intention. And this intention complies with societal laws because
    demagogy, because the worker-peasant alliance is not even a subject of
    the popular classes have interests in the realisation of this front. There are
    debate for Marxist-leninists. What is up for debate is the alliance to be
    strong economic, social and political factors that will bring them to
    founded on the worker-peasant alliance, that is, the alliance to be made
    gether. But in order for this to happen there will be a process of strug-
    with the revolutionary wing of the national bourgeoisie And the stating
    gle. We cannot attain the objective fact without this process. The
    point of the debate was a criticism of your policy tailing the reformist na
    revisionist gents assume this period does not exist. It is like confusing a
    tional bourgeoisie. Why is an alliance with the national bourgeoisie not
    child starting primary school wishing to be an engineer with someone
    feasible without the rise of red political power in one of more areas? Be
    who is an actual engineer. In order to realise the peoples united front
    cause prior to that the national bourgeoisie will not accept the leadership
    under the leadership of the proletariat based on the fundamental worker
    of the proletariat. It will maintain obstinately and persistently its own
    peasant alliance we must firstly correctly identify the friends and foes of
    compromising capitulationist reformist line that will never take the pop
    the revolution. Secondly, we should start the struggle today to unite the
    ular masses to revolution and liberation. Alliance will not be possible
    friends of the revolution. Thirdly, we should be aware that without this
    because the bourgeoisie will not go along with such an alliance, not be
    struggle reaching a certain point, without passing through a certain
    cause the proletariat does not want alliance with the bourgeoisie. Isn,tthis abundantly clear?
    process of struggle, the front will not become a tact. The revisionistgentlemen reverse this clear truth with an incredible demagogy and the
    Doesn't it comply with the current realities of our country? Aren, t
    skill of a juggler. They sort everything out by saying: "the front signifies
    the representatives of the national bourgeoisie, from the far right to the
    the correct identification of the friends and foes of the revolution
    most left, endeavouring to seize power by election or a military coup, and
    The claim of the Marxist-leninists that so enrage the revisionist
    to smooth down the rough edges of the present order and establish their
    this: the peoples united front which we shall establish under the leader
    own dictatorship over the workers and peasants? Arent they waggin
    ip of the proletariat and based on a fundamental worker-peasant al
    their tails at fascism most of the time? Is it possible to establish a popu
    liance cannot come to a real state of being without red political power
    lar front with them aiming for a people's democratic dictatorship under
    being realised in one or several areas. These are clear and in no way
    the leadership of the proletariat under current conditions? Has it been
    means let's not work to realise the peoples united front. Only retards
    Possible up to pow

==========第200頁==========
    With the formation of red political power In one or more than one
    the new Iskra(p S
    areas what is not feasible today will become feasible, as the working
    For the wealth of"gems "it contains this passage is indeed rare
    class, poor peasants and the communist party will possess a peoples
    I )The phrase about alliance with the liberals is a sheer muddle. No
    army that is the real guarantor of real freedom and of maintaining and
    body mentioned alliance, Comrade Martov, but only temporary or par
    protecting their existence. As comrade Mao Tse-tung said: Quotes from
    tial agreements. That is an entirely different thing. 2) If Plekhanoy's
    Mao this was also formulated on your draft. Secondly, the worker-peas
    resolution ignores an incredible"alliance "and speaks only of"suppor
    ant alliance. that is the fundamental alliance, will have been realised to
    in general, that is one of its merits. not a defect
    a certain extent. These extremely significant changes will draw the na
    Yes, an alliance with temporary and partial agreements is a com
    tional bourgeoisie, which from time to time is indecisive and steers to
    letely different thing. The sophistry of".Dennocratic unity of forces
    wards the enemies of the workers and peasants, to a large degree towards
    which is the basis of the Dev-guc perception. and temporary and partial
    the revolutionary front led by the proletariat. We say to a large degree as
    agreements based on that perception are entirely different, too
    prior to that some representatives of the national bourgeoisie and certain
    Firstly, it Is temporary and partial. Whereas the second, includin
    elements may ioin the ranks of the revolution. but this wili not be con
    the demand for permanency and for the bourgeoisie to seize power with
    sidered an alllance with the national bourgeoisie
    a coup is directed at supporting all their demands. It is abundantly clear
    The revisionist traitors consider an"alliance'(! )with the national
    that the first is to make provisional agreements that are suitable to the in
    bourgeoisie is feasible today! Yes, it is possible, but only in one form: in
    terests of the proletariat on certain questions and appropriate to their
    stead of a front under the red flag of the proletariat based on a funda
    principles, while the second is an effort to make the proletariat tail the
    mental alliance of workers and peasants aiming to establish a peoples
    bourgeoisie
    democratic dictatorship. in a"front"()behind the bourgeoisie, aiming
    Let us point out the following: When communists determine their
    to smooth out the jagged edges of the present order with certain reforms
    policies they separate the primary from the secondary. This is extremel
    and to establish a bourgeois dictatorship
    Important, and a condition for advancing on the correct path. For in
    Since the revisionist traitors perception of""falls into the sec
    stance, today we say that the armed struggle is primary and the other
    ond category they see an alliance(!) with the national bourgeoisie as fea
    omms of struggle are secondary. Accepting the other forms of struggle
    Tble from today. In our opinion, today, as comrade Lenin says: only
    does not necessitate making them primary. Again, for instance, today we
    temporary and partial agreements "with the bourgeoisie are possible
    say struggle in the rural areas is primary, while struggle in the big cities
    Comrade Lenin sa
    Is secondary. Accepting struggle in the big cities does not necessitate
    At the League Congress Comrade Martov also adduced the follow
    making it primary. In the same way it is primary to rely on our own
    Ing argument against Comrade Plekhanov's resolution: "The chief ob
    forces and secondary to rely on the allies. The united front is a contra
    ction to it, the chief defect of this resolution, is that it totally ignores the
    dictory unity. E: very contradiction has a primary and a secondary facet
    lact that it Is our duty, in the struggle against the autocracy, not to shun
    The primary facet of the united front is the proletariat and peasantry
    alliance with liberal-democratic elements. Comrade Lenin would call
    while the secondary facet is the national bourgeoisie. Accepting the
    this a Martynov tendency. This tendency is already being manifested in
    united front with the national bourgeoisie does noi imply acceptance of

==========第201頁==========
    it as the primary facet In the struggle to realise the front Marxist-lenin
    lords in power in these countries from relying definitely on either side
    ists will primarily work to establish the worker-peasant alliance and give
    These classes find it more advantageous to continue collaboration with
    prominence to that, while attaching secondary importance to the alliance
    both of them, using their collaboration with one as a trump card against
    with the bourgeoisie. In more concrete terms this means: they will con.
    the other as a way of increasing their share of exploitation. When one im
    centrate primarily on constructing the party and peoples army while
    erialist country increases its influence at the expense of the other the rel
    giving secondary attention to the alliance with the national bourgeoisie
    atively"neutral"stance of the classes in power will certainly end. Also
    The betrayal of the revisionist traitors displays itself here: they afe con
    in the countries in question there are sections of the comprador bour-
    stantly and without let up attempting to give priority to alliance() with
    geoisie and landlords that advocate dependence on eithe
    S imperial-
    the bourgeoisie, while relegating the construction of the party and peo
    ]sm or Soviet social imperialism
    ples army to a secondary level
    The Shafak revisionists continued to maintain that in these cour
    This is all irrefutable proof that the Shafak revisionists have entirely
    tries there are politically independent national bourgeois governments
    adopted the Mihriist Dev-guc perception its bourgeois tailing and pol
    They even said the global tendency is for an increase in national bour
    icy of capitulation, and are perpetuating it
    geois power. However, In the age of imperialism independent national
    22. The Shafak Revisionists consider long lasting National
    bourgeois governments are in general not possible in backward coun
    Bourgeois Governments in Backward Countries as Feasible
    tries(some specials situations may occur). This is because in the era ofimperialism markets have united on a global scale. The giant imperial-
    The Shafak revisionists champion the idea that the Kemalist go
    ist monopolies have extended theur tentacles like an octopus into every
    ernment was a "national bourgeois regime and that it continued until
    corner of the world. There is absolutely no possibility of the puny capi-
    bout 1935. They claim that in todays world national bourgeois adnan
    tal of the national bourgeoisie in backward countries competing with
    istrations exist and are on the increase. It will be usefu to recount a de
    them. For them the way out is to immediately go into collaboration with
    bate that took place amongst us
    the Imperialists and be content with a suitable share of the exploitation
    The debate arose from a sentence in an article entitled" The Polit
    of the country. For this reason the national bourgeoisie that seizes power
    cal situation in the World and Turkey after 12 March, i.e."Arab coun
    in backward countries will either immediately become comprador bour-
    tries where the national bourgeoisie is in power". The countries referred
    geoisie or will be removed from power by economic, social, political
    to here were Syria, Libya, Sudan. Egypt etc. We maintained that the na
    and military pressure from Imperialism and native reactionaries, to be
    tional bourgeoisie was not in power in these countries and that it was the
    replaced by a govemment of the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords
    comprador big bourgeoisie and landlords who were in power. We went
    Back in 1916 comrade Lenin said
    on to say that the reason these classes took a relatively neutral stance be
    n a commodity producing society, no independent development
    tween various imperialist blocs was due to their having achieved a bal
    or development of any sort whatsoever, is possible without capital. The
    ance between the influences of various imperialist countries. In particula
    colonies have no capital @f their own, or none to speak o/, and under fi
    their achieving a balance between the influence of US imperialisn and
    nance capital no colony can obtain any except on terms of political sub
    Soviet imperialism has prevented the comprador bourgeoisie and land
    mission. (Lenin collected works Vol 22)

==========第202頁==========
    The words which comrade Lenin uttered for the colonies are also
    Arab regimes". And they claim that the" nationalist Arab regimes " are
    alid today for semi-colonial countries with the necessary changes. Fou
    showing reactions" to the influence of US imperialism and Soviet so
    in a commodity producing society, no independent development, or de
    cial imperialism in the Middle East. (The Political situation in the World
    velopment of any sort whatsoever, is possible without capital
    and Turkey after 12 March, pages 22-23)
    Semi-colonial countries, too, capital of their own, or none to speak
    The revisionists also consider a national bourgeois government is
    of We are also"in finance capital conditions "and in these conditions
    possible in Turkey. This is one of the reasons they are so keenly court
    backward countries"cannot find capital without conforming to (he con
    ing the middle bourgeoisie. But as comrade Mao Tse-tung says: they are
    dition of political dependence". Consequently, even if a national boun
    hasing an empty dream
    geo]sie seizes power for a time, it will in a very short time have to throw
    23. The Shafak Revisionists reiect the idea that the Middle
    itself into the arms of an imperialist country
    Bourgeoisiemay be able to co-exist with the comprador big
    Comrade Mao Tse-tung pointed to the same reality in 1926
    bourgeoisie and Landlord cliques
    ie middle bourgeoisie. This class. Politically, they stand for theestablis hment of a state under the rule of a single class, the nationd
    The Political situation in the World and Turkey after 12 March
    bourgeoisie. But its attempt to establish a state under therule of the na
    booklet they say
    tional bourgeoisie is uite impracticable, because the present world il
    The big bourgeoisie and middle bourgeoisie cannot co-exist in the
    uation is such that the two major forces. revolution aid
    sameplace"(page 56)
    counter-revolation, are locked in inal struggle. Each has hoisted a h
    This is a generalisation. What may be true in certain particular cir
    bamer: one is the red banner of revolution held aloft by the Third In
    cumstanccs becomes entirely erroneous when generalised. This is to
    ternationa/ as the rallying point for all the oppressed classes of the
    deny the class character of the middle bourgeoisie. It is not possible that
    world, the other is the white banner of counterrevolution held aloft by the
    these revisionists do not know the judgement of Marxism-leninism or
    League of Nations as the ra/Ving point /or all the counter-revoluttionctr
    the middle bourgeoisie, i.e.: "the middle bourgeoisie from time to time
    ies of the world. The intermediate classes are bound to disintegrate
    oins the ranks of the revolution and from time to time the ranks of the
    quickly, some sections turning lefi to join the revolution, others turning
    counter-revolution etc, The revisionists in a trice trample on the worldly
    tht to join the countey-revolntion, there is no room for then to re
    experience and replace it with their own reactionary utopias. The reali-
    main independent. therefore the idea cherished by China s middie
    ties of our country, too, give countless examples of how, in periods when
    bourgeoisie of an"independent revolution in which it would play the
    there was not a strong revolutionary political movement, the middle
    primary role is a mere illusion. (Mao Tse-tung, Selected Works 1)
    bourgeoisie of a national character for long years attached itself to the
    The revisionists have not abandoned their claim that in our age po
    comprador big bourgeoisie and landlord cliques. The claim that"the big
    litically independent national bourgeois power is possible and that the
    bourgeoisie and middle bourgeoisie cannot co-exist "is contrary to the re
    tendency is for this to increase. But they have opted to camouflage this
    alities of our country. Mao mentions that the middle bourgeoisie in China
    claim insidiously. They have replaced the phrase"Arab countries in
    often followed the Kuomintang reactionaries. Therefore, the above claim
    which the national bourgeoisie is in power "with the term"nationalist
    also contradicts the objective realities of the Chinese Revolution
    403

==========第203頁==========
    To attribute to the middle bourgeoisie a quality they do not deser
    We should continue to insistently defend the Kurdish people's
    is another image of the revisionist traitors,tendency to rely on the mid
    right of self-determination(On the question of founding of Red Po
    dle bourgeoisie
    itical Power)
    24. The Shafak Revisionists are Driying Dominant Nation
    The"People's Right of Self- Determination " advocated b
    Nationalism and making the Kurdish Nation,s Right of Self-
    Bukharin and" right of nations to self-determination ' advocated b
    Determination impossible
    comrade Lenin are two entirely different things. The first mneans thepeoples right to make a revolution, whereas the second means a na
    Since we have criticised the revisionists views regarding the Na
    tion's right to establish a separate state. The Shafak Revisionists de
    tional Question in a separate booklet we shall only briefly touch on the
    fend the Kurdish people's right to make a revolution(!). This is their
    question here
    resolution of the national question. And this is nothing else but to de
    The Shafak revisionists do not see the Kurdish movenent as a na
    fend insidiously the continuation the Turkish nations existing privi
    tional movement. They evaluate it only
    popular movenent that is
    ge to establish a state. It is to be an accomplice of the Turkish ruling
    acting against national oppression and persecution. They are erasing the
    classes. It is to approve the xisting inequality that is to the disad
    great difference between popular movement and national movement.
    vantage of the Kurdish nation
    ( See Draft Programme articles 10-25). They portray national oppression
    We are including a section from our booklet on the national question
    and class oppression, national contradiction and class contradiction as
    that documents the dominant nation nationalism of the Shafak revision
    one and the same thing. In this way, by pushing to one side the class con
    Ists
    tradictions of the Kurdish bourgeoisie and landlords they are lending
    The Shafak revisionists approve of the national oppression meted
    support to efforts to deceive the Kurdish working class and toilers
    out to the Kurdish nation and other minority nationalities in history. They
    On the one hand the Shafak Revisionists, by distorting the concept
    applaud M Kemal,s stating at the Sivas Congress that"In Turkey the
    of"The Right of Nations to Self-determination in an incredible way, are
    Turks and the Kurds live. They warmly welcome Ismet Inonu saying at
    making this right inpossible. They came up with the form"People s
    susanne that"I am the representative of the Turks and the Kurds, and
    right of self-determination a formulation once advocated by Bukharin
    make it a prop for themselves. It is as if they are saying to the Turkish
    against Lenin, then tied this" People s right of self-deternlination"to
    ruling classes"Look, Ataturk and Inonu also recognised the existence
    kinds of conditions, shamefully trampling on the"K urdish nation's right
    of the Kurds. This is what we are doing, too! What is there to get angry
    to self-determination". ( See Draft Programme, article 52)
    The Marxist-leninist movement is a defender of the Kurdish peo
    The revisionist traitors assume that by recognising a nations ex
    ple,s right to self-determination
    Istence they have resolved the national question. Communists, on the
    ( The Political situation in the World and Turkey after 12 March, page
    national question, champion the absolute equality of every nationalnty and language and oppose all manner of inequality and privilege
    -We shall defend the Kurdish people' s right to self-determination
    On the question of establishing a state, too, they demand the equality
    without concessions"(ibid, page 72
    of nations. Their unconditional defence of"the right of Nations to
    404

==========第204頁==========
    self-determination ' comes from this. However, the bourgeoisie at
    25. The Kemalist inheritance
    every opportunity wants inequality to the advantage of its own nationality and privilege, and tramples on the most natural rights o
    We are going to deal with how the Shafak revisionists evaluate the
    other nations etc
    history of Turkey and their flattery of Kemalism in a separate booklet
    The dominant nation bourgeoisie may recognise the existence of
    Let us point out briefly here that the Shafak revisionists are to the rigaht
    other nations, and even, when it has to, grant them certain rights. Like
    of Ecevit, a spokesman of the reformist bourgeoisie, and closer to the
    the Arab bourgeoisie in Iraq. But at cvery opportunity it will trample
    Kemal Satir group, in their evaluation of the Kemalist movement The
    on these rights and wish to oppress other nationalities. What sepa
    Shafak revisionists eagerly embrace the inheritance that even Ecevit is
    rates communists and the bourgeoisie is not whether or not the
    reluctant to accept, and endeavour to publicise this"precious"inheri
    recognise a minority nationalitys existence
    tance in all directions. The Kemalists tenet of"complete independence
    Besides, M. Kemal,s real purpose in mentioning the existence o
    implies willing acceptance of the semi-colonial structure and there is ab
    the Kurds at the Sivas Congress in conditions where there was little
    olutely nothing in this that communists should wish to possess. This is
    or no central authority was to prevent a possible separate Kurdish
    an inheritance that is worthy of Kemal Satir. As for us we are the hei
    movement and to block the right of self-determination. He wished to
    of the struggles of the toiling peoples of every nationality and of our
    ensure they would consent to the yoke of the Turkish bourgeoisie and
    heroic workers and peasants. We are the heirs of the Inexhaus tible energy,
    andlords. The whole life of M. Kemal is full of examples of oppres
    epic-creating heroism, endless determination to struggle and intense class
    sion and persecution of the Kurdish nation and other nationalities In
    resentment of the masses that were dulled and subsequently brutally op
    Turkey if there is one person whom communists should not enrol in
    pressed by the Kemalists who took the leadership of the Liberation War
    leir support on the national question it is M. Kemal. And in Turkey
    The toiling masses know well the true nature of the thing that the Shafak
    the nationalism that needs to be struggled against first and foremost
    revisionists cherish as an inheritance. That inheritance is the gendarmerifle butt on th
    is M.Kemal nationalism. which is dominant nation nationalism
    le necks of the peasants, beatings at the military post, the
    Inonu's claim to represent the Kurds at the Lausanne Conference was
    whip of the landlords and everything that brought hunger and disaster for
    a blatant attack on the Kurdish nation, s right to self-determination. A
    the masses. I1 was oppression for the minorities. It was a mark of"class
    shameful determination of the Kurdish nations destiny from outside
    fraternity "with the British, French and German imperialists! As long as
    The craftiness to haggle with imperialists to include the region where
    you retain that inheritance the toiling masses will regard you with a ter-
    the Kurdish people live within the borders of Turkey that s the area
    rible anger that they have carried for a long time
    of domination of the Turkish bourgeoisie and landlords: And the
    26. TKP Inheritance
    emergence of the most ferocious forms of Turkish nationalism. This the thing the revisionist traitors have made a base for themselves
    The Shafak revisionists do not relinquish to anyone the inheritance
    A Turkish nationalism that makes certain concessions to Kurdish
    of revisionist history of the TKP that is worthy of M. Belli, H. Kivilciml
    nationalism. This is the summary of all the prattling and charlatanry pel
    and Yakup Demir. Since we have detailed our views on the TKP in a sep
    petrated by the Shafak revisionists on the national question
    arate booklet we will not dwell on them here. Let us point out briefl
    407

==========第205頁==========
    that the TKP pursued a rightist and revisionist line after the death of com-
    al realities of the alphabe
    L
    n that all
    rade Mustafa Suphi. Sheifk Husnu, who seized the leadership of the
    communists should know. Marxism-leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought
    party, drifted so far away from Marxism-leninism as to expect the Ke-
    has two characteristics: one is its class character. that is. in the service o
    malists to carry out socialist revolution. The TKP under the leadership of
    a class, the proletariat. And, secondly, its practical characteristic in that
    Shefik Husnu never grasped the revolutionary role of the peasantry or the
    it emerges from the class struggle, production struggle and scientific test
    worker-peasant alliance. It always tried to forge an alliance with the
    practice and the fact it can again be implemented in practice. The revi
    bourgeoisie and paid the penalty, but had the working class and poor
    sionists have torn Marxisnn-leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought away from
    nts suffer for it. The TKP under the leadership of Shefik Husnu
    its most important characteristic. its class character; in this way they have
    maintained an endless fidelity to the Kemalist administration. It rejected
    reduced it to the state of"a divine ethical philosophy that will serve the
    the armed struggle. Initially it waited for the Kemalist government to
    bourgeoisie and landlord class to the same degree it serves the prole
    achieve socialism (.)with coercive nationalisation, then suffered disa
    tariat. Besides, even every ethical philosophy has a class character. To
    pointment, and set about waiting for the Kemalists to mature the condi
    vulgarise Marxism-leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought to this extent takes
    tions for socialist revolution, It applauded the Kemalist government's
    great ability ( )and a subtle mind, talents our revisionists have in abun
    oppression and persecution of the minority nationalities. This inheritancwell befits our greedy inheritance merchants. We are Sure that they will
    The means of production are neutral as regards the classes
    find many things In the TKP inheritance to supporf teir revis\ow/ the
    Whichever class has seized control of them they will serve that cla
    s. But a movement genuinely bound to the cause of communism will
    When the working class seizes power it will not destroy the means of
    reject such an inheritance. We are the heirs of comrade Mustafa Suphi
    production, but will take them away from the hands of a handful of ex-
    and the TKP under his leadership. We are the heirs of the unshakeable be
    loiters and make them the joint property of the proletariat. In this way
    lief in the fire ofrevolution and"communism carried subjectively in
    the means of production, with production relations, that is, collective
    the hearts and minds of the worker, peasant and intellectual cadres who
    production, will find the opportunity to develop and expand. However
    were committed to the cause of communism but whose beliefs and en
    Marxism-leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought has been in conflict with the
    ergy were channelled into erroneous paths by the revisionist leadership
    ideas of the bourgeoisie and all classes since the day it emerged. It is animportant weapon in the hands of the proletariat. Just as It is of no use
    27. The Shafak Revisionists Deny the Class Character of
    to the reactionary classes it will also bring about their death as a clas:
    Marxism-leninism-mao Tse-tung Thought.
    The reactionary classes and even a section of allies of the proletariat maysometimes make imitations of this weapon and put them on the market
    According to the Shafak revisionists"_eninismi-m:
    but this cannot overshadow the class character of Marxism-leninism
    tung Thought is the joint property of all mankind ". The revisionist tral
    Mao Tse-tung Thought. This is because the thing put on the market b
    tors are comparing Marxismi-lenmism Ma Tse-tung T hought which is
    the other classes as Marxism-leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought is the
    the joint property of the global working class, with a printing machine
    thoughts of their own classes varnished with Marxism-leninism Mao
    with the means of production that are neutral and serve the class that
    Tse-tung Thought in order to mislead the proletariat
    controls them. The Shafak revisionists do not hesitate to trample on the
    409

==========第206頁==========
    Under the dictatorship of the proletariat, too, Marxism-leninism
    37. The disappearance of all these contradictions and our peo
    Mao Tse-tung Thought will be in conflict with the ideas of othel
    ples liberation from exploitation and oppression will be realised with
    classes and will again serve the proletariat. Only when all classes dis
    Sociallsm
    appear, when the state which is a means of class domination withers
    The disappearance of all these contradictions.will be realised
    away and society writes the slogan"From each according to his abil
    with socialism". As is known, there are different ways of resolving dif-
    ity, to each according to his need"on their banners, that Is, when the
    ferent contradictions. The contradiction between imperialism and our
    sublime world of communism is attained, only then will Marxisi
    eople (but not our country)will be resolved by a revolutionary national
    eninism Mao Tse-tung Thought become the joint property of all hu-
    war (with a national revolution). The contradiction between the broad
    mankind, as all classes will have disappeared and there will no longer
    popular masses and feudalism will be resolved by a revolutionary civil
    be a class struggle
    war (with democratic revolution). In semi-colonial, semi-feudal coun
    Then Marxism-leninisnl Mao Tse-tung Thought will be in the
    tries the struggle against imperialism and the struggle against feudalism
    service of humanity in the production struggle, the struggle of scen
    that is, the national revolution and the democratic revolution are not sep
    tific test that is humanitys struggle with nature. In todays world hu
    arated one from the oter, as they are Jinked to each other with un-
    manity is divided into classes and there is a merciless struggle between
    breakable ties. But according to circumstances sometimes one of these
    these classes. The proletariat is waging a life and death struggle against
    contradictions and sometimes the other may become prominent. Al
    reaction having gathered a section of the people behind It with the
    thoug) in semi-colonial and semi-feudal countries under the indirect rule
    weapon of Marxism-leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought. In such an en-
    of imperialism the contradiction between feudalism and the popular
    ironment the revisionists are saying: "Marxism-leninism Mao Tse-
    masses is the main contradiction. in such countries that suffer the mii
    tung Thought is the joint property of all humanity", in a way that wi
    tary occupation of imperialism the national contradiction comes to the
    make the proletariat and its allies doubt this weapon. If this is not due
    fore and becomes the main contradiction. But in both cases the resolu
    to their ill intentions it is due to their utter stupidity
    tion of these two contradictions is not separated one from the other. Thismeans that the reso]utionof these first two contradictions will come
    28. The Shafak Revisionists are Distorting the Doctrines of
    about before through the democratic popular revolution, notwith so
    Democratic People's Dictatorship, Socialism and
    cialism". Since the country in question is Turkey and the"ruling classes
    Communism in an unbelievable wa
    in question are the ruling classes of Turkey, then once their" po-
    We are quoting the following articles regarding this subject from the
    sition in Turkey is ended there will no longer a question of"contradic
    Draft Programne and the criticism of them since they are important
    tion among the ruling classes". Who are the ruling classes today? The big
    36. These are the main contradictions in our semi-colonial, semi
    comprador bourgeoisie and landlords. When they are brought down from
    feudal society: 1 )the contradiction between imperialism and our coun
    their"ruling positions by the democratic popular revolution, who will
    try; 2)the contradiction between the broad popular masses and
    be the ruling classes? Primarily the working class, peasantry, urban petit
    feudalism; 3)the contradiction between the proletariat and the bour
    bourgeoisie and the revolutionary wing of the national bourgeoisie. The
    geoiste, 4)the contradiction amongst the ruling classes
    domiant class in this alliance will be the proletariat. It is clear that the
    410
    41

==========第207頁==========
    contradiction amongst the ruling classes of the democratic peoples gov
    facet. But it will not entirely remove this contradiction. Socialism will
    ernment will be entirely different to the contradiction amongst the ol
    make the proletariat the primary facet and the entire bourgeoisie, in-
    ruling classes. And it is a contradiction "within the people that can be
    cluding the national bourgeoisie, the secondary facet but will not en
    resolved by peaceful, non-antagonistic methods
    tirely remove this contradiction In the period of proletarian power and
    The contradiction that" will be resolved by socialism
    the foundation of socialism and even after the completion of the trans-
    four contradictions. only the "contradiction between the proletariat
    formation of the means of production to socialist ownership, a contra
    and the bourgeoisie".(in other words, the contradiction between labour
    diction will still exist between the proletariat of that country and
    and capital)
    imperialism and the entire bourgeoisie and landlords(particularly in
    Let us make another point: in the draft mention is made of the"dis
    the ideological sphere). But in that country the proletariat will consti
    appearance of the contradiction, not its resolution. Neither the con
    tute the primary facet of this contradiction while the others will consti-
    prador big bourgeoisie and landlords, nor the national bourgeoisie car
    tute the secondary facet. The contradiction amongst the reactionariesthat constitute the secondary facet will also continue to exist .The dis
    be entirely abolished by either the democratic popular revolution or thesocialist revolution. They will maintain their existence in the ideologi-
    appearance of all these contradictions 'will"be realised"with com
    cal and cultural sphere after the realisation of the dictatorship of the
    munis, notwith socialism! Prom whichever angle we look thesentence in the draft is erroneous and contrary to Marxism-leninism
    proletariat and even after the completion of the transtormation of themeans of production to collective ownership. This is the reason for the
    37.the liberation of our people from exploitation and oppression
    continuation of the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat
    ill be realised with socialism. It is true that with socialism"our peo
    They have shown the source of all this in comrade Lenin's'left Com
    ples" exploitation will end. In the period of democratic peoples power,
    munism, an infantile Disorder. As long as imperialism and reaction Is
    since the national bourgeoisie and its property will continue to exist, ex
    not uprooted worldwide, in a country where the proletariat has achieved
    ploitation, although not extreme, will continue to exist. Even the exis
    victory, the overthrown reactionary classes will maintain their existence.
    tence of small-scale production means that exploitation will exist to a
    lie in wait and look for an opportunity to transform the revolution into
    certain extent. Therefore, under proletarian power too, as long as the
    a counter-revolution. What is meant by the resolution of the contradic
    transformation of the means of production to collective ownership has
    tion is the secondary facet of the first three of todays contradictions
    not been completed exploitation will partially continue. Once collec
    becoming primary and the primary contradictions becoming second-
    tive ownership has been achieved in all fields there will no longer be any
    ary. As for the"disappearance" of contradictions this implies that they
    question of exploitation. The universal watchword of socialism.from
    will no longer exist and completely vanish and will have neither a dom
    everyone according to their talents, to everyone according to their needs
    inant nor a secondary facet, The democratic popular revolution will
    ill become reality. The situation of the means of production, the source
    make imperialism and the comprador bourgeoisie and landlords who
    of exploitation, being in the hands of a group of people will have ended
    constitute the primary facet of the current contradiction into the sec
    with these becoming the joint property of society. The source of exploitation will have been dried
    ondary facet and the proletariat and the other popular classes that con-stitute the secondary facet of the current contradiction into the primary
    But the second part of the sentence"the liberation of our people
    412

==========第208頁==========
    fron oppression will be realised with socialism! "is completely wrong
    and oppression is being postponed until communism. That is, both in
    This is to accept indirectly that oppression will exist in the system of
    the system of democratic people's dictatorship and in the system o
    democratic people's dictatorship What is oppression? Oppression is the
    proletarian dictatorship"oppression exist! Furthermore, socialism is
    persecution and coercion inflicted by the current ruling classes on the
    preserving'exploitation! Either this"socialism"is something like
    popular classes. It is reactionary violence to which the reactionary classes
    Swedish socialism, or the imperialists or reactionaries are right when
    resort in order to maintain its exploitation and preserve Its position o
    they say"Socialism is the most oppressive and exploitative order". Or
    power. In this respect the violence they inflict on the popular classes
    the colleague who penned the Draft is unaware of the real meaning of
    also unjust. What is this unjust and reactionary violence implemented
    the concepts he uses
    with? The regular army whose profession is to guard the ruling classes
    Let us reiterate: in a socialist society although classes and the state
    the police, prisons etc . The ruling classes have from way back always
    which is the vehicle of proletarian dictatorship exist, there is neither
    used two weapons against the people: "Hangman and priest". The Imeans
    exploitation nor oppression. Exploitation disappears with the con
    of oppression is this"hangman". Since a victorious people s revolution
    struction of socialism. To talk of exploitation in a society where the
    under the leadership of the proletariat will throw out the"hangman and
    atchword is"from everyone according to their means, to everyone
    the"priest "from that country where will the oppression remain? Yes
    according to their labour, shows that this principle has not been
    after the democratic popular revolution (and even after the socialist rev
    grasped. As for oppression, this will disappear with the realisation of
    olution )violence will not disappear. But the character of this violence
    the democratic peoples power( this is a peoples republic). That is
    ill change completely. It will be revolutionary violence used by the
    there is no question of oppression in either the system of democratic
    proletariat and popular classes against the reactionary classes wishing to
    people's dictatorship or the system of proletarian dictatorship. Op
    bring back the old order, and will be historically legitimate and just. But
    pression is the crushing of the revolutionary people by a handful of ex
    it oppression If you ask the reactionaries, it is, but if you ask us it 1
    plotters and the reactionary class. If the dictatorship of the people and
    the most natural, inevitable thing, a just and progressive thing and never
    proletariat over the reactionaries is seen as oppression this is absolutely
    oppression! On the contrary, it is a punishment given by the people to
    Tong, and thie language of reactionaries
    those who wish to bring back the old oppression. Isnt the Draft Pro
    It is correct that the world of communism is a world where there
    grange, by indirectly accepting that oppression will exist in the system
    are no longer classes. ' But this is not all. In the world of communism
    of democratic people s dictatorship, sipping into a parallel position with
    ong with classes the state that is the product of irreconcilable class
    the reactionaries
    contradictions, that is the means of repression of the ruling classes over
    9. The ultimate goal of our movement is to realise a classless so
    other classes, and the means of proletarian dictatorship in socialism,
    ciety, that is, communism, by getting rid of all manner of exploitation and
    will also disappear. This is because with the complete disappearance of
    oppression
    classes the proletariat will no longer need the state. On the other hand
    With the above phrase the Programme has fallen behind article 3
    at the stage of communism. that is
    At a stroke the abolishing of exploitation and oppression becones the
    From each according to his ability
    h
    ding to hi
    ultimate goal of our movement. That is, the abolishing of exploitation
    nee '(M

==========第209頁==========
    It means that the characteristic of the world of communism Is not
    men! For people can learn good lessons from bad teachers. From such
    Ist the disappearance of classes, but also the disappearance of class
    teachers people learn what not to do and what not to champion and this
    domination and the replacement of the slogan from everyone accord
    is a good lesson PDA and Shafak revisionism have been our bad teach
    ing to their means, to everyone according to their labour, by the watch
    ers, from whom we have leamed good lessons. And we have digested
    word: " from everyone according to their talents, to everyone according
    these good lessons in struggle against the bad advice of our teachers
    to their needs". The Draft, apart from confirming exactly the qualities
    In this context the PDA and Shafak revisionism have helped us to grasp
    attributed to socialism and the system of democratic popular dictator
    Marxism-leninism. If we had tamely followed our teachers we would
    ship by reactionaries, has also broken communism away from its most
    have ended up now like you revisionist traitors
    significant characteristics
    Since we criticised PDA revisionism for extending a hand to Soviet social-imperialism in the past they became irate, saying: "Their
    29. On Certain Slanders
    accusation is just like saying to a five-year-old child why don't you
    The Shafak revisionists, in panic, published a rag that criticised us
    hink like a fifteen-year-old? ""How pathetic! Comrade Stalin said
    or rather slung mud at us. It is necessary to briefly touch on some o
    A persons social life determines their consciousness'" What true
    these slanders
    words. The answer to why the Shafak revisionists cannot stop thinking
    As we maintained that legal publishing activity should not be pri-
    like bourgeois is these words of comrade Stalin. A child of five will in
    mary they say we"ad vocate closing the newspaper and magazine and
    a normal process of development be a youth at the age of fifteen. But
    stuffing the entire cadre into a mouse hole. We have stated before that
    a five-year-old donkey will never become a fifteen-year-old youth
    we have never rejected publishing activity, only that we opposed a com-
    In the same way revisionism will never grow up to become Marx
    munist movement being reduced to the status of a publishing house
    ism-leninism. Bourgeois gentlemen see Marxism-leninism as the nat-
    We will demonstrate how we understand publishing activity with our
    ural outcome of revisionism. They see the correct idea as the natura
    future practice. The revisionist traitors are exposing their own vileness
    result of an erroneous idea. A young communist movement is not a re
    as they slander us. To want illegal activity to be primary is, in the eyes
    visionist movement. It may be inexperienced and still weak and with
    of the revisionist traitors who have a dogs loyalty to bourgeois laws
    limited ability to wage struggle, but it will still follow a correct line in
    to stuff the cadre into a mouse hole. These vain intellectual gentle
    Dite of this. It will not defend errors on questions concerning which it
    men are saying: "Wasn't it these publications that transported working
    has no experience. It will merely grasp the truth with time and step by
    class ideology into their bourgeois heads and got them involved in the
    step. A communist movement will make mistakes in every period, but
    struggle Presumably those who read these criticisms will decide who
    these errors will not be serious and will be corrected as soon as possi-
    owns a bourgeois head? Anyone who is familiar with Marx ism-lenin
    ble Marxism-leninism will develop in struggle and in rejection of re
    istn will easily understand that our publications contain undiluted bour
    visionis. Do you understand? As long as you do not reject"being a
    geois ideology with a little Marxist-leninist polish in the name of
    donkey", as long as you do not struggle with"being a donkey " however
    working class ideology. As for the claim that we learned Marxism
    much you grow up you will not be a"man". You will just be an older
    Leninism from your publications, there is some truth in this gentle
    donkey”,that'sall
    416

==========第210頁==========
    The revisionists say that we used to be together with the
    la
    but they will attain the idea that liberation will occur with armed strug
    tionists "and that we made a self-criticism in their ranks and stayed there
    le long before timid, garrulous types like you who adorn themselves
    To claim that we are with them is to tell a blatant lie. In particular the
    with the title proletarian"revolutionary " Long before you have read
    claim that we made a self-criticism and stayed in their ranks is the limit
    this truth in books a section of workers and peasants will know that lib
    If you are hoping to stay upright with such lies and chicanery it will no
    eration will come with armed struggle. Let us reiterate: if your logic
    be long before you begin to decay
    was correct then in today's Turkey where the proletarian party is still
    The revisionist traitors also claim that we say that"the workers
    in its labour pains then it would be necessary for there to be no work
    peasants, all our people have understood that liberation will comle with
    ers and peasants anywhere in Turkey"who have grasped that libera
    armed struggle". What we say is this: this sentence exists in exactly the
    tion will be by aned struggle. "This would be a shameful slander o
    same form in the DABK Resolution "Today a current that does not take
    the masses
    the revolutionary struggle in our country to a very significant point, the
    And these traitors are laying down the condition of the masses hav
    path of the armed struggle, will be isolated from the masses, even if by
    politically (whatever that means )grasped the question of power
    name it is a communist movement
    being prepared to take up arms"andbeing organised"(yes, you
    This is something different from what you are trying to attribute
    have not misread"organised)
    to us. Today in Turkey there are many people who have not yet grasped
    The revisionists are describing a militant member of a communis
    the necessity of armed struggle who trust and believe in a movement
    party, not a worker or peasant"who has grasped that liberation will
    that leads the armed struggle. And look at these pearls of wisdom
    occur with armed struggle. And since the number of people who
    'The designation that"all our people have understood that liber-
    would match this description in our country could be counted on the
    ation will happen with armed struggle involves the party of the pro
    fingers of very few hands, our gentlemen are snoozing comfortably
    letariat having established its influence over the people in our country
    Atleast do not try to attribute our backwardness, lack of intelligence
    and the workers and peasants in particular having grasped politically
    stupidity and lethargy to the masses that are a thousand times more
    the question of power, prepared to take up arms, being organised etc
    advanced than you timid bourgeois. In our country, contrary to your
    Does such a situation exist
    claim, a significant section of the workers and peasants knows that
    According to this logic it is necessary for there to be absolutely
    liberation will be with armed struggle. They know this from the ex
    nowhere in Turkey where there are workers and peasants"who have
    perience they have gained in their own class struggle. But the masses
    grasped that liberation will come with armed struggle, 'beeause with-
    are in need of a decisive, energetic, intelligent communist leadership
    out the influence of a party the masses cannot work out the necessity
    that will give them confidence and leadership! And such a communist
    of armed struggle through their own experience! So, gentlemen, what
    leadership can emerge and develop today in our country amidst the
    about the rebellions in history? or let us put to one side the distant
    flames of the armed struggle. This is the crux of the matter. To know
    past, the struggle of workers and peasants who had not heard even the
    that liberation will be with armed struggle does not mean to know
    name of the proletarian party in recent periods? Workers and peasants
    Marxism-leninism. An ordinary person who sees their enemy com
    annot attain scientific socialism through just their own experience
    ing towards them with a cudgel or a gun will presumably think of grab
    418
    419

==========第211頁==========
    bing whatever they have and bringing it down on the head of their
    a revolutionary policy tied to principles. Both revisionism and Mao
    enemy. As for our people they have lived under the threat of the
    Tse-tung Thought are to be found in these cunning traders shops. Ac
    enemy' s rifle butt bayonet and prison for years. Why can you not
    cording to circumstances they sometimes have one, and sometimes the
    think of talking to them in their own language
    other on display. But most of the times both of thein are on the marke
    From all this garrulousness it is once again understood that for you
    Whichever one is there they always implement revisionism in prac
    the armed struggle is a phobia. You are making any number of excuses
    tice. Another characteristic of Shafak revisionism is that it presents the
    and inventing numerous theories in order to keep it away. Your above
    most rightist practice in an excellent way and Is expert at deceiving
    theses are further proof of your rightist and pacifist line that delays the
    cadre. In this way we have indicated the three fundamental character
    Istics of Shafak revisionism
    aried struggle Ior years
    And already we can see that new theories are beginning to appear
    Its efforts in ideology and in policy to reconcile the shoddiest re
    such as"let s not annoy fascism or we'ii suffer for it', completely ca-
    visionist theses to Mao Tse-tung Thought. 2)Always pursuing a right
    pltulatlonist, pacifist theories wrapped up ready to be put on the mar
    Ist, capitulationist pacifist line in practice. 3) Being excellent
    ket. Instead of reaching the conclusion from the blow of martial law to
    concealing this rightist, capitulationist, pacifist line
    embrace illegality more seriously, we are amazed to see that reactionaryconclusions such as" we drew many cadre into illegality, that's why it
    The Sources of Shafak Revisionism
    happened, have been reached. And we wait impatiently for what newtheories you will come up with!
    From all these criticisms the sources of Shafak revisionism should
    You say we support an armed struggle disconnected from the
    have been clearly understood. These sources are, briefly: I-the fact
    masses. You cannot show even one sentence or a single act of ours that
    that the cadres who fill the ranks of the movement are to a great extent
    will support this claim. On the contrary, we have constantly maintained
    from bourgeois or even big bourgeois circles. They bring their class
    the necessity in the conditions in Turkey of organising the peasant
    ideologies, habits and long-established class instincts with them and
    masses for the armed struggle. But since you consider that the armed
    manifest them at every opportunity in different forms. 2. The emer
    struggle is contrary to the mass line(! )we were not surprised at you
    gence and development of the movement in peaceful forms of struge
    accusation
    Being alien to the armed struggle from the beginning. The Shafak
    Your claims that we reject the party and the worker-peasant al
    movement, which prepared itself and its cadres according to entirely
    liance are too ridiculous to be worthy of a response
    peaceful methods of struggle, is totally unable to throw off the ailmentsof passivity and bureaucracy that have penetrated to their very marrow
    LET US SUMMARISE
    in the conditions of armed struggle, and is trying to conceal this attitudewith new theoretical coverings. Until the storm of the increasingly vi
    Shafak revisionism, as can be seen, on all the fundamental ques
    olent class struggle hurls it aside Shafak revisionism will continue to
    tions of the revolution has extended one hand to revisionism and the
    hinder the revolutionary movement. But its life will not be long
    other to Maotse-tung Thought. A merchant-like cunning has replaced
    420
    421

==========第212頁==========
    A New Variety of Shafak Revisionism
    The gentlemen who made these claims are now abroad. far from
    Refugee Revisionism
    the"fear of arrest, grasping(! )the revolutionary experiences of Viet-
    In the struggle between the two lines, certain elements that have
    nam and other countries. They are"learning "how to organise a prole
    been in the ranks of the Shafak revisionists from the beginning and are
    tarian party from abroad (!) Subsequently they will found a
    now abroad made a self-criticism during martial law announcing they
    proletarian party " that we have all looked forward to and they will
    had ioined the ranks of the Marxist-leninists. But when these incorri
    save us from curiosity and the people of Turkey from lack of leadership
    gible opportunists were summoned to participate actively in the class
    (1 ) These"colleagues who are well aware of their responsibilities(
    struggle they once again showed their true faces, and shunned the class
    are apparently debating whether it will be more useful to apply for asy
    struggle. They also accused our Marxist-leninist movement of "left
    lum in Algeria or in Sweden. In our opinion it would be best if theywent to the"moon", as there are no police there
    deviation in a Shafak revisionist way. Their clains are
    It is clear that the above theories are a cover for pacifism and flee
    I-the question today is one of organising the proletarian parties
    Ing the struggle, while the slogan"No to sectarianism"is in reality a
    Such a party should be organised that comes to lead all the people, inwhich there will be no more debate and will go on to the end withou
    justification for the desire to establish unity without principles with allrevisionist and opportunist groups and for mental laziness
    any deviation. Armed struggle is the highest form of class struggle andhe party is the highest form of proletarian organisation. Theretore
    As for the idea that we are a group, so are they " this is an expres-sion of narrow cliquism and careerism. Marxist-leninists. wherever
    without such a party being formed armed struggle cannot be launched
    they are, see themselves as part of the communist movement. not as a
    2- What needs to be done today is to sit down and read and learnfrom the Vietnam experiment and experiences of other countries
    separate group. The most worthy place for the refugee revisionists istheir former homes, that is, the ranks of Shafak revisionism
    3-the revolutionary movernent in Turkey has suffered a great defeat. The responsibility is on"" shoulders. We should be aware o
    All the Communist Revolutionaries of Turkey
    our responsibility and not get ourselves arrested. For this reason it is not
    Unite in the Ranks of the Marxist-leninist Movement!
    correct to go to Turkey
    4-there should not be sectarianism. We should have friendly rela
    e Marxist-leninists, whatever appearance they take, will con
    tions with all groups. The Shatak movements error is not opposition to
    tinue to wage a determined struggle against revisionism
    armed struggle and passivity, but sectarianism. The TKP movements
    The Marxist-leninists will be merciless towards their own erron
    error from the start was also sectarianism
    and implement the principle of criticism and self-criticism sincerely
    5-colleagues in Turkey(they mean us) made an error in not con
    Ind courageously. Today in our country the primary task of commu
    sulting with us " before stating to organise. We are also, like them, es
    nist revolutionaries is to construct the three weapons of the people
    tablishing a group. There should have been a meeting and agreement
    ithin the armed strugg
    made between representatives of the two groups prior to commencing
    A disciplined Communist Party cleansed of subjectivism, rev
    organisation
    sionism and dogmatism, fused with the masses, combining practiceand theory, implementing self-critical method; people's armed forces
    423

==========第213頁==========
    under the leadership of such a party; and a peoples united front,again under the leadership of such a party. These are the three weaponsof the people we shall use in defeating the enemy
    The Marxist-leninists have decided and are determied to ignitethe fire of armed struggle amongst the masses in various areas of ourcountry for this purpose
    The Origin And Development Of
    All Comrades! All the Communist revolutionaries of our country
    The Differences Between Ourselves And
    Let us break off all our links with the revisionist cliques
    Let us establish a stable unity in the Marxist-leninist ranks
    Shafak Revisionism
    There are hard but glorious days of struggle in front of us. Let usleap into the sea of class struggle with all our being
    Let us possess an endless trust in our heroic working class. long
    A General Critique of TIIKP(Turke
    suffering peasants and bold youth in this struggle!
    Revolutionary Worker Peasant Party
    Long live the bright road of comrades Marks, Engels, Lenin
    Stalin and Mao Tse-tung
    Long live the toiling people of every nationality in Turkeong live our Marxist-leninist movement.
    ae1972
    424

==========第214頁==========
    INTERROGATON
    Accused Ibrahim Kaypakkaya was brought in and after his iden-tity was ascertained the accused was reminded of the incident and organisational relationship and asked: the accused replied, sastudied for 6 years at the Hasanoglan Primary Teachers Boardingschool as a child from a poor family. Due to my success there I wassent to the High Teachers'school. After a vear studving in prep classentered the Istanbul Capa High Teachers'school and at the sartime the Faculty of Science at Istanbul University. After that I particted in d
    d
    f the
    uti
    youth and developed Iy revolutionary ideas. In 1967 along with 9colleagues I was a founder of the Capa Ideas Club. At that time as amember of the FKF ( deas Club Federation )and the TIP I attended allthe meetings. debates. rallies and demonstrations organised by them
    In 1968 I was initially provisionally and subsequently permanentlyexpelled by the School,'s reactionary administration. Despite gettinga stay of execution of this decision from the Council of State the fas-cist administration of the school did not comply with it. My ideas, actions in which I had participated and my work in youth organisationswere given as the main reasons for my expulsion. As far as I can recall my participation in the No to NATO and protest of the American6th Fleet, work in organising a Troubadours Night, distributing certain leaflets and participation in workers'marches were regarded asactions harmful to my status as a student. However, all these activities are things that everyone who loves their country and peopshould carry out in accordance with their beliefs, consciousness andpersonal responsibility

==========第215頁==========
    Over time certain differences of opinion developed within the
    gendarme and the just strikes and resistance of workers in the Istanbul
    FKF youth organisation. This was in one respect a natural outcome o
    factories of Demir Dokum, Sungurlar, Horoz Civi, Pertriks, Ege
    dvancing awareness and experiences gained. The two main view
    Sanayi, EASAKU, Gislaved, Gamak, Singer and Derby. I participated
    that emerged were, firstly, the opinion of the FKF administration from
    In the great workers demonstration of 15-16 June and when I had the
    way back i.e. the TIP parliamentarist and reformist view and, sec
    opportunity I endeavoured to make a contribution to the struggle of
    ondly, the phased revolutions view that advocated a national demo
    revolutionary youth defending themselves against fascist attacks on
    cratic revolution. Initially this view was championed by Turk Solu
    the universities, and other democratic actions. I have no objection to
    and Aydinlik Socialist Magazine and subsequently by'the PDA and
    making the preceding comments. Al these activities were legal during
    Isci-koylu. In spite of certain negative aspects. Turk Solu and Ay
    that period and did not constitute offences. And I, as a revolutionary
    dinlik Socialist Magazine assisted tie advance of the revolutionar
    took part in these activities within the framework I have explained
    cadres awareness and their understanding of revolutionary ideas. This
    above. I continued these activities as being necessary work for the lib
    is because the TIP and its leading cadre were preventing the dissem
    eration of the people as a communist revolutionary believing in Marx
    ination of revolutionary ideas and Marxism-leniinlsin amongst revo
    Ismi-leninism and as a member of the revolutionary youth organisation
    lutionary cadre, workers and peasants. I see the TIPS administrators
    DEV-GENC as a necessary responsibility of a revolutionary youth to
    s reformist middle bourgeois intellectuals who call themselves so
    wards the people and youth. However, apart from subjects concerning
    cialists. The TIP,s line was also a consistent reformist line of the ra
    mre and the charges against me I cannot make a statement that will al
    ical section of the middle bourgeoisie
    fect others in the youth organisation and revolutionary groups in which
    In this split I was in the group advocating MDD(National Den
    worked. The things I have explained concern my own work and ideas
    ocratic Revolution).Although the grouping around Turk Solu and Ay
    within the youth and revolutionary groups I was in. I deem makin
    dinlik Socialist Magazine was not of a revolutionary character-in the
    declarations regarding others as an action exceeding my area of per
    real meaning of the word- it endeavoured to show a little more inter
    sonal responsibility. These were my activities up until the proclama
    est in the democratic and revolutionary actions of the workers. peas
    tio of martial av
    ants, students and other popular masses than the TIP
    Immmediately following the declaration of martial law and particu
    Later in 1969 at the conference in which the FKF transformed
    latly alter the killing of the israeli consul Efrain ELROM, many youth
    into DEV-GENC, a split took place within DEV-GENC and the Ay
    and intellectuals were remanded in custody after the intensifying fas
    dinlik Socialist magazine. In this split I was in the group of colleagues
    cist mass oppression and arrests that followed these events. After peo
    around Proletarian Devrimci Aydinlik magazine and isci-koylu new
    ple within DEV-GENC who had not been active were also arrested I
    paper. I endeavoured to assist in the production and distribution o
    went into hiding for a long period, guessing that I would be sought and
    these publications and to disseminate the views we championed
    arrested. I consider it unnecessary to say anything regarding where I hid
    amongst workers, peasants and the youth. Meanwhile, I also did what
    or relationships during this time. During this period when I was a fugi
    I could to help the actions of landless peasants in occupying the land
    tive Shatak publications reached me around the end of April 1972
    of large farmers in Thrace who had seized their land by coercion of the
    do not consider it impor tant who brought these publications to me
    429

==========第216頁==========
    Although the Shafak magazine and publications contained certain
    great pride in being a member of these organisations. My method o
    views regarding the democratic popular revolution with which I did
    work within this organisation and the ideas that are the basis of the or
    not agree. I was pleased to learn of the continuing existence OI revo
    ganisation's founding are to be found to a great extent in the articles
    lutionary work. I subsequently carried out propaganda and concho
    you mention. I agree with the ideas and theses that reflect the ideas of
    ness raising work in line with my own ideas and through my own
    the organisation contained in these organisations'articles entitled: A
    means at the place where I was, without making any contact with the
    CRITIQUE OF THE THESES OF SHAFAK REVISIONISM THE
    organisation that publishes the papers
    NATIONAL QUESTION IN TURKEY, THE KEMALIST MOVE
    did not know that the Shafak publication belonged to an organ
    MENT INTURKEY THE PERIOD OF KEMALIST POWER. SEC
    isation called the Revolutionary Worker Peasant Party of Turke
    OND WORLD WAR YEARS AND 27 MAY MOVEMENT LET
    (TILKP)and did know of the existence of such an organisation. I
    US GRASP CORRECTLY THE RED POLITICAL POWER DOC
    learned these things subsequently from news of arrests concerning thi
    TRINE OF CHAIRMAN MAO
    organisation on the radio and in newspapers. I have not been as you al
    I am prepared to put my signature to these articles as being my
    lege in communication with Dogu PERINCEK, who you say is an ad
    views but by which person or persons these articles were actually writ-
    ministrator of this illegal organisation. And I was not given an
    ten T do not know. In order to wage revolutionary struggle in line witl
    organisational or other task by Dogu PERINCEK. In fact I do not
    these views late in January 1973 I went to Tunceli with my heroic
    know Dogu PERINCEK, I had merely heard of him prior to martial
    friend Ali Haydar YIL DIZ, who was later martyred by fascist forces
    law. I knew of him as revolutionary writing articles in PDA. I did not
    We went to the villages to organise the peasants for revolution and
    join the, in your words, illegal SHAFAK organisation I will not say
    people' s uprising. Our work there continued until the commune at Var
    anything regarding my activities in that period. I am of the opinion
    tinik hamlet was raided on 24 January 1973. I do not consider it nec
    that to say I worked is sufficient from the point of view of my per
    essary to say anything more apart from this
    sonal responsibility. I was not active in the Malatya and Tunceli re
    Essentially, we communist revolutionaries do not in principle hidi
    gions, as you have asked. My districts of work were not there and I find
    our political opinions and views anywhere. But we do not relate our or
    it unnecessary to say where they were. I find it sufliclent to say where
    ganisational activities, the colleagues with whom we work in the or
    they were not My activities of a personal nature without any connec
    ganisation or the persons and groups outside the organisation who
    tion whatsoever to the organisation you mention by the name of the
    assist us From the point of view of my personal responsibility I have
    TIKP continued until I joined the ranks of the Turkish Communist
    already said what was necessary to say. What I have related I did for
    Party (marxist-leninist)and the Worker, Peasant, Liberation Army o
    the sake of the Marxist-leninist idea in which I sincerely believe. And
    Turkey. I do not remember when I joined these organisations and I
    I have absolutely no regrets as regards the outcome. I waged a strug
    find it unnecessary to say who recruited me. I do not know by whom
    gle to this end taking into account all possible consequences and was
    the TKP(M-l)and TIKKO organisations were established and di
    arrested. I have no regrets. If one day I escape from your hands I will
    rected. But I do not hide the fact that I joined the ranks of these or
    work again in the same way, he said
    ganisations and that I am an illegal member and supporter and fee
    He said he had nothing more to add and this statement was then

==========第217頁==========
    read back and signed. (21 April 1973, TKP(M-L), TIKKO, TMLGBcase. File no.3, dossier no. 1 line 4
    The alleged incident constituting a crime was explained to
    Ibrahim Kaypakkaya and he was shown the person brought in. Theaccused said: "1 do not know this person here or Haci DOGAN. I didnot, as you allege, obtain an identity card from this person. I found theidentity card which was on my person and which you say belongs tothis person here in Malatya. Since I was being sought by the martiallaw authorities I stuck my own photograph on this identity card I foundin order to conceal my identity. I am a communist who has adopted theideology of the proletariat and champions the liberation of the peopleI consider such things to be normal in this struggle I am waging againstyou which is a class struggle. I do not know the person who is here andyou say is the owner of the identity card found on my person. His saying he knows me is due either to your coercing hi with torture andpersecution, or because he is lying on account of fear for the same reason, I don,t know the reason for this, "he said
    The accused Ibrahim Kaypakkaya was shown the three other persons and the incident in question was explained. The accused saiddo not know the three peasants you have brought here and have nevermet them. Your allegation that they helped me after the raid is a fabrication and a lie. As I was wounded in the clash I could not eat anythingeven bread. These three peasants have been brought here for mo rea-son, unjustly and they have been intimidated with persecution and torture, although they have absolutely no connections to me. This is anexample of fascist oppression and the fascists will be called to accountfor their oppression of the people sooner
    (TKP/ML, TIKKO, TMLGB case, File no. 3, dossier no4 line
    432

==========第218頁==========
    Kaypakkaya identified with Turkey political and socialrevolution's character: He achieved this by theoricalpolitical and organizational line he established. He became fairly the spirit of Turkey revolution.
    He grew early and shouldered this historic responsibilityby maturing on the point that ongoing process, availability of social conditions and strong principals of theclass struggle which knocked terms door as revealingnecessity of a pioneering and leading power

==========第219頁==========
