    The Question of Womens Leadership in Peoples War in Nepal
    Introduction
    Peoples War(PW)in Nepal, which was initiated in February 1996 under the leadershipof the CPN(Maoist) has been developing in leaps and bounds. The fire of revolution,which initially sparked in a few districts in Western Nepal, has swept all over thecountry. According to the Governments own account, out of 75 districts in Nepal, PWhas affected 73 districts. All these gains could not have been possible without the
    mobilization of the masses that are the backbone of PW in Nepal. The mobilization of
    women in particular is apparent in PW in Nepal
    onsider their daring feats. They were the first to break the tense silence throughout
    Nepal caused by the first historic strike that marked the initiation of PW in Nepal on 13
    February 1996. On the occasion of March 8th 1996 the All Nepalese Womens

==========第1页==========
    Association (Revolutionary) ANWA(R) dared to organize a seminar(amidst stronspeculation that they all would be arrested )and to voice the need for overall revolutionto solve womens oppression. It was after that bold step that other mass organizationsstarted giving their own programmes. Dalit lowest caste-ed. women in Kalikotdistrict in western Nepal were the first to snatch rifles from reactionary armed forcesand hand them over to the local Party. thus accelerating PW in that district. The first
    daring historical jailbreak from the heavily fortified Gorkha district jail in March 2001by six Maoist women is one of the rarest events, perhaps even in world history. Untithe clamp down of emergency rule in November 2001. of all the mass organizations the
    womens organization was the most active and in the forefront of the movement. The
    successful antiliquor drive, which rocked the whole country in October 2001 in factforced the government to negotiate with AN WA(R). Consider another feat; even beforemen in the Party started renouncing their parental properties to the Party, women of
    Rolpa started forsaking voluntarily their personal jewelry the main form of womenproperty -ed. to the local Party. After the promulgation of the Emergency, more andmore women have been raped, killed, incarcerated and disappeared. Despite all thisthere is a growing participation of women in PW in Nepal
    There are now obiective grounds for developing women's leadership in all fronts
    Realizing this, CPN(Maoist )has created a separate women's department under theentral Committee of the Party. The function of this department is to make policies todevelop womens potentialities to higher levels so that more and more women are able
    to reach policy making bodies in all the three fronts: Party. Army and United Front
    he Question of Womens Leadership in CPN ( Maoist
    The question of women's leadership became more and more important in Nepal as
    revolutionary united fronts were replacing the reactionary state machinery at villageand district levels. It was seen that women were joining the movement in unprecedentednumbers, showing tremendous endurance, sacrifice and devotion; however they lacked

==========第2页==========
    expert knowledge to lead the movement. With the establishment of a central leve
    United Revolutionary People,s Council(URPC)to co-ordinate the activities of all theunited fronts at various levels, this question became all the more pertinent. Also withthe creation of higher military formations within the Peoples Liberation Army, thequestion of women started being raised by the women themselves. This has becomemore important as military formations have now reached the level of Brigade, and thereare separate womens platoon and sections with the brigade. It is seen that while men
    are continuing to develop in the military field even when they have reached beyond 40
    years of age, women are hardly seen to continue in this field beyond 25 years. Whilefrom the field, objective conditions were demanding the need of developing womensleadership qualities from the women cadres, within the Party itself there was atheoretical debate on women's role in the communist movement. It was in the Second
    National Conference, in the process of analysis and synthesis of achievements of PWin Nepal which led to the adoption of Prachanda Path, that womens role ininstitutionalization of continuous revolution and their role in preventingcounterrevolution were seriously discussed. In fact the creation of separate womendepartment is the product of Prachanda Path. Their role in the three instruments orevolution-party, Army and United Front-was discussed The Party being the mostdecisive amongst the three instruments, the question of developing revolutionary
    women leaders in Communist Party was given prominence
    The Leadership Question and Women
    Leadership is basically actualization of political ideology, hence in the Communist
    Party it is the command in ideology that determines the leadership quality. This qualityis developed through continuous class struggle, inner-party struggle and inner-struggle
    Hence real tested leadership can only come in countries where there is class strugglewhere the Party thrives on healthy inner-party struggle demanding a higher level otransformation of individuals through relentless inner-struggle. Indeed Rosauxemburg, Alexandra Kollontai, Clara Zetkin, Chiang Ching were all products of

==========第3页==========
    intense class struggle and inner-party struggle that was being waged in Germany, Russiaand China in their time. And being women in addition, they had to wage a morecomplex inner-struggle than the men of their time
    The question of leadership is also linked to objective necessity and the chance factor
    In the dialectical relationship between the two. it is true that the obiective condition
    necessitates birth of a leader but the question of who emerges as a leader is left to chance
    It is here that the womens leadership question becomes slightly complicated. It is seerthat revolutionary communist movements have always unleashed womens fury, butthey are not able to channelize this energy into producing enduring women communistleaders. The question has been raised again and again as to why there are so few womenleaders in communist parties when Marxism offers such a deep penetrating analysis andsolution to womens oppression. Hence the question arises as to why the chance factor
    is constrained in producing women leaders in communist parties despite growingobjective conditions for it? This needs deep analysis
    Women are Late Arrivals in the Politica Arena
    Right from the period of the slavery system men from the privileged class developedtheir skill in running political state affairs. They developed their leadership quality atthe cost of women of both classes and the enslaved men. This continues to this day, insome form or other. Here it is worth remembering Engels, who said that the overthrowof mother-right was the world historical defeat of the female sex and that men took
    command in the house also: the woman was degraded and reduced to servitude. she
    became the slave of his lust and a mere instrument for the production of children. Byvirtue of their sole right over property men became the rulers, the women upon losingtheir historic mother-right became the ruled. The prevailing division of labor, accordingto which men undertook mental work, while women were relegated to physical work,led to cumulative experience of men in the field of analysis and synthesis of the worldwhile women were lost in the hidden world of household activities. Men thus

==========第4页==========
    monopolized the field of worldly knowledge; they have been actively involved in notonly defining the world but changing it too. Consider this-women got voting rightslong after it was achieved by men. Even in todays 21 st century, women in Kuwait donot have the right to vote. With the imperialist countries backing religious medievalcudal rulers like the Taliban in Afghanistan(now replaced by a coalition of smallerfeudal lords under Hamid Karzai )and sheiks in Gulf countries, women are restrainedfrom entering public life. Also in Western countries, despite much noise being made byfeminists, there are few women leaders in political parties. Take the case of Nepal wherewomen are denied the right to rule right from the womb. because of the feudal
    monarchical system prevalent here. All these have a cumulative effect on the strugglefor developing women,s leadership in political parties, even in the communist partieswhose history is comparatively recent and which are so antagonistic to the prevailingmainstream political parties
    Prevailing Mode of Production is Not Favorable
    The base and superstructure of the present society is based on exploitation in generaland in particular on exploitation of womens reproductive and domestic labor. Inproperty relations women are looked upon as maintainers of mens property andproducers of sons to pass on the property within a male lineage. The prevailingsuperstructure. such as the social. cultural. educational. and political system. are all
    geared to support this exploitation. Take the example of the marriage institution. It isan alliance of convenience for men to perpetuate their hegemonism in property relations
    For women the same alliance in fact marginalizes them to domestic slavery. Sadly thisholds true amongst the communists too. although to a lesser degree
    Nepal with strong left movements has periodically produced many women activistsbut they seem to vanish as soon as they are recognized. One of the most apparentreasons is the institution of marriage, which has robbed us of promising women leaders
    Peoples War seems to be changing that pattern, however, even within PW the question

==========第5页==========
    of continuity of womens leadership keeps coming up, especially when they get marriedand decide to have children. This is because in countries like Nepal, where the feudalpatriarchal system is yet more oppressive than the capitalist patriarchal system inadvanced countries, the married life of women communists can be more complex
    Although the element of the notion of private property is slowly disappearing in Nepalwith the waging of PW, however the cultural root of feudalism eventually creeps in imany forms, such as the conventional division of labor in the name of necessity. Addedto this is the unilateral burden a woman has to carry when she becomes a mother. With
    the birth of every child she sinks deeper into domestic slavery. In fact many womenwho have been active in Peoples War in Nepal are found to complain that having babiesis like being under disciplinary action, because they are cut off from the Party activitiesfor a long period. In this way many bright aspiring communist women are at risk ofbeing lost in oblivion, even after getting married to the comrades of their choice. Thisis specially so in white dominated areas areas still dominated by the local traditionaelite-ed. where women seldom get support system from the mass as well as from the
    Party to sustain themselves in their reproductive years. However, it is heartening to seethat this problem is being solved in the base areas of Rolpa and Rukum, where the masssupport and the consolidation of the Party has made it possible for the Party and massesto support such maternal burdens of women leaders. Another aspect of Nepalese feudalsociety is that there is a strong pressure on women to bear children, especially sons
    With the launching of PW this aspect has been negated to some level, however, there isstill pressure to have at least one child
    There is also the tendency to create pressure on women cadres to get married covertor overtly as unmarried women draw lots of suspicion from men as well as women fortheir unmarried status. This results in marriages against their wishes or before they areready to get married. Also there is a tendency to take sexual offenses more serious.
    than political offenses
    Womens Struggle is More Complex than Men's

==========第6页==========
    For communist women, it is not enough for them to participate in class struggle, innerparty struggle, and inner-struggle. Often they may remain in the minority even if theybelong to the majority line within the party. And because they are the product of thispatriarchal structure, hence their inner-struggle consists in not only struggle againstthemselves as individuals but also struggle against the effect of patriarchal values onthem, such as fatalistic tendency, inferiority complex, guilt syndrome, victim syndrome
    hey have to face an even more complex struggle if they happen to be single,divorced or married more than once. This is well documented in Alexandra Kollantai's
    collection of articles. In fact she represents the best example of revolt against such
    marriages. She left her first husband and child in order to concentrate more on
    revolutionary work, then later she left her second(communist)husband on the ground
    of his stereotyped expectation of the marriage alliance. And because of her rebellion
    against conventional marriages she not only faced difficulties with the bourgeoissociety but also from conservative communists as well. As a result Alexandra Kollontai
    is more known for the"glass of water theory(the theory that sex should be as easy anduncomplicated as drinking glass of water )among the conservative communists than hercontributions to the communist movement and the proletarian womens movement
    Take another example, that of Chiang Ching. She had to face slander from the bourgeois
    press and personalitles because of her past marriages, and even within the Party she was
    not received kindly. Chiang Ching had to agree to political isolation for many years asa condition for her to marry Mao. This decision was taken when the rightist Liu Shao
    Chi was in the Party headquarters
    Manifestation of Patriarchal Values in Communist Party
    Since the feminist movement is the product of the bourgeois revolution, quite oftencommunist parties tend to become hyper-sensitive to womens issues. As a result theyfall prey to patriarchal values even while agreeing in theory to womens liberation. This
    is manifested in many ways. For example instead of taking women as reliable longterm equal partners in the communist movement it takes womens role as supportive

==========第7页==========
    As a result the Party is often found overemphasizing the class struggle at the cost ofgender exploitation, forgetting the dialectical relationship between the two. There havebeen cases of delaying the formation of separate womens organization or even
    temporarily dismissing existing women's organization within communist parties. Inparties where separate womens organization exists, there are cases where the womensmass front is not given the required degree of freedom so as to make their own plansand programmes. thus robbing them of initiative and creative power. This ultimatel
    breeds alienation and tailism in the Party. This can also take place by not coordinatingthe womens programme with the party programme and as a result the party programmegets priority over the women's programme Conservatism in the party can also be seenthrough relegating women cadres to only women related work, thereby robbing themof the chance to develop in party policy matters and other fields
    In the practical front, this leads to spontaneity whereby women,s issues are addressedbut not implemented because one leaves it to circumstances, leading to gradualism
    Often it is seen that the party does not actively intervene in the existing traditionaldivision of labor between men and women whereby men take to mental work whilewomen are left to do physical labor. This is also manifested in taking men and women
    as absolute equals by not being sensitive to womens special condition and their specianeeds. This becomes all the more apparent when women are menstruating or are in thereproductive period
    Lack of Subjective Effort on the Part of Women Cadres
    Women have to wage a longer struggle because of their double oppression. Howeverdue to lack of subjective efforts they lose half way. For example, where they havesuccessfully rebelled against feudal values, they have not been able to sustainthemselves in class struggle And where they have been able to wage class strugglethey have not been able to sustain in inner-party struggle. And by not participating orparticipating poorly in inner-party struggle they lose sharpness on ideology, thus

==========第8页==========
    robbing them of their chance to determine the course of the communist movementwhich has so much relevance to their own liberation. Their lack of subjective effort is
    manifest in many ways. In the field of ideology, they fall prey to pragmatismeconomism, sectarianism because they are not serious enough to study theoreticalknowledge and be involved in inner-party struggle to overcome their objectiveconditions, which in turn breeds these tendencies because of their past objective
    conditions
    In the practical field they often fall into tailism whereby they follow the directives othe party blindly without questioning, just as traditional women have been followingtheir fathers when unmarried and their husbands when married. and their sons whenwidowed. They thus become the victims of circumstance. This manifests in unplannedmotherhood. which affects them most if they are in the military field. It manifests in
    following the husband,s political line blindly instead of developing ones own political
    line, thereby affecting their independent political life. By not being assertive of theirrights they fall into the trap of traditional division of labor. As a result they covertbecome the vehicle of traditional conservative ideas leading to counter-revolution. Inmany cases they take marriage and motherhood as a break in their political/militarycareer as if it is temporary work. Similarly they become willing partners to theirhusband's field of work thereby losing hold of their own previous work. Hence frequentchange of place and work affects them more than men. The effect of all these tendenciesleads to developing an inferiority complex among women which is counter-productive
    to the revolution
    Mens Willingness to Give Up their Special Privileges
    While women cadres have the problem of asserting themselves, men cadres have theproblem of relinquishing the privileged position bestowed on them by the patriarchalstructure. This is manifested in many ways. This is mainly seen in the form of formaacceptance of womens leadership, while in essence not accepting their leadership. Thus

==========第9页==========
    there are delays made in establishing womens leadership in the Party, PLA and United
    Front. This also results in their being impatient with women's mistakes and general lack
    of skill in fields from which women have been excluded. Often they relegate womens
    issues to women as if it does not concern them. This is manifested in not readingliterature on womens issues, and not taking part in implementing programmes givenby the womens mass front. Sometimes this covertly is seen in the form of beingoverprotective about safety of women cadres when it is not warranted and bundertaking womens mental work on their behalf. This is also seen in their sticking toold traditional division of labor, without relinquishing their monopoly on mental workand relegating women to everyday drudgery work. Not wanting to give up theirprivileged position they tend to discourage promising wives from taking upindependent work. which would take them far off from their husbands
    Political Line and the Question of Women's Leadership
    It is the correct ideology and policy of the communist party that will determine thequality of women communist leaders produced and the path of women,s liberation. Itwas the correct political line of the Bolshevik Party headed by Com. Lenin that
    produced fine women communist leaders like Alexandra Kollontai, Clara Zetkin, Inessa
    Armand, Krupskaya, etc. It was the correct political line because of which communistwomen leaders like Clara Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg were able to evolve the conceptof celebrating 8th March as International Working Womens Day every year globally,the decision being taken by the first international socialist womens conference in
    Stockholm in the year 1910. And it is being followed by not only communists but alsothe bourgeoisie(in their own way )even till this day
    It was the correct political line of Com. Rosa Luxemburg of exposing and strugglingagainst Bernstein in her book"Reform or Revolution and later her struggle against
    Kautsky that brought her to the notice of revolutionary communists of the world. She
    dared to warn Lenin that bureaucracy may breed in the structure of the Party if the

==========第10页==========
    question of centralism and democracy are not understood in their dialecticalrelationship and under the specific condition of the individual country where it is
    applied With the occurrence of counter-revolution in previous socialist states and withthe tendencies of bureaucracy which seem to sap revolutionary parties engaged in PWtime and again, her warning seems to have relevance even toda
    Similarly it was the correct political line carried by Com. Mao which heralded Cultural
    Revolution that unleashed womens fury. It was a woman who put up the first poster
    denouncing Liu Shao Chi heralding the revolt against rightist headquarters. It was the
    Cultural Revolution that unleashed Com. Chiang Ching's suppressed leadership qualitymaking her one of the resolute fighters against the capitalist roaders until her death(ormurder?). One must also remember that in the period of occupation of headquarters bythe rightist Liu Shao Chi, he was the one who ordered women to go back home in orderto solve the unemployment problem that was looming large. It was the rightist policy
    Perestroika, and the capitalist policy of Deng which slowly introducedcommercialization of women thus bringing back prostitution, gambling, beautycontests etc in Russia and China
    Having said all this, let us not forget that just as women themselves are divided intodifferent classes, so are the communist women divided along rightist, centrist, and
    revolutionary lines. Due to anti-working womens liberation policy taken by the rightistand centrist line, those women who belong to these lines are eventually marginalizedin their own parties and remain exposed outside the party because of their anti-women's
    stand. Whereas those women who stood by the revolutionary line even while failing tomake revolution in their own country remain popular. Take the case of Rosa Luxemburgwho is the most popular woman communist leader so far. She was killed before she
    could realize her dream; this all the more enhanced respect for her as a devoted womancommunist leader in the communist world. Similarly it was the tough stand taken by
    Chiang Ching who defended Mao's revolutionary line even in her captivity until herdeath in revisionist China that made her the defiant heroine

==========第11页==========
    It is interesting to observe that revolutionary communist women have always been onthe offensive when they are fighting against the revisionists. The reason may be becausethey are painfully aware that revisionism breeds bureaucratization, which in turn
    strengthens patriarchal values, ultimately negating women in politics
    It should be noted that in third world county like Nepal, where class differentiation isnot sharp enough, inner-party struggle may often appear in the form of gender, ethnicregional struggle. Hence the gender issue becomes quite an important component of theclass issue. In such a case dismissing the gender issue as an alien force will ultimatelyaffect class struggle
    Private Property and the Question of Womens Leadershi
    It is time and again seen that women masses do come in a tide to participate inrevolutionary movements producing some potential women leaders. But this tide alongwith the prospective women leaders seems to recede once the revolution is completed
    or is defeated. The chief reason behind this phenomenon is the existence of the concept
    of private property. As long as private property remains women will always have to goback to tend individual household activities, maintaining private property for men, nomatter how many social revolutions take place. Hence the concept of continuousrevolution until one reaches communism has strategic relevance for women, because itis only then that private property gets abolished, unleashing the creativity of women
    That is why it is important to make conscious efforts by revolutionary parties of theworld to create a conducive environment for developing revolutionary womencommunist leaders so that they can play a role as catalyst agents in arriving atcommunism. Hence the question of developing women communist leaders cannot be
    left to chance, they need to be consciously nurtured, cultivated and safeguarded
    Some Experiences of Women's Leadership in Nepal
    Realizing the importance of revolutionary women and their role in the communist

==========第12页==========
    movement, CPN(Maoist)has come forward with some encouraging results. Today thereare several women in the Central Committee of the Party. There are dozens of women
    at the regional level and hundreds in the district levels. and several thousands in the
    area and cell levels in the Party. In the Peoples Liberation Army there are many womencommanders, vice commanders in different sections within the brigade, platoonsquads and militia. There are separate women's sections in the brigade: women platoonswomen squad teams, women militia teams functioning in the field. In the United
    Revolutionary Peoples Council, which is an embryonic central peoples governmentorganizing committee, there are four women out of 37 members. Womens participationin all levels of Peoples Councils has been made mandatory
    Just to give some idea about their participation in different fields, let us take the Westernregion of Nepal. This region alone has 1500 women's units. The total number of womenmembership in the womens mass organization is six hundred thousand. In the militaryfield there are ten women section commanders in the main force, two women platooncommanders in the secondary force and several militia commanders in the basic force
    The team commander of the health section of the battalion force is a woman. The
    women there have started a campaign called "One village, one unit, one house, onefriend. This has helped in organizing and politicizing village after village. Similarly inthe field of production, there is a campaign called "Where there is contact, there isorganization; where there is organization, there is production. Hence women are alsoinvolved in production activities. They are actively involved in conducting peoplescourts where informers, drunkards, gamblers, womanizers, and cheaters are punished
    In such trials usually local women militias are actively involved together with thevillagers. Hence one can say the objective basis for producing women leaders in variousfields are ripening in western region
    Today more and more women are encouraged to rebel against their oppressive
    marriages, and politically incorrect marriages. Take the case of Com. Shilpa, who wasfirst a commander in a guerrilla squad and later a sub-regional committee member o

==========第13页==========
    the Party and vice-chairman of a district level peoples committee. She had a heroicdeath while laying an ambush against the reactionary armed forces in May 2002. Shedared to denounce and divorce her husband who had reneged against the revolution
    after being captured. There is an increasing trend of widow remarriages [condemnedby orthodox Hindu tradition, ed ] The definition of the family of martyrs has now beenextended to those wives of martyred comrades who have remarried without forsakingthe revolutionary cause. This has indirectly helped widows of martyred men to remarrywithout feeling guilt. Take the example of Com. Shilu, the commander of the historicwomen jail breakers in Gorkha in March, 2001. She has remarried another comradeafter losing her husband Bhim Sen Pokharel who got martyred while giving protectionto Com. Basu, the first martyred politburo member of CPN(Maoist). There have beencases of husbands and wives being given challenging works. It is worth mentioning that
    Com. Phul Maya BK, who was a section commander of a battalion in the historic Dang
    Barrack attack on November 23, 2001, was martyred along with her husband Com
    Bijok in the same battle. Also it is worth mentioning that the political commissar forthe Satbaria barrack attack in Dang in April 2002 was a woman. In the course opromulgation of the Emergency and military mobilization many husbands, wives andsons and daughters have been martyred, this also indicates the level of politicalizationof the family in Nepal
    Conclusion
    From the above it can be concluded that the importance of revolutionary women's
    leadership in the communist party has strategic importance as they are a reliable, longterm and mass based force which will help push the communist movement from New
    Democratic Revolution to socialism, and from socialism to stateless and propertylesscommunism where complete womens emancipation is guaranteed. Taking on therelationship between communism and emancipation of women, Inessa Armand hasrightly said that if the emancipation of women is unthinkable without communism, thencommunism is unthinkable without the full emancipation of women. The concepts o

==========第14页==========
    right to rebel. cultural revolution. continuous revolution. overall revolution. mass based
    politics etc. all have strong appeal and application for women because of their doubleoppressed status. Their double oppression and the continued false promise of equalitygiven to them by the ruling class (including the revisionist left parties )keeps them alertand on their toes to check any counter-revolution or revisionism, because they haseen the gains of womens rights slowly eroding with every capitalist stand taken bythe party in both Russia and China
    The Communists should be politically aware that if patriarchal values are not checkedperiodically through rectification campaigns then it may slowly breed bureaucracy inthe party. The result of bureaucracy in the party is that it gets cut off from the masses
    Once the party becomes an end in itself, serving the interest of its own existence, it willeventually strengthen revisionism. This will result in the party becoming the vanguardof the exploiting class instead of the exploited class, thus losing both class and gender
    perspective
    For the communist movement to flourish it is not enough to produce individuaoutstanding women communist leaders such as Rosa Luxemburg or Clara Zetkin, butalso equally important to produce women communist companions like Krupskaya and
    Chiang Ching, who were leaders in their own field, who stood by their husbands whowere leaders of the communist movement. They were not only providing their husbandswith comfort and companionship but were also actively engaged in two-line struggle inthe party. We also need women like Jenny Marx who stood by her husband like a rock
    in the hours of political and personal turmoil, and helped him in whatever capacity shehad. For in order to preserve the gains of revolution and its continuous advancementwe need to not only produce revolutionary women leaders but also equally it isimportant to sustain and preserve revolutionary communist men leaders. Let us notforget that it was also revolutionary men like Karl Marx, Engels, August Bebel, Lenin
    Mao etc who provided deep analysis of women's oppression and have shown the path
    OI women s emancipation.

==========第15页==========
    Also it is important to note that just as communist women know that for every gain inthe proletarian peoples power there is a relative gain in womens power, similarlycommunist men should know that the revolution and the gains of revolution can only
    be preserved and furthered when more and more women join and lead the revolution
    Similarly just as the proletarian movement needs the input of all those who haverebelled against their class outlook, similarly the proletarian women's movement needsthe input of all those who have not only rebelled against their class outlook but alsoagainst their stereotyped sexist outlook. Hence the alliance between revolutionary menand women is not only to be desired but is also historically necessary. This is all the
    more necessary in producing revolutionary women communist leaders
    astly it is important to note Mao's remark"keep being dissatisfied, the world belongsto the dissatisfied. This is all the more true for women revolutionary leaders who have
    to tread a longer and more complex path of class struggle, inner-party struggle andinner-struggle

==========第16页==========
