MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 21
Marx and Engels 1867-70    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_21.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:35]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
21 
Marx and Engels 1867-70
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me21.htm [09/12/2010 15:14:21]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-965-5 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
V 
Contents 
Preface XIII 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
November 1867-mid-July 1870 
1. K. Marx. The Fenian Prisoners at Manchester and the Interna­
tional Working Men's Association 3 
2. K. Marx. The Position of the International on Prussian Protec­
tionist Tariffs 5 
3. K. Marx. Resolution on Changing the Place of the Internation­
al's Congress in 1868 6 
4. K. Marx. Resolution of the General Council on Félix Pyat's 
Provocative Behaviour 7 
5. K. Marx. Declaration of the General Council Concerning the 
British Government's Attitude Towards Tsarist Russia 8 
6. K. Marx. Draft Resolution on the Consequences of Using 
Machinery under Capitalism Proposed by the General Council 
to the Brussels Congress 9 
7. K. Marx. To the President and Executive Committee of the 
General Association of German Workers 10 
8. K. Marx. Draft Resolution on the Reduction of the Working 
Day Proposed by the General Council to the Brussels 
Congress 11 
9. K. Marx. The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of 
the International Working Men's Association 12 
10. F. Engels. To the Directorate of the Schiller Institute 18 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
11. F. Engels. On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' 
Association , 20 
12. F. Engels. On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' 
Association (Postscript) 24 
13. K. Marx. Connections Between the International Working 
Men's Association and English Working Men's Organisa­
tions 25 
14. K. Marx. How Mr. Gladstone's Bank Letter of 1866 Procured a 
Loan of Six Millions for Russia 28 
15. K. Marx. Preamble to the Resolutions of the Geneva (1866) and 
Brussels (1868) Congresses of the International 31 
16. K. Marx. Statement to the German Workers' Educational 
Society in London 32 
17. K. Marx. The International Working Men's Association and the 
International Alliance of Socialist Democracy 34 
18. K. Marx. Resume of the Meetings of the General Council. 
International Working Men's Association to the Editor of "The 
Bee-Hive" 37 
19. F. Engels. Report on the Miners' Guilds in the Coalfields of 
Saxony 39 
20. K. Marx. The General Council of the International Working 
Men's Association to the Central Bureau of the International 
Alliance of Socialist Democracy 45 
21. K. Marx. The Belgian Massacres. To the Workmen of Europe and 
the United States 47 
22. K. Marx. Address to the National Labour Union of the United 
States 53 
23. K. Marx. Preface to the Second Edition of The Eighteenth 
Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte 56 
24. F. Engels. Karl Marx 59 
25. K. Marx. Report of the General Council on the Right of 
Inheritance 65 
26. K. Marx. Report of the General Council to the Fourth Annual 
Congress of the International Working Men's Association 68 
27. K. Marx. Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy 
of the British Government Towards the Irish Prisoners 83 
28. K. Marx. The General Council to the Federal Council of 
Romance Switzerland 84 
29. K. Marx. Obituary 92 
30. F. Engels. Preface to the Second Edition of The Peasant War in 
Germany 93 
31. K. Marx. The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners 101 
32. K. Marx. Concerning the Conflict in the Lyons Section 108 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
33. K. Marx. The General Council of the International Working 
Men's Association to Committee Members of the Russian 
Section in Geneva 110 
34. K. Marx. Confidential Communication 112 
35. K. Marx. To the International Metalworkers' Society 125 
36. K. Marx. Resolution of the General Council on The Bee-Hive 126 
37. K. Marx. Concerning the Persecution of the Members of the 
French Sections. Declaration of the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association 127 
38. K. Marx. Draft Resolution of the General Council on the 
"French Federal Section in London" 131 
39. K. Marx. Resolution of the General Council on the Convocation 
of the Congress in Mainz 132 
40. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Committee of the German 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party 133 
41. K. Marx. General Council Resolution on the Federal Committee 
of Romance Switzerland. The General Council to the Romance 
Federal Committee 136 
42. K. Marx. The Lock-out of the Building Trades at Geneva. 
The General Council of the International Working Men's Associa­
tion to the Working Men and Women of Europe and the United 
States 137 
43. F. Engels. Notes for the Preface to a Collection of Irish Songs .... 140 
44. K. Marx. Confidential Communication to All Sections 142 
45. K. Marx. Programme for the Mainz Congress of the Interna­
tional 143 
•46. F. Engels. The History of Ireland 145 
Natural Conditions 147 
Old Ireland 168 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
,1. K. Marx. Notes for an Undelivered Speech on Ireland 189 
2. K. Marx. Outline of a Report on the Irish Question Delivered to 
the German Workers' Educational Society in London on 
December 16, 1867 194 
3. K. Marx. Remarks on the Programme and Rules of the 
International Alliance of Socialist Democracy 207 
4. K. Marx. Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union 
of 1801. Extracts and Notes 212 
I. From 1778 to 1782. Independence 212 
II. From 1782 (after the Declaration of Independence) to j 
1795 230 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
III 252 
Summary 270 
5. F. Engels. Notes on Goldwin Smith's Book Irish History and Irish 
Character 283 
6. F. Engels. Varia on the History of the Irish Confiscations 297 
7. F. Engels. Plan for The History of Ireland 307 
8. F. Engels. Plan of Chapter Two and Fragments for The History 
of Ireland 308 
APPENDICES 
1. Record of a Speech on the Irish Question Delivered by Karl 
Marx to the German Workers' Educational Society in London 
on December 16, 1867 317 
2. Record of Marx's Speeches on Changing the Place of 
the Congress of the International in 1868. From Newspaper 
Reports of the General Council Meetings of May 26 and June 16, 
1868 : 320 
3. Wilhelm  Eichhoff.  The International Working Men's Association. 
Its Establishment, Organisation, Political and Social Activity, 
and Growth .' 322 
4. Record of Marx's Speech on the Successes of the International 
in Germany and France. From the Newspaper Report of the 
General Council Meeting of July 21, 1868 381 
5. Record of Marx's Speech on the Consequences of Using 
Machinery under Capitalism. From the Minutes of the General 
Council Meeting of July 28, 1868 382 
6. Appeal to the German Workers in London 385 
7. Record of Marx's Speech on the Reduction of the Working Day. 
From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of August 11, 
1868 387 
8. Record of Marx's Speech on the Influence of Competition in 
Cotton Industry on the Condition of the Working Men in 
France. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of 
January 5, 1869 388 
9. Record of Marx's Speech on the Condition of the Coalminers in 
the Coalfields of Saxony. From the Newspaper Report of the 
General Council Meeting of  February  23, 1869 389 
10. Resolution of the General Council on the Programme of the 
Basle Congress 391 
11. Record of Marx's Speeches on Landed Property. From  the Minutes 
of the General Council Meeting of July 6, 1869 392 
12. Record of Marx's Speech on the Right to Inheritance. From the 
Minutes of the General Council Meeting of July 20, 1869 394 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
13. Record of Marx's Speeches on General Education. From the 
Minutes of the General Council Meetings of August 10 and 17, 
1869 398 
14. Address of the Land and Labour League to the Working Men 
and Women of Great Britain and Ireland 401 
15. Record of Marx's Speech on the Policy of the British 
Government with Respect to the Irish Prisoners. From 
the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of November 16, 
1869 '. ! 407 
16. Record of Marx's Speeches on the Policy of the British 
Government with Respect to the Irish Prisoners. From the 
Minutes of the General Council Meetings of November 23 and 30, 
1869 ! .' ill 
17. Record of Marx's Speech on the Significance of the Irish 
Question. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of 
December 14, 1869 413 
18. Articles by Jenny Marx on the Irish Question ....._.„ 414 
I '. 414 
II 417 
III 420 
IV 425 
V 429 
VI. Agrarian Outrages in Ireland 434 
VII.  The Death of John Lynch 437 
VIII. Letter from England 439 
19. Letter of the General Council to Robert William Hume in New 
York 442 
20. Retord of Marx's Speech on The Bee-Hive. From the Minutes of 
the General Council Meeting of April 26, 1870 444 
21. Account of a Letter by Karl Marx to the Committee of the 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party 445 
22. Record of Marx's Speech on the Split in the Romance 
Federation. From the Minutes of the General Council Meeting of 
June 28, 1870 ' 446 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 449 
Name Index 533 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 572 
Index oj Periodicals 593 
Subject Index 599 

=====第8页=====
X Contents 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Page of the Minute Book with Marx's manuscript of "Concerning 
the Persecution of the Members of the French Sections" 129 
First page of Engels' History of Ireland 149 
Map of Ireland 158-59 
Page of Marx's manuscript Ireland from the American Revolution to the 
Union of 1801 213 

=====第9页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
KAIE COOK: Works 31; Appendix 18 
VIC SCHNEI ERSON: From the Preparatory Materials 2; 
Appendix 3 
BARRIE SELMAN: Works 10, 11, 12, 16, 40, 43, 46 
JOAN and TREVOR WALMSLEY: Works 7, 24 

=====第10页=====

=====第11页=====
XIII 
Preface 
Volume 21 of the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels contains works dating from November 1867 to mid-July 
1870,  most of them relating to the activity of the First 
International—documents, reports, articles, statements, and out­
lines.  Much space is devoted to works, speeches, and preparatory 
materials on the Irish question. 
The period dealt with in this volume saw a sharpening of the 
economic and social conflicts in Europe and the United States of 
America, mass working-class actions, an intensification of the Irish 
national liberation struggle, a deepening of the crisis of Louis 
Bonaparte's Second Empire, and a mounting threat of war in 
Europe. 
This volume, like volume 20, reflects Marx's diverse activity in 
the First International and the efforts of its General Council, led 
by him, to strengthen the unity of the working class and cultivate 
the spirit of proletarian internationalism and class consciousness in 
it. The First International (the International Working Men's 
Association—IWMA) had constituted itself by then, and the time 
had come for its ideological and organisational consolidation. Its 
federations and sections had become active in many European 
countries and in the United States. In Britain its base consisted of 
the trade unions, which numbered tens of thousands of workers; 
and in other countries unions were also beginning to take their place 
as the first class organisations of the proletariat. The International 
Working Men's Association, Engels wrote in 1869, had already 
shown in more than one place in Europe that it was a force the 
ruling classes were compelled to reckon with (see this volume, 
p. 64). 

=====第12页=====
XIV Preface 
After the approval of the International's basic documents 
defining the relationship between economic and political struggle, 
Marx set out to substantiate and publicly proclaim the principles 
of scientific socialism in the programme of the International. 
Besides this, he was engaged in working out the tactics of the 
proletariat to suit the concrete situation of the late 1860s, defining 
its independent class attitude to the national question and to the 
question of war and peace. The General Council's documents 
written by Marx, like his speeches at meetings of the Council on 
various aspects of the working-class and general democratic 
movement, show him as the true leader of the first mass 
international working-class political organisation which, at least as 
far as the workers' movement was concerned, Engels described in 
his article "Karl Marx" as an "epoch-making organisation" (p. 64). 
In 1866 and in the following year most countries in Europe 
were gripped by economic crisis, accompanied by a capitalist 
offensive on workers' wages. The actions of the proletariat against 
this economic oppression grew to unprecedented proportions, 
often leading to the suppression of strikes by armed force. The 
masters, as Marx observed in 1869, transformed their private 
feuds with their men into "a state crusade against the Internation­
al Working Men's Association" (p. 71). As before, the General 
Council saw its main objectives as defending the vital interests of 
the working class, assisting the strike movement, and securing 
unity of working-class action at national and international level. All 
its activity was directed to stimulating the international solidarity 
of the working class and winning more of its detachments to the 
side of the International Association. 
Written by Marx, such General Council appeals as "The Belgian 
Massacres" and "The Lock-out of the Building Trades at 
Geneva", as well as the annual reports to the Brussels and Basle 
congresses of the IWMA, are evidence of the far-flung organisa­
tional efforts of the Council and of Marx's own efforts to bring 
material aid and moral support to the strikers. "This was a great 
opportunity to show the capitalists," Marx wrote in the "Report of 
the General Council to the Fourth Annual Congress of the 
International Working Men's Association" concerning the strike of 
the Rouen weavers, "that their international industrial warfare, 
carried on by screwing wages down now in this country, now in 
that, would be checked at last by the international union of the 
working classes" (p. 74). And in a number of large-scale strikes, 
the workers owed their victory to the direct assistance of the 
International. 

=====第13页=====
Preface XV 
The documents and materials in this volume demonstrate the 
intensive efforts made by Marx and the General Council to form and 
to consolidate sections of the International in various countries. 
Particular space is devoted to articles and documents on the 
German workers' movement. Marx's and Engels' previous writings 
against Lassalleanism, to which was added the German and 
international working-class movement's own experience, had 
helped some sections of the German working class to shake off the 
influence of Lassallean dogma and had strengthened the opposi­
tion within the General Association of German Workers to its 
Lassallean leaders. Marx's letter, "To the President and Executive 
Committee of the General Association of German Workers", and 
Engels' articles "On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' 
Association ' note that the class struggle of the German proletariat 
and the pressure of the rank and file had compelled the leaders of 
that organisation to include agitation for political freedom, 
regulation of the working day, and international cooperation of 
the working classes—that is, points "from which, in fact, any 
serious workers' movement must proceed" (p. 10)—on the agenda 
of its Hamburg Congress (General Assembly) in August 1868. 
The constitution of the North-German Confederation greatly 
furthered the unification of Germany from above under the 
supremacy of reactionary and militarist Prussia, leading to the 
emergence in Europe of a source of new wars, in addition to the 
France of Louis Bonaparte. However, Marx and Engels held that, 
objectively, Germany's unification was hastening the country's 
development, and gave the working class new opportunities for 
revolutionary struggle, which it should use as best it could for "the 
national organisation and unification of the German proletariat" (see 
Engels' letter to Marx of July 25, 1866, Vol. 42 of the present 
edition). Conditions were thus maturing in Germany for an 
independent proletarian party. Marx and Engels welcomed the 
German working class's steps to that end, and gave August Bebel and 
Wilhelm Liebknecht all possible assistance in forming such a party. 
To relieve Marx of at least part of the tremendous burden of his 
work for the International, Engels took over most of the 
correspondence with Germany. 
On Marx's advice, the General Council sent a representative to 
the Nuremberg Congress of the Union of German Workers' 
Associations (September 1868), many of which were simultane­
ously sections of the International. The congress showed that the 
delegates were acquainted with the documents of the Internation­
al. One of the sources of their knowledge was the then just 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
published pamphlet by Wilhelm  Eichhoff,  The International Work­
ing Men's Association, on which Marx had collaborated (see 
Appendices in this volume). Marx praised the Nuremberg 
Congress, which came out in favour of adhering to the Interna­
tional (see this volume, pp. 15 and 33). Its decision signified a 
break between the majority of the Union and the liberal 
bourgeoisie, and the Union's adoption of proletarian, class 
positions. 
The founding of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party in 
Eisenach in 1869, as Marx saw it, was a victory for the ideas of the 
International in the German working-class movement. In the 
"Report of the General Council to the Fourth Annual Congress of 
the Internationa] W7orking Men's Association", Marx stressed the 
proletarian character of the newly formed party, representing 
more than 150,000 workers from Germany, Austria, and Switzer­
land, with a programme "literally embodying the leading princi­
ples of our Statutes" (p. 79). As Lenin observed later, "a sound 
basis"  had been laid in Eisenach "for a genuinely Social-
Democratic workers' party". And he added: "In those days the 
essential thing was the basis of the party" (Collected Works, Vol. 19, 
Moscow, 1973, p. 298). 
A few of the works appearing in the present volume reflect the 
resolve of Marx and Engels to heighten the theoretical level of the 
German workers' movement by propagating the ideas of scientific 
socialism and criticising Lassalleanism. 
Shortly before the Eisenach Congress, Engels wrote and 
published "Karl Marx", the first brief biography of him, showing 
the importance of his activity and of his theories for the 
emancipation struggle of the working class. Attacking the attempts 
to portray Lassalle as the founder of the workers' movement in 
Germany, Engels demonstrated that "nothing could be less 
correct" (p. 59), showing that the movement had been initiated 
by Marx and the Communist League founded by him. Engels 
described the League as a "well-organised socialist party", 
stressing that later Lassalle had merely taken possession of the 
ground prepared by it. Not only did Engels' article set out the 
basis for the criticism of Lassalle; it also called on the German 
workers to carry on the revolutionary traditions of the Communist 
League. 
To further the German workers' knowledge of the ideas of 
scientific socialism, Marx and Engels republished The Eighteenth 
Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Marx) and The Peasant War in 
Germany (Engels), both of which they supplied with new prefaces. 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
Engels' preface to the second edition of The Peasant War in 
Germany (February 1870) was of tremendous help to the newly 
formed Social-Democratic Party, impressing upon it a most im­
portant point—the attitude of the working class and its party to 
the peasants. Engels made a concrete historical study of the 
economic and political situation in Germany after 1848, and 
specified and projected one of Marxism's most crucial theoretical 
and political tenets, spelling out the need for an alliance between 
the working class and the peasantry, a tenet formulated by Marx 
and Engels on the basis of the 1848-49 revolutions. Engels warned 
against taking the peasants in capitalist society to be a uniform 
mass.  He stressed the existence of different sections of peasants, 
and the need for considering the peculiarities of each section if 
there was to be a firm alliance with the labouring majority in the 
countryside in opposition to the capitalist farmers. He called 
attention to the relevance for Germany as well as Britain of the 
resolution of the IWMA Congress in Basle (1869), that it was in 
the interest of society to transform landed property into common, 
national property (p. 100). 
Having formed their party, the German Social-Democrats had to 
think of expanding its mass base and of its relation to the trade 
unions. The "Resume of the Meetings of the General Council" 
and the "Report of the General Council to the Fourth Annual 
Congress of the International Working Men's Association" set out 
Marx's views on the relationship between the party and the 
unions. He called on the leaders of the party to defy Lassallean 
sectarianism and take the initiative in forming trade unions "on 
the model of the English ones" but with a broader base, giving 
due consideration to the relevant decisions of the Geneva, 
Lausanne, and Brussels congresses of the International. In 
January 1869, Marx noted with satisfaction that in Germany the 
trade unions, "brought into existence by the efforts of the 
Internationa] Working Men's Association, number already 110,000 
members" (p. 37). 
The documents included in this volume show that Marx devoted 
meticulous attention to the working-class movement in England. 
England, he noted, was "the only country  where the  great majority of  the 
population consists of wages-labourers" and where "the class struggle 
and the organisation of the working class by the Trades Unions 
have acquired a certain degree of maturity and universality" 
(p. 86). 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
As noted earlier, Marx urged working men in other countries to 
avail themselves of the organisational experience of the British 
workers when forming unions of their own. He attached great 
importance to the General Council's activity as the Federal Council 
for England. As in previous years, this activity was designed, above 
all, and with some success, to place the trade unions under the 
influence of the International. In an article, "Connections Between 
the International Working Men's Association and English Working 
Men's Organisations", Marx wrote: "Not one significant organisa­
tion of the British proletariat exists which is not directly, by its own 
leaders, represented on the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association" (p. 26). Some of the British trade 
unionists backed the line of the General Council at congresses of the 
International. 
However, it was clear to Marx that the International would not 
help the British proletariat take the revolutionary road unless it 
managed to isolate the right-wing trade union leaders. Marx 
criticised their reformist view of the aims of the workers' 
movement, their slide to the platform of the Liberal Party, as 
demonstrated, among other things, by the 1868 general election, 
and their ambiguous posture on the Irish question. He called on 
the General Council to strengthen the revolutionary trend in the 
British working-class movement. He commended the activity of 
Robert Shaw, a member of the General Council and representative 
of the British workers. He praised Shaw's "truly revolutionary 
intelligence" and absence of "petty ambition or personal interest" 
(p. 92). When the sharp aggravation of the economic crisis in 
Britain in the late 1860s, which caused widespread impoverish­
ment, aroused sentiment favouring nationalisation of land and 
gave birth to the socialistic Land and Labour League, Marx helped 
draw up the "Address of the Land and Labour League to the 
Working Men and Women of Great Britain and Ireland", pointing 
out in it that "nothing short of a transformation of the existing 
social and political arrangements could avail" in abolishing the 
existing evils (p. 404). 
The increasing political instability of Louis Bonaparte's regime, 
accompanied by an upsurgence of mass revolutionary activity, 
enhanced the International's influence in France. The Bonapar-
tist government therefore resolved to cripple the Paris Section of 
the International Association. It framed court proceedings against 
it on two occasions in 1868 (see the account of the trials in 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
Eichhoff's pamphlet, this volume, pp. 366-74). Nearly all the 
defendants used their courtroom speeches to propagate the ideas of 
the International. The trials and repression of members of the 
International won it the sympathy of working men and of some 
democrats, and as Marx wrote in "The Fourth Annual Report of the 
General Council of the International Working Men's Association", 
have "given it a fresh impulse by forcing the Empire to drop its 
patronising airs to the working classes" (p. 14). 
The revolutionary tide in France kept rising steadily. Large-scale 
strikes and political demonstrations in the winter of 1868-69 and 
the election campaign in the spring of 1869 were clear evidence of 
the people's mood. The election programme of a group of Paris 
workers was published, which the General Council praised as a 
programme based on the principles of the Association. In January 
1870,  analysing the prospects of revolution in Europe, Marx 
conjectured that the "revolutionary initiative will probably come 
from France" (p. 86). 
To buttress its position, Louis Bonaparte's government resorted 
to one more demagogic manoeuvre, scheduling a plebiscite for 
May 8, 1870. Before that date, it arrested leaders of the sections of 
the International on false charges of conspiring against the 
emperor. On the instructions of the General Council, Marx wrote 
a declaration, "Concerning the Persecution of the Members of the 
French Sections", published in the press of the International and 
the French workers' papers. Exposing the motives behind the 
plebiscite, Marx firmly denied that the International was involved 
in any secret conspiracies, stating that the Rules bind all the 
sections of the Association to act in broad daylight and that "the 
very nature of an Association which identifies itself with the 
working classes, would exclude from it every form of secret 
society. If the working classes, who form the great bulk of all 
nations, who produce all their wealth, and in the name of whom 
even the usurping powers always pretend to rule, conspire, they 
conspire publicly, as the sun conspires against darkness, in the full 
consciousness that without their pale there exists' no legitimate 
power" (p. 127). 
While standing by the true representatives of the French 
proletariat in the International, the General Council publicly 
dissociated itself from the French Federal Section in London, an 
organisation of the followers of Félix Pyat, a petty-bourgeois 
democrat. The section had lost contact with the International in 
1868,  but continued its adventurist and often provocative activity, 
ostensibly in the name of the International (p. 131). 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
The mass of the proletariat had by then declared adherence to 
the International, and the pro-socialist elements were gathered in 
its General Council. Along with the publication of Volume One of 
Marx's Capital in 1867 and its popularisation in the press (see 
present edition, Vol. 20), all this helped combat Proudhonism, 
Lassalleanism and other petty-bourgeois trends, and contributed to 
the ground being laid for the acceptance of socialist principles as 
the foundation of the programme endorsed by congresses of the 
International. 
The present volume contains Marx's speeches at meetings of the 
General Council during the preparation of the agenda of the 
Brussels (1868) and Basle (1869) congresses and the drafts of the 
resolutions whose adoption he urged on the consequences of using 
machinery under capitalism, on the reduction of the working day, 
and on public ownership of the means of production, including 
land. His speeches and resolutions were all designed to bring 
home the key socialist principles of the programme of the 
International to members of the General Council. 
Of special interest are the records of Marx's speeches during the 
preparations for the Brussels Congress on the consequences of 
using machinery under capitalism and on the reduction of the 
working day. At the General Council meeting of July 28, 1868 
(pp. 382-84), Marx set forth the basic ideas on machinery which 
he had developed in Volume One of Capital. Showing the 
calamitous consequences for the working classes of the use of 
machinery in capitalist society, Marx stressed at the same time that 
it led to "associated organised labour". In his draft resolution, 
Marx pointed out that "machinery has proved a most powerful 
instrument of despotism and extortion in the hands of the 
capitalist class", but noted that, on the other hand, "the 
development of machinery creates the material conditions neces­
sary for the superseding of the wages-system by a truly social 
system of production" (p. 9). 
Marx argued for the necessity of demanding the reduction of 
the working day (p. 387). In his draft resolution on this subject he 
reaffirmed the relevant resolution of the Geneva Congress (1866), 
and said that the time had arrived "when practical effect should be 
given to that resolution" (p. 11). 
The preliminary discussion of the agenda of the Brussels 
Congress by the General Council yielded good results. Despite the 
resistance of the Proudhonist right, the Congress adopted the 
socialist principles of making the means of production, mines, 
collieries, railways, the land (including arable land), common 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
property, and acknowledged the advantages of the public owner­
ship of the means of production. The Congress also adopted 
Marx's resolutions on the consequences of the use of machinery in 
capitalist society and on the reduction of the working day. 
The question of landed property, already settled at the Brussels 
Congress, was, as a result of Marx's motion, again on the agenda 
of the next congress, which gathered in Basle in 1869. This was 
prompted by the need for isolating any advocates of private 
landownership and for defining the tactics of the International on 
the peasantry. 
Marx spoke twice during the preliminary discussion of the issue 
at the meeting of the General Council (pp. 392-93). He explained 
the error of those who favoured small private property, chiefly the 
Proudhonists, and of those among the British members of the 
International who argued in favour of the nationalisation of land 
with references to the "natural right" of the farmers. 
Marx maintained that "to push this natural right to its logical 
consequences would land us at the assertion of every individual to 
cultivate his own share", that is, to the assertion of small private 
property in land. Not the will of individuals, he pointed out, but 
the "social right and social necessity determined in what manner 
the means of subsistence must be procured" (p. 392). Marx 
guided the members of the General Council towards understand­
ing that any consistent solution of the agrarian question called for 
a revolutionary transformation of all society, which also meant 
nationalisation of land and its conversion into collective property. 
The confirmation of the Marxian platform by the Basle 
Congress was a victory for revolutionary proletarian socialism over 
various schools of petty-bourgeois socialism, and marked an 
important stage in working socialist principles into the programme 
of the International. 
The Brussels resolutions on public property showed that most 
members of the Association had put aside the Proudhonist dogma 
and held a common view of the aim of the proletarian struggle, 
that of building socialist society. It was left to Marx to set out a 
common approach to attaining this aim. But here, in questions 
related to the motive forces of the socialist revolution and the 
attitude to the state and to the allies of the proletariat, he 
encountered obdurate resistance from followers of the petty-
bourgeois schools, notably anarchism. The chief exponent of 
anarchism at that time was the Russian revolutionary Mikhail 
Bakunin, whose views were a variety of pre-Marxian petty-
bourgeois socialism, reflecting the sentiment of ruined petty 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
proprietors, and were totally unsuited to chart any realistic way of 
ending capitalist oppression. 
Some of the documents in this volume deal with the struggle by 
Marx and the General Council against Bakunin's anarchist views 
on key aspects of the theory and tactics of the proletarian class 
movement, and against the disruptive activity of Bakunin and his 
followers in the International. 
In the autumn of 1868 in Geneva, Bakunin gathered a following 
of heterogeneous elements to form the International Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy. In its Programme and Rules, the Alliance 
declared itself part of thelWMA, claimed ideological supremacy, 
and also the light to autonomy within the International. He 
expected thereby to use the Working Men's Association for the 
propagation of anarchist ideas in the international working-class 
movement. 
What the International should do about Bakunin's Alliance was 
discussed at a meeting of the General Council on December 15, 
1868,  when it was considering the request for its admission to the 
Association. The document Marx wrote on behalf of the General 
Council, "The International Working Men's Association and the 
International Alliance of Socialist Democracy" (pp. 34-36), defended 
the unity and structural principles of proletarian organisations. 
Marx exposed Bakunin's designs of gaining control of the 
International and subordinating it to his ideological influence by 
getting it to admit the Alliance as an independent international 
organisation with its own programme, organisational structure, and 
administrative bodies. The Alliance was denied admission to the 
International Working Men's Association, the reason given being 
that under its Rules it admitted only local and national organisations, 
and not international ones. For the time being Marx saw fit to refrain 
from any critical examination of the programme of the Alliance. But 
in his "Remarksoil the Programme and Rules of the International 
Alliance of Socialist Democracy'' (given in this volume in the section 
"From the Preparatory Materials"), in which he also took note of 
Engels' opinion, Marx produced the first rough outline of a criticism 
of these documents. He revealed the confused, purely declarative 
and demagogical nature of the Bakuninist programme, whose main 
points—"equalisation of classes", "abolition of the right of 
inheritance", and abstention from political struggle—were likely 
seriously to damage the workers' movement. Probing the intentions 
of Bakunin and his followers in respect of the International, Marx 
pointed out that "they want to compromise us under our own 
patronage" (p. 209). 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
A criticism of the basic provision of the Bakuninist programme, 
that of the "political, economical, and social equalisation of 
classes", is given in a letter of the General Council to the Central 
Bureau of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, 
drawn up by Marx on March 9, 1869 (pp. 45-46) in reply to the 
Alliance's second application for admission. Marx's reply is a 
model of principled tactics working for the unity of the labour 
movement. He pointed out that it was not the function of the 
General Council to examine the programmes of societies seeking 
admission, and that all it asked was whether their tendency did not 
run against the General Rules. Thereupon, Marx showed that the 
Bakuninists' demand for "political, economical, and social equalisa­
tion of classes" did run against the General Rules since it amounted 
to the bourgeois slogan of "harmony of capital and labour". He 
amplified: "It is not the logically impossible 'equalisation of  classes', 
but the historically necessary, superseding 'abolition of  classes'...,  this 
true secret of the proletarian movement, which forms the great aim 
of the Int. W. Ass." (p. 46). 
Again rejected by the General Council, the Central Bureau of 
the Alliance introduced a few amendments to its programme and 
publicly announced the dissolution of its international organisa­
tion, suggesting to its sections that they adhere to the Internation­
al. But, in fact, Bakunin and his followers retained a secret 
Alliance. 
The fight against the Bakuninists broke out in earnest at the 
Basle Congress (1869) over the right of inheritance, an item 
included in its agenda on their insistence. 
Marx attached much importance to the question of inheritance, 
associating it with the attitude to the peasants, and the ways of 
winning them for the socialist transformation of the countryside. 
When the matter was discussed at a meeting of the General 
Council in the summer of 1869 preliminary to the Congress, and 
in a special report written for its delegates (pp. 65-67 and 394-97), 
Marx came to grips with Bakunin's idea of abolishing the right of 
inheritance as the starting point of the social revolution and the 
only way of eliminating private property in the means of 
production. Marx approached the issue in the light of historical 
materialism and concluded that to proclaim the abolition of the 
right of inheritance "would be a thing false in theory, and 
reactionary in practice" (p. 66). Like all civil legislation, he 
explained, the laws of inheritance were not the cause but the 
effect of the social order. What the working class must grapple 
with, he said, "is the cause and not the effect, the economical 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
basis—not its juridical superstructure" (p. 65). The beginning of 
the social revolution, he emphasised, "must be to get the means to 
socialise the means of labour" (p. 396). 
Marx also saw the danger that Bakunin's idea entailed for the 
tactical tasks of workers' organisations. Any call for the abolition 
of the right of inheritance, he warned, would inevitably turn the 
peasants, the workers' natural allies, away from them. Explaining 
the substance of the differences of opinion with Bakunin over this 
important point of revolutionary tactics in a letter to Paul 
Lafargue of April 19, 1870, Marx said: "The proclamation of the 
abolition of inheritance ... would be not a serious act, but a foolish 
menace, rallying the whole peasantry and the whole small middle 
class round the reaction" (see present edition, Vol. 43). 
The Bakuninists' abortive attempt to seize control of the 
International at the Basle Congress precipitated an open war 
against the General Council in the Égalité, organ of the Romance 
Federal Council, which then adhered to Bakunin's views. The 
General Council was accused of breaching the Rules, of refusing 
to form a special federal council for Britain, of toying with matters 
that were of no concern to the working men's movement, such as 
the Irish question, all of which was said to be doing untold harm 
to the international interests of the proletariat. 
In "The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance 
Switzerland" and the "Confidential Communication" which he 
addressed to the Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of 
Germany as the Corresponding Secretary for Germany, Marx 
criticised the Bakuninist papers, and explained the General 
Council's position on a number of essential topics related to the 
international working-class movement. Scrutinising the Interna­
tional's stand on the Irish question, for example, Marx demon­
strated the connection between the social and national questions, 
and emphasised that the Bakuninist dogma about the non-
connection between the social movement and the political move­
ment ran counter to the Rules of the IWMA (see pp, 89, 120-21). 
A sharp controversy with the Bakuninists developed in the years 
that followed. At the centre of it stood the workers' attitude to the 
state and to political struggle. In the polemics with Bakunin at the 
Basle Congress, Marx's comrades defended the need for the 
proletariat to fight for political power. Seeing the importance of 
the question, an item on the "relationship between the political 
action and the social movement of the working class" (p. 143) was, at 
Marx's suggestion, put on the agenda of the next congress of the 
International to be held in Mainz in the summer of 1870. But that 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
congress was not destined to convene owing to the outbreak of the 
Franco-Prussian war. 
The Russian Section of the International, formed in Geneva in 
March 1870, gave the General Council considerable help in the 
fight against Bakuninism. In a letter to its members (pp. 110-11), 
Marx informed them officially of its admission to the International 
and wrote that he was pleased to accept their proposal to be their 
representative on the General Council. By that time, Marx was 
well enough acquainted with the struggle of the Russian revolution­
ary democrats against Tsarism, and with the thinking of Russian 
progressives, and had read the works of Russian economists. All of 
this led him to conclude that Russia "is also beginning to take part 
in the movement of our age" (p. 111). 
With the international contradictions growing sharper in the late 
1860s and a war threat hanging over Europe, the question of war 
and the position to be taken by the proletariat if it broke out, was 
still, as before, in the focus of Marx's attention and that of the 
International Association. It was also discussed at the Brussels 
Congress. 
In a letter of September 10, 1868, which he wrote to Georg 
Eccarius and Friedrich Lessner who had gone to Brussels as 
delegates of the General Council, Marx observed that the working 
class was not yet sufficiently organised to throw any substantial 
weight into the scales. However, he pointed out that the Congress 
must protest in the name of the working class and denounce the 
instigators of a war between France and Germany that was 
"ruinous for both countries and ruinous for Europe in general" 
(see present edition, Vol. 43). 
The resolution of the Brussels Congress reflected in the main 
the ideas of Marx and his followers, stating that a final end would 
be put to wars only by thorough social reform, and that the 
number of wars and the extent of the calamities wrought by them 
could be diminished if the peoples, above all the working classes, 
resisted their governments and exposed their policy of conquest by 
all available means. However, the resolution contained a number 
of concrete proposals which Marx subjected to criticism in the 
above-mentioned letter to Eccarius and Lessner. 
The fight for peace was becoming one of the official aims of the 
international workers' movement, and its success depended in 
many ways on the international unity of the proletariat. In the 
"Address to the National Labour Union of the United States", 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Preface 
which Marx wrote on behalf of the General Council, he clearly 
saw that "the working classes are bestriding the scene of 
history no longer as servile retainers, but as independent actors, 
conscious of their own responsibility, and able to command peace 
where their would-be masters shout war" (p. 54). 
Much space is devoted in this volume to the works, speeches, 
extracts and notes of Marx and Engels on the Irish question, an 
intricate amalgam of acute social and national contradictions. The 
national liberation movement in Ireland had grown to imposing 
proportion in the 1860s. This was due to the change in the 
methods of English colonial exploitation and the social and 
economic processes that were running their course in Ireland— 
the conversion from small-scale farming to large-scale, capitalist 
pasturage, accompanied by mass evictions of tenants, who were 
thus consigned to hunger or the agony of emigration. Marx 
described the system as a "quiet business-like extinction" 
(p. 192). The response to it was the Fenian movement, which 
"took root ... in the mass of the people, the lower orders" 
(p. 194). While giving their due to the courage and fighting spirit 
of the champions of Irish independence, Marx disapproved of 
their conspiratory tactics. The failed attempt of the Fenians to 
start an uprising in early 1867, their persecution and trial, aroused 
the public in Ireland and England. 
In this setting, Marx and Engels faced the task of defining the 
proletariat's attitude to the national question, of working out the 
tactics in relation to the national liberation movement, and of 
instilling the spirit of proletarian internationalism among the 
workers. With Ireland as an example, Marx and Engels spelled out 
their views on the national liberation struggle of oppressed 
nations and its bearing on the world revolutionary process, the 
relationship between the national liberation movement and the 
international workers' movement,the attitude of the proletariat in 
the metropolitan countries towards the colonial policies of their 
governments, and the allies of the proletariat in the revolution. 
"The policy of Marx and Engels on the Irish question," wrote 
Lenin, "serves as a splendid example of the attitude the proletariat 
of the oppressor nations should adopt towards national move­
ments, an example which has lost none of its immense practical 
importance" (Collected Works, Vol. 20, Moscow, 1972, p. 442). 
In a series of documents dating from November to December 
1867,  such as "The Fenian Prisoners at Manchester and the 
International Working Men's Association", "Notes for an Undeli-

=====第25页=====
Preface XXVII 
vered Speech on Ireland", "Outline of a Report on the Irish 
Question Delivered to the German Workers' Educational Society in 
London on December 16, 1867", and some later works, Marx 
formulated the General Council's attitude to the struggle of the Irish 
people and called on the English working class and the international 
workers' movement to support it. The discussions of the issue at 
General Council meetings witnessed clashes with George Odger, 
Benjamin Lucraft, and other right-wing trade union leaders, who, in 
effect, shared the anti-Irish sentiment of the bourgeois radicals. 
Marx backed the historical right of oppressed peoples to fight 
for their liberation. The English, he noted sarcastically, claimed "a 
divine right to fight the Irish on their native soil, but every Irish 
fighting against the British Government in England is to be 
treated as an outlaw" (p. 189). Stigmatising the British Government's 
policy towards the Fenians, he branded the death sentence passed on 
four of them as an act of political revenge (p. 3). Marx also outlined 
the attitude the English working class should adopt on the Irish 
question: "Repeal [of the Union with Great Britain forced on 
Ireland in  1801  — Ed.] as one of the articles of the English 
Democratic Party" (p. 193). In the outline of a report to the German 
Workers' Educational Society in London, Marx showed the 
pernicious effects for Ireland of the many centuries of British 
exploitation and oppression. He cited Thomas Francis Meagher, the 
Irish democrat, on the results of British rule in Ireland: "One 
business alone survives!... the Irish coffin-maker's" (pp. 199-200). 
Marx looked closely into the process of the forcible expropriation of 
Irish farmers. Eccarius' record of this report singles out Marx's 
words that the Irish question is "not simply a question of nationality, 
but a question of land and existence" (p. 319). 
Marx returned to the Irish question again in the autumn of 
1869,  when a broad movement was launched for the amnesty of 
imprisoned Fenians, in which the International took an active part. 
Speaking at a meeting of the General Council, Marx depicted the 
colonialist, anti-popular substance of the policy of Gladstone's 
Liberal government, which "are the servants of the oppressors of 
Ireland" (p. 409). In the "Draft Resolution of the General Council 
on the Policy of the British Government Towards the Irish 
Prisoners", submitted by Marx on November 16, 1869, he noted 
explicitly that the General Council "express their admiration of the 
spirited, firm and high-souled manner in which the Irish people 
carry on their Amnesty movement" (p. 83). 
To impart international resonance to the Irish question and 
attract the attention of the European proletariat, the General 

=====第26页=====
XXVIII Preface 
Council, on Marx's suggestion, had this resolution published in the 
organs of the International on the continent and in the European 
democratic press, as well as in the British labour press. 
Marx's article, "The English Government and the Fenian 
Prisoners", exposed the brutal treatment of participants in the 
Irish national liberation movement by the British authorities. 
Marx's daughter Jenny wrote eight articles on this subject for the 
Paris La Marseillaise, the third of which was composed with Marx's 
assistance. They are given in the Appendices to this volume 
(pp. 414-41). 
The most exhaustive exposition of the relation between the 
working-class and the national liberation movements was given by 
Marx in a General Council circular, "The General Council to the 
Federal Council of Romance Switzerland" (January 1870), and in 
the "Confidential Communication" (March 1870). Coming to grips 
with the Bakuninists' nihilist attitude to the national liberation 
movement, Marx underlined the international significance of the 
Irish question and its bearing on the struggle of the English 
proletariat for radical social transformation in England  itself.  Marx 
stressed that the participants in the Irish independence movement 
were natural allies of the English working class. The proletariat of 
the two countries, therefore, he noted, must do all they can to 
overcome the antagonism between them artificially nourished by 
the bourgeoisie. "Any people that oppresses another people," 
Marx observed, "forges its own chains." He argued for the 
necessity of granting Ireland independence, including complete 
separation from England. "The position of the International 
Association with regard to the Irish question is very clear," he 
states.  "Its first concern is to advance the social revolution in 
England. To this end a great blow must be struck in Ireland" 
(p. 89). 
All that Marx and the General Council did for the Irish national 
liberation movement attracted the attention of the Irish workers to 
the International and laid the ground for the founding of Irish 
sections, and, naturally, enlisted sympathy for the Irish revolution­
ary movement among the English workers and workers abroad. 
The General Council's attitude to the Irish question and the 
analysis of its various aspects were based on the profound study 
Marx and Engels made of Ireland's history from ancient times. 
Their manuscripts (included in this volume), though uncompleted, 
present an integral view of Ireland's history on a historical materialist 

=====第27页=====
Preface XXIX 
basis.  They define the main periods in the country's history and 
examine its key problems. This study has lost none of its relevance 
today. What distinguishes it is its broad view of the topics at hand. 
Marx and Engels used extensive source material to trace the 
stages, forms and methods of Ireland's colonial subjugation, the 
beginnings and gradual growth of the national liberation move­
ment, and its specific features and peculiarities. Their manuscripts 
provide evidence of their deep interest in the history of 
pre-capitalist societies—an interest that did not slacken in later 
years. 
Marx's manuscript, "Ireland from the American Revolution to 
the Union of 1801. Extracts and Notes" (see "From the 
Preparatory Materials" in this volume), was written preliminary to 
the discussion of the Irish question by the General Council. 
His study of the period from 1776 to 1801 enabled him to 
determine the most typical features of the policy of the English 
ruling classes in Ireland. His attention was drawn to the colonialist 
nature of the Union of 1801 (abolition of the autonomy of Irish 
Parliament), the dissolution of which was sought by generation 
after generation of fighters for Ireland's independence. The 
thought Marx expressed in his letter to Engels of December 10, 
1869 (see present edition, Vol. 43), that "the English reaction in 
England had its roots (as in Cromwell's time) in the subjugation of 
Ireland", is present throughout the manuscript. 
Marx painted a picture of English rule in Ireland, and analysed 
the motive forces of the Irish national liberation movement and 
the role of the peasantry in it. He also produced a vivid portrayal 
of the Irish bourgeois revolutionaries, the left wing of the United 
Irishmen, pinpointing its weaknesses and the reasons for the 
failure of the uprising of 1798, whose lessons were of great 
significance for the Irish national liberation movement as a whole. 
The manuscript shows the influence of the American War of 
Independence and, especially, the French Revolution on the 
emergence and growth of the independence movement in Ireland 
(pp. 238-39). Marx's observations are of immense relevance for 
understanding the international nature of these historic events. 
The uncompleted manuscript of Engels' History of  Ireland,  like 
his preparatory material for it ("Notes on Goldwin Smith's Book 
Irish History and Irish Character" and "Varia on the History of the 
Irish Confiscations"), included in this volume, are evidence of his 
intention to produce a large, comprehensive history of Ireland 
from ancient times, shedding light on the phases of her 
subjugation and the fight of the Irish for liberation. 

=====第28页=====
XXX Preface 
Engels completed only the first chapter of the manuscript of his 
History of Ireland ("Natural Conditions") and the beginning of the 
second ("Old Ireland"), both of which appear in the main section 
of this volume. The first chapter is devoted to the geological 
structure and climate of Ireland, though it also touches on 
questions of a political nature. Engels rejects the attempts of the 
English ruling classes to justify British colonial rule in Ireland with 
references to the unfavourable geographic conditions for indepen­
dent economic development and the "ignorance and sloth" of the 
country's native population, from which it follows that Ireland's 
very climate condemned it to supplying beef and butter for the 
English rather than bread for the Irish (pp. 148, 161). Engels 
portrays Ireland's ancient history and the social and political 
system of the Celtic clans. Challenging the chauvinist idea of 
Ireland's backwardness, he demonstrates the contribution of the 
Irish Christian missionaries and scholars to European culture in 
the early Middle Ages (p. 171), and notes the bitter Irish 
resistance to the invasion of the Norsemen. The manuscript 
refutes the theories that attribute the foundation of many 
European states to the Northern conquerors. Engels shows, on the 
contrary, that the conquests of the Norsemen were really nothing 
more than piratic raids (p. 179). He denounces the tendency to 
portray the national liberation struggle as banditism or to ascribe 
to it merely religious motives. The hiding or the distortion of facts 
relating to the Irish people's struggle, he observes, is intended to 
vindicate English domination. 
In his "Notes for the Preface to a Collection of Irish Songs", 
Engels speaks of the deliberate obliteration of Ireland's finest 
cultural traditions by the English conquerors from the seventeenth 
century on, with the result that Gaelic was understood in the 
country by only few people and the nation was forfeiting its rich 
culture (p. 141). 
Two of Engels' manuscripts, "Notes on Goldwin Smith's Book 
Irish History and Irish  Character''''  and "Varia on the History of the 
Irish Confiscations", reflect his views on the later period of Irish 
history. His précis of Goldwin Smith's book is of special interest. 
Goldwin Smith was an English liberal historian and economist, and 
his book attracted Engels' attention as an example of how Irish 
history was being falsified for the benefit of the liberal bourgeoisie 
to justify its colonial subjection and social and national oppression. 
Engels' polemical notes show that he saw one of his tasks as 
exposing this tendency, as well as the chauvinist conception of 
Irish history. Referring to Smith, he writes: "Behind the cloak of 

=====第29页=====
Preface XXXI 
objectivity, the apologetic English bourgeois professor" (p. 283). 
Smith extolled the English conquerors for bringing civilisation to the 
country, and denounced the Irish national liberation movement as 
lacking reason and national roots. The concessions that the Irish had 
wrested from the English in many centuries of continuous struggle 
Smith portrays as acts of "goodwill" on the part of the English. He 
ignores the strong influence of the American War of Independence 
and the French Revolution on the Irish movement for national 
liberation. The English concessions, as Engels observes, are ascribed 
by Smith to the English "spirit of toleration", the "liberal ideas of the 
new era", and the like. "These are the 'general causes' which have to 
be kept in mind," Engels exclaims, "but by no means the real ones!" 
(p. 295). 
Engels' "Varia on the History of the Irish Confiscations" deals 
with the basic aspect of English rule in Ireland, that of the land 
confiscations in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Here he 
surveys the expropriation of the country's native population and 
Ireland's conversion into a stronghold of English landlordism. He 
traces England's policy in Ireland over a century and a  half,  and 
offers evidence that the leaders of the seventeenth-century English 
Revolution inherited the colonialist tradition of their absolutist 
predecessors. Engels shows that the confiscations were accom­
panied by the ruthless suppression of the resistance put up by the 
native population. "The Irish," he observes, "were denied all 
rights...,  with resistance treated as rebellion" (pp. 297-98). 
In the Appendices to this volume the reader will find Wilhelm 
Eichhoff's pamphlet, The International Working Men's Association. 
Its Establishment, Organisation, Political and Social Activity, and 
Growth, which appears in English translation fpr the first time. It is 
the first history of the First International. Written with the 
collaboration of Marx, if offers a detailed account of the 
foundation and the early years of the International, its class 
nature, and its responsibilities in organising the economic and 
political struggle of the proletariat in various countries. Eichhoff 
pays high tribute to Marx for his role in establishing and directing 
the International, and in drawing up its programmatic-documents. 
The pamphlet contains the texts of a few of the most important 
ones,  notably the Inaugural Address and the Provisional Rules. 
Eichhoff's pamphlet made an important contribution to the 
spread and propagation of the ideas of the First International, and 
to its struggle against trends that were hostile to Marxism. It was a 

=====第30页=====
XXXII Preface 
dependable source for later works on the history of the First 
International. 
* * * 
The present volume contains 54 works of Marx and Engels, 
eight of which are appearing in English for the first time, 
including Marx's address "To the President and Executive 
Committee of the General Association of German Workers" and 
"Statement to the German Workers' Educational Society in 
London", and Engels' article "Karl Marx" and the plan of the 
second chapter of his History of  Ireland.  Among Appendices three 
documents appear in English for the first time. 
In cases where documents of the International written by Marx 
or with his collaboration have reached us in more or less authentic 
versions in several languages, their publication in this volume is 
based on the English-language source, whether handwritten or 
printed. Any discrepancies in content or sense from sources in 
other languages are given in footnotes. 
All the texts have been translated from the German except 
where otherwise stated. Headings supplied by the editors where 
none existed in the original are given in square brackets. Asterisks 
indicate footnotes by the author; editors' footnotes are indicated by 
index letters. 
Misprints found in quotations, proper names, place names, 
figures, dates, and so on, have been checked and corrected with 
reference to the sources used by Marx and Engels. All known 
literary and documentary sources used by them are cited in 
footnotes and in the index of quoted and mentioned literature. 
Words written in English in the original are given in small caps. 
The volume was compiled and the preface written by Marina 
Doroshenko and Valentina Ostrikova (Institute of Marxism-
Leninism of the CC CPSU). The documents of the First 
International in the main part of the volume, Marx's "Remarks on 
the Programme and Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy" and the documents on the history of the First 
International in the Appendices, were prepared by Valentina 
Ostrikova, who also wrote the relevant notes. The index of quoted 
and mentioned literature to these documents is by Valentina 
Ostrikova, who was assisted by Yuri Vasin. 
The basic works of Marx and Engels on the history of Ireland 
(Engels' History of Ireland and the section "From the Preparatory 

=====第31页=====
Preface XXXIII 
Materials"), all of Jenny Marx's articles on the Irish question (in 
the Appendices), and the relevant notes and bibliography were 
compiled by Marina Doroshenko. 
The text of Wilhelm Eichhoff's pamphlet, The International 
Working Men's Association (in the Appendices), and the notes and 
bibliography for it, were prepared by Yuri Vasin. 
The name index and the index of periodicals are by Yuri Vasin 
in collaboration with Yelena Kofanova, the subject index is by 
Vasily Kuznetsov, and the editor of the volume is Tatyana 
Yeremeyeva (all from the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the 
CC CPSU). 
The English translations were made by Barrie Selman and Joan 
and Trevor Walmsley (Lawrence and Wishart), Kate Cook and 
Vic Schneierson (Progress Publishers), and edited by Nicholas Jacobs 
(Lawrence and Wishart), Lydia Belyakova, Victor Schnittke and 
Yelena Vorotnikova (Progress Publishers), and Vladimir Mosolov, 
scientific editor (Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). 
The volume was prepared for the press by Lydia Belyakova, 
Anna Vladimirova and assistant editor Natalia Kim (Progress 
Publishers). 
2-733 

=====第32页=====

=====第33页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
November 1867—mid-July 1870 

=====第34页=====

=====第35页=====
3 
Karl Marx 
THE FENIAN PRISONERS AT MANCHESTER AND 
THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 1 
At a special meeting of the General Council of the I.W.A. held 
at the office 16, Castle Street, East, W., on Wednesday evening 3 
the following memorial was adopted: 
"Memorial of the General Council of the International Working 
Men's Association. 
"To the Right Hon. Gathorne-Hardy, her Majesty's Secretary of 
State. 
"The memorial of the undersigned, representing working men's 
associations in all parts of Europe, showeth: 
"That the execution of the Irish prisoners condemned to death 
at Manchester will greatly impair the moral influence of England 
upon the European Continent. The Execution of the four 
prisonersb resting upon the same evidence and the same verdict 
which, by the free pardon of Maguire, have been officially 
declared, the one false, the other erroneous, will bear the stamp 
not of a judicial act, but of political revenge. But even if the 
verdict of the Manchester jury and the evidence it rests upon had 
not been tainted by the British Government  itself,  the latter would 
now have to choose between the blood-handed practices of old 
Europe and the magnanimous humanity of the young Transatlan­
tic Republic.2 
"The commutation of the sentence for which we pray will be an 
act not only of justice, but of political wisdom. 
a November 20, 1867.—  JEd. 
b Edward Condon, Michael Larkin, William Philip Allen, Michael O'Brien.— Ed. 

=====第36页=====
4 Karl Marx 
"By order of the General Council of the I. W. Association, 
"John Weston, Chairman 
R. Shaw, Secretary for America 
Eugene Dupont, Secretary for France 
Karl Marx, Secretary for Germany 
Hermann Jung, Secretary for Switzerland 
P. Lafargue, Secretary for Spain 
Zabicki, Secretary for Poland 
Derkinderen, Secretary for Holland 
Besson, Secretary for Belgium 
G. Eccarius, General Secretary."3 
November 20, 1867 
Reproduced from the copy of 
Adopted by the General Council on Marx's manuscript made by Marx's 
November 20, 1867 wife, Jenny Marx 
First published in French in Le Courrier 
français, No. 163, November 24, 1867 
a In Le Courrier français the names of Hermann Jung and Anton Zabicki are 
omitted.— Ed. 

=====第37页=====
5 
Karl Marx 
[THE POSITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
ON PRUSSIAN PROTECTIONIST TARIFFS] 3 
The trades unions established in Germany by the agency and 
with the assistance of the International Working Men's Association 
have furnished the chiefs of the iron trade in the Rhenish 
province, with an argument against the Prussian Government with 
regard to a reduction of the import duties on foreign iron. The 
Chamber of Commerce of Elberfeld and Barmen is of opinion 
that a reduction of the import duties on iron will completely ruin 
the Prussian iron masters. The English capitalists maintain that 
they must reduce the wages of their workmen to be able to cope 
with the foreigners. The German iron masters demand the 
continuance of protection against the English to save themselves 
from utter ruin; yet the wages received by the Prussian workmen 
are less than half what the British workman receives, and the 
hours of labour are more. In its report of April 14th to the 
Government, the Chamber of Commerce statçs: 
"The iron trade of Germany once prostrate a remedy is impossible. Much 
capital will then be lost, and thousands of working men deprived of the means of 
subsistence—a matter that would be the more critical, as the labour question 
becomes more and more serious, and the International Working Men's Association 
assumes a more and more active and menacing attitude." 
This statement proves that the Association has not laboured in 
vain. The capitalists demand a public inquiry into the present state 
of the Prussian iron trade. The workmen insist that the inquiry 
shall include an investigation of the condition of the workpeople 
employed in the trade. 
Written between May 5 and 12, 1868 
First published in The Bee-Hive News­
paper, No. 344, May 16, 1868 Reproduced from the newspaper 

=====第38页=====
6 
Karl Marx 
[RESOLUTION ON CHANGING THE PLACE 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL'S CONGRESS IN 1868] 4 
1. Considering, that the Belgian Parliament has just prolon­
gated for three years the law by which every foreigner may be 
expelled [from] the country by the Belgian executive govern­
ment5; 
2. that the dignity of the I. W. Association is incompatible with 
the meeting of the Congress at a place where they would be at the 
mercy of the local police; 
3. that Article 3 of the Rules of the I.W.A.a provides that the 
General Council may, in case of need, change the place of meeting 
of the Congress; 
the General Council resolves that the Congress of the I.W.A. do 
assemble in London on the 5th of September, 1868. 
Introduced at the General Council meet- Reproduced from the Minute 
ing of June 2, 1868 Book of the General Council 
First published in The Bee-Hive News­
paper, No. 347, June 6, 1868 
a Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 1864, 
London [1867], p. 4.— Ed. 

=====第39页=====
7 
Karl Marx 
[RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
ON FÉLIX PYAT'S PROVOCATIVE BEHAVIOUR] 6 
Resolved. That the General Council of the I.W.A. repudiates all 
responsibility for the address3  delivered at the public meeting in 
Cleveland Hall by Félix Pyat, who is in no way connected with the 
Association. 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the Minute 
July 7, 1868 Book of the General Council 
First published in French in La Liberté, 
No. 55, July 12, 1868 
a L'Espiègle, No. 25, July 5, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第40页=====
Karl Marx 
[DECLARATION 
OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL CONCERNING 
THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT'S 
ATTITUDE TOWARDS TSARIST RUSSIA]7 
The Council of the I. W. Association denounces the last 
manifestation of the subserviency to Russia of the British 
Government by suppressing the adjective "Polish" before the 
word "refugees" in the budget one month after the Russian 
Government had by an ukase3 suppressed the name of Poland. 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the Minute 
July 14, 1868 Book of the General Council 
First published in The Bee-Hive, No. 352, 
July 18, 1868 
a Marx means Alexander II's ukase of February 29, 1868 abolishing the 
Government Commission for Home Affairs in the Kingdom of Poland and the 
additional rules to the Regulations on the Gubernia and Uyezd Administration in the 
Gubernias in the Kingdom of Poland approved by His Majesty on December 19 (31), 
1866.—  Ed. 

=====第41页=====
9 
Karl Marx 
[DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE CONSEQUENCES 
OF USING MACHINERY UNDER CAPITALISM 
PROPOSED BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
TO THE BRUSSELS CONGRESS]8 
Resolved: that on the one side machinery has proved a most 
powerful instrument of despotism and extortion in the hands of 
the capitalist class; 
that on the other side the development of machinery creates the 
material conditions necessary for the superseding of the wages-
system by a truly social system of production. 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the Minute 
August 11, 1868 Book of the General Council 
First published in French in a special 
supplement to Le Peuple Belge, No. 38, 
September 11, 1868 

=====第42页=====
10 
Karl Marx 
TO THE PRESIDENT AND EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
OF THE GENERAL ASSOCIATION OF GERMAN WORKERS 9 
London, August 18, 1868 
In order to conclude preparations for the Brussels Congress a 
meeting of the Executive Committee of the General Council of the 
International Working Men's AssociationI0 has been called for 
August 22, and a plenary session of the General Council for 
August 25. As I have been given the task of making reports on 
both days I find that I am unable to accept the invitation,3 by 
which I am greatly honoured, to attend the Congress of the 
General Association of German Workers in Hamburg. 
I am happy to see that the programme of your Congress0 lays 
down those points from which, in fact, any serious workers' 
movement must proceed: agitation for complete political freedom, 
regulation of the working day, and systematic international 
cooperation of the working class in the great, historical task which 
it has to accomplish for the whole of society. Good luck in your 
work! 
With democratic greetings 
Karl Marx 
First published in Der Social-Demokrat, Printed according to the news-
No. 100, August 28, 1868 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a J. B. Schweitzer, "An Herrn Carl Marx in London. Berlin, 6. Juli 1868", Der 
Social-Demokrat, No. 95, August 14, 1868.— Ed. 
b J. B. Schweitzer, "An die Mitglieder des Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-
Vereins", Der Social-Demokrat, No. 80, July 10, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第43页=====
11 
Karl Marx 
[DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE REDUCTION 
OF THE WORKING DAY 
PROPOSED BY THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
TO THE BRUSSELS CONGRESS]11 
A resolution having been passed unanimously by the Congress 
of Geneva 1866 to this effect: "That the legal limitation of the 
working day is a preliminary condition indispensable for the 
ulterior social improvements,"3 the Council is of opinion that the 
time is now arrived when practical effect should be given to that 
resolution and that it has become the duty of all the branches to 
agitate that question practically in the different countries where 
the International Working Men's Association is established. 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the Minute 
August 25, 1868 Book of the General Council 
First published in The Bee-Hive, No. 359, 
August 29, 1868 
a The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 
1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869], pp.  4-5.—  Ed. 

=====第44页=====
12 
Karl Marx 
THE FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT 
OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S 
ASSOCIATION 12 
The year 1867-68 will mark an epoch in the history of the 
Association. After a period of peaceable development it has 
assumed dimensions powerful enough to provoke the bitter 
denunciations of the ruling classes and the hostile demonstrations 
of governments.3 It has entered upon the phases of strife. 
The French Government took, of course, the lead in the 
reactionary proceedings against the working classes. Already last 
year we had to signalise some of its underhand manoeuvres. It 
meddled with our correspondence, seized our Statutes, and the 
Congress documents.b  ,3 After many fruitless steps to get them 
back, they were at last given up only under the official pressure of 
Lord Stanley, the English Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
But the Empire has this year thrown off the mask and tried to 
directly annihilate the International Association by coups de police 
and judiciary prosecution. Begot by the struggle of classes, of 
which the days of June, 1848, are the grandest expression, it could 
not but assume alternately the attitudes of the official saviour of 
the Bourgeoisie and of the paternal protector of the Proletariat. 
The growing power of the International having manifested itself 
in the strikes of Roubaix, Amiens, Paris, Geneva, &c., 14 reduced 
our would-be patron to the necessity of turning our Society to his 
own account or of destroying it. In the beginning he was ready 
enough to strike a bargain on very moderate terms.c The 
manifesto of the Parisians read at the Congress of Genevad15 
a The German text has "and persecutions by governments".— Ed. 
b The German text has "and the Geneva Congress documents on the French 
frontier".— Ed. 
c The German text has: "In the beginning not much was demanded."—Ed. 
d The German text further has: "(1866) and published in Brussels in the following 
year".— Ed. 

=====第45页=====
The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of the IWMA 13 
having been seized at the French frontier, our Paris Executive 
demanded of the Minister of the Interior the reasons of this 
seizure.3  M. Rouher then invited one of the members of thé 
Committee b to an interview, in the course of which he declared 
himself ready to authorise the entry of the manifesto on the 
condition of some modifications being inserted.0 On the refusal of 
the delegate of the Paris Executive, he added, 
"Still, if you would introduce some words of gratitude to the Emperor, who has 
done so much for the working classes, one might see what could be done."d 
M. Rouher's, the sub-Emperor's, insinuation was met by a blank 
rebuff.  From that moment the Imperial Government looked out 
for a pretext to suppress the Association. Its anger was heightened 
by the anti-chauvinist agitation on the part of our French 
members after the German war. Soon after, when the Fenian 
panic had reached its climax, the General Council addressed to the 
English Government a petition6 demanding the commutation of 
the sentence of the three victims of Manchester, and qualifying 
their hanging as an act of political revenge/ At the same time it 
held public meetings in London for the defence of the rights of 
Ireland. The Empire, always anxious to deserve the good graces of 
the British Government, thought the moment propitious for laying 
hands upon the Internationale It caused nocturnal perquisitions to 
be made, eagerly rummaged the private correspondence, and 
announced with much noise*1 that it had discovered the centre of 
the Fenian conspiracy, of which the International was denounced 
as one of the principal organs.16 All its laborious researches, 
however, ended in nothing.1 The public prosecutor himself threw 
down his brief in disgust.j The attempt at converting the 
a "A M. le ministre de l'intérieur. Vendredi. 9 mars 1867". In Le Courrier 
français, No. 112, May 1, 1868.— Ed. 
b Antoine Marie Bourdon, the section's archivist.— Ed. 
c Instead of "to an interview ... being inserted" the German has: "to an interview. 
In the course of the meeting that followed he first demanded that certain passages in 
the Manifesto should be moderated and altered".— Ed. 
d Le Courrier français, No. 112, May 1, 1868. The quotation gives the general 
meaning of Rouher's speech.— Ed. 
e See this volume, pp. 3-4.— Ed. 
f After the word "petition" the German has the following text: "in which the 
forthcoming execution of the three Manchester martyrs was described as a judicial 
murder" (the reference is to William Philip Allen, Michael Larkin and Michael 
O'Brien).— Ed. 
s The German further has "on both sides of the Channel".— Ed. 
h The German has "in the English press".— Ed. 
1 In the German text this sentence reads: "Much ado about nothing."—Ed. 
J In the German text this sentence reads: "The legal investigation found not a 
shadow of a corpus delicti despite its  zeal."—Ed. 

=====第46页=====
14 Karl Marx 
International Association into a secret society of conspirators 
having miserably broken down, the next best thing was to 
prosecute our Paris branch as a non-authorised society of more 
than 20 members. 17 The French judges, trained by the Imperialist 
discipline, hastened, of course, to order the dissolution of the 
Association and the imprisonment of its Paris Executive.3  The 
tribunal had the naïveté to declare in the preamble of its judgment 
that the existence of the French Empire was incompatible with b a 
working men's association that dared to proclaim truth, justice, 
and morality as its leading principles.0 The consequences of these 
prosecutions made themselves felt in the departments, where 
paltry vexations on the part of the Prefects succeeded to the 
condemnations of Paris. This Governmental chicanery, however, 
so far from annihilating the Association, has given it a fresh 
impulse0 by forcing the Empire to drop its patronising airs to the 
working classes. 
In Belgium the International Association has made immense 
strides. The coal lords of the basin of Charleroi, having driven 
their miners to riots by incessant exactions, let loose upon those 
unarmed men the armed force which massacred many of them.e 
It was in [the] midst of the panic thus created that our Belgian 
branch took up the cause of the miners, disclosed their miserable 
economical condition/ rushed to the rescue of the families of the 
dead and wounded, and procured legal counsel for the prisoners, 
who were finally all of them acquitted by the jury.18 After the 
affair of Charleroi the success of the International in Belgium was 
assured. The Belgian Minister of Justice, Jules Bara, denounced 
the International Association in the Chamber of Deputies and 
made of its existence the principal pretext for the renewal of the 
law against foreigners.19 He even dared to threaten he should 
a Instead of "and the imprisonment of its Paris Executive" the German text has 
"and fined the Committee members and sentenced them to imprisonment".— Ed. 
b In the German text the beginning of this sentence reads as follows: "Yet the 
tribunal had the naïveté to state two things, in the preamble of its judgement: on 
the one hand that the power of the I.W.A. was growing and, on the other, that the 
December Empire was incompatible  with...."—Ed. 
c See the tribunal's sentences of March 20 and May 22, 1868 in Procès de 
l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris, Paris, 1868, pp. 39-40 
and 128.—  Ed. 
d In the German text then follows a separate sentence: "Nothing has enhanced 
its influence in France more strongly than the fact that it finally forced the 
December government to break clearly with the working class."—Ed. 
e In the German text the words "which massacred many of them" are 
omitted.— Ed. 
f The German text has "in the press and at public meetings".— Ed. 

=====第47页=====
The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of the IWMA 15 
prevent the Brussels Congress from being held.a  The Belgian 
Government ought at last to understand that petty States have no 
longer any raison d'être in Europe except they be the asylums of 
liberty. 
In Italy, the progress of the Association has been impeded by 
the reaction following close upon the ambuscade of Mentana20; 
one of the first consequences was the restriction put upon the 
right of association and public meeting. But the numerous letters 
which have come to our hands fully prove that the Italian working 
class is more and more asserting its individuality quite indepen­
dently of the old parties. 
In Prussia, the International cannot exist legally, on account of a 
law which forbids all relations with foreign societies.21 Moreover, 
in regard to the General Union of the German Working Men, the 
Prussian Government has imitated Bonapartism on a shabby scale. 
Always ready to fall foul of each other, the military Governments 
are cheek by jowl when entering upon a crusade against their 
common enemy, the working classes. In spite, however, of all these 
petty tribulations, small groups spread over the whole surface of 
Germany had long since rallied round our Geneva centre.22 The 
General Union of the German Working Men, whose branches are 
mostly confined to Northern Germany, have in their recent 
Congress held at Hamburg decided to act in concert with the 
International Working Men's Association,23 although debarred 
from joining it officially.b In the programme of the Nuremberg 
Congress, representing upwards of 100 working men's societies, 
which mostly belong to Middle and Southern Germany, the direct 
adhesion to the International has been put on the order of the 
day.0 At the request of their leading committee we have sent a 
delegate to Nuremberg.24 
In Austria the working-class movement assumes a more and 
more revolutionary aspect.d In the beginning of September a 
congress was to meet at Vienna, aiming at the fraternisation of the 
working men of the different races of the Empire. They had also 
sent an address to the English and French working men, in which 
they declared for the principles of the International.6 Your 
a Marx refers to Jules Bara's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on May 16, 
1868,  published in La Liberté, No. 47, May 17, 1868.— Ed. 
b In the German text the end of the sentence reads: "although by law it is 
unable to join the I.W.A. officially".— Ed. 
c See Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 35, August 29, 1868, pp. 275-76.— Ed. 
d The German text has "distinct character".— Ed. 
e "Die Arbeiter Wien's an die französischen und englischen Arbeiter", Der 
Vorbote, No. 8, August 1868, pp. 120-22.— Ed. 

=====第48页=====
16 Karl Marx 
General Council had already appointed a delegate  " to Vienna a 
when the Liberal Government of Austria, on the very point of 
succumbing to the blows of the feudal reaction, had the 
shrewdness to stir the anger of the working men by prohibiting 
their congress. 
In the struggle maintained by the building trades of Geneva the 
very existence of the International in Switzerland was put on its 
trial. The employers made it a preliminary condition of coming to 
any terms with their workmen that the latter should forsake the 
International. The Working men indignantly refused to comply 
with this dictate. Thanks to the aid receivedb from France, 
England, Germany, &c, through the medium of the International, 
they have finally obtained a diminution of one hourc of labour 
and 10 per centd  increase of wages. Already deeply rooted in 
Switzerland, the International has witnessed since that event a 
rapid increase in the number of its members. In the month of 
August last the German working men residing in Switzerland 
(about 50 societies) passed at their Congress in Neuenburg a 
unanimous vote of adhesion to the International. 25 
In England the unsettled state of politics,e the dissolution of the 
old parties, and the preparations for the coming electoral 
campaign have absorbed many of our most active members, and, 
to some degree, retarded our propaganda. Nevertheless, we have 
entered into correspondence with numerous provincial trades' 
unions, many of which have sent in their adhesion. Among the 
more recent London affiliations those of the Curriers' Society and 
the City Men's Shoemakers are the most considerable as regards 
numbers. 
Your General Council is in constant communication with the 
National Labour Union of the United States. On its last Congress 
of August, 1867, the American Union had resolved to send a 
delegate to the Brussels Congress/ but, pressed for time, was 
unable to take the special measures necessary for carrying out the 
vote. 26 
The latent power of the working classes of the United States has 
recently manifested itself in the legal establishment of a working 
a Peter Fox.— Ed. 
b The German text has "by them in Switzerland itself as well as".— Ed. 
c The words "one hour" are omitted in the German text.— Ed. 
d "10 per cent" omitted in the German text.— Ed. 
e The German text has "the political movement" instead of "the unsettled state of 
politics".— Ed. 
f Richard Trevellick.— Ed. 

=====第49页=====
The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of the IWMA 17 
day of eight hours in all the workshops of the Federal Govern­
ment, and in the passing [of] laws to the same effect by many State 
Legislatures.27 However, at this very moment the working men of 
New York, for example, are engaged in a fierce struggle for 
enforcing the eight hours' law, against the resistance of rebellious 
capital. This fact proves that even under the most favourable 
political conditions all serious success of the proletariat depends 
upon an organisation that unites and concentrates its forces; and 
even its national organisation is still exposed to split on the 
disorganisation of the working classes in other countries, which 
one and all compete in the market of the world, acting and 
reacting the one upon the other. Nothing but an international 
bond of the working classes can ever ensure their definitive 
triumph. This want has given birth to the International Working 
Men's Association. That Association has not been hatched by a sect 
or a theory. It is the spontaneous growth of the proletarian 
movement, which itself is the offspring of the natural and 
irrepressible tendencies of modern society. Profoundly convinced 
of the greatness of its mission, the International Working Men's 
Association will allow itself neither to be intimidated nor misled. 
Its destiny, henceforward, coalesces with the historical progress of 
the class that bear in their hands the regeneration of mankind.3 
London, September 1 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from The Times and 
September 1, 1868 checked with the copy of the 
German manuscript made by First published in French in a special  Marx >s wife  Jenny  Marx 
supplement to Le Peuple Belge, September 
8, 1868: "Troisième congrès de l'Associa­
tion Internationale des Travailleurs. 
Compte rendu officiel", Bruxelles, 1868; 
in English in The Times, No. 26225, 
September 9, 1868 
a In the manuscript there follows: "For the General Council: Robert Shaw, 
Chairman /. George Eccarius, General Secretary."—Ed. 

=====第50页=====
18 
Frederick Engels 
TO THE DIRECTORATE 
OF THE SCHILLER INSTITUTE 
Manchester, September 16, 1868 
Mr. Davisson has informed me that at its meeting of Sep­
tember 7 the Directorate took the decision to invite Mr. Karl Vogt 
to give a lecture at the Institute. 
Much as I regret it, this decision obliges me to resign my post as 
chairman as well as that of member of the Directorate. 
I do not need to enter here into the objective grounds on which, 
had I been present, I would have voted against the decision. It is 
not these reasons which make my decision a duty. 
My resignation stems only from reasons not connected with the 
Institute. During 1859 and 1860 my political friends and I levelled 
grave charges of a political nature against Mr. Vogt, presenting 
evidence to support them. (See the work Herr Vogt by Karl Marx, 
London, 1860.) Mr. Vogt has so far remained silent in the face of 
these accusations, which have subsequently been repeated by other 
quarters. 
This entire affair, as well as the polemic about it at the time, is 
probably unknown to the other members of the Directorate, or 
forgotten by them. They are quite entitled to disregard Mr. Vogt's 
political character and regard him as the more or less agreeable 
populariser of the scientific discoveries of others. I cannot afford 
to do so. Were I to remain in the Directorate after the above 
decision, I would be denying my entire political past and my 
political friends. I would be giving a vote of confidence to a man 
who,  I consider it proved, was in 1859 a paid agent of 
Bonapartism. 
Only such a compelling necessity could induce me to resign from 
a post in which I considered it my duty to remain under 
difficulties now fortunately overcome.29 

=====第51页=====
To the Directorate of the Schiller Institute 19 
I thank the members of the Directorate cordially for the 
confidence they have so lavishly bestowed on me, and leave them 
with the request to retain towards me the same friendly sentiments 
that I shall always cherish for them. 
Yours faithfully, 
F. E. 
First published in German in the Bulletin 
of the International Institute of Social His­
tory, Amsterdam, No. 2, 1950 Printed according to the manu­
script draft 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第52页=====
fomofroliftlif*  Sodifiililnlt. 
Organ bet bentféen  SSolHpavtcL 
No. 40.  *ti$iit,  Mn 3. ottob«.  1868. 
Frederick Engels 
ON THE DISSOLUTION 
OF THE LASSALLEAN WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
"The government knows, and the bourgeoisie knows too, that 
the whole German workers' movement today is only  tolerated,  only 
survives, for as long as the government  chooses.  For as long as it 
serves the government's purpose for this movement to exist and 
for the bourgeois opposition to be faced with new, independent 
opponents, thus long will it tolerate this movement. From the 
moment that this movement turns the workers into an indepen­
dent force, and thereby becomes a danger to the government, 
there will be an abrupt end to it all. The whole manner in which 
the men-of-Progress agitation in the press, associations and 
assemblies has been put down, should serve as a warning to the 
workers. The same laws, edicts and measures which were applied in 
that case, can be applied against them at any time and deal a lethal 
blow to their agitation; and they will  be so  applied  as soon  as this agitation 
becomes  dangerous. It is of the greatest importance that the workers 
should be clear about this point, and do not fall prey to the same 
illusion as the bourgeoisie in the New Era,31 when it was similarly 
only tolerated but imagined it was already in the saddle. And if 
anyone should imagine the present government would free the 
press,  the right of association and the right of assembly from their 
present fetters, he is clearly among those to whom there is no point 
in talking. And unless there is freedom of the press, the right of 
association and the right of assembly, no workers' movement is 
possible." 
These words may be found on pages 50 and 51 of a pamphlet, 
Die preussische Militärfrage und die deutsche Arbeiterpartei, by 

=====第53页=====
On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' Association 21 
Frederick Engels, Hamburg, 1865. a At that time the attempt was 
made to bring the General Association of German Workers—in its 
time the only organised association of social-democratic workers in 
Germany—under the wing of the Bismarck ministry by presenting 
the workers with the prospect of the government granting 
universal suffrage. "Universal, equal and direct suffrage" was of 
course preached by Lassalle as the sole and, infallible means for 
the working class to win political power b; is it any wonder that 
under these circumstances such subordinate things as freedom of 
the press and the right of association and assembly, which even 
the bourgeoisie stood for, or at least claimed to stand for, should 
be looked down upon? If the bourgeoisie took an interest in such 
things was that not a good reason for the workers to steer clear of 
the agitation for them? This view was opposed by the pamphlet 
mentioned above. The leaders of the General Association of 
German Workers knew better, and the author only had the 
satisfaction that the Lassalleans of his hometown Barmen declared 
him and his friends outlawed and excommunicated. 
And what is the state of affairs today? "Universal, direct and 
equal suffrage" has existed for two years. Two parliaments have 
already been voted in. The workers, instead of sitting at the helm 
of state and decreeing "state aid" according to Lassalle's direc­
tions,  manage with the utmost difficulty to get half a dozen 
deputies elected into parliament. Bismarck is Federal" Chancellor, 
and the General Association of German Workers has been dissolved. 
But why universal suffrage failed to bring the workers the 
promised millennium, they were already able to find out from 
Engels. In the above pamphlet it says on page 48 c: 
"And regarding universal direct suffrage  itself,  one has only to 
go to France to realise what tame elections it can give rise to, if 
one has only a large and ignorant rural population, a well-
organised bureaucracy, a well-regimented press, associations suffi­
ciently kept down by the police and no political meetings at all. 
How many workers' representatives does universal*1 suffrage send 
to the French chamber, then? And yet the French proletariat has 
the advantage over the German of far greater concentration and 
longer experience of struggle and organisation. 
a See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 75-76 (Engels introduced some additional 
italics in quoting this passage in the present article).— Ed. 
b F. Lassalle, Offenes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comité zur Berufung eines 
Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Congresses zu Leipzig, Zurich, 1863, p. 5.— Ed. 
c See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 74-75.— Ed. 
à In Engels' pamphlet: "universal direct."—Ed. 

=====第54页=====
22 Frederick Engels 
"Which brings us to yet another point. In Germany the rural 
population is twice the size of the urban population, i. e.?2/3 earn 
their living from agriculture and Vs from industry. And since in 
Germany the big landowner is the rule and the small peasant with 
his strips the exception, put another way that means: if Vs of the 
workers are at the beck and call of the capitalists, 2/3 are at the 
beck and call of the feudal lords. Let those who never stop railing 
at the capitalists but never utter a word in anger against the 
feudalists take that to heart! The feudalists exploit twice as many 
workers in Germany as the bourgeoisie.... But that is by no means 
all. The patriarchal economic system on the old feudal estates 
generates a hereditary dependence of the rural day labourer or 
cottager on 'his lordship', which makes it far more difficult for the 
agricultural proletarian to enter the urban workers' movement. 
The clergy, the systematic obscurantism in the country, the bad 
schooling and the remoteness of the people from the world at 
large do the rest. The agricultural proletariat is the section of the 
working class which has most difficulty in understanding its own 
interests and its own social situation and is the last to do so, in 
other words, it is the section which remains the longest an 
unconscious tool in the hands of the privileged class which is 
exploiting it. And which class is that? Not the bourgeoisie, in 
Germany, but the feudal aristocracy. Now even in France, where 
after all virtually all the peasants are free and own their land, and 
where the feudal aristocracy has long been deprived of all political 
power, universal suffrage has not put workers into the Chamber 
but has almost totally excluded them from it. What would be the 
consequence of universal suffrage in Germany, where the feudal 
aristocracy is still a real social and political power and where there 
are two agricultural day labourers for every industrial worker? The 
battle against feuda' and bureaucratic reaction — for the two are 
inseparable in our country—is in Germany identical with the 
struggle for the intellectual and political emancipation of the rural 
proletariat—and until such time as the rural proletariat is also 
swept along into the movement, the urban proletariat cannot and 
will not achieve anything at all in Germany and universala suffrage 
will not be a weapon for the proletariat but a snare. 
"Perhaps this exceptionally candid but necessary analysis will 
encourage the feudalists to espouse the cause of universal direct 
suffrage. So much the better." 
The General Association of German Workers has been dissolved 
a In Engels' pamphlet: "universal direct".— Ed. 

=====第55页=====
On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' Association 23 
not merely under the rule of universal suffrage but also precisely 
because universal suffrage rules. Engels had predicted that it would 
be suppressed as soon as it became dangerous. At its last general 
assembly 32 the Association had decided: 1. to work for full 
political liberty and 2. to cooperate with the International 
Working Men's Association.3 These two resolutions comprise a 
complete break with the entire past of the Association. With them, 
it emerged from its previous sectarian position into the broad field 
of the workers' movement. But in higher places they seem to have 
imagined that this was to a certain extent a breach of agreement. 
At other times it would not have mattered so much; but since the 
introduction of universal suffrage, when they have to be careful to 
shield their rural and provincial proletariat from such subversive 
tendencies! Universal suffrage was the last nail in the coffin of the 
General Association of German Workers. 
It does the Association credit that it foundered precisely on this 
breach with narrow-minded Lassalleanism. Whatever may take its 
place will consequently be built on a far more general, principled 
basis than the few incessantly reiterated Lassallean phrases about 
state aid could offer. The moment the members of the dissolved 
Association started thinking instead of believing, the last obstacle 
in the way of an amalgamation of all German social-democratic 
workers into one big party disappeared. 
Written at the end of September 1868 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Demokratisches Wochen­
blatt, No. 40, October 3, 1868 Published in English for the first 
time 
a "Die Generalversammlung des Allg. deutsch. Arbeiter-Vereins", Der Social-
Demokrat, Nos. 100 and 102, August 28 and September 2, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第56页=====
24 
Frederick Engels 
ON THE DISSOLUTION 
OF THE LASSALLEAN WORKERS' ASSOCIATION 
(POSTSCRIPT)33 
In the article which appeared under the above heading (in the 
previous issue), the following note should be added at the end of 
the quotation from the pamphlet by Engels on universal suffrage 3: 
At that time the "President of Mankind", Bernhard Becker, 
bequeathed by Lassalle to the Association, 34 was heaping the vilest 
insults on "the Marx Party", i. e. Marx, Engels and Liebknecht* 
Now, in his obscene screed Enthüllungen über das tragische 
Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's, which lays bare his own piteous soul 
and is only of interest because of the suppressed documents it 
reproduces, the very same Becker bowdlerises Engels in the 
following way: 
"Yet, why is there no agitation for unconditional freedom of association and 
assembly and freedom of the  press?  Why do the workers not seek to remove the fetters 
placed on them in the period of reaction?" (P. 133.) "...Only by further 
development of the democratic basis can Lassalleanism be renewed and led over 
into pure socialism. To this end it is necessary among other things that the interests 
of the Junkers or wealthy landowners should no longer be spared but that socialist 
theory should be supplemented and completed by applying it to the great mass of 
agricultural labourers who in Prussia outnumber by far the population of the 
towns." (P. 134.) 
It can be seen that the author of the pamphlet (F. Engels) may 
be content with its effect on his opponents. 
Written at the beginning of October 1868 
First published in Demokratisches Wochen­
blatt, No. 41, October 10, 1868 
* This pretty business is now being continued by Countess Hatzfeldt, the "mother" 
of the Försterling-Mende caricature of the General Association of German Workers. 35 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See previous article.— Ed. 

=====第57页=====
25 
Karl Marx 
[CONNECTIONS BETWEEN THE INTERNATIONAL 
WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION AND 
ENGLISH WORKING MEN'S ORGANISATIONS]36 
The unusual seriousness with which the English and 
particularly the London press treats the International Working 
Men's Association and its Brussels Congress (The Times alone 
devoted four leading articles to ita) has stirred up a real devil's 
sabbath in the German bourgeois press. It, the German press, 
takes the English press to task for its error in believing that such 
importance is attached to the International Working Men's 
Association in England! It has discovered that the English TRADES 
UNIONS, which, through the International Working Men's Associa­
tion, have given considerable financial support to the Paris, 
Geneva and Belgian workers in their fight against capital,37 have 
absolutely no connection with that very same International 
Working Men's Association! 
"Apparently all this is based," we have in writing from London, 
"on the assertion of a certain M. Hirsch* whom Schulze-Delitzsch 
sent specially to London to kick up such a fuss. M. Hirsch says so, 
and M. Hirsch is an honourable man! The honourable Hirsch 
aroused the suspicions of London trade unionists because [he] 
bore no letters of recommendation from the International 
Working Men's Association. They simply made a fool of him. No 
wonder then that Hirsch got it all wrong. If he had been taken 
seriously, he could have been told, without being entrusted with 
* Reference is to Dr. Max Hirsch, the "famous" economist of the Duncker 
Volks-Zeitung. Until his voyage of discovery into the English unknown, apparen­
tly no one in London had any idea of the existence of this new saviour of 
society. 
a The Times, Nos. 26225, 26228, 26230 and 26234, September 9, 12, 15 and 19, 
1868.—  Ed. 

=====第58页=====
26 Karl Marx 
anything really confidential, what the whole of London knows—that 
the General Council of  TRADES  UNIONS  in London38 consists of six or 
seven people, of whom three, Odger (Secretary of the General 
Trades Council and shoemakers' delegate), R. Applegarth (delegate 
of the Amalgamated Carpenters and Joiners) and Howell (delegate 
of the bricklayers and Secretary of the Reform League39), are at the 
same time members of the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association. He would have discovered further that 
the rest of the affiliated  TRADES  UNIONS (there are about 50 in London 
alone, not counting the provincial  TRADES  UNIONS) are represented on 
the General Council of the International Working Men's Association 
by another five members, namely, R. Shaw, Buckley, Cohn, Hales and 
Maurice; furthermore every union has the right and makes a 
practice of sending delegates to the General Council for special 
purposes. Further, the following English organisations are rep­
resented on the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association: 
"co-operative societies, which sent three delegates3  to the Brussels 
Congress, by Wim. Weston h and Williams; 
"the Reform League, by Dell, Cowell Stepney and Lucraft, all three 
are also on the Executive Committee of the Reform League; 
"the National Reform Association,40 set up by the late agitator 
Bronterre O'Brien, by its President A. A. Walton and Milner; 
"lastly, the atheist popular movement by its famous orator Mrs. 
Harriet Law and Mr. Copeland. 
"It is clear that not one significant organisation of the British 
proletariat exists which is not directly, by its own leaders, 
represented on the General Council of the International Working 
Men's Association. Finally, there is The Bee-Hive, under George 
Potter's management, the official organ of the English TRADES 
UNIONS, which is at the same time the official organ of the General 
Council of the International Working Men's Association, on whose 
meetings it reports weekly. 
"The discoveries of the honourable Hirsch and the subsequent 
jubilation in the German bourgeois press have provided just the 
right fodder for the London correspondent of the Weser-Zeitung 
and the London correspondent of the Augsburgerin, 0 who signs 
himself A . This person — for one and the same person writes for 
a Frederick Dean (a smith), John Foster Sr (a carpenter) and John Foster Jr 
(a mechanic)—all three members of co-operative societies in Hull.— Ed. 
b John Weston is more likely the man meant here.— Ed. 
c The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第59页=====
Connections Between the IWMA and English Working Men's Organisations 27 
the two papers—lives, for reasons best known to  himself,  in a 
remote corner a few hours away from London. There he coyly 
culls his extracts from The Times, The Morning Star and The 
Saturday Review, and serves them up with an aesthetic fish sauce to 
suit the taste of his public. From time to time, as is the case here, 
he also digs up the gossip of German papers and has it reprinted 
under a false date in the Weser-Zeitung and the Augsburgerin. The 
said correspondent of the Weser-Zeitung and the Augsburgerin is 
none other than the notorious literary lumpenproletarian Elard 
Biscamp. Long rejected by any decent society, this unfortunate 
seeks consolation in the bottle for the broken heart caused him by 
Prussia annexing his native Hesse-Cassel as well as his friend Edgar 
Bauer. 41" 
Written on October 4, 1868 
First published in Demokratisches Wochen 
blatt, No. 42, October 17, 1868 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第60页=====
28 
Karl Marx 
HOW MR. GLADSTONE'S BANK LETTER OF 1866 
PROCURED A LOAN OF SIX MILLIONS 
FOR RUSSIA42 
Mr. Gladstone's letter of the 11th of May, 1866,a suspended the 
Bank Charter Act of 184443 on the following conditions: — 
1. That the minimum rate of discount should be raised to 10 
per cent. 
2. That if the Bank overstepped the legal limitation of its note 
issue, the profits of such overissue should be transferred from the 
Bank to the Government. 
Consequently the Bank raised its minimum rate of discount to 
10 per cent, (which means 15 to 20 per cent, for the common run 
of merchants and manufacturers), and did not infringe the letter of 
the Act in regard to the note issue. They collected, in the evening, 
notes from their banking friends and other connexions in the City 
to reissue them in the morning. They infringed, however, the 
spirit of the Act by allowing, under the Government letter, their 
Reserve to dwindle down to zero, and that Reserve, according to the 
contrivances of the Act of 1844, forms the only available assets of 
the Bank as against the liabilities of its banking department. 
Mr. Gladstone's letter, therefore, suspended Peel's Act in such a 
way as to perpetuate and even artificially exaggerate its worst 
effects. Neither Sir G. C. Lewis's letter of 1857 nor Lord John 
Russell's letter of 1847 44 lay open to the same censure. 
The Bank maintained the 10 per cent, minimum rate of 
discount for more than 3 months. This rate was regarded by 
Europe as a danger signal. 
The most morbid sense of distrust in English solvency having 
thus been created by Mr. Gladstone, out comes Lord Clarendon, 
a W. E. Gladstone and J. Russell, "To the Governor and Deputy-Governor of 
the Bank of England. May 11, 1866", The Times, No. 25497, May 14, 1866.— Ed. 

=====第61页=====
Mr. Gladstone's Bank Letter of 1866 29 
the man of the Paris Conference,45 with an explanatory letter, 
published in The Times, to the English Embassies on the Continent.3 
He told the Continent, in so many words, that the Bank of England 
was not bankrupt (although it was really so, according to the Act of 
1844),  but that, to a certain degree, English industry and 
commerce were so. The immediate effect of his letter was not a 
"run"  of the Cockneys upon the Bank, but a "run" (for money) of 
Europe upon England. (That expression was used at the time by 
Mr. Watkin in the House of Commons.b) Such a thing was quite 
unheard of in the annals of English commercial history. Gold was 
shipped from London to France, while, simultaneously, the official 
minimum rate of discount was 10 per cent, in London, and 3l/2 to 3 
per cent, at Paris. This proves that the withdrawal of gold was no 
regular commercial transaction. It was solely the effect of Lord 
Clarendon's letter. 
The 10 per cent, minimum rate of discount having thus been 
kept up for more than three months, there followed the inevitable 
reaction. From 10 per cent, the minimum rate receded by quick 
steps to 2 per cent., which, a few days ago, was still the official 
Bank rate.46 Meanwhile, all English securities, railway shares, bank 
shares, mining shares, every sort of home investment, had become 
utterly depreciated, and was anxiously shunned. Even the Consols 
declined. (On one day, during the Panic, the Bank declined making 
advances upon Consols.) Then the hour had struck for Foreign 
Investments. Foreign Government Loans were contracted, under 
the most facile conditions, on the London market. At their head 
stood a Russian Loan for 6 millions sterling.47 This Russian Loan, 
which, a few months ago, had miserably broken down at the Paris 
Bourse, was now hailed as a godsend on the London Stock 
Exchange. Last week only Russia has come out with a new loan for 
4 millions sterling. Russia was in 1866, as she is now (November 9, 
1868),  almost breaking down under financial difficulties, which, 
consequent on the agricultural revolution she is undergoing, have 
assumed a most formidable aspect. 
This,  however, is the least thing Peel's Act does for Russia—to 
keep the English money-market open to her. That Act puts 
England, the richest country in the world, literally at the mercy of the 
Muscovite Government, the most bankrupt Government in Europe. 
a G. W. Clarendon, "Foreign Office. May 12", The Times, No. 25504, May 22, 
1866.—  Ed. 
b Marx refers to Watkin's speech of July 31, 1866, published in The Times, 
No. 25565, August 1, 1866.— Ed. 

=====第62页=====
30 Karl Marx 
Suppose the Russian Government had had lodged, in the name 
of a private firm, German or Greek, from one to one and a half 
millions sterling at the beginning of May, 1866, in the banking 
department of the Bank of England. By the sudden and 
unexpected withdrawal of that sum, she might have forced the 
banking department to stop payment at once, although there were 
more than thirteen millions sterling of gold in the issue 
department. The bankruptcy of the Bank of England might, then, 
have been enforced by a telegram from St. Petersburg. 
What Russia was not prepared for in 1866, she may make ready 
to do—if Peel's Act be not repealed—in 1876. 
Written on November 9, 1868 Reproduced from the journal 
First published in The Diplomatic Review, 
December 2, 1868 

=====第63页=====
31 
Karl Marx 
[PREAMBLE TO THE RESOLUTIONS 
OF THE GENEVA (1866) AND BRUSSELS (1868) 
CONGRESSES OF THE INTERNATIONAL]48 
As some of the resolutions passed at the first Congress may be 
considered as part of the platform of principles of the Internation­
al Working Men's Association, and the reports of that Congress 
have had but a limited circulation, the General Council deems it 
advisable to republish them with the issue of the resolutions 
passed at the last Congress. 
Amongst the various subjects that came under the consideration 
of the first—the Geneva Congress—the following are the most 
important.49 
Written at the end of October-Novem- Reproduced from the newspaper 
ber 3, 1868 
Adopted by the General Council on 
November 3, 1868 
First published in The Bee-Hive News­
paper, No. 371, November 21, 1868 
3-733 

=====第64页=====
32 
Karl Marx 
[STATEMENT 
TO THE GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY 
IN LONDON]50 
November 23, 1868 
1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, 
Haverstock Hill, London 
To Mr C. Speyer, Secretary of  the German Workers' Educational Society 
Dear friend, 
I have been informed that the Society has decided to issue a 
circular letter to the German workers,3 the theme of which is said to 
be the "mass unification of the German workers of South and North 
in consequence of the Berlin Congress of September  26".51 
In these circumstances I am obliged to announce my resignation 
from the Workers' Society. 
Such a letter is obviously intended as, or implies, a public 
alignment of the London German Workers' Educational Society for 
Schweitzer and his organisation and against the organisation of the 
Nuremberg Congress,52 which embraces most of South Germany 
and various parts of North Germany. As I am known in Germany 
as a member of the Society, in fact its oldest member, / would be 
held responsible for this step in spite of all possible assurances to 
the contrary. 
You must, however, realise that I cannot accept such responsi­
bility. 
Firstly: During the disputes between the Nuremberg organisa­
tion, represented by Liebknecht, Bebel, etc., and the Berlin 
organisation, represented by Schweitzer, both parties have con­
tacted me in writing. I have replied that as the Secretary of the 
General Council of the International Working Men's Association 
a K. Speyer, "Der deutsche Arbeiter-Bildungsverein in London an die Arbeiter 
Deutschlands", Der Vorbote, No. 12, December 1868; No. 1, January 1869.— Ed. 

=====第65页=====
Statement to the German Workers' Educational Society 33 
for Germany I have to maintain an impartial position. I have 
advised both parties, if they cannot and will not amalgamate with 
each other, to look for ways and means of working for the 
common goal peacefully side by side. 
Secondly: In reply to a letter from Herr von Schweitzer to me, I 
have set out for him in detail the reasons why I can neither 
approve the manner in which the Berlin Congress was managed 
nor the statutes adopted by it. 53 
Thirdly: The Nuremberg Congress has affiliated itself directly to 
the International Working Men's Association. The Hamburg 
Congress—of which the Berlin Congress was a continuation—has 
only indirectly affiliated itself by a statement of sympathy, owing to 
the obstacles placed in its path by the Prussian legislation. In spite 
of these obstacles, however, the newly formed Democratic 
Workers' Association of Berlin,54 which belongs to the Nuremberg 
organisation, has publicly and officially affiliated itself to the 
International Working Men's Association. 
I repeat that in these circumstances the decision of the Society 
leaves me no other choice than to announce my resignation from 
it. I trust you will be so kind as to convey these lines of mine to 
the Society. 
Yours sincerely, 
Karl Marx 
First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the manu-
Briefen von J. Ph. Becker, J. Dietzgen, script 
F. Engels, K. Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge u. A., 
Stuttgart 1906 Published in English for the first 
time 
3* 

=====第66页=====
34 
Karl Marx 
THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
AND THE INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE 
OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY55 
Just about a month ago a certain number of citizens formed in 
Geneva the Central Initiatory Committee of a new international 
society named The International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, 
stating that it was their "special mission to study political and 
philosophical questions on the basis of the grand principle of 
equality, etc." 
The programme and rules printed by this Initiatory Committee3 
were only communicated to the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association at its meeting on December 15. 
According to these documents, the said "International Alliance is 
merged entirely in the International Working Men's Association" , at the 
same time as it is established entirely outside this Association. 
Besides the General Council of the International Association, 
elected at the Geneva, Lausanne and Brussels working men's 
congresses, there is to be, in line with the initiatory rules, another 
Central Council in Geneva, which is self-appointed. Besides the 
local groups of the International Association, there are to be local 
groups of the International Alliance, which "through their national 
bureaus", operating outside the national bureaus of the Interna­
tional Association, "shall ask the Central Bureau of the Alliance to 
admit them into the International Working Men's Association"; the 
Alliance Central Committee thereby takes upon itself the right of 
admittance to the International Association. Lastly, the General 
Congress of the International Association will have its parallel in the 
a Programme et Règlement de l'Alliance Internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste, 
Genève [1868] (see this volume, pp. 207-09). Here and below Marx quotes this 
document. — Ed. 

=====第67页=====
The IWMA and the Alliance of Socialist Democracy 35 
General Congress of the International Alliance, for, as the initiatory 
rules say, 
"At the annual Working Men's Congress the delegation of the Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy, as a branch of the International Working Men's Association, shall hold public 
meetings in a separate building. "a 
Considering, 
That the presence of a second international body operating 
within and outside the International Working Men's Association 
would be the infallible means of its disorganisation; 
That every other group of individuals, residing anywhere at all, 
would have the right to imitate the Geneva initiatory group and, 
under more or less plausible excuses, to bring into the International 
Working Men's Association other international associations with 
other "special missions"; 
That the International Working Men's Association would thereby 
soon become a plaything for intriguers of all race and nationalityb; 
That, moreover, the Rules of the International Working Men's 
Association admit only local and national branches into its ranks 
(see Article 1 and Article 6 of the Rules); 
That sections of the International Association are forbidden to 
give themselves rules or administrative regulatipns contrary to the 
General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International 
Association (see Article 12 of the Administrative Regulations^; 
That the Rules and Administrative Regulations of the Interna­
tional Association can only be revised by the General Congress in the 
event of two-thirds of the delegates present voting in favour of 
such a revision (see Article 13 of the Administrative Regulations),'1 
'•' See this volume, p. 209.— Ed. 
b Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale by Marx and Engels (Genève, 1872, 
p. 7) has: "for intriguers of any nationality and any party".— Ed. 
c Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 
1864, London [1867], pp. 4-5,  7.—Ed. 
d During discussion of the draft resolution at the General Council meeting on 
December 22, 1868, on Dupont's proposal an addition was made to this part of the 
resolution which was not recorded in full in the Minute Book. The text of this 
addition, edited apparently by Marx, was included in the final version of the 
circular (see K. Marx and F. Engels, Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, 
Genève, 1872, p. 8) and reads as follows: 
"That this question was decided beforehand in the resolutions against the Peace 
League, unanimously passed at the General Congress in Brussels 56; 
"That in its resolutions the Congress declared there was no justification for the 
Peace Leagues existence since, according to its recent declarations, its aim and 
principles were identical with those of the International Working Men's Association; 
"That a few members of the Geneva Initiatory group, as delegates to the Brussels 
Congress, had voted for these resolutions."—Ed. 

=====第68页=====
36 Karl Marx 
The General Council of the International Working Men's Association 
unanimously agreed at its meeting on December 22, 1868, that: 
1) All articles of the Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy, defining its relations with the International Working 
Men's Association, are declared null and void; 
2) The International Alliance of Socialist Democracy may not be 
admitted as a branch of the International Working Men's Association; 
3) These resolutions be published in all countries where the 
International Working Men's Association exists.3 
By order of the General Council 
of the International Working Men's Association 
London, December 22, 1868 
Adopted by the General Council on 
December 22, 1868 
First published in the pamphlet Les 
prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, 
Genève, 1872 Printed according to the manu­
script, checked with various copies 
and the pamphlet 
Translated from the French 
a Point 3 was not included in the final text of the resolution. Neither was it 
included in the pamphlet Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale. — Ed. 

=====第69页=====
37 
Karl Marx 
[RESUME OF THE MEETINGS 
OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL]5 
INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE BEE-HIVE 
Sir,—At the meeting of this Association, held on the 5th inst., 
letters were read from Germany announcing the adhesion of 
2,000 miners, from Lugau, in Saxony, and arrangements are in 
progress with two other bodies, of 7,000 miners each, with a view 
of their joining the International Working Men's Association.58 
A democratic Working Men's Club has been formed at Berlin59; 
the members have joined the International Working Men's 
Association, and declared themselves opposed to the Prussian 
Government and to Schultze-Delitzsch. The trades' unions in 
Germany, on the model of the English ones, with some 
improvements suggested by the resolutions of the Geneva, 
Lausanne, and Brussels Working Men's Congresses, brought into 
existence by the efforts of the International Working Men's 
Association, number already 110,000 members. 
The Belgian secretary3 stated that in Belgium they had sixty 
branches, and that they were getting new members at the rate of 
1,000 per week.60 
The secretary for Switzerlandb stated that he had received 
information concerning some riband weavers of Basel, who had 
been locked out.61 The matter will come up again on Tuesday, 
when the Council will be in possession of the facts. 
The secretary for Francec reported an agreement come to 
between the cotton masters of Rouen, the northern and some 
other departments of France, to reduce the workmen's wages, in 
a Marie Bernard.— Ed. 
b Hermann Jung.— Ed. 
c Eugène Dupont.— Ed. 

=====第70页=====
38 Karl Marx 
order to .undersell the English manufacturers in their own 
markets.3 
The following resolution, proposed by Citizen Applegarth, and 
seconded by Citizen Marx, was unanimously agreed  to: — 
Resolved—That in the opinion of this Council the attempt of 
the employers of Rouen, of the northern and other departments 
of France, to reduce the wages of their workpeople with the 
avowed object of underselling the manufacturers of England in 
their own markets is deserving the reprobation of the workmen 
and employers of all nations. That while recognising the right of 
free competition carried on by legitimate means, we utterly 
deprecate the extension of trade by reducing the wages of 
workpeople already underpaid. 
Resolved—That the various societies be invited to send dele­
gates to the next meeting of the Council, to be held on Tuesday 
19 inst. at eight p. m., to devise the best means to frustrate the 
unwarrantable attempts of the French manufacturer, and to 
render to the workmen concerned such assistance as they may 
need.62 
Hermann Jung,b Sec. pro. tern. 
6th Jan. 1869 
First published in The Bee-Hive, No. 379, Reproduced from the newspaper 
January 16, 1869 
a See this volume, p.  388.—  Ed. 
b The Bee-Hive has a mistake: "Henry Lang".— Ed. 

=====第71页=====
39 
Frederick Engels 
REPORT ON THE MINERS' GUILDS 
IN THE COALFIELDS OF SAXONY 63 
The first wage scale we take, e. g., that of the Niederwürschnitz 
Company, shows us the overall condition of the miners in the 
collieries of the Erzgebirge. A week's wage for adult miners 
amounts to from 2 talers to 3 talers 12 silver groschen 6 pfennigs.for 
juveniles between 1 taler 10 silver groschen and 1 taler 20 silver 
groschen. A week's wage for an average miner amounts approxi­
mately to 2 2/3 talers. At the demand of the owners the workers have 
to work at piece rates. The wage  scale  is arranged in such a way that 
the piece rate will not usually exceed the normal rate for a day's 
work. Every worker must give a month's notice to leave, and that on 
the first day of the month. Consequently, if he refuses to work at 
piece rates on the terms proposed, he can be forced to it for 4-8 weeks 
at the least. Such being the circumstances, it is simply ridiculous to 
talk of regulating the piece rate by mutual agreement, of a free 
contract between worker and capitalist! 
Wages are paid in two instalments; an advance is made on the 
22nd of the month, the remainder for that month being paid on 
the 8th of the following month. The capitalist therefore retains 
wages that he owes his workers for a full three weeks on the 
average—this compulsory loan to the employer is all the more 
agreeable since money is thus obtained without the payment of 
interest. 
As a rule the miners work in twelve-hour shifts, and the 
afore-mentioned weekly wages are paid for 6 twelve-hour working 
days.  The twelve-hour working day includes 2 hours (2 half hours 
and 1 full hour) for meals, or so-called rest periods. If the work is 
urgent, shifts last eight hours (i. e., each man does 3 shifts in 48 
hours) with half an hour for meals; they may even last six hours, in 
which case "no rest period is granted". 

=====第72页=====
40 Frederick Engels 
These facts offer a gloomy picture of the condition of the 
miners. But to appreciate their serf-like status we must also 
examine the rules of the miners' guilds. Let us take the rules for the 
coal-mines, those of (I) the high and mighty Prince Schönburg, (II) 
the Niederwürschnitz Company, (III) the Niederwiirschnitz-Kirchberg 
Company, and (IV) the Joint Lugau companies. 
The income of the miners' guilds consists of (1) the workers' 
entrance fees and dues, fines, unclaimed wages, etc., and (2) 
contributions from the capitalists. The workers pay 3 or 4 per cent 
of their wages, the owners of (I) pay 7 silver groschen 5 pfennigs 
monthly for every paid-up miner, of (II) 1 pfennig for every 
scheffel3  of coal sold, of (III) as initial contribution and to found a 
miners' guild fund—500 talers; after that the same dues as the 
workers, and of (IV) like those of (II), plus a membership fee of 
100 talers from each of the joint companies. 
Are we not overwhelmed by this picture of friendly harmony 
between capital and labour? After that, who will dare to go on 
harping on their contradictory interests? But, as the great German 
thinker Hansemann once said, "business is business". b So we 
might ask what the worker has to pay for the magnanimity of the 
"exalted coal-owners". Let's see. 
The capitalists contribute in one instance (III) as much as the 
workers, in all other instances appreciably less. For this they lay 
claim to the following rights in respect of the property of the  guild: 
I. "No property rights in respect of the guild fund shall accrue to members of the 
miners' guild, and they shall not expect to obtain more from the fund than the 
amount to which they, according to the rules, are entitled in certain circumstances, 
in particular they shall not be able to propose sharing the fund and its ready cash even in 
the event of any of the works ceasing to operate. Should there be a complete 
shut-down in the coal-mines of Prince Schönburg in Oelsnitz", then, after 
satisfaction of ready claims, "the right to dispose of the remainder is vested in the Prince, 
owner of the  coalfields.  " 
II. "In the event of the joint Niederwürschnitz Coal Company closing down, the 
miners' guild fund shall also be closed down, and the right to dispose of the 
remaining money is vested in the management." 
Members of the guild fund have no property rights in  respect  of the 
guild  fund. 
III. as in II. 
IV. "The guild fund shall be considered the inalienable property of its present 
members and those who join it in future. Only in the unexpected event of the 
a 1 scheffel is one-eighth of a ton.— Ed. 
b From Hansemann's speech in the first United Diet on June 8, 1847 (see 
Preussens erster Reichstag, Th. 7, Berlin, 1847, p. 55).— Ed. 

=====第73页=====
Report on the Miners' Guilds in Saxony 41 
complete liquidation of all the joint coal-mines and the consequent closing 
down of the miners' guild"—now, in this unexpected event one might have 
expected the workers to be able to divide up among themselves any money 
remaining. Nothing of the sort! In this case "the management of the last closed 
trust shall direct suggestions to the Royal District  Board.  The last-named authority 
shall decide how this sum of money is to be used." 
In other words, the workers pay the greater part of the 
contributions to the guild fund, but the capitalists arrogate to 
themselves the ownership of the  fund.  The capitalists seem to make the 
workers a present. Actually, the workers are forced to make a 
present to their capitalists. Together with the property right, the 
latter obtain control of the fund. 
The chairman of the fund board is the coalfield manager. He is 
the chief administrator of the fund, he decides all disputed issues, 
determines the amount of fines, etc. Next below him is the secretary 
of the  guild,  who is also the treasurer. He is either appointed by the 
capitalist or has to get the latter's approval if he is elected by the 
workers. Then come the ordinary members of the  board.  They are 
usually elected by the workers, but in one instance (III) the 
capitalist appoints three members of the board. What sort of 
"board" this actually is can be seen from the rule obliging "it to 
hold a meeting at least once a year". Actually it is run by the 
chairman, and the board members carry out his orders. 
This Mr. Chairman, the coalfield manager, is a powerful person 
in other respects too. He can reduce the probation period for new 
members, issue extra allowances, even (III) expel workers wht>se 
reputation he deems poor, and he can always appeal to the 
capitalist, whose decision is final on everything concerning the miners' 
guild.  Prince Schönburg and the managers of the joint stock 
companies can, for instance, alter the guild rules, raise the 
workers' dues, reduce sick benefits and pensions, create new 
obstacles or formalities in dealing with claims on the fund. In 
short, they can do what they like with the workers' money, with the one 
reservation that they need the sanction of the government 
authorities, who have never yet displayed any desire to know 
anything about the condition or needs of the workers. In 
enterprise III the managers even reserve themselves the right to 
expel from the guild any worker who has been brought to trial by them, 
even if he has been acquitted! 
And what are the benefits for which the miners so blindly 
subordinate their own affairs to an alien despotism? Listen to this! 
1) In the event of sickness they receive medical treatment and a 
weekly allowance, in enterprise I—up to a third of their wages, in 

=====第74页=====
42 Frederick Engels 
III—up to a half of their wages, in II and IV — up to a half or, if 
the illness is due to an accident at work, 2/3 and 3/4  respectively. 
2) The incapacitated receive a pension depending on their length 
of service, and hence on their contributions to the guild fund, 
from V2Ü to V2 of their last wages. 3) If a member dies his widow 
receives an allowance of between V5 and V3 of the pension which 
her husband was entitled to, and a weekly pittance for each child. 
4) A burial allowance in the event of death in the family. 
The noble prince and enlightened capitalists who compiled these 
rules,  and the paternal government which endorsed them, owe the 
world the solution of this problem: if a miner with the full average 
wage of 22/3  talers a week is half starved, how can he live on a 
pension of, say, V20 of this wage, some 4 silver groschen a week? 
The tender concern which the rules display for the interests of 
capital comes out clearly in the way mine accidents are treated. 
With the exception of enterprises II and IV there is no special 
allowance if illness or death occurs through an accident "in the 
course of duty". In not a single  case  is the pension increased if disability 
follows from a mine accident. The reason is very simple. This 
clause would substantially increase payments out of the fund and 
very soon make even the most short-sighted see the real nature of 
presents from the capitalist gentlemen. 
The rules imposed by the capitalists of Saxony differ from the 
constitution imposed by Louis Bonaparte3 in that the latter still 
awaits the crowning touch whereas the former already have it in 
the form of the following article applicable to all: 
"Every worker who leaves the company, be it voluntarily, be it compulsorily, 
thereby leaves the guild and forfeits all rights and claims both to its fund and to the 
money he himself has contributed." 
Thus,  a man who has worked 30 years in one mine and 
contributed his share to the guild fund, forfeits all his hard-earned 
rights to a pension as soon as the capitalist  chooses  to sack him  I This 
article turns the wage-worker into a  serf,  ties him to the soil, 
exposes him to the most shameful mistreatment. If he is no lover 
of kicks, if he resists the cutting of wages to starvation level, if he 
refuses to pay arbitrarily imposed fines, if he dares to insist on 
official verification of weights and measures—he will always 
receive the same old answer: get out, but your fund contributions 
and your fund rights stay with us! 
It seems paradoxical to expect manly independence and 
self-respect from people in such a humiliating position. Yet these 
a Constitution faite en vertu des pouvairs délégués par le peuple français à 
Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, par le vote des 20 et 21 décembre 1851.— Ed. 

=====第75页=====
Report on the Miners' Guilds in Saxony 43 
miners can be counted — much to their credit—among the 
vanguard fighters of the German working class. Their masters are 
therefore beginning to be greatly worried, despite the tremendous 
hold the present organisation of the miners' guilds gives them. 
The most recent and meanest of their rules (III, dating from 
1862) contains the following grotesque clause against strikes and 
associations: 
"Every guild member must always be satisfied with the pay accruing to him in 
accordance with the wage scale, he must never take part in joint action to force higher 
wages, to say nothing of inciting his workmates to the same, but should, rather, 
etc." 
Why have the Lycurguses of the Niederwiirschnitz-Kirchberg 
Coalfield Company, Messers. B. Krüger, F. W. Schwamkrug and F. W. 
Richter not also deigned to make it a rule that henceforward every 
coal purchaser "must always be satisfied" with the coal prices fixed by 
their exalted selves? This is too much even for Herr von Rochow's 
"limited understanding of the loyal subject". 64 
As a result of agitation among the miners, preliminary draft rvles 
for the unification of miners' guilds of all coalfields in Saxony 
were recently published (Zwickau 1869). They were drawn up by a 
workers' committee under the chairmanship of Mr. J. G. Dinter. 
The main points are: 1) All guilds to be united in a single guild. 2) 
Members retain their rights as long as they live in Germany and 
pay their dues. 3) A general meeting of all adult members 
constitutes the supreme authority. It elects an executive commit­
tee, etc. 4) Contributions by the masters to the guild fund must 
make up half those paid by the workers. 
This draft in no way reflects the views of the most intelligent 
miners of Saxony. It comes rather from a section which prefers 
reforms with the permission of capital. It bears the stamp of 
unpracticality on its brow. What a naïve idea indeed that the 
capitalists, unrestrained rulers over the miners' guilds up to now, 
will surrender their power to a democratic general workers' 
meeting and still pay their contributions! 
The basic evil lies in the very fact that the capitalists contribute. 
As long as this continues, they cannot be removed from running 
the guild and the fund. To be genuine workers' societies, the 
miners' guilds must rely exclusively on workers' contributions. 
Only thus can they become TRADES UNIONS which protect individual 
workers from the arbitrariness of individual masters. The insig­
nificant and dubious advantages which come from the capitalists' 
contributions—can they ever compensate for the state of serfdom 
into which they force the workers? Let the Saxon miners always 

=====第76页=====
44 Frederick Engels 
remember that what the capitalist puts into the guild fund he gets 
it all back, and more, from the workers' wages. Guilds of this type have 
the unique effect of suspending the operation of the law of supply and 
demand to the exclusive advantage of the capitalist. In other words, by 
the unusual hold which they give capital over individual workers, 
they press down wages even below their usual average level. 
But should the workers then present the existing funds— 
naturally after compensation for the acquired rights—to the 
capitalists? This question can only be decided by law. Although 
endorsed by the supreme royal authority, certain articles in the rules 
patently conflict with generally accepted legal regulations concern­
ing contracts. In all circumstances, however, the separation of the 
workers' money from the capitalists' money remains the essential 
precondition to any reform of the miners' guilds. 
The contributions of the Saxon coalfield owners to the guild 
funds are an involuntary admission that capital is up to a certain 
point responsible for accidents which threaten the wage worker 
with mutilation or death during the execution of his duty at his 
place of work. But instead of allowing this responsibility to be made 
the pretext for extending the despotism of capital, as is the case now, 
the workers must agitate for this responsibility being regulated by the 
law. 
Written between February 17 and 21, Published according to the news-
1869 paper 
First published as a supplement to 
Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 12, 
March 20, 1869 

=====第77页=====
45 
Karl Marx 
THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION TO THE 
CENTRAL BUREAU OF THE INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE 
OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY65 
London, 9 March, 1869 
Citizens, 
According to Article I of  its3  Statutes, the Int. W. Ass.b admits 
"all working men's societies ... aiming at the same end, viz., the 
protection, advancement, and complete emancipation of the working 
classes".0 
Since the various sections of working men in the same country, 
and the working classes in different countries, are placed under 
different circumstances and have attained to different degrees of 
development, it seems almost necessary that their theoretical 
notions, which reflect the real movement, should also diverge. 
The community of action, however, called into life by the 
Intern. W. Ass., the exchange of ideas facilitated by the public 
organs of the different national sections, and the direct debates at 
the General Congresses, are sure by and by to engender a 
common theoretical programme. 
Consequently, it belongs not to the functions of the General 
Council to subject the programme of the Alliance to a critical 
examination.d We have not to inquire whether, yes or no, it be a 
true scientific expression of the working-class movement." All we 
have to ask is whether its general tendency does not run against the 
a The clean copy in French has "our".— Ed. 
b Here and below in the French copy the name of the International is given in 
full.— Ed. 
c Rules of the International Working Men's Association, London [1867], p. 4.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 207-10.—Ed 
e The clean copy in French has "an adequate expression of the proletarian 
movement" instead of "a true scientific expression of the working-class move­
ment".— Ed. 

=====第78页=====
46 Karl Marx 
general tendency of the3  Int. W. Ass., viz., the complete emancipation 
of the working class? 
One phrase in your programme lies open to this objection. It 
occurs [in] Article 2: 
"Elle (l'Alliance) veut avant tout l'égalisation politique, économique et sociale des 
classes." ("The Alliance aims above all at the political, economical, and social 
equalisation ... of classes." 66) 
The "égalisation des classes", literally interpreted, comes to the 
"Harmony of Capital and Labour" ("l'harmonie du capital et du 
travail") so persistently preached by the bourgeois socialists. It is 
not the logically impossible "equalisation of classes", but the 
historically necessary, superseding "abolition of classes" (abolition 
des classes), this true secret of the proletarian movement, which 
forms the great aim of the Int. W. Ass. 
Considering, however, the context, in which that phrase 
"égalisation des classes" occurs, it seems to be a mere slip of the 
pen, and the General Council feels confident that you will be 
anxious to remove from your programme an expression which 
offers such a dangerous misunderstanding. 
It suits the principles of the Int. W. Ass. to let every section 
freely shape its own theoretical programme, except the single case 
of an infringement upon its general tendency. There exists, 
therefore, no obstacle to the transformation of the sections of the 
Alliance into sections of the Int. W. Ass. 
The dissolution of the Alliance, and the entrance of its sections 
into the Int. W. Ass, once settled, it would, according to our 
Regulations, become necessary to inform the General Council of 
the residence and the numerical strength of each new section.b 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the English 
March 9, 1869 rough copy, checked with Marx's 
First published in the pamphlet Les 
prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, 
Genève, 1872 clean copy in French 
a The clean copy in French has "our".— Ed. 
b In the English manuscript the following text is crossed out: "It is 
self-understood that every section is bound to admit all workmen who accept the 
general statutes of the I. W. Association without adopting the special programme 
of the section."—Ed. 

=====第79页=====
47 
Karl Marx 
THE BELGIAN MASSACRES 
TO THE WORKMEN OF EUROPE AND THE UNITED STATES 
There passes hardly a week in England without strikes—and 
strikes upon a grand scale. If, on such occasions, the Government 
was to let its soldiers loose upon the Working Class, this land of 
strikes would become a land of massacres, but not for many a 
week. After a few such physical force experiments, the powers that 
be would be nowhere. In the United States, too, the number and 
scale of strikes have continued to increase during the last few 
years,  and even sometimes assumed a riotous character. But no 
blood was spilt. In some of the great military states of continental 
Europe, the era of strikes may be dated from the end of the 
American Civil War. But here, again, no blood was spilt. There 
exists but one country in the civilised world where every strike is 
eagerly and joyously turned into a pretext for the official massacre 
of the Working Class. That country of single blessedness is 
Belgium! the model state of continental constitutionalism, the 
snug, well-hedged, little paradise of the landlord, the capitalist, 
and the priest. The earth performs not more surely its yearly 
revolution than the Belgian Government its yearly Working Men's 
massacre. The massacre of this year does not differ from last 
year's massacre,3 but by the ghastlier number of its victims, the 
more hideous ferocity of an otherwise ridiculous army, the noiser 
jubilation of the clerical and capitalist press, and the intensified 
frivolity of the pretexts put forward by the Governmental 
butchers. 
It is now proved, even by the involuntary evidence of the 
11 Marx refers to the events in Charleroi (Belgium) in March 1868. See this 
volume, pp. 14-15.— Ed. 

=====第80页=====
48 Karl Marx 
capitalist press,3  that the quite legitimate strike of the puddlers in 
the Cockerill Ironworks, of Seraing, was only converted into a riot 
by a strong posse of cavalry and gendarmerie suddenly launched 
upon that place in order to provoke the people. From the 9th to 
the 12th of April these stout warriors not only recklessly charged 
with sabre and bayonet the unarmed workmen, they indiscrimi­
nately killed and wounded harmless passers-by, forcibly broke into 
private houses, and even amused themselves with repeated furious 
onslaughts on the travellers pent up in the Seraing Railway 
Station. When these days of horror had passed away, it became 
bruited about that Mr. Kamp, the mayor of Seraing, was an agent 
of the Cockerill Joint Stock Company, that the Belgian Home 
Minister, a certain Mr. Pirmez, was the largest shareholder in a 
neighbouring colliery also on strike, and that His Royal Highness 
the Prince of Flanders had invested  1,500,000  francs in the 
Cockerill concern. 68 Hence people jump to the truly strange 
conclusion that the Seraing massacre was a sort of joint stock 
company coup d'état, quietly plotted between the firm Cockerill and 
the Belgian Home Minister, for the simple purpose of striking 
terror unto their disaffected subjects. This calumny, however, was 
soon after victoriously refuted by the later events occurring in Le 
Borinage, a colliery district where the Belgian Home Minister, the 
said Mr. Pirmez, seems not to be a leading capitalist. An almost 
general strike having broken out amongst the miners of that 
district, numerous troops were concentrated, who opened their 
campaign at Frameries by a fusillade, which killed nine and 
grievously wounded twenty miners, after which little preliminary 
exploit the Riot Act, singulary enough styled in French "les 
sommations préalables", 69 was read, and then the butchery pro­
ceeded with. 
Some politicians trace these incredible deeds to motives of a 
sublime patriotism. While just negotiating on some ticklish points 
with their French neighbour,70  the Belgian Government, they say, 
were bound in duty to show off the heroism of their army. Hence 
that scientific division of arms, displaying, first, the irresistible 
impetuosity of the Belgian cavalry at Seraing, and then the steady 
vigour of the Belgian infantry at Frameries. To frighten the 
foreigner, what means more infallible than such homely battles, 
which one does not know how to lose, and such domestic 
battlefields, where the hundreds of workmen killed, mutilated, 
a See "Moralités de l'affaire de Seraing" and "Episodes de troubles de Seraing 
et du Borinage", L'Internationale, Nos. 14 and 15, April 18 and 25, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第81页=====
The Belgian Massacres 49 
and made prisoners, shed so glorious a lustre upon those 
invulnerable warriors, who, all of them, to a man, get off with their 
skins safe. 
Other politicians, on the contrary, suspect the Belgian ministers 
to be sold to the Tuileries, and to periodically enact these horrible 
scenes of a mock civil war, with the deliberate aim of affording 
Louis Bonaparte a pretext for saving society in Belgium as he has 
saved it in France. But was Ex-Governor Eyre ever accused of 
having organised the Negro massacre at Jamaica in order to wrest 
that island from England and place it into the hands of the United 
States? 71 No doubt the Belgian ministers are excellent patriots of 
the Eyre pattern. As he was the unscrupulous tool of the 
West-Indian planter, they are the unscrupulous tools of the 
Belgian capitalist. 
The Belgian capitalist has won fair fame in the world by his 
eccentric passion for, what he calls, the liberty of labour (la liberté du 
travail).  So fond is he of the liberty of his hands to labour for him 
all the hours of their life, without exemption of age or sex, that he 
has always indignantly repulsed any factory law encroaching upon 
that liberty. He shudders at the very idea that a common workman 
should be wicked enough to claim any higher destiny than that of 
enriching his master and natural superior. He wants his workman 
not only to remain a miserable drudge, overworked and under­
paid, but, like every other slave-holder, he wants him to be a 
cringing, servile, broken-hearted, morally prostrate, religiously 
humble drudge. Hence his frantic fury at strikes. With him, a 
strike is a blasphemy, a slave's revolt, the signal of a social 
cataclysm. Put, now, into the hands of such men—cruel from 
sheer cowardice—the undivided, uncontrolled, absolute sway of 
the state power, as is actually the case in Belgium, and you will no 
longer wonder to find the s-abre, the bayonet, and the musket 
working in that country as legitimate and normal instruments for 
keeping wages down and screwing profits up. But, in point of fact, 
what other earthly purpose could a Belgian army serve? When, by 
the dictation of official Europe, Belgium was declared a neutral 
country, 72 it ought, as a matter of course, have been forbidden the 
costly luxury of an army, save, perhaps," a handful of soldiers, just 
sufficient to mount the royal guard and parade at a royal 
puppet-show. Yet, within its 536 square leagues of territory, 
Belgium harbours an army greater than that of the United 
Kingdom or the United States. The field service of this neutralised 
army is fatally computed by the number of its razzias upon the 
working class. 

=====第82页=====
50 KP- i Marx 
It will easily be understood that the International Working Men's 
Association was no welcome guest in Belgium. Excommunicated by 
the priest, calumniated by the respectable press, it came soon to 
loggerheads with the Government. The latter tried hard to get rid 
of it by making it responsible for the Charleroi colliery strikes of 
1867-68,  strikes wound up, after the invariable Belgian rule, by 
official massacres, followed by the judicial prosecution of the 
victims. Not only was this cabal baffled, but the Association took 
active steps, resulting in a verdict of not guilty for the Charleroi 
miners, and, consequently, in a verdict of guilty against the 
Government  itself.73  Fretting at this defeat, the Belgian ministers 
gave vent to their spleen by fierce denunciations, from the tribune 
of the Chamber of Deputies, against the International Working 
Men's Association, and pompously declared they should never allow 
its General Congress to meet at Brussels.3 In the teeth of their 
menaces the Congress met at Brussels. But now at last the 
International is to succumb before the 536 square leagues of Belgian 
Omnipotence. Its culpable complicity during the recent events has 
been proved beyond the possibility of doubt. The emissaries of the 
Brussels Central Committee for Belgium and some of the Local 
Committees stand convicted of several flagrant crimes. In the first 
instance, they have tried hard to calm the excitement of the 
workmen on strike, and warn them off the Government traps. In 
some localities they have actually prevented the effusion of blood. 
And last, not least, these ill-boding emissaries observed on the 
spot, verified by witnesses, noted carefully down and publicly 
denounced the sanguinary vagaries of the defenders of order. By 
the simple process of imprisonment they were at once converted 
from the accusors into the accused. Then the domiciles of the 
members of the Brussels Committee were brutally invaded, all 
their papers seized, and some of them arrested on the charge of 
belonging to an association "founded for the purpose of attempting the 
lives and properties of individuals"}3 In other words, they were 
impeached of belonging to an Association of Thugs,74 commonly 
styled the International Working Men's Association. Hunted on by 
the raving capucinades of the clerical and the savage howls of the 
capitalist press, this swaggering pigmy government is decidedly 
anxious to drown itself in a morass of ridicule, after having 
weltered in a sea of blood. 
a A reference to the speech of Jules Bara, the Belgian Minister of Justice, in the 
Chamber of Deputies on May 16, 1868, published in La Liberté, No. 47, May 17, 
1868.—  Ed. 
h "Arrestations et condamnations", L'Internationale, No. 16, May 2, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第83页=====
The Belgian Massacres 51 
Already the Belgian Central Committee at Brussels has an­
nounced its intention to institute, and afterwards publish the 
results of, a full inquiry into the massacres of Seraing and Le 
Borinage. 3 We will circulate their revelations all over the world, in 
order to open the eyes of the world on the pet funfaronade of the 
Belgian capitalist: La liberté, pour faire le tour du monde, n'a pas 
besoin de passer par ici (la Belgique).* 
Perhaps, the Belgian Government flatters itself that having, 
after the revolutions of 1848-49, gained a respite of life by 
becoming the police agent of all the reactionary governments of 
the Continent, it may now again avert imminent danger by 
conspicuously playing the gendarme of capital against labour. 
This,  however, is a serious mistake. Instead of delaying, they will 
thus only hasten the catastrophe. By making Belgium a byword 
and a nickname with the popular masses all over the world, they 
will remove the last obstacle in the way of the despots bent upon 
wiping that country's name off the map of Europe. 
The General Council of the International Working Men's Associa­
tion hereby calls upon the workmen of Europe and the United 
States to open monetary subscriptions for alleviating the sufferings 
ot the widows, wives, and children of the Belgian victims, and also 
for the expenses incident upon the legal defence of the arrested 
workmen, and the inquiry proposed by the Brussels Committee. 
By order of the General Council of the International Working 
Men's Association, 
R. Applegarth, Chairman 
R. Shaw, Secretary for America 
Bernard, Secretary for Belgium 
Eugène Dupont, Secretary for France 
Karl Marx, Secretary for Germany 
Jules Johannard, Secretary for Italy 
A. Zabicki, Secretary for Poland 
H. Jung, Secretary for Switzerland 
Cowell Stepney, Treasurer 
/. G. Eccarius, Secretary to the General Council 
London, May 4th, 1869 
* Liberty in travelling round the world has no need of passing through 
Belgium.75 
L'Internationale, No. 15, April 25, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第84页=====
52 Karl Marx 
All contributions for the victims of the Belgian massacre to be 
sent to the Office of the General Council, 256, High Holborn, 
London, W.C. 
Adopted by the General Council on May 4, Reproduced from the leaflet 
1869 
First published as a leaflet, The Belgian 
Massacres. To the Workmen of Europe and 
the United States, May 1869 

=====第85页=====
53 
Karl Marx 
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL LABOUR UNION 
OF THE UNITED STATES 76 
Fellow-workmen, 
In the initiatory programme of our Association we stated: "It 
was not the wisdom of the ruling classes, but the heroic resistance 
to their criminal folly by the working classes of England that saved 
the West of Europe from plunging headlong into an infamous 
crusade for the perpetuation and propagation of slavery on the 
other side of the Atlantic." 3 Your turn has now come to stop a 
war, the clearest result of which would be, for an indefinite 
period, to hurl back the ascendant movement of the working class 
on both sides of the Atlantic. 
We need hardly tell you that there exist European powers 
anxiously bent upon hurrying the United States into a war with 
England. A glance at commercial statistics will show that the 
Russian export of raw produce, and Russia has nothing else to 
export, was rapidly giving way before American competition, when 
the civil war suddenly turned the scales. To convert the American 
ploughshares into swords would just now rescue from impending 
bankruptcy that despotic power which your republican statesmen 
have,  in their wisdom, chosen for their confidential adviser. But 
quite apart from the particular interests of this or that govern­
ment, is it not the general interest of our common oppressors to 
turn our fast-growing international cooperation into an inter­
necine war? 
In a congratulatory address to Mr. Lincoln on his re-election as 
president, we expressed our conviction that the American civil war 
a Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association, 
London, 1864.— Ed. 

=====第86页=====
54 Karl Marx 
would prove of as great import to the advancement of the working 
class as the American war of independence had proved to that of 
the middle class.3 And, in point of fact, the victorious termination 
of the anti-slavery war has opened a new epoch in the annals of 
the working class. In the States themselves, an independent 
working-class movement, looked upon with an evil eye by your old 
parties and their professional politicians, has since that date 
sprung into life. To fructify it wants years of peace. To crush it, a 
war between the United States and England is wanted. 
The next palpable effect of the civil war was, of course, to 
deteriorate the position of the American workman. In the United 
States, as in Europe, the monster incubus of a national debt was 
shifted from hand to hand, to settle down on the shoulders of the 
working class. The prices of necessaries, says one of your 
statesmen, have since 1860 risen 78 per cent, while the wages of 
unskilled labour rose 50 per cent, those of skilled labour 60 per 
cent only. "Pauperism," he complains, "grows now in America 
faster than population." Moreover, the sufferings of the working 
classes set off as a foil the new-fangled luxury of financial 
aristocrats, shoddy aristocrats,77 and similar vermin bred by wars. 
Yet for all this the civil war did compensate by freeing the slave 
and the consequent moral impetus it gave to your own class 
movement. A second war, not hallowed by a sublime purpose and a 
great social necessity, but of the Old World's type, would forge 
chains for the free labourer instead of tearing asunder those of 
the slave. The accumulated misery left in its track would afford 
your capitalists at once the motive and the means to divorce the 
working class from its bold and just aspirations by the soulless 
sword of a standing army. 
On you, then, depends the glorious task to prove to the world 
that now at last the working classes are bestriding the scene of 
history no longer as servile retainers, but as independent actors, 
conscious of their own responsibility, and able to command peace 
where their would-be masters shout war. 
In the name of the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association, 
British nationality: R. Applegarth, carpenterb ; 
M. J. Boon, engineer; /. Buckley, painter; J. Hales, 
elastic web-weaver; Harriet Law; B. Lucraft, chair-
a K. Marx, "To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America" 
(see present edition, Vol. 20, p. 20).— Ed. 
b At its meeting on May 11, 1869 the General Council decided that all Council 
members signing the address should indicate their profession.— Ed. 

=====第87页=====
Address to the National Labour Union of the US 55 
maker; J. Milner, tailor; G. Odger, shoemaker; 
/. Ross, bootcloser; B. Shaw, painter; Cowell Step­
ney; J. Warren, trunk-maker; /. Weston, handrail-
maker. French nationality: E. Dupont, instrument-
maker; Jules Johannard, lithographer; Paul Lafar-
gue. German nationality: G. Eccarius, tailor; F. Les-
sner, tailor; W. Limburg, shoemaker; Marx, Karl. 
Swiss nationality: H. Jung, watchmaker; A. Müller, 
watchmaker. Belgian nationality: M. Bernard, 
painter. Danish nationality: /. Cohn, cigar-maker. 
Polish nationality: Zabicki, compositor. 
B. Lucraft, Chairman 
Cowell Stepney, Treasurer 
J. George Eccarius, General Secretary 
London, May 12th, 1869 
Adopted by the General Council on May Reproduced from the leaflet 
11, 1869 
First published as a leaflet, Address to the 
National Labour Union of the United States, 
London, 1869 

=====第88页=====
56 
Karl Marx 
PREFACE 
[TO THE SECOND EDITION 
OF THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE 
OF LOUIS BONAPARTE]78 
My friend Joseph Weydemeyer* who died so early, intended to 
publish a political weekly in New York starting from January 1, 
1852.  He invited me to provide a history of the coup d'état for it. 
Down to the middle of February, I accordingly wrote him weekly 
articles under the title: The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. 
Meanwhile Weydemeyer's original plan had failed. Instead, in the 
spring of 1852 he began to publish a monthly, Die Revolution, the 
first issue of which consists of my Eighteenth Brumaire. 79 A few 
hundred copies of this found their way into Germany at that time, 
without, however, getting into the actual book trade. A German 
bookseller of extremely radical pretensions to whom I offered the 
sale of my book was most virtuously horrified at a "presumption" so 
"contrary to the times". 80 
It will be seen from the above that the present work was written 
under the immediate pressure of events and its historical material 
does not extend beyond the month of February (1852). Its 
republication now is due in part to the demand of the book trade, 
in part to the urgent requests of my friends in Germany. 
Of the works on the same subject written at approximately the 
same time as mine, only two deserve notice: Victor Hugo's Napoléon 
le petit and Proudhon's Coup d'état? 
Victor Hugo confines himself to bitter and witty invective against 
the responsible publisher of the coup d'état. The event itself 
* Military commandant of the St. Louis district during the American Civil War. 
a V. Hugo, Napoléon le petit, London, 1852; P. J. Proudhon, La Révolution sociale 
démontrée par le coup d'état du 2 décembre, Paris, 1852.— Ed. 

=====第89页=====
Preface to the 2nd Ed. of The Eighteenth Brumaire 57 
appears in his work like a bolt from the blue. He sees in it only 
the violent act of a single individual. He does not notice that he 
makes this individual great instead of little by ascribing to him a 
personal power of initiative such as would be without parallel in 
world history. Proudhon, for his part, seeks to represent the coup 
d'état as the result of preceding historical development. Unnotice-
ably, however, his historical construction of the coup d'état 
becomes a historical apologia for its hero. Thus he falls into the 
error of our so-called objective historians. In contrast to this, I 
demonstrate how the class struggle in France created circumstances 
and relations that made it possible for a grotesque mediocrity 
to play a hero's part. 
A revision of the present work would have robbed it of its 
specific colouring. Accordingly I have confined myself to mere 
correction of printer's errors and to striking out allusions now no 
longer intelligible. 
The concluding words of my work3 : "But when the imperial 
mantle finally falls on the shoulders of Louis Bonaparte, the 
bronze statue of Napoleon will crash from the top of the 
Vendôme Column 81", have already been fulfilled. 
Colonel Charras opened the attack on the Napoleon cult in his 
work on the campaign of 1815.b Subsequently, and particularly in 
the last few years, French literature made an end of the Napoleon 
legend with the weapons of historical research, of criticism, of 
satire and of wit. Outside France this violent breach with the 
traditional popular  belief,  this tremendous mental revolution, has 
been little noticed and still less understood. 
Lastly, I hope that my work will contribute towards eliminating 
the school-taught phrase now current, particularly in Germany, of 
so-called Caesarism. In this superficial historical analogy the main 
point is forgotten, namely, that in ancient Rome the class struggle 
took place only within a privileged minority, between the free rich 
and the free poor, while the great productive mass of the 
population, the slaves, formed the purely passive pedestal for 
these combatants. People forget Sismondi's significant saying: The 
Roman proletariat lived at the expense of society, while modern 
society lives at the expense of the proletariat.0 With so complete a 
difference between the material, economic conditions of the ancient 
a See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 197.— Ed. 
h J. B. A. Charras, Histoire de la campagne de 1815. Waterloo, Brussels, 
1857.—  Ed. 
c J. C. L. Simonde de Sismondi, Etudes sur l'économie politique, t. 1, Paris, 1837, 
p. 24.—  Ed. 

=====第90页=====
58 Karl Marx 
and the modern class struggles, the political figures produced by 
them can likewise have no more in common with one another than 
the Archbishop of Canterbury has with the High Priest Samuel. 
Karl Marx 
London, June 23, 1869 
First published in the second edition of Printed according to the text of 
Marx's Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis the 1869 edition 
Bonaparte, Hamburg, July 1869 

=====第91页=====
59 
Frederick Engels 
KARL MARX82 
It has become the habit in Germany to regard Ferdinand 
Lassalle as the founder of the German workers' movement. And 
yet nothing could be less correct. If six or seven years ago in all 
the manufacturing districts, in all the major towns, the centres of 
the working population, the proletariat flooded to see him in vast 
numbers, and his journeys were triumphal processions which the 
reigning princes might have envied — had the ground not been 
quietly fertilized beforehand for it to bear fruit so rapidly? If the 
workers acclaimed his teachings, was this because those teachings 
were new to them, or because they had long been more or less 
familiar to the thinkers amongst them? 
Life moves quickly for today's generation and they are quick to 
forget. The movement of the forties, which culminated in the 
revolution of 1848 and ended with the reaction of 1849 to 1852, 
has already been forgotten together with its political and socialist 
literature. It is therefore necessary to recall that before and during 
the revolution of 1848 there existed amongst the workers, 
precisely in western Germany, a well-organised socialist party,83 
which broke up after the Cologne Communist trial,84  it is true, but 
whose individual members continued quietly to prepare the 
ground of which Lassalle later took possession. One must further 
recall that there existed a man who, as well as organising that 
party, had devoted his life's work to the scientific study of what 
was called the social question, i. e. the critique of political 
economy, and even prior to 1860 had published some of the 
significant results of his researches. 3 Lassalle was a highly talented 
a This refers to Marx's work A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy.— Ed. 

=====第92页=====
60 Frederick Engels 
and well-educated fellow, a man of great energy and almost 
boundless versatility; he was clearly cut out to play a part in 
politics whatever the circumstances. But he was neither the initial 
founder of the German workers' movement, nor was he an 
original thinker. Everything he wrote was derived from elsewhere, 
not without some misunderstandings either; he had a forerunner 
and an intellectual superior, whose existence he kept a secret, of 
course, whilst he vulgarised his writings, and the name of that 
intellectual superior is Karl Marx.85 
Karl Marx was born on May 5, 1818 in Trier, where he received 
a classical education. He studied jurisprudence at Bonn and later 
in Berlin, where, however, his preoccupation with philosophy soon 
turned him away from law. In 1841, after spending five years 
in the "metropolis of intellectuals", he returned to Bonn intending 
to habilitate. At that time the first "New Era"86  was in vogue in 
Prussia. Frederick William IV had declared his love of a loyal 
opposition, and attempts were being made in various quarters to 
organise one. Thus the Rheinische Zeitung was founded at 
Cologne; with unprecedented daring Marx used it to criticise the 
deliberations of the Rhine Province Assembly, in articles which 
attracted great attention.' 1 At the end of 1842 he took over the 
editorship himself and was such a thorn in the side of the censors 
that they did him the honour of sending a censor15  from Berlin 
especially to take care of the Rheinische Zeitung. When this proved 
of no avail either the paper was made to undergo dual censorship, 
since, in addition to the usual procedure, every issue was subjected 
to a second stage of censorship by the office of Cologne's 
Regierungspräsident. 0 But nor was this measure of any avail 
against the "obdurate malevolence" of the Rheinische Zeitung, and 
at the beginning of 1843 the ministry issued a decree declaring 
that the Rheinische Zeitung must cease publication at the end of the 
first quarter. Marx immediately resigned as the shareholders 
wanted to attempt a settlement, but this also came to nothing and 
the newspaper ceased publication. 87 
His criticism of the deliberations of the Rhine Province Assembly 
compelled Marx to study questions of material interest. In 
pursuing that he found himself confronted with points of view 
which neither jurisprudence nor philosophy had taken account 
of.88 Proceeding from the Hegelian philosophy of law, Marx came 
a K. Marx, "Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly".— Ed. 
b Wilhelm Saint-Paul.— Ed. 
c Karl Heinrich von Gerlach.— Ed. 

=====第93页=====
Karl Marx 61 
to the conclusion that it was not the state, which Hegel had 
described as the "top of the edifice", but "civil society", which 
Hegel had regarded with disdain, that was the sphere in which a 
key to the understanding of the process of the historical 
development of mankind should be looked for. However, the 
science of civil society is political economy, and this science could 
not be studied in Germany, it could only be studied thoroughly in 
England or France. 
Therefore, in the summer of 1843, after marrying the daughter 
of Privy Councillor von Westphalen in Trier (sister of the von 
Westphalen who later became Prussian Minister of the Interior), 
Marx moved to Paris, where he devoted himself primarily to 
studying political economy and the history of the great French 
Revolution. At the same time he collaborated with Ruge in 
publishing the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, of which, however, 
only one issue was to appear. Expelled from France by Guizot in 
1845,  he went to Brussels and stayed there, pursuing the same 
studies, until the outbreak of the February revolution. Just how little 
he agreed with the commonly accepted version of socialism there, 
even in its most erudite-sounding form, was shown in his critique of 
Proudhon's major work Philosophie de la misère, 3 which appeared in 
1847 in Brussels and Paris under the title of The  Poverty  of Philosophy. 
In that work can already be found many essential points of the 
theory which he has now presented in full detail. The Manifesto of the 
Communist Party, London, 1848, written before the February 
revolution and adopted by a workers' congress in London, is also 
substantially his work. b 
Expelled once again, this time by the Belgian government under 
the influence of the panic caused by the February revolution, 
Marx returned to Paris at the invitation of the French provisional 
government. The tidal wave of the revolution pushed all scientific 
pursuits into the background; what mattered now was to become 
involved in the movement. After having worked during those first 
turbulent days against the absurd notions of the agitators, who 
wanted to organise German workers from France as volunteers to 
fight for a republic in Germany,89  Marx went to Cologne with his 
friends and founded there the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which 
appeared until June 1849 and which people on the Rhine still 
remember well today. The freedom of the press of 1848 was 
a P. J. Proudhon, Systeme des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère, 
t. 1-2, Paris, 1846.— Ed. 
h Written by Marx and Engels, the Manifesto was adopted at the second 
congress of the Communist League (November 29-December 8, 1847).— Ed. 

=====第94页=====
62 Frederick Engels 
probably nowhere so successfully exploited as it was at that time, 
in the midst of a Prussian fortress, by that newspaper. After the 
government had tried in vain to silence the newspaper by 
persecuting it through the courts—Marx was twice brought before 
the assizes for an offence against the press laws and for inciting 
people to refuse to pay their taxes, and was acquitted on both 
occasions—it had to close at the time of the May revolts of 1849 
when Marx was expelled on the pretext that he was no longer a 
Prussian subject, similar pretexts being used to expel the other 
editors. Marx had therefore to return to Paris, from where he was 
once again expelled and from where, in the summer of 1849,a he 
went to his present domicile in London. 
In London at that time was assembled the entire fine fleurb of 
the refugees from all the nations of the continent. Revolutionary 
committees of every kind were formed, combinations, provisional 
governments in partibus infidelium,c  there were quarrels and 
wrangles of every kind, and the gentlemen concerned no doubt 
now look back on that period as the most unsuccessful of their 
lives.  Marx remained aloof from all of those intrigues. For a while 
he continued to produce his Neue Rheinische Zeitung in the form 
of a monthly review (Hamburg, 1850), later he withdrew into the 
British Museum and worked through the immense and as yet for 
the most part unexamined library there for all that it contained on 
political economy. At the same time he was a regular contributor 
to the New-York Tribune, acting, until the outbreak of the 
American Civil War, so to speak, as the editor for European 
politics of this, the leading Anglo-American newspaper. 
The coup d'état of December 2 induced him to write a 
pamphlet, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, New York, 
1852,  which is just now being reprinted (Meissner, Hamburg), 0 
and will make no small contribution to an understanding of the 
untenable position into which that same Bonaparte has just got 
himself.  The hero of the coup d'état is presented here as he really 
is, stripped of the glory with which his momentary success 
surrounded him. The philistine who considers his Napoleon III to 
be the greatest man of the century and is unable now to explain to 
a About August 26, 1849.— Ed. 
b Flower.— Ed. 
c In partibus infidelium—literally: in parts inhabited by infidels. The words are 
added to the title of Roman Catholic bishops appointed to purely nominal dioceses 
in non-Christian countries. Here the words mean "in exile".— Ed. 
d K. Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, 2 Ausg., Hamburg, 
1869.—Ed. 

=====第95页=====
Karl Marx 63 
himself how this miraculous genius suddenly comes to be making 
bloomer after bloomer and one political error after the other— 
that same philistine can consult the aforementioned work of Marx 
for his edification. 
Although during his whole stay in London Marx chose not to 
thrust himself to the fore, he was forced by Karl Vogt, after the 
Italian campaign of 1859, to enter into a polemic, which was 
brought to an end with Marx's Herr Vogt (London, 1860). At 
about the same time his study of political economy bore its first 
fruit: A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Part One, 
Berlin, 1859. This instalment contains only the theory of money, 
presented from completely new aspects. The continuation was some 
time in coming, since the author discovered so much new material in 
the meantime that he considered it necessary to undertake further 
studies. 
At last, in 1867, there appeared in Hamburg: Capital. A Critique  of 
Political Economy, Volume I. This work contains the results of studies 
to which a whole life was devoted. It is the political economy of the 
working class, reduced to its scientific formulation. This work is 
concerned' not with rabble-rousing phrasemongering, but swith 
strictly scientific deductions. Whatever one's attitude to socialism, 
one will at any rate have to acknowledge that in this work it is 
presented for the first time in a scientific manner, and that it was 
precisely Germany that accomplished this. Anyone still wishing to do 
battle with socialism, will have to deal with Marx, and if he succeeds 
in that then he really does not need to mention the dei minorum 
gentium}" 
But there is another point of view from which Marx's book is of 
interest. It is the first work in which the actual relations existing 
between capital and labour, in their classical form such as they 
have reached in England, are described in their entirety and in a 
clear and graphic fashion. The parliamentary inquiries provided 
ample material for this, spanning a period of almost forty years 
and practically unknown even in England, material dealing with 
the conditions of the workers in almost every branch of industry, 
women's and children's work, night work, etc.90; all this is here 
made available for the first time. Then there is the history of 
factory legislation in England which, from its modest beginnings 
with the first acts of 1802,91 has now reached the point of limiting 
working hours in nearly all manufacturing or cottage industries to 
a Added in the manuscript: "not with political propaganda".— Ed. 
h Gods of lesser stock; approximate meaning: celebrities of lesser stature.— Ed. 
4-733 

=====第96页=====
64 Frederick Engels 
60 hours per week for women and young people under the age of 
18, and to 39 hours per week for children under 13.92 From this 
point of view the book is of the greatest interest for every 
industrialist. 
For many years Marx has been the "best-maligned" of the 
German writers, and no one will deny that he was unflinching in 
his retaliation and that all the blows he aimed struck home with a 
vengeance. But polemics, which he "dealt in" so much, was 
basically only a means of self-defence for him. In the final analysis 
his real interest lay with his science, which he has studied and 
reflected on for twenty-five years with unrivalled conscientious­
ness,  a conscientiousness which has prevented him from present­
ing his findings to the public in a systematic form until they 
satisfied him as to their form and content, until he was convinced 
that he had left no book unread, no objection unconsidered, and that 
he had examined every point from all its aspects. Original thinkers 
are very rare in this age of epigones; if, however, a man is not only an 
original thinker but also disposes over learning unequalled in his 
subject, then he deserves to be doubly acknowledged. 
As one would expect, in addition to his studies Marx is busy 
with the workers' movement; he is one of the founders of the 
International Working Men's Association, which has been the 
centre of so much attention recently and has already shown in 
more than one place in Europe that it is a force to be reckoned 
with. We believe that we are not mistaken in saying that in this, at 
least as far as the workers' movement is concerned, epoch-making 
organisation the German element—thanks precisely to Marx— 
holds the influential position which is its due. 
Written on about July 28, 1869 Printed according to the news­
paper, checked against the manus-
First published in Die Zukunft, No. 185, crint 
August 11, 1869 P 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第97页=====
65 
Karl Marx 
REPORT OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
ON THE RIGHT OF INHERITANCE 93 
1. The right of inheritance is only of social import, in so far as it 
leaves to the heir the power which the deceased wielded during his 
lifetime, viz., the power of transferring to  himself,  by means of his 
property, the produce of other  people's  labour. For instance, land gives 
the living proprietor the power to transfer to  himself,  under the 
name of rent, without any equivalent, the produce of other 
people's labour. Capital gives him the power to do the same under 
the name of profit and interest. The property in public funds 
gives him the power to live without labour upon other people's 
labour, &c. 
Inheritance does not create that power of transferring the 
produce of one man's labour into another man's pocket—it only 
relates to the change in the individuals who yield that power. Like 
all other civil legislation, the laws of inheritance are not the cause, 
but the effect, the juridical consequence of the existing economical 
organisation of  society,  based upon private property in the means of 
production, that is to say, in land, raw material, machinery, &c. In 
the same way the right of inheritance in the slave is not the cause 
of slavery, but, on the contrary, slavery is the cause of inheritance 
in slaves. 
2. What we have to grapple with, is the cause and not the effect, 
the economical basis—not its juridical superstructure. Suppose the 
means of production transformed from private into social 
prosperity, then the right of inheritance—(so far as it is of any 
social importance)—would die of  itself,  because a man only leaves 
after his death what he possessed during his lifetime. Our great 
aim must, therefore, be to supersede those institutions which give 
to some people, during their lifetime, the economical power of 
4* 

=====第98页=====
66 Karl Marx 
transferring to themselves the fruits of the labour of the many. 
Where the state of society is far enough advanced, and the 
working class possesses sufficient power to abrogate such institu­
tions,  they must do so in a direct way. For instance, by doing away 
with the public debt, they get of course, at the same time, rid of 
the inheritance in public funds. On the other hand, if they do not 
possess the power to abolish the public debt, it would be a foolish 
attempt to abolish the right of. inheritance in public funds. 
The disappearance of the right of inheritance will be the natural 
result of a social change superseding private property in the 
means of production; but the abolition of the right of inheritance can 
never be the starting-point of such a social transformation. 
3. It was one of the great errors committed about 40 years since 
by the disciples of St. Simon, to treat the right of inheritance, not as 
the legal effect, but as the economical cause of the present social 
organisation.94 This did not at all prevent them from perpetuating 
in their system of society private property in land, and the other 
means of production. Of course elective and life-long proprietors, 
they thought, might exist as elective kings have existed. 
To proclaim the abolition of the right of inheritance as the 
starting-point of the social revolution, would only tend to lead the 
working class away from the true point of attack against present 
society. It would be as absurd a thing as to abolish the laws of 
contract between buyer and seller, while continuing the present 
state of exchange of commodities. 
It would be a thing false in theory, and reactionary in practice. 
4. In treating of the laws of inheritance, we necessarily suppose 
that private property in the means of production continues to exist. 
If it did no longer exist amongst the living, it could not be 
transferred from them, and by them, after their death. All 
measures, in regard to the right of inheritance, can therefore only 
relate to a state of social transition, where, on the one hand, the 
present economical base of society is not yet transformed, but 
where, on the other hand, the working masses have gathered 
strength enough to enforce transitory measures calculated to bring 
about an ultimate radical change of society. 
Considered from this standpoint, changes of the laws of 
inheritance form only part of a great many other transitory measures 
tending to the same end. 
These transitory measures, as to inheritance, can only be: 
(a) Extension of the inheritance duties already existing in many 
states,  and the application of the funds hence derived to purposes 
of social emancipation. 

=====第99页=====
Report of the General Council on the Right of Inheritance 67 
(b) Limitation of the testamentary right of inheritance, which— 
as distinguished from the intestate or family right of inheritance— 
appears an arbitrary and superstitious exaggeration even of the 
principles of private property themselves. 
Written on August 2-3, 1869 Reproduced from the pamphlet 
Adopted by the General 
Council on August 3, 1869 
First published in the pamphlet Report of 
the Fourth Annual Congress of the Interna­
tional Working Men's Association, held at 
Basle, in Switzerland, London [1869] 

=====第100页=====
68 
Karl Marx 
REPORT OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
TO THE FOURTH ANNUAL CONGRESS 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION95 
Citizens," 
The delegates of the different sections will give you detailed 
reports on the progress of our Association in their respective 
countries. The report of your General Council will mainly relate to 
the guerilla fights between capital and labour—we mean the 
strikes which during the last year have perturbed the continent of 
Europe, and were said to have sprung neither from the misery of 
the labourer nor from the despotism of the capitalist, but from the 
secret intrigues of our Association. 
A few weeks after the meeting of our last Congress, a 
memorable strike on the part of the ribbon-weavers and silk-dyers 
occurred in Basle, a place which to our days has conserved much 
of the features of a mediaeval town with its local traditions, its 
narrow prejudices, its purse-proud patricians, and its patriarchal 
rule of the employer over the employed. Still, a few years ago a 
Basle manufacturer boasted to an English secretary of embassy, 
that 
"the position of the master and the man was on a better footing here than in 
England", that "in Switzerland the operative who leaves a good master for better 
wages would be despised by his own fellow-workmen", and that "our advantage lies 
principally in the length of the working time and the moderation of the wages". 
You see, patriarchalism, as modified by modern influences, 
comes to this—that the master is good, and that his wages are 
bad, that the labourer feels like a mediaeval vassal, and is 
exploited like a modern wages-slave. 
a The word "Citizens" is omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 

=====第101页=====
Report of the General Council to the Fourth Congress of the IWMA 69 
That patriarchalism may further be appreciated from an official 
Swiss inquiry into the factory employment of children and the 
state of the primary public schools. It was ascertained that 
"the Basle school atmosphere is the worst in the world, that while in the free air 
carbonic acid forms only 4 parts of 10,000, and in closed rooms should not exceed 
10 parts, it rose in Basle common schools to 20-81 parts in the forenoon, and to 
53-94 in the afternoon".3 
Thereupon a member of the Basle Great Council, 
Mr. Thurneysen, coolly replied, 
"Don't allow yourselves to be frightened. The parents have passed through 
schoolrooms as bad as the present ones, and yet they have escaped with their skins 
safe".b 
It will now be understood that an economical revolt on the part 
of the Basle workmen could not but mark an epoch in the social 
history of Switzerland. Nothing more characteristic than the 
starting-point of the movement. There existed an old custom for 
the ribbon-weavers to have a few hours' holiday on Michaelmas/ 
The weavers claiming this small privilege at the usual time in the 
factory of Messrs. Dubary and Sons, one of the masters declared, 
in a harsh voice and with imperious gesticulation, 
"Whoever leaves the factory will be dismissed at once and for ever".d 
Finding their protestations in vain, 104 out of 172 weavers left 
the workshop without, however, believing in their definite 
dismissal, since master and men were bound by written contract to 
give a fourteen days' notice to quit. On their return the next 
morning they found the factory surrounded by gendarmes, 
keeping off the yesterday's rebels, with whom all their comrades 
now made common cause.e Being thus suddenly thrown out of 
work, the weavers with their families were simultaneously ejected 
a See Report of the commission inquiring into the state of public schools in 
Switzerland. Quoted from J. Ph. Becker, Die Internationale Arbeiter-Association und 
die Arbeiterbewegung in Basel im Winter 1868 auf 1869,  Genf,  1869, S. 34.— Ed. 
b Ibid.— Ed. 
1 In the German pamphlet this sentence reads: "According to an old custom 
the workers in Basle take a quarter of a day off on the last day of the Autumn 
Fair." The next sentence begins as follows: "When, on November 9, 1868 the 
weavers claimed...".— Ed. 
d See "Bericht über die Arbeiterbewegung in Basel", Der Vorbote, No. 12, 
December 1868, p.  \T7.~Ed . 
e Instead of "with whom all their comrades now made common cause" the 
German pamphlet has two separate sentences: "Even the weavers who had not 
taken a quarter of a day off did not want to go in either. The general slogan was: 
'All or none'".— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
70 Karl Marx 
from the cottages they rented from their employers, who, into the 
bargain, sent circular letters round to the shopkeepers3 to debar 
the houseless ones from all credit for victuals.1" The struggle thus 
begun lasted from the 9th of November, 1868, to the spring of 
1869.  The limits of our report do not allow us to enter upon its 
details. It suffices to state that it originated in a capricious and 
spiteful act of capitalist despotism, in a cruel lock-out, which led to 
strikes, from time to time interrupted by compromises, again and 
again broken on the part of the masters, and that it culminated in 
the vain attempt of the Basle "High and Honourable State 
Council" to intimidate the working people by military measures 
and a quasi state of siege. 
During their sedition the workmen were supported by the 
International Working Men's Association. But that was not all.0 
That society the masters said had first smuggled the modern spirit 
of rebellion into the good oldd  town of Basle. To again expel that 
mischievous intruder from Basle became, therefore, their great 
preoccupation. Hard they tried, though in vain, to enforce the 
withdrawal from it as a condition of peace, upon their subjects. 
Getting generally worsted in their war with the International they 
vented their spleen in strange pranks. Owning some industrial 
branch establishments at Lörrach, in Baden, e these republicans 
induced the grand-ducal officialf  to suppress the International 
section at that place, a measure which, however, was soon after 
rescinded by the Baden Government. The Augsburg Allgemeine 
Zeitung, a paper of world-wide circulation, presuming to report on 
the Basle events in an impartial spirit, the angry worthies 
threatened it in foolish letters with the withdrawal of their 
subscriptions. 8 To London they expressly sent a messenger on the 
fantastic errand of ascertaining the dimensions of the Internation­
al general "treasury-box". Orthodox Christians as they are, if they 
had lived at the time of nascent Christianity, they would, above all 
things, have spied into St. Paul's banking accounts at Rome. 
Their clumsily savage proceedings brought down upon them 
some ironical lessons of worldly wisdom on the part of the Geneva 
a The German pamphlet has "butchers, bakers, grocers".— Ed. 
b J. Ph. Becker, op. cit., p. 5.— Ed. 
' This sentence is omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 
d In the German pamphlet the word "Imperial" has been added.— Ed. 
e The German pamphlet has "at Lörrach, a Baden border village situated near 
Basle".— Ed. 
f The German has "local magistrate".— Ed. 
8 Allgemeine Zeitung, Nos. 9 and 13, January 9 and 13, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第103页=====
Report of the General Council to the Fourth Congress of the IWMA 71 
capitalist organs." Yet, a few months later, the uncouth Basle 
vestrymen might have returned the compliment with usurious 
interest to the Geneva men of the world. 
In the month of March there broke out in Geneva a buildings' 
trade strike, and a compositors' strike, both bodies being affiliated 
to the International. The builders' strike was provoked by the 
masters setting aside a convention solemnly entered upon with 
their workmen a year ago. The compositors' strike was but the 
winding-up of a ten years' quarrel which the men had during all 
that time in vain tried to settle by five consecutive commissions. As 
in Basle, the masters transformed at once their private feuds with 
their men into a state crusade against the International Working 
Men's Association.1' 
The Geneva State Gouncil dispatched policemen to receive at 
the railway stations, and sequestrate from all contact with the 
strikers, such foreign workmen as the masters might contrive to 
inveigle from abroad. It allowed the "Jeunesse Dorée", the 
hopeful loafers of "La Jeune Suisse",' 96 armed with revolvers, to 
assault, in the streets and places of public resort, workmen and 
workwomen. It launched its own police ruffians on the working 
people on different occasions, and signally on the 24th May, when 
it enacted at Geneva, on a small scale, the Paris scenes which 
Raspail has branded as "Les orgies infernales des casse-têtes". 97 
When the Geneva workmen passed in public meeting an address 
to the State Council, calling upon it to inquire into these infernal 
police orgies,'1 the State Council replied by a sneering rebuke.e  It 
evidently wanted, at the behest of its capitalist superiors,' to 
madden the Geneva people into an émeute, to stamp that émeute 
out by the armed force, to sweep the International from the Swiss 
soil, and to subject the workmen to a Decembrist regime. This 
scheme was baffled by the energetic action and moderating 
influence of our Geneva Federal Committee. 98 The masters had at 
last to give way. 
a The German pamphlet has "the Geneva capitalists".— Ed. 
b See L'Égalité, Nos. 10, 11 and 13, March 27, April 3 and 17, 1869.— Ed. 
c The words "the hopeful loafers of 'La Jeune Suisse'" are omitted in the 
German pamphlet.— Ed. 
'' "Adresse au Conseil d'État de la République de Genève. Genève, le 31 mai 
1869",  L'Égalité, No. 20, June 5, 1869.— Ed. 
e E. Morhardt, "Genève, le 2 mai (lisez juin) 1869. Le Chancelier de la République 
et Canton de Genève", L'Égalité, No. 20, June 5, 1869.— Ed. 
f The words "at the behest of its capitalist superiors" are omitted in the German 
pamphlet.— Ed. 

=====第104页=====
72 Karl Marx 
And now listen to some of the invectives of the Geneva 
capitalists and their press-gang against the International. In public 
meeting they passed an address to the State Council, where the 
following phrase occurs: 
"The International Committee at Geneva ruins the Canton of Geneva by decrees 
sent from London and Paris; it wants here to suppress all industry and all labour."3 
One of their journals stated 
"That the leaders of the International were secret agents of the Emperor,b who, at 
the opportune moment, were very likely to turn out public accusers against this little 
Switzerland of ours".c 
And this on the part of the men who had just shown themselves 
so eager to transplant at a moment's notice the Decembrist regime 
to the Swiss soil, on the part of financial magnates, the real rulers 
of Geneva and other Swiss towns, whom all Europe knows to have 
long since been converted from citizens of the Swiss republic into 
mere feudatories of the French Crédit Mobilier" and other 
international swindling associations. 
The massacres by which the Belgian Government did answer in 
April last to the strikes of the puddlers at Seraing and the 
coal-miners of Borinage, have been fully exposed in the address of 
the General Council to the workmen of Europe and the United 
States.d We considered this address the more urgent since, with 
that constitutional model government, such working men's mas­
sacres are not an accident, but an institution. The horrid military 
drama was succeeded by a judicial farce. In the proceedings 
against our Belgian General Committee at Brussels, whose 
domiciles were brutally broken in by the police, and many of 
whose members were placed under secret arrest, the judge of 
instruction finds the letter of a workman, asking for 500 
"Internationales''', and he at once jumps to the conclusion that 500 
fighting-men were to be dispatched to the scene of action. The 
500 "Internationales" were 500 copies of the Internationale, the 
weekly organ of our Brussels Committee. 
A telegram to Paris by a member of the International, ordering 
a certain quantity of powder, is raked up.e After a prolonged 
research, the dangerous substance is really laid hand on at 
a L'Égalité, No. 11, April 3, 1869.— Ed. 
b The German pamphlet has "Emperor Napoleon".— Ed. 
c L'Égalité, No. 13, April 17, 1869.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 47-52.— Ed. 
e The German pamphlet has the verb stiebert coined from Stieber (sleuth, 
detective)—an allusion to the Chief of the Prussian police Stieber.— Ed. 

=====第105页=====
Report  of the  General Council  to the  Fourth Congress  of the  IWMA  73 
Brussels.  It is  powder  for  killing vermin. Last,  not  least,  the 
Belgian police flattered  itself, in one of its  domiciliary visits,  to 
have  got at  that phantom treasure which haunts  the great mind  of 
the continental capitalist,  viz.: the  International treasure,  the  main 
stock  of which  is safely hoarded  at London,  but  whose offsets 
travel continually  to all the  continental seats  of the  Association. 
The Belgian official inquirer thought  it buried  in a  certain strong 
box, hidden  in a  dark place.  He gets  at it,  opens  it forcibly,  and 
there  was  found—some pieces  of coal. Perhaps,  if touched  by the 
hand  of the  police,  the pure International gold turns  at once into 
coal. 
Of the  strikes that,  in December,  1868,  infested several French 
cotton districts,  the  most important  was  that  at Sotteville-lès-
Rouen.  The  manufacturers  of the  Department  de la  Somme  had 
not long  ago met at  Amiens,  in order  to consult  how  they might 
undersell" 1 the English manufacturers  in the  English market  itself. 
Having made sure that, besides protective duties,  the  comparative 
lowness  of French wages  had  till now  mainly enabled them  to 
defend France from English cottons, they naturally inferred that  a 
still further lowering  of French wages would allow them  to invade 
England with French cottons.  The  French cotton-workers, they  did 
not doubt, would feel proud  at the  idea  of defraying  the  expenses 
of a war of  conquest which their masters  had so  patriotically 
resolved  to wage  on the  other side  of the  Channel. Soon after  it 
was bruited about that  the  cotton manufacturers  of Rouen  and its 
environs  had, in  secret conclave, agreed upon  the  same line  of 
policy. Then  an  important reduction  of wages  was  suddenly 
proclaimed  at Sotteville-lès-Rouen,  and then  for the  first time  the 
Normand weavers rose against  the  encroachments  of capital. They 
acted under  the  stir  of the  moment. Neither  had  they before 
formed  a trades union  nor  provided  for any  means  of resistance. 
In their distress they appealed  to the  International committee  at 
Rouen, which found  for  them some immediate  aid  from  the 
workmen  of Rouen,  the neighbouring districts,  and  Paris. Towards 
the end of  December,  1868, the  General Council  was  applied  to by 
the Rouen Committee,  at a  moment  of utmost distress throughout 
the English cotton districts,  of unparalleled misery  in London,  and 
a general depression  in all  branches  of British  b industry. This state 
of things  has  continued  in England  to this moment. Despite such 
a In the  German text this word  is given  in brackets after  the  German verb 
unterkaufen. —Ed. 
b "British"  is omitted  in the  German pamphlet.—  Ed. 

=====第106页=====
74 Karl Marx 
highly unfavourable circumstances, the General Council thought 
that the peculiar character of the Rouen conflict would stir the 
English workmen to action. This was a great opportunity to show 
the capitalists that their international industrial warfare, carried on 
by screwing wages down now in this country, now in that, would 
be checked at last by the international union of the working 
classes. To our appeal the English workmen replied at once by a 
first contribution to Rouen, and the London Trades Council 
resolved to summon, in unison with the General Council, a 
metropolitan monster meeting on behalf of their Normand 
brethren.' 00 These proceedings were stopped by the news of the 
sudden cessation of the Sotteville strike. The miscarriage of that 
economical revolt was largely compensated for by its moral results. 
It enlisted the Normand cotton-workers into the revolutionary 
army of labour, it gave rise to the birth of trades unions at Rouen, 
Elboeuf,  Darnétal, and the environs; and it sealed anew the bond 
of fraternity between the English and French working classes. 
During the winter and spring of 1869 the propaganda of our 
Association in France was paralysed, consequent upon the violent 
dissolution of our Paris section in 1868,101 the police chicaneries in 
the departments, and the absorbing interest of the French general 
elections. 
The elections once over, numerous strikes exploded in the Loire 
mining districts, at Lyons, and many other places. The economical 
facts revealed during these struggles between masters and men, 
struck the public eye like so many dissolving views of the 
high-coloured fancy pictures of working-class prosperity under the 
auspices of the Second Empire. The claims of redress on the part 
of the workmen were of so moderate a character, and so urgent a 
nature that, after some show of angry resistance, they had to be 
conceded, one and all. The only strange feature about those 
strikes was their sudden explosion after a seeming lull, and the 
rapid succession in which they followed each other. Still, the 
reason of all this was simple and palpable. Having, during the 
elections, successfully tried their hands against their public despot, 
the workmen were naturally led to try them after the elections 
against their private despots. In one word, the elections had 
stirred their animal spirits. The governmental press, of course, 
paid as it is to misstate and misinterpret unpleasant facts, traced 
these events to a secret mot d'ordre from the London General 
Council, which, they said, sent their emissaries, from place to 
place, to teach the otherwise highly satisfied French workmen that 
it was a bad thing to be overworked, underpaid, and brutally 

=====第107页=====
Report of the General Council to the Fourth Congress of the IWMA 75 
treated. A French police organ, published at London, the 
"International— (see its number of August 3)—has condescended 
to reveal to the world the secret motives of our deleterious activity. 
"The strangest feature," it says, "is that the strikes were ordered to break out in 
such countries where misery is far from making itself felt. These unexpected 
explosions, occurring so opportunely for certain neighbours of ours, who had first 
to apprehend war, make many people ask themselves whether these strikes took 
place on the request of some foreign Machiavelli, who had known how to win the 
good graces of this all-powerful Association."a 
At the very moment when this French police print impeached us 
of embarrassing the French Government by strikes at home, in 
order to disembarrass Count Bismarck from war abroad, a 
Prussian paperb accused us of embarrassing the Northern German 
Bund 102 with strikes, in order to crush German industry for the 
benefit of foreign manufactures. 
The relations of the International to the French strikes we shall 
illustrate by two cases of a typical character. In the one case, the 
strike of St. Etienne and the following massacre at Ricamarie, the 
French Government itself will no longer dare to pretend that the 
International had anything whatever to do with it. In the Lyons 
case,  it was not the International that threw the workmen into 
strikes, but, on the contrary, it was the strikes that threw the 
workmen into the International. 
The miners of St. Etienne, Rive-de-Giers, and Firminy had 
calmly, but firmly, requested the managers of the mining 
companies to reduce the working day, numbering 12 hours hard 
underground labour, and revise the wages  tariff.  Failing in their 
attempt at a conciliatory settlement, they struck on the 11th of 
June.  For them it was of course a vital question to secure the 
co-operation of the miners that had not yet turned out to combine 
with them.' To prevent this, the managers of the mining 
companies requested and got from the Prefect of the Loire a 
forest of bayonets. On the 12th of June, the strikers found the 
coal pits under strong military guard. To make sure of the zeal of 
the soldiers thus lent to them by the government, the mining 
companies paid each soldier a franc daily. The soldiers paid the 
companies back by catching, on the 16th June/ 1 about 60 miners 
eage 1" to get at a conversation with their brethren in the coal pits. 
These prisoners were in the afternoon of the same day escorted to 
a "La Dictature universelle", L'International, No. 2345, August 3, 1868.— Ed. 
b The German pamphlet has "a paper of Rhenish-Prussian manufacturers".— Ed. 
c The German pamphlet has "the miners who continued to work".— Ed. 
d The date is omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 

=====第108页=====
76 Karl Marx 
St. Etienne by a detachment (150 men), of the fourth regiment of 
the line. Before these stout warriors set out, an engineer of the 
Dorian mines distributed them 60 bottles of brandy, telling them 
at the same time, they ought to have a sharp eye on their 
prisoners' gang, these miners being savages, barbarians,  ticket-of-
leave men. What with the brandy, and what with the sermon, a 
bloody collision was thus prepared for. Followed on their march 
by a crowd of miners, with their wives and children, surrounded 
by them on a narrow defile on the heights of the Moncel, Quartier 
Ricamarie, requested to surrender the prisoners, and, on their 
refusal, attacked by a volley of stones, the soldiers, without any 
preliminary warning, fired with their  chassepots*  pell-mell into the 
crowd, killing 15 persons, amongst whom were two women and an 
infant, and dangerously wounding a considerable number. The 
tortures of the wounded were horrible. One of the sufferers was a 
poor girl of 12 years, Jenny Petit, whose name will live immortal 
in the annals of the working-class martyrology. Struck by two balls 
from behind, one of which lodged in her leg, while the other 
passed through her back, broke her arm, and escaped through her 
right shoulder. "Les chassepots avaient encore fait merveille." 103 
This time, however, the government was not long in finding out 
that it had committed not only a crime, but a blunder. It was not 
hailed as the saviour of society by the middle class. The whole 
municipal council of St. Etienne tendered its resignation in a 
document, denouncing the scoundrelism of the troops, and 
insisting upon their removal from the town. b The French press 
rung with cries of horror! Even such conservative prints as the 
Moniteur universel opened subscriptions for the victims. 0 The 
government had to remove the odious regiment from St. Etienne. 
Under such difficult circumstances, it was a luminous idea to 
sacrifice on the altar of public indignation a scapegoat always at 
hand,d the International Working Men's Association. At the 
judicial trial of the so-called rioters, the act of accusation divided 
them into 10 categories, very ingeniously shading their respective 
darkness of guilt. The first class, the most deeply tinged, consisted 
of workmene  more particularly suspected to have obeyed some 
secret mot d'ordre from abroad, given out by the International. The 
a The words "with their chassepots" are omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 
b "Massacres de Saint-Étienne", La Liberté, No. 105, June 27, 1869.— Ed. 
c Le Moniteur universel, No. 172, June 21, 1869.— Ed. 
d The words "always at hand" are omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 
e The German pamphlet has "5 workmen".— Ed. 

=====第109页=====
Report of the General Council to the Fourth Congress of the IWMA 77 
evidence was, of course, overwhelming, as the following short 
extract from a French paper will show: 
"The interrogatory of the witnesses did not allow 'neatly to establish the 
participation of the International Association. The witnesses affirm only the 
presence, at the head of the bands, of some unknown people, wearing white frocks 
and caps. None of the unknown ones have been arrested, or appear in the dock. To the 
question: do you believe in the intervention of the International Association? a 
witness replies: I believe it but without any proofs whatever]"a 
Shortly after the Ricamarie massacres, the dance of economical 
revolts was opened at Lyons by the silk-winders, most of them 
females. In their distress they appealed to the International,' 3 
which, mainly by its members in France and Switzerland, helped 
them to carry the day. Despite all attempts at police intimidation, 
they publicly proclaimed their adhesion to our Society,' and 
entered it formally by paying the statutory contributions to the 
General Council. At Lyons, as before at Rouen, the female 
workers played a noble and prominent part in the movement. 
Other Lyons trades have since followed in the track of the 
silk-winders. Some 10,000 new members were thus gained for us 
in a few weeks amongst that heroic population which more than 
thirty years ago inscribed upon its banner the watchword of the 
modern Proletariat: "Vivre en travaillant ou mourir en combat­
tant!'" 1104 
Meanwhile the French Government continues its petty tribula­
tions against the International. At Marseilles our members were 
forbidden meeting for the election of a delegate to Basle. The 
same paltry trick was played in other towns. But the workmen on 
the Continent, as elsewhere, begin at last to understand that the 
surest way to get one's natural rights is to exercise them at one's 
personal risk. 
The Austrian workmen, and especially those of Vienna, 
although entering their classe movement only after the events of 
1866, 105 have at once occupied a vantage-ground. They marched 
at once under the banners of socialism and the International, 
11 "L'Internationalomanie", L'Internationale, No. 33, August 29, 1869 (italics by 
Marx in the quotation).— Ed. 
b A. Richard, "Aux membres du Conseil général des sections belges. 6 juillet 
1869",  L'Internationale, No. 26, July 11, 1869.— Ed. 
c "Déclaration au Conseil général de Londres. Lyon, 6 juillet 1869", L'Inter­
nationale, No. 26, July 11, 1869.— Ed. 
d "Live working or die fighting." In the German pamphlet the French sentence 
is followed by the German translation of it in brackets.— Ed. 
e The word "class" is omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 

=====第110页=====
78 Karl Marx 
which, by their delegates at the recent Eisenach Congress,106 they 
have now joined en masse. 
If anywhere, the liberal middle class has exhibited in Austria its 
selfish instincts, its mental inferiority, and its petty spite against 
the working class. Their ministry, seeing the empire distracted and 
threatened by an internecine struggle of races and nationalities, 
pounces upon the workmen who alone proclaim the fraternity of 
all races and nationalities. The middle class  itself,  which has won 
its new position not by any heroism of its own, but only by the 
signal disaster of the Austrian army,107  hardly able as it is, and 
knows itself to be, to defend its new conquests from the attacks of 
the dynasty, the aristocracy, and the clerical party, nevertheless 
wastes its best energies in the mean attempt to debar the working 
class from the rights of combination, public meeting, free press 
and free thought. In Austria, as in all other states of continental 
Europe, the International has supplanted the ci-devant spectre 
rouge? When, on the 13th of July, a workmen's massacre on a 
small scale was enacted at Brunn, the Cottonopolis of Moravia, the 
event was traced to the secret instigations of the International, 
whose agents, however, were unfortunately invested with the rare 
gift of rendering themselves invisible. 6 When some leaders of the 
Vienna work-people figured before the judicial bench, the public 
accuser stigmatised them as tools of the foreigner. Only, to show 
how conscientiously he had studied the matter, he committed the 
little error of confounding the middle-class League of Peace and 
Liberty108 with the working men's International Association.109 
If the workmen's movement was thus harassed in Cis-Leithanian 
Austria,'10  it has been recklessly prosecuted in Hungary. On this 
point the most reliable reports from Pest and Pressburg have 
reached the General Council. One example of the treatment of the 
Hungarian workmen by the public authorities may suffice. Herr 
von Wenckheim, the Hungarian Home Minister, was just staying 
at Vienna on public business/ Having for months been interdicted 
from public meetings and even from entertainments destined for 
the collection of the funds of a sick club, the Pressburg workmen 
sent at last delegates to Vienna/ 1 then and there to lay their 
a Old red spectre (see A. Romieu, Le spectre rouge de 1852, Bruxelles, 
18:")1).—  Ed. 
b The German pamphlet has: "whose agents were in possession of magic-
caps".—  Ed. 
c The German pamphlet has "with the Hungarian delegation".— Ed. 
d In the German pamphlet the following words have been added: "among whom 
was the well-known agitator Niemtzik".— Ed. 

=====第111页=====
Report of the General Council to the Fourth Congress of the IWMA 79 
grievances before the illustrious Herr von Wenckheim. a Puffing and 
blowing his cigar, the illustrious one received them with the bullying 
apostrophe,h "Are you workmen? Do you work hard?' For nothing 
else you have to care. You do not want public clubs; and if you dabble 
in politics, we shall know what measures to take against you. I shall 
do nothing for you. Let the workmen grumble to their heart's 
content!" To the question of the workmen, whether the good 
pleasure of the police was still to rule uppermost, the liberal'1 
minister replied: "Yes, under my responsibility." After a somewhat 
prolonged but useless explanation the workmen left the minister 
telling him, "Since state matters influence the workmen's condition, 
the workmen must occupy themselves with politics, and they will 
certainly do  so."1' 
In Prussia and the rest of Germany, the past year was 
distinguished by the formation of trades unions all over the 
country. At the recent Eisenach Congress the delegates of 
150,000' German workmen, from Germany proper, Austria, and 
Switzerland, have organised a new democratic social party, with a 
programme literally embodying the leading principles of our 
Statutes.•' Debarred by law from forming sections of our Associa­
tion, they have, nevertheless, formally entered it by resolving'1 to 
take individual cards of membership from the General Council. At 
its congress at Barmen,"1  the Allgemeine Deutsche Arbeiterverein 
has also reaffirmed its adhesion to the principles of our 
Association, but simultaneously declared the Prussian law forbade 
them joining us.' 
New branches of our Association have sprung up at Naples, in 
Spain, and in Holland. 
•' The German pamphlet has "before the Home Minister".— Ed. 
h Instead of "Puffing and blowing his cigar ... with the bullying apostrophe" the 
German pamphlet has: "It was hard to receive audience from this high gentleman, 
and when die ministerial room at last opened, the workers were met by the minister in 
a manner which was quite disrespectful."—Ed. 
' In the German pamphlet the following words have been added: "asked the 
minister puffing his cigar and twisting it in his mouth".— Ed. 
•' The word "liberal" is omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 
<" See Volksstimme, No. 9, August 8, 1869.— Ed. 
1 The German pamphlet has "more than 150,000".— Ed. 
K "Programm und Statuten der social-demokratischen Arbeiter-Partei", Demok­
ratisches Wochenblatt, No. 33, August 14, 1869.— Ed. 
h The German pamphlet has "they resolved".— Ed. 
1 This sentence is omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 

=====第112页=====
80 Karl Marx 
At Barcelona a Spanish, and at Amsterdam a Dutch organ of 
our Association is now being issued. a 
The laurels plucked by the Belgian Government on the glorious 
battlefields of Seraing and Frameries seem really to have roused 
the angry jealousy of the Great Powers. No wonder, then, that 
England also had this year to boast a workman's massacre of its 
own. The Welsh coal-miners, at Leeswood Great Pit, near Mold, in 
Denbighshire, had received sudden notice of a reduction of wages 
by the manager of those works, whom, long since, they had reason 
to consider a most incorrigible petty oppressor. Consequently, they 
collected aid from the neighbouring collieries, and, besides 
assaulting him, attacked his house, and carried all his furniture to 
the railway station, these wretched men fancying in their childish 
ignorance thus to get rid of him for good and all. Proceedings 
were of course taken against the rioters; but one of them was 
rescued by a mob of 1,000 men, and conveyed out of the town. 1' 
On the 28th May, two of the ringleaders were to be taken before 
the magistrates of Mold by policemen under the escort of a 
detachment of the 4th Regiment of the line, "The King's Own". A 
crowd of miners, trying to rescue the prisoners, and, on the 
resistance of the police and the soldiers, showering stones at them, 
the soldiers—without any previous warning—returned the shower 
of stones by a shower of bullets from their breechloaders (Snider 
fusils). c Five persons, two of them females,d  were killed, and a 
gre.t many wounded. So far there is much analogy between the 
Mold and the Ricamarie massacres, but here it ceases. In France, 
the soldiers were only responsible to their commander. In 
England, they had to pass through a coroner's jury inquest; but 
this coroner was a deaf and daft of fool, who had to receive the 
witnesses' evidence through an ear trumpet, and the Welsh jury, 
who backed him, were a narrowly prejudiced class jury. They 
declared the massacre "Justifiable Homicide". e 
In France, the rioters were sentenced from 3 to 18 months' 
imprisonment, and soon after, amnestied. In England, they were 
condemned to 10 years' penal servitude! In France, the whole 
press resounded with cries of indignation against the troops. In 
England, the press was all smiles for the soldiers, and all frowns 
for their victims! Still the English workmen have gained much by 
a La Federation and De Werkman.—Ed. 
b This sentence is omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 
c The words in brackets are omitted in the German pamphlet.— Ed. 
d The German pamphlet has "and a child".— Ed. 
e See "Riot at Mold", The Bee-Hive, No. 400, June 12, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第113页=====
Report of the General Council to the Fourth Congress of the IWMA 81 
losing a great and dangerous illusion. Till now they fancied to 
have their lives protected by the formality of the Riot Act,112 and 
the subordination of the military to the civil authorities. They 
know now, from the official declaration of Mr. Bruce, the liberal 
Home Minister, in the House of Commons—firstly, that without 
going through the premonitory process of reading the Riot Act, 
any country magistrate, some fox-hunter or parson, has the right 
to order the troops to fire on what he may please to consider a 
riotous mob; and, secondly, that the soldier may give fire on his 
own hook, on the plea of self-defence.3 The liberal Minister forgot 
to add that, under these circumstances, every man ought to be 
armed, at public expense, with a breachloader, in self-defence 
against the soldier. 
The following resolution was passed at the recent General 
Congress of the English Trades Unions at Birmingham: 
"That as local .organisations of labour have almost disappeared before 
organisations of a national character, so we believe the extension of the principle of 
free trade, which induces between nations such a competition that the interest of 
the workjnan is liable to be lost sight of and sacrificed in the fierce international 
race between capitalists, demands that such organisations should be still further 
extended and made international. And as the International Working Men's 
Association endeavours to consolidate and extend the interests of the toiling 
masses, which are everywhere identical, this Congress heartily recommends that 
Association to the support of the working men of the United Kingdom, especially 
of all organised bodies, and strongly urges them to become affiliated to that body, 
believing that the realisation of its principles would also conclude to lasting peace 
between the nations of the earth."113 
During last May, a war between the United States and England 
seemed imminent. Your General Council, therefore, sent an 
address to Mr. Sylvis, the President of the American National 
Labour Union,114 calling on the United States' working class to 
command peace where their would-be masters shouted war.b 
The sudden death of Mr. Sylvis, that valiant champion of our 
cause, will justify us in concluding this report, as an homage to his 
memory, by his reply to our letter0: 
"Your favour of the 12th instant, with address enclosed, reached me yesterday. 
I am very happy to receive such kindly words from our fellow-working men across 
the water: our cause is a common one. It is war between poverty and wealth: 
labour occupies the same low condition, and capital is the same tyrant in all parts 
a Marx refers to Bruce's speech in the House of Commons on June 7, 1869, 
published in The Times, No. 26442, June 8, 1869.— Ed. 
h See this volume, pp. 53-55.— Ed. 
c In the German pamphlet the reply is datelined: "Philadelphia, May 26, 
1869".—  Ed. 

=====第114页=====
82 Karl Marx 
of the world. Therefore I say our cause is a common one. I, in behalf of the 
working people of the United States, extend to you, and through you to those you 
represent, and to all the downtrodden and oppressed sons and daughters of toil in 
Europe, the right hand of fellowship. Go ahead in the good work you have 
undertaken, until the most glorious success crowns your efforts. That is our 
determination. Our late war resulted in the building up of the most infamous 
monied aristocracy on the face of the earth. This monied power is fast eating up 
the substance of the people. We have made war upon it, and we mean to win. If we 
can, we will win through the ballot-box: if not, then we will resort to sterner means. 
A little blood-letting is sometimes necessary in desperate cases." 
By order of the Council, 
R. Applegarth, Chairman 
Cowell Stepney, Treasurer 
/. George  Eccarius,  General Secretary b 
First published in English in the pam- Reproduced from the text in the 
phlet Report of the Fourth Annual Congress Report of the Fourth Annual Congress 
of the International Working Men's Associa- of the International Working Men's 
Hon,  held at Basle, in Switzerland, London Association, checked with the Ger-
[1869],  and in German as a separate man pamphlet 
pamphlet in Basle in September 1869 
a Sylvis' reply of May 26, 1869 to the General Council's letter was published in 
The Bee-Hive, No. 400, June 12, 1869.— Ed. 
b At the end of the report the German pamphlet has: "London, September 1, 
1869.  Office: 256, High Holborn, W.C."— Ed. 

=====第115页=====
83 
Karl Marx 
[DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
ON THE POLICY 
OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT TOWARDS 
THE IRISH PRISONERS]115 
Resolved, 
that in his reply to the Irish demands for the release of the 
imprisoned Irish patriots—a reply contained in his letter to Mr. 
O'Shea etc., etc.3—Mr. Gladstone deliberately insults Irish Nation; 
that he clogs political amnesty with conditions alike degrading to 
the victims of misgovernment and the people they belong to; 
that having, in the teeth of his responsible position, publicly and 
enthusiastically cheered on the American slave-holders' Rebell­
ion,116 he now steps in to preach to the Irish people the doctrine 
of passive obedience; 
that his whole proceedings with reference to the Irish Amnesty 
question are the true and genuine offspring of that "policy of 
conquest" by the fiery denunciation of which Mr. Gladstone ousted 
his Tory rivals from office117; 
that the General Council of the "International Working Men's 
Association" express their admiration of the spirited, firm and 
high-souled manner in which the Irish people carry on their 
Amnesty movement; 
that these resolutions be communicated to all the branches of, 
and working men's bodies connected with, the "International 
Working Men's Association" in Europe and America. 
Introduced by Marx on November 16, Reproduced from the manuscript, 
1869 checked with the Minute Book of 
the General Council Adopted by the General Council on 
November 30, 1869 
First published in Reynolds's Newspaper, 
No. 1006, November 21, 1869 
a In the Minute Book of the General Council this text in parentheses reads as 
follows: "in a reply contained in his letter to Mr. O'Shea d. d. Oct. 18, 1869, and to 
Mr. Isaac Butt d.d. Oct. 23, 1869" (see W. E. Gladstone, "The Government and 
the Fenians. Hawarden, Chester, Oct. 18" and "Hawarden, Chester, Oct. 23", The 
Times, Nos. 26579 and 26583, October 23 and 27, 1869).— Ed. 

=====第116页=====
84 
Karl Marx 
THE GENERAL COUNCIL TO THE FEDERAL COUNCIL 
OF ROMANCE SWITZERLAND 118 
At its extraordinary meeting on January 1, 1870, the General 
Council resolved: 
1) We read in the Égalité of December 11, 1869: 
"It is certain that it" (the General Council) "is neglecting extremely important 
matters.... We remind it of them" (the General Council's obligations) "with Article 1 
of the Regulations, etc.: 'The General Council is commissioned to carry the 
resolutions of the Congress into effect'.... We could put enough questions to the General 
Council for its replies to make up quite a long report. They will come later.... 
Meanwhile... etc."3 
The General Council does not know of any article, either in the 
Rules or in the Regulations, which would oblige it to enter into 
correspondence or into polemic with the Égalité or to provide 
"replies" to "questions" from newspapers. The Federal Council of 
Romance Switzerland alone represents the branches of Romance 
Switzerland vis-à-vis the General Council. When the Romance 
Federal Council addresses requests or reprimands to us through 
the only legitimate channel, that is to say through its  secretary,  the 
General Council will always be ready to reply. But the Romance 
Federal Council  ^ has no right either to abdicate its functions in 
favour of the Égalité and the Progrès, or to let these newspapers 
usurp its functions. Generally speaking, the General Council's 
correspondence with the national and local committees cannot be 
published without greatly prejudicing the Association's general 
interests. Consequently, if other organs of the International were 
to follow the example of the Progrès and the Égalité, the General 
Council would be faced with the alternative of either discrediting 
a See "Réflexions", L'Égalité, No. 47, December 11, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第117页=====
The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland 85 
itself publicly by its silence or violating its obligations by replying 
publicly.3 
The Égalité joins the Progrès (a paper which is not sent to the 
General Council) in inviting Le Travail (a Paris paper which has 
not hitherto declared itself an organ of the International, and 
which is also not sent to the General Council) to demand an 
explanation from the General Council. b That is almost a League of 
Public Welfare.119 
2) Now, assuming that the questions put by the Egalité come 
from the Romance Federal Council, we shall answer them on 
condition that such questions do not reach us in such a manner in 
future. 
3) Question of a Bulletin. In the resolutions of the Genevac 
Congress, which are inserted in the regulations, it is laid down 
that the national committees shall send the General Council 
documents dealing with the proletarian movementd and that the 
General Council shall thereupon publish a bulletin in the different 
languages as often as its means permit ("As often as its means permit, 
the General Council shall publish a report, etc.").e 
The General Council's obligation was thus made dependent on 
conditions that have never been fulfilled. Even the statistical 
inquiry provided for by the Rules, decided by consecutive General 
Congresses, and demanded yearly by the General Council, has 
never been made. No document has been presented to the 
General Council. As far as the means are concerned, the General 
Council would have long since ceased to exist had it not been for 
a In the manuscript, after the word "publicly", Marx had crossed out the 
words: "The Progrès (which is not sent to the General Council as it should be in 
accordance with resolutions thrice adopted by General Congresses) has taken the 
initiative in usurping the Federal Council's functions."—Ed. 
b The manuscript has the following passage crossed out: "The same people who 
last year, immediately after their tardy entry into our Association, formed the 
dangerous project of founding another international association within the 
International Working Men's Association, under their personal control and based 
in Geneva, have returned to their project and still believe in their special mission to 
usurp the supreme authority of the International Association. The General Council 
reminds the Romance Federal Council that it is responsible for the question of the 
newspapers L'Egalité and Le Progrès."—Ed. 
c The manuscript mistakenly has "Lausanne".— Ed. 
d Congrès ouvrier de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs tenu à Genève du 3 au 
8 septembre 1866, Geneva, 1866, pp. 13 and 26.— Ed. • 
e Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 
1864, London [1867], p. 6. The sentence in brackets is given by Marx in 
English.— Ed. 

=====第118页=====
86 Karl Marx 
local contributions from England and the personal sacrifices of its 
members. 
Thus,  the Regulations passed at the Geneva'' Congress have 
remained a dead letter.b 
As regards the Basle Congress, it did not discuss the fulfilment 
of these existing Regulations. It discussed the possibility of issuing 
a bulletin in good time and it did not pass any resolution (see the 
German report published in Basle under the eyes of the Cong­
ress c). 
For the rest, the General Council believes that the purpose of 
the bulletin is at the moment perfectly fulfilled by the different 
organs of the International published in the different languages 
and exchanged among them. It would be absurd to do by costly 
bulletins what is being done already without any expense. On the 
other hand, a bulletin which would print what is not contained in 
the organs of the International would only help our enemies to see 
behind the scenes. 
4) Question of separating the General Council from the Federal 
Council for England. 
Long before the foundation of the Egalité, this proposition was 
made periodically inside the General Council by one or two of its 
English members. 12" It was always rejected almost unanimously. 
Although' revolutionary initiative will probably come from 
France, England alone can serve as the lever for a serious economic 
Revolution. It is the only country where there are no more 
peasants and where landed property is concentrated in a few hands. 
It is the only country where the capitalist form, that is to say combined 
labour on a large scale under capitalist masters, embraces virtually 
the whole of production. It is the only country  where the  great majority 
of the population  consists  of WAGES-LABOURERS.  It is the only country where 
the class struggle and the organisation of the working class by the 
TRADES  UNIONS  have acquired a certain degree of maturity and 
universality. It is the only country where, because of its domination 
on the world market, every revolution in economic matters must 
immediately affect the whole world. If landlordism and capitalism 
are classical features in England, on the other hand, the material 
conditions for their destruction are the most mature here. The 
General Council now being in the happy position of having its hand 
a The manuscript mistakenly has "Lausanne".— Ed. 
b In the manuscript, after the words "dead letter", the following is crossed out: 
"They were treated as such by the Basle Congress."—Ed. 
' Verhandlungen des IV. Congresses des internationalen Arbeiterbundes in Basel, Nos. 
1-7, 7-14, September 1869, p. 90.— Ed. 

=====第119页=====
The General Council  to the  Federal Council  of Romance Switzerland  87 
directly on this great lever of the proletarian revolution, what folly, we 
might say even what a crime, to let this lever fall into purely English 
hands! 
The English have all the material necessary for the social 
revolution. What they lack is the spirit of generalisation and 
revolutionary ardour. It is only the General Council that can provide 
them with this, that can thus accelerate the truly revolutionary 
movement in this country, and consequently everywhere. The great 
results we have already achieved in this respect are attested to by the 
most intelligent and influential of the newspapers of the ruling 
classes, as e.g. The Pall Mall Gazette, Saturday Review, The Spectator 
and The Fortnightly Review, to say nothing of the so-called radicals in 
the COMMONS  and the  LORDS  who, a little while ago, still exerted a great 
influence on the leaders of the English workers. They accuse us 
publicly of having poisoned and almost extinguished the English 
spirit of the working class and of having pushed it into 
revolutionary socialism. 
The only way to bring about this change is to act like the General 
Council of the International Association. As the General Council we 
can initiate measures (e.g., the founding of the Land and Labour 
Leaguev21) which later, in the process of their execution, will 
appear to the public as spontaneous movements of the English 
working class. 
If a Federal Council were formed apart from the General Council, 
what would be the immediate results? 
Placed between the General Council and the General Council of 
1 rades Unions',* 22 the Federal Council would have no authority 
whatever. On the other hand, the General Council of the Internation­
al would lose control of the great lever. If we had preferred the 
showman's chatter to serious and unostentatious work, we would 
perhaps have committed the mistake of replying publicly the 
Égalités question as to why the General Council permits "such a 
burdensome combination of functions". 
England cannot be treated simply as a country along with other 
countries. It must be treated as the metropolis of capital. 
5) Question of the General Council Resolution on the Irish Amnesty:' 
If England is the  BULWARK  of landlordism and European 
capitalism, the only point where official England can be struck a 
great blow is  Ireland. 
In the first place, Ireland is the  BULWARK  of English landlordism. If 
it fell in Ireland, it would fall in England. In Ireland this is a hundred 
See this  volume,  p. 83.—  F.d. 

=====第120页=====
88 Karl Marx 
times easier because the  economic  struggle  there  is concentrated exclusively 
on landed  property,  because this struggle is at the same time national, 
and because the people there are more revolutionary and more 
exasperated than in England. Landlordism in Ireland is maintained 
solely by the English army. The moment the forced union between the 
two countries 12S ends, a social revolution will immediately break out 
in Ireland, though in outmoded forms. English landlordism would 
not only lose a great source of its wealth, but also its greatest moral 
force, i.e., that of representing the domination of England over  Ireland. 
On the other hand, by maintaining the power of its landlords in 
Ireland, the English proletariat makes them invulnerable in England 
itself. 
In the second place, the English bourgeoisie has not only 
exploited Irish poverty to keep down the working class in England 
by forced immigration of poor Irishmen, but it has also divided the 
proletariat into two hostile camps. The revolutionary fire of the 
Celtic worker does not go well with the solid but slow nature of 
the Anglo-Saxon worker. On the contrary, in all the big industrial 
centres in England there is profound antagonism between the Irish 
proletarian and the English proletarian. The average English 
worker hates the Irish worker as a competitor who lowers wages 
and the STANDARD OF  LIFE.  He feels national and religious antipathies for 
him. He regards him somewhat like the  POOR  WHITES  of the Southern 
States of North America regarded black slaves. This antagonism 
among the proletarians of England is artificially nourished and 
kept up by the bourgeoisie. It knows that this scission is the true 
secret of maintaining its power. 
Moreover, this antagonism is reproduced on the other side of 
the Atlantic. The Irish, chased from their native soil by the bulls 
and the sheep, reassemble in North America where they constitute 
a huge, ever-growing section of the population. Their only 
thought, their only passion, is hatred for England. The English 
and American governments (that is to say, the classes they 
represent) play on these feelings in order to perpetuate the covert 
struggle between the United States and England. They thereby 
prevent a sincere and serious alliance between the working classes 
of both sides of the Atlantic, and, consequently, their common 
emancipation. 
Furthermore, Ireland is the only pretext the English Govern­
ment has for retaining a big standing army, which, if need be, as 
has happened before, can be used against the English workers 
after having had its drill in Ireland. 
Lastly, England today is seeing a repetition of what happened 

=====第121页=====
The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland 89 
on a monstrous scale in ancient Rome. Any people that oppresses 
another people forges its own chains. 
Thus,  the position of the International Association with regard 
to the Irish question is very clear. Its first concern is to advance 
the social revolution in England. To this end a great blow must be 
struck in Ireland.3 
The General Council's resolutions on the Irish amnestyb serve 
only as an introduction to other resolutions124 which will affirm 
that, quite apart from international justice, it is a precondition to the 
emancipation of the English working class to transform the present 
forced union (i.e., the enslavement of Ireland) into equal and free 
confederation if possible, into complete separation if need be.c 
For the rest, the naïve doctrines of the Égalité and the Progrès 
about the CONNEXION, or rather, the NON-CONNEXION, between the social 
movement and the political movement have never, as far as we 
know, been recognised by any of our International congresses. 
They run counter to our Rules. The Rules say 125: 
"That the economical emancipation of the working classes is 
therefore the great end to which every political movement ought to 
be subordinate as a means.,,d 
The words "as a means"e were omitted in the French translation 
made in 1864 by the Paris Committee.1 When questioned by the 
General Council, the Paris Committee excused itself by the 
difficulties of its political situation.8 
a After the words "in Ireland" the manuscript has the following words crossed 
out: "and the Irish economic-national struggle must be exploited in all ways 
possible".— Éd. 
b See this volume, pp. 3-4 and  83.—  Ed. 
0 After "if need be" the following words are crossed out in the manuscript: 
"The difficulties and even personal dangers which face General Council members 
who take such a stand may be judged by the fact that The Bee-Hive in its reporting 
of our meetings not only omitted our resolutions but did not even mention the fact 
that the General Council is concerned with the Irish question. The General Council 
was thus obliged to print its resolutions and send them to all  TRADES UNIONS 
separately. The oracles of L'Égalité are now at liberty to say that it is a 'local political 
movement', that, in their opinion, a Eederal Council should deal with such bagatelle, and 
that there is no need to 'better the existing governments'. LÉgalité might just as well 
have said that we intend to 'better the Belgian Government' by denouncing its 
massacres. "— Ed. 
d Here and below quotations from the Provisional Rules of the Association are 
given in English in the manuscript (see present edition, Vol. 20, p. 14).— Ed. 
e Marx uses the English phrase and gives the French equivalent "comme moyen" 
in parentheses.— Ed. 
f Congrès ouvrier. Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Règlement Provisoire 
[Paris,  1864], p. 1.— Ed. 
s The next five paragraphs were added by Marx on a separate sheet.— Ed. 

=====第122页=====
90 Karl Marx 
There are other mutilations of the authentic text. Thus the first 
clause of the preamble to the Rules reads: "The struggle for the 
emancipation of the working classes means ... a struggle ... for 
equal rights and duties, and the abolition of all class rule"a 
The Paris translation has "equal rights and duties", i.e., it 
reproduces a general phrase which may be found virtually in all 
democratic manifestoes of the last hundred years and which means 
different things in the mouth of different classes, but leaves out 
the concrete demand: "the abolition of all class rule"} 
Further, in the second clause of the preamble to the Rules we read: 
"That the economical subjection of the man of labour to the 
monopoliser of the means of labour, that is, the sources of life, etc." 
The Paris translation substitutes the word "capital" for "the 
means of labour, that is, the sources of life", an expression which 
includes the land as well as the other means of labour. 
The original authentic text was, however, restored in the French 
translation published in pamphlet form in Brussels by the Rive 
Gauche (1866).126 
6) Liebknecht-Schweitzer Question. 
The.  Egalité writes: 
"Both these groups belong to the International. " 
That is incorrect. The Eisenachers' group (which the Progrès 
and the Egalité would like to turn into Citizen Liebknecht's group) 
belongs to the International. Schweitzer's group does not belong to it. c 
Schweitzer himself exp'ainëd at length in his newspaper 
(Social-Demokrat) why the Lassallean organisation could not join the 
International without destroying  itself. d Without realising it, he was 
speaking the truth. His artificial sectarian organisation is opposed 
to the historical and spontaneous organisation of the working class. 
The Progrès and the Egalité have summoned the General 
Council to state publicly its "opinion" on the personal differences 
between Liebknecht and Schweitzer. Since Citizen Johann Philipp 
Becker (who is slandered as much as Liebknecht in Schweitzer's 
paper e) is a member of the Égalité's editorial  board,  it seems most 
strange that its editors are not better informed about the facts. 
They should have known that Liebknecht, in the Demokratisches 
a See present edition, Vol. 20, p. 14.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English phrase and gives the French equivalent in bracket», 
"l'abolition des classes".— Ed. 
c The rest of the text was inserted by Marx.— Ed. 
d Marx is referring to Schweitzer's leading article in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 82, 
July 16, 1869.— Ed. 
e Der Social-Demokrat, No. 24, February 24, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第123页=====
The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland 91 
Wochenblatt? publicly invited Schweitzer to accept the General 
Council as arbiter of their  differences,*"  and that Schweitzer no less 
publicly refused to acknowledge the authority of the General 
Council. 0 
For its part the General Council has employed all possible 
means to put an end to this scandal.d It instructed its Secretary for 
Germanye to correspond with Schweitzer; this has been done for 
two years, but all attempts by the Council have broken down in 
the face of Schweitzer's firm resolution to preserve at all cost his 
autocratic power together with the sectarian organisation. It is up 
to the General Council to determine the favourable moment when 
its public intervention in this quarrel will be more useful than 
damaging. 
7) Since the Égalité's accusations are public and could be 
considered as emanating from the Romance Committee of 
Geneva, the General Council is to communicate this reply to all 
committees corresponding with it. 
By order of the General Council 
Written on about January 1, 1870 Printed according to the manu­
script copy made by Marx's wife Approved by the General Council on and  checked  by  the  author 
January 1, 1870 
Translated from the French Published in part in the pamphlet Les 
prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale, 
Genève, 1872 
a A mistake in the original: Volksstaat instead of Demokratisches Wochenblatt. —Ed. 
b W. Liebknecht, "Erklärung. Leipzig, 18. Februar 1869", Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt, No. 8, February 20, 1869.— Ed. 
c See Der Social-Demokrat, No. 24, February 24, 1869.— Ed. 
d The copy of the manuscript in Jung's handwriting further has: "which casts 
aspersions on the proletarian party in Germany".— Ed. 
e Karl Marx.— Ed. 

=====第124页=====
Numéro S3. Deuxième année. 18 Janvier IS90. 
LINTERMTIOMLE 
ORGANE DES SECTIONS BELGES 
DE L'ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE DES TRAVAILLEURS. 
PAKAISSANT LE SAMEDI. 
Karl Marx 
OBITUARY 127 
Citizen Robert Shaw, Correspondent of the London General 
Council for North America, and one of the founders of the 
International, died this week of pulmonary tuberculosis. 
He was one of the most active members of the Council. A pure 
heart, iron character, passionate temperament, truly revolutionary 
intelligence, quite above any petty ambition or personal interest. A 
poor worker  himself,  he could always find a worker poorer than 
himself to help. As meek as a child in personal affairs, he 
indignantly rejected all manner of compromise in his public life. It 
is principally due to his constant efforts that the TRADES UNIONS 
have rallied around us. But this same work made him plenty of 
implacable foes. The English TRADES UNIONS, all of local origin, all 
originally founded with the exclusive purpose of maintaining 
wages, etc., were all more or less afflicted by the narrowness that 
characterised the medieval guilds. There was a little conservative 
party that wanted at all cost to preserve the basic framework of 
unionism. Since the foundation of the International, Shaw made it 
his life's aim to break these voluntary chains and transform the 
unions into organised centres of the proletarian revolution. 
Success almost always crowned his efforts, but ever since that 
moment his life became a terrible battle in which his feeble health 
had to give way. He was already dying when he left for the 
Brussels Congress (September 1868). After his return, his good 
bourgeois masters banned him from all their works. He leaves a 
wife and daughter in poverty, but the English workers will not 
leave them in the lurch. 
Written after January 4, 1870 
First published in L'Internationale, 
No. 53, January 16, 1870 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Translated from the French 

=====第125页=====
93 
Frederick Engels 
PREFACE 
[TO THE SECOND EDITION 
OF THE PEASANT WAR IN GERMANY]128 
The following work was written in London in the summer of 
1850,  the recent counter-revolution still fresh in mind; it appeared 
in the 5th and 6th issues of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue, edited by Karl Marx, Hamburg, 1850. 
My political friends in Germany desire it to be reprinted, and I 
accede to their desire, because, to my regret, the work is still 
timely today. 
It makes no claim to providing material derived from independ­
ent research. On the contrary, all the material on the peasant 
risings and on Thomas Münzer is taken from Zimmermann. 3 His 
book, despite gaps here and there, is still the best compilation of 
factual data. Moreover, old Zimmermann enjoyed his subject. The 
same revolutionary instinct, which prompted him throughout the 
book to champion the oppressed class, made him later one of the 
best of the extreme Left 129 in Frankfurt.b 
If, nevertheless, Zimmermann's presentation lacks inner cohe­
sion; if it does not succeed in showing the political and religious 
controversies of the times as a reflection of the contemporary class 
struggles; if it sees in these class struggles only oppressors and 
oppressed, evil folk and good folk, and the ultimate victory of the 
evil ones; if its exposition of the social conditions which 
determined both the outbreak and the outcome of the struggle is 
extremely defective, it was the fault of the time in which the book 
a W. Zimmermann, Allgemeine Geschichte des grossen Bauernkrieges, Th. 1-3, 
Stuttgart, 1841-1843.— Ed. 
b 1 he third edition (1875) further has: "It is true that since then he is said to 
have aged somewhat."—Ed. 

=====第126页=====
94 Frederick Engels 
came into existence. On the contrary, for its time, it is written 
quite realistically and is a laudable exception among the German 
idealist works on history. 
My presentation, while sketching the historical course of the 
struggle only in its bare outlines, attempted to explain the origin 
of the Peasant War, the position of the various parties that played 
a part in it, the political and religious theories by which those 
parties sought to clarify their position in their own minds, and 
finally the result of the struggle itself as following logically from 
the historically established social conditions of life of these classes; 
that is to say, it attempted to demonstrate the political structure of 
Germany at that time, the revolts against it, and the contemporary 
political and religious theories not as causes but as results of the 
stage of development of agriculture, industry, roads and water­
ways,  commerce in commodities and money then obtaining in 
Germany. This, the only materialist conception of history, 
originates not with myself but with Marx, and can also be found in 
his works on the French Revolution of 1848-49, in the same 
Revue, and in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. 1lM) 
The parallel between the German Revolution of 1525 and that 
of 1848-49 was too obvious to be altogether ignored at that time. 
Nevertheless, despite the uniformity in the course of events, where 
various local revolts were crushed one after another by one and 
the same princely army, despite the often ludicrous similarity in 
the behaviour of the city burghers in both cases, the difference 
was also clear and distinct. 
"Who profited from the Revolution of 1525? The princes. Who 
profited from the Revolution of 1848? The big princes, Austria 
and Prussia. Behind the minor princes of 1525 stood the petty 
burghers, who chained the princes to themselves by taxes. Behind 
the big princes of 1850, behind Austria and Prussia, there stand 
the modern big bourgeois, rapidly getting them under their yoke 
by means of the national debt. And behind the big bourgeois 
stand the proletarians."3 
I regret to have to say that in this paragraph much too much 
honour was done to the German bourgeoisie. Both in Austria and 
in Prussia it has indeed had the opportunity of "rapidly getting" 
the monarchy "under its yoke by means of the national debt", but 
nowhere did it ever make use of this opportunity. 
As a result of the war of 1866 Austria fell into the lap of the 
bourgeoisie as a gift. But it does not know how to rule, it is 
a F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany (present edition, Vol. 10, p. 482).— Ed. 

=====第127页=====
Preface to the 2nd Ed. of The Peasant War in Germany 95 
powerless and incapable of anything. It can do only one thing: 
savagely attack the workers as soon as they begin to stir. It still 
remains at the helm solely because the Hungarians need it. 
And in Prussia? True, the national debt has increased by leaps 
and bounds, the deficit has become a permanent feature, state 
expenditure grows from year to year, the bourgeoisie have a 
majority in the Chamber and without them taxes cannot be 
increased nor loans floated. But where is their power over the 
state? Only a few months ago, when there was again a deficit, the 
bourgeoisie occupied a most favourable position. By holding out 
only just a little, they could have forced far-reaching concessions. 
What do they do? They regard it as a sufficient concession that 
the government allows them to lay at its feet close on 9 millions, 
not just one year, oh no, but every year, and for all time to come.131 
I do not want to blame the poor National-Liberals132 in the 
Chamber more than they deserve. I know they have been left in 
the lurch by those who stand behind them, by the mass of the 
bourgeoisie. This mass does not want to rule. It still has 1848 in its 
bones. 
Why the German bourgeoisie exhibits this astonishing cowardice 
will be discussed later. 
In other respects the above statement has been fully confirmed. 
Beginning with 1850, the more and more definite recession into 
the background of the small states, which serve now only as levers for 
Prussian or Austrian intrigues; the increasingly violent struggle 
between Austria and Prussia for supremacy; finally, the forcible 
settlement of 1866,133 under which Austria retains its own 
provinces, while Prussia subjugates, directly or indirectly, the 
whole of the North, and the three states of the Southwest3 are left 
out in the cold for the time being. 
In all this grand performance134 only the following is of 
importance for the German working class: 
First, that through universal suffrage the workers have got the 
power of being directly represented in the legislative assembly. 
Secondly, that Prussia has set a good example by swallowing 
three other crowns held by the grace of God.135 Even the 
National-Liberals do not believe that after this operation it still 
possesses the same immaculate crown, held by the grace of God, 
which it formerly ascribed to  itself. 
Thirdly, that there is now only one serious adversary of the 
revolution in Germany—the Prussian government. 
a Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg. — Ed. 
5-733 

=====第128页=====
96 Frederick Engels 
And fourthly, that the German-Austrians will now at last have to 
make up their minds as to which they want to be, Germans or 
Austrians; whom they prefer to belong to—Germany or their 
extra-German trans-Leithan appendages.136 It has been obvious for 
a long time that they have to give up one or the other, but this has 
been continually glossed over by the petty-bourgeois democrats. 
As regards the other important issues relative to 1866, which 
since then have been thrashed out ad nauseam between the 
National-Liberals on the one hand, and the People's Party137 on 
the other, the history of the next few years should prove that 
these two standpoints are so bitterly hostile to one another solely 
because they are the opposite poles of one and the same 
narrow-mindedness. 
The year 1866 has changed almost nothing in the social 
relations of Germany. The few bourgeois reforms—uniform 
weights and measures, freedom of movement, freedom of 
occupation, etc., all within limits acceptable, to the bureaucracy— 
do not even come up to what the bourgeoisie of other West 
European countries have enjoyed for a long time, and leave the 
main abuse, the bureaucratic license system, untouched.138 For the 
proletariat all laws concerning freedom of movement, the right of 
naturalisation, the abolition of passports, etc., are anyhow made 
quite illusory by the common police practices. 
What is much more important than the grand performance of 
1866 is the growth of German industry and commerce, of 
railways, telegraphs and ocean steam shipping since 1848. 
However much this progress lags behind that of England, or even 
of France, during the same period, it is unprecedented for 
Germany and has accomplished more in twenty years than was 
previously done in a whole century. Only now has Germany been 
drawn, seriously and irrevocably, into world commerce. The capital 
of the industrialists has multiplied rapidly; the social position of 
the bourgeoisie has risen accordingly. The surest sign of industrial 
prosperity—swindling—has become very widespread and chained 
counts and dukes to its triumphal chariot. German capital is now 
constructing Russian and Romanian railways—may it not come to 
grief!—whereas only fifteen years ago, German railways went 
begging to English entrepreneurs. How, then, is it possible that the 
bourgeoisie has not conquered political power as well, that it 
behaves so cowardly towards the government? 
It is the misfortune of the German bourgeoisie to arrive too late, 
as is the favourite German manner. The period of its florescence 
is occurring at a time when the bourgeoisie of the other West 

=====第129页=====
Preface to the 2nd Ed. of The Peasant War in Germany 97 
European countries is already politically in decline. In England, 
the bourgeoisie could get its real representative, Bright, into the 
government only by an extension of the franchise, whose 
consequences are bound to put an end to all bourgeois rule. In 
France, where the bourgeoisie as such, as a class in its entirety, 
held power for only two years, 1849 and 1850, under the republic, 
it was able to continue its social existence only by abdicating its 
political power to Louis Bonaparte and the army. And in view of 
the enormously increased interaction of the three most advanced 
European countries, it is today no longer possible for the 
bourgeoisie to settle down to comfortable political rule in Germany 
after this rule has had its day in England and France. 
It is a peculiarity of the bourgeoisie, in contrast to all former 
ruling classes, that there is a turning point in its development after 
which every further expansion of its agencies of power, hence 
primarily of its capital, only tends to make it more and more unfit 
for political rule. "Behind the big  bourgeois  stand the proletarians. "a In 
proportion as the bourgeoisie develops its industry, commerce and 
means of communication, in the same proportion it increases the 
numbers of the proletariat. At a certain point—which is not 
necessarily reached everywhere at the same time or at the same 
stage of development—it begins to notice that its proletarian 
double is outgrowing it. From that moment on, it loses the 
strength required for exclusive political rule; it looks around for 
allies with whom to share its rule, or to whom to cede it entirely, as 
circumstances may require. 
In Germany this turning point for the bourgeoisie came as early 
as 1848. To be sure, at that time the German bourgeoisie was less 
frightened by the German proletariat than by the French. The 
June 1848 battle in Paris showed the bourgeoisie what it had to 
expect; the German proletariat was restless enough to prove to it 
that the seed for the same crop had already been sown on German 
soil, too; from that day on the edge was taken off all bourgeois 
political action. The bourgeoisie looked around for allies, sold 
itself to them regardless of the price—and even today it has not 
advanced one step. 
These allies are all reactionary by nature. There is the monarchy 
with its army and its bureaucracy; there is the big feudal nobility; 
there are the small country squires, and there are even the priests. 
With all of these the bourgeoisie made pacts and bargains, if only 
to save its dear skin, until in the end it had nothing left to barter. 
a F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany (present edition, Vol. 10, p. 482).— Ed. 
5* 

=====第130页=====
/ 
98 Frederick Engels 
And the more the proletariat developed, the more it became 
aware of itself as a class and acted as a class, the more 
faint-hearted did the bourgeois become. When the astonishingly 
bad strategy of the Prussians triumphed over the astonishingly 
worse strategy of the Austrians at Sadowa, it was difficult to say 
who heaved a deeper sigh of relief—the Prussian bourgeois, who 
was also defeated at Sadowa, or the Austrian. 
In 1870 our big bourgeois are acting exactly the same way as the 
middle burghers acted in 1525. As to the petty bourgeois, artisans 
and shopkeepers, they will always be the same. They hope to 
swindle their way up into the big bourgeoisie; they are afraid of 
being pushed down into the proletariat. Hovering between fear 
and hope, they will save their precious skins during the struggle 
and join the victor when the struggle is over. Such is their nature. 
The social and political activity of the proletariat has kept pace 
with the rise of industry since 1848. The role that the German 
workers play today in their trade unions, cooperative societies, 
political associations and at meetings, elections and in the so-called 
Reichstag, is by itself sufficient proof of the transformation 
Germany has imperceptibly undergone in the last twenty years. It 
redounds to the credit of the German workers that they alone have 
succeeded in sending workers and workers' representatives into 
parliament, whereas neither the French nor the English have so 
far achieved this. 
But even the proletariat has not yet outgrown the parallel of 
1525.  The class exclusively dependent on wages all its life is still 
far from being the majority of the German people. It is, therefore, 
also compelled to seek allies. These can be looked for only among 
the petty bourgeois, the lumpenproletariat of the cities, the small 
peasants and the agricultural labourers. 
The petty bourgeois we have spoken of above. They are extremely 
unreliable except after a victory has been won, when their 
shouting in the beer houses knows no bounds. Nevertheless, there 
are very good elements among them, who join the workers of 
their own accord. 
The lumpenproletariat, this scum of depraved elements from all 
classes, with headquarters in the big cities, is the worst of all the 
possible allies. This rabble is absolutely venal and absolutely 
brazen. If the French workers, in every revolution, inscribed on 
the houses: Mort aux voleurs! Death to thieves! and even shot 
some, they did so not out- of reverence for property, but because 
they rightly considered it necessary above all to keep that gang at 
bay. Every leader of the workers who uses these scoundrels as 

=====第131页=====
Preface to the 2nd Ed. of The Peasant War in Germany 99 
guards or relies on them for support proves himself by this action 
alone a traitor to the movement. 
The small peasants—for the bigger peasants belong to the 
bourgeoisie—differ in kind. They are either feudal peasants and 
still have to perform corvée services for their gracious lord. Now 
that the bourgeoisie has failed in its duty of freeing these people 
from serfdom, it will .not be difficult to convince them that they 
can expect salvation only from the working class. 
Or they are tenant farmers. In this case the situation is for the 
most part the same as in Ireland. Rents are pushed so high that in 
times of average crops the peasant and his family can barely make 
ends meet; when the crops are bad he is on the verge of 
starvation, is unable to pay his rent and is consequently entirely at 
the mercy of the landowner. The bourgeoisie never does anything 
for these people, unless it is compelled to. From whom then 
should they expect salvation if not from the workers? 
There remain the peasants who cultivate their own small plots of 
land.  In most cases they are so burdened with mortgages that they 
are as dependent on the usurer as the tenant on the landlord. For 
them also there remains only a meagre wage, which, moreover, 
since there are good years and bad years, is highly uncertain. 
These people can least of all expect anything from the 
bourgeoisie, because it is precisely the bourgeoisie, the capitalist 
usurers, who suck the lifeblood out of them. Still, most of these 
peasants cling to their property, though in reality it does not 
belong to them but to the usurer. It will have to be brought home 
to them all the same that they can be freed from the usurer only 
when a government dependent on the people has transformed all 
mortgages into debts to the state, and thereby lowered the interest 
rates.  And this can be brought about only by the working class. 
Wherever medium-sized and large estates prevail, farm labourers 
form the most numerous class in the countryside. This is the case 
throughout the North and East of Germany and it is there that the 
industrial workers of the towns find their most numerous and most 
natural allies. In the same way as the capitalist confronts the 
industrial worker, the landowner or large tenant confronts thé 
farm labourer. The same measures that help the one must also 
help the other. The industrial workers can free themselves only by 
transforming the capital of the bourgeois, that is, the raw 
materials, machines and tools, and the means of subsistence they 
need to work in production, into the property of society, that is, 
into their own property, used by them in common. Similarly, the 
farm labourers can be rescued from their hideous misery only 

=====第132页=====
100 Frederick Engels 
when, primarily, their chief object of labour, the land  itself,  is 
withdrawn from the private ownership of the big peasants and the 
still bigger feudal lords, transformed into public property and 
cultivated by cooperative associations of agricultural workers on 
their common account. And here we come to the famous 
resolution of the International Working Men's Congress in Basle 
that it is in the interest of society to transform landed property 
into common, national property.139 This resolution was adopted 
mainly for countries where there is large-scale landed property, 
and, consequently, big estates are operated, with one master and 
many labourers on them. This state of affairs is still largely 
predominant in Germany, and therefore, next to England, the 
resolution was most timely precisely for Germany. The agricultural 
proletariat, the farm labourers—that is the class from which the 
bulk of the armies of the princes is recruited. It is the class which, 
thanks to universal suffrage, now sends into parliament the large 
number of feudal lords and Junkers; but it is also the class nearest 
to the industrial workers of the towns, which shares their living 
conditions and is steeped even more in misery than they. This 
class is impotent because it is split and scattered, but its latent 
power is so well known to the government and nobility that they 
let the schools fall into decay deliberately in order to keep it 
ignorant. It is the immediate and most urgent task of the German 
labour movemerit to breathe life into this class and draw it into the 
movement. The day the mass of the farm labourers will have 
learned to understand their own interests, a reactionary—feudal, 
bureaucratic or bourgeois—government will become impossible in 
Germany. 
Written on about February 11, 1870 
First published in the second edition of 
The Peasant War in Germany, Leipzig, 
October 1870 Printed according to the text of 
the second edition of the book, 
checked with the preface to the 
third edition (Leipzig, 1875) 

=====第133页=====
101 
Karl Marx 
THE ENGLISH GOVERNMENT AND 
THE FENIAN PRISONERS 140 
London, February 21, 1870 
I 
The silence which is observed in the European press concerning 
the disgraceful acts committed by this oligarchical bourgeois 
government is due to a variety of reasons. Firstly, the English 
Government is rich and the press, as you know, is immaculate. 
Moreover, the English Government is the model government, 
recognised as such by the landlords, by the capitalists on the 
Continent and even by Garibaldi (see his book3): consequently we 
should not revile this ideal government. Finally, the French 
Republicans are narrow-minded and selfish enough to reserve all 
their anger for the Empire. It would be an insult to free speech to 
inform their fellow countrymen that in the land of bourgeois 
freedom sentences of 20 years hard labour are given for offences 
which are punished by 6 months in prison in the land of barracks. 
The following details concerning the treatment of Fenian prison­
ers have been taken from English journals: 
Mulcahy, sub-editor of the newspaper The Irish Peopled sen­
tenced for taking part in the Fenian conspiracy, was harnessed to 
a cart loaded with stones with an iron collar round his neck at 
Dartmoor. 
O'Donovan Rossa, owner of The Irish People, was shut up for 35 
days in a pitch-black dungeon with his hands chained behind his 
back day and night. They were not even unchained to allow him 
a G. Garibaldi, The Rule of the Monk, or Rome in the Nineteenth Century, London, 
1870.—  Ed. 
b The name of the newspaper is in English in the oiriginal, with the French 
translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第134页=====
102 Karl Marx 
to eat the miserable slops which were left for him on the earthen 
floor.a 
Kickham, one of the editors of The Irish People, although he was 
unable to use his right arm because of an abscess, was forced to sit 
with his fellow prisoners on a heap of rubble in the November 
cold and fog and break up stones and bricks with his left hand. 
He returned to his cell at night and had nothing to eat but 
6 ounces of bread and a pint of hot water.b 
O'Leary, an old man of sixty or seventy kept in prison, was put 
on bread and water for three weeks because he would not 
renounce paganism (this, apparently, is what a jailer called free 
thinking) and become either Papist, Protestant, Presbyterian or 
even Quaker, or take up one of the many religions which the 
prison governor offered to the heathen Irish/ 
Martin H. Carey is incarcerated in a lunatic asylum at Millbank. 
The silence and the other bad treatment to which he was 
subjected have made him lose his reason/1 
Colonel Richard Burke is in no better condition. One of his 
friends writes that his mind is affected, he has lost his memory 
and his behaviour, manners and speech are those of a madman.e 
The political prisoners are dragged from one prison to the next 
as if they were wild animals. They are forced to keep company 
with the vilest knaves; they are obliged to clean the pans used by 
these wretches, to wear the shirts and flannels previously worn by 
these criminals, many of whom are suffering from the foulest 
diseases, and to wash in the same water. Before the arrival of the 
Fenians at Portland all the criminals were allowed to talk with 
their visitors. A visiting cage was installed for the Fenian prisoners. 
It consists of three compartments divided by partitions of thick 
iron bars; the jailer occupies the central compartment and the 
a See this volume, pp. 414-15, 417-19. See also The Irishman, No. 49, June 12, 
1869,  "O'Donovan Rossa. To the Editor of The Irishman; The Press on the Treatment 
of the Political Prisoners: The Treatment of O'Donovan Rossa"; The Irishman, 
No. 30, January 22, 1870, "The Political Prisoners — Misguided Men and Their 
Desires".— Ed. 
lj Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the 
English Convict Prisons, London, 1867, p. 19. See also this volume, p. 422.— Ed. 
1 The Irishman, No. 12, September 18, 1869, "The Irishman in Paris. John 
O'Mahony and Pagan O'Leary".— Ed. 
d The Irishman, No. 20, November 13, 1869, "Gladstone and His Victims. To the 
Editor of the Irishman".— FA. 
e The Irishman, No. 30, January 22, 1870, "The Irish Political Prisoners and Her 
Majesty's Government"; No. 27, January 1, 1870: "More Prison Horrors. Irish 
Political Prisoners Being Done to Death in English Prisons."—Ed. 

=====第135页=====
The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners 103 
prisoner and his friends can only see each other through this 
double row of bars. 
In the docks you can find prisoners who eat all sorts of slugs, 
and frogs are considered dainties at Chatham. General Thomas 
Burke said he was not surprised to find a dead mouse floating in 
the soup. The convicts say that it was a bad day for them when the 
Fenians were sent to the prisons. (The prison regime has become 
much more severe.) 
I should like to add a few words to these extracts. 
Last year Mr. Bruce, the Home Secretary, a great liberal, great 
policeman and great mine owner in Wales who cruelly exploits his 
workers, was questioned on the bad treatment of Fenian prisoners 
and O'Donovan Rossa in particular.11 At first he denied everything, 
but was later compelled to confess.6 Following this Mr. Moore, an 
Irish member in the House of Commons, demanded an enquiry 
into the facts.c This was flatly refused by the radical ministry of 
which that demigod Mr. Gladstone (he has been compared to 
Jesus Christ publicly) is the head, and that old bourgeois 
demagogue, John Bright, is one of the most influential members.d 
Recently, when rumours concerning the bad treatment of the 
Fenians were resumed, several members of Parliament requested 
Mr. Bruce for permission to visit the prisoners in order to be able to 
verify the falseness of these rumours." Mr. Bruce refused this 
permission on the grounds that the prison governors were afraid 
that the prisoners would be too excited by visit of this kind.' 
Last week the Home Secretary was again submitted to question­
ing. He was asked whether it was true that O'Donovan Rossa 
received corporal punishment (i. e., whipping)s after his election 
a J. Gray, Enquiry in the House of Gommons concerning the treatment of the 
Irish prisoners, The Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.— Ed. 
b H. A. Bruce, Speech in the House of Gommons on June 4, 1869, The 
Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.— Ed. 
c "Mr. G. H. Moore's Motion upon the Treatment, by England of Irish Political 
Prisoners", The Irishman, No. 1, July 3, 1869.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 408, 415.— Ed. 
e Ph. Callan, "To the Right Hon. H. A. Bruce, Home Secretary. Reform Club, 
January 18", The Irishman, No. 32, February 5, 1870.— Ed. 
f H. A. Bruce, "To P. Callan, Esq., M.P., Home Office, January 19", The 
Irishman, No. 32, February 5, 1870.— Ed. 
g G. W. White, Speech in the House of Commons on February 18, 1870, Ehe 
Times, No. 26975, February 19, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第136页=====
104 Karl Marx 
to Parliament as the member for TipperaryH1; the Minister 
confirmed that he had not received such treatment since 1868a 
(which is tantamount to admitting that the political prisoner had 
been given the whip over a period of two to three years). 
I am also sending you extracts (which we are going to publish in 
our next issue) concerning the case of Michael Terbert, a Fenian 
sentenced as such to forced labour, serving his sentence at Spike 
Island Convict Prison in the county of Cork, Ireland. You will see 
that the CORONER0 himself C attributes this man's death to the torture 
which was inflicted on him. This investigation was held last week.d 
In the course of two years more than twenty Fenian workers have 
died or gone insane thanks to the philanthropy of these good 
bourgeois souls, backed by these good landlords. 
You are probably aware that the English press professes a chaste 
distaste for the dreadful general security laws which grace la belle 
France. Well, except for a few short intervals, it has been 
general security laws that formed the Irish Charter. Since 
1793 the English Government has taken advantage of any pretext to 
suspend the Habeas Corpus Bill (a law guaranteeing 
the liberty of the individual)142 regularly and periodically, in fact all 
laws,  except that of brute force. In this way thousands of people have 
been arrested in Ireland on suspicion of being  suspected  of Fenianism 
without ever having been tried, brought before a judge or court, or 
even charged. Not content with depriving them of their liberty, the 
English Government has had them tortured in the most savage way 
imaginable. The following is but one example. 
One of the prisons where persons suspected of being Fenians 
were buried alive is Mountjoy Prison in Dublin. The prison 
inspector, Murray, is a despicable brute. He maltreated the 
prisoners so cruelly that some of them went mad. The prison 
doctor, an excellent man called M'Donnell (who also played a 
creditable part in the enquiry into Michael Terbert's death), spent 
several months writing letters of protest which he addressed in the 
first instance to Murray  himself.  As Murray did not reply, he 
sent accusing letters to higher authorities/ but being an expert 
jailer Murray intercepted these letters. 
a H. A. Bruce, Speech in the House of Commons on February 18, 1870, The 
Times, No. 26975, February 19, 1870.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English term and gives the French equivalent in brackets.— Ed. 
c John Moore.— Ed. 
d "Inquest at Spike Island.—Condemnation of the Prison Treatment", The 
Irishman, No. 34, February 19, 1870.— Ed. 
e The Irishman, Nos. 7, 12 and 15, August 14, September 18 and October 9, 
1869.—  Ed. 

=====第137页=====
The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners 105 
Finally M'Donnell wrote directly to Lord Mayo, then Viceroy of 
Ireland. This was during the period when the Tories were in 
power (Derby and Disraeli). What effect did his actions have? The 
documents relating to the case were published by order of 
Parliamenta and ... Dr. M'Donnell was dismissed from his post!!! 
Whereas Murray retained his. 
Then the so-called radical ministry of Gladstone came to power, 
the tender, unctuous, magnanimous Gladstone who had shed such 
warm, sincere tears before the eyes of the whole of Europe over 
the fate of Poerio and other members of the bourgeoisie who were 
badly treated by King Bomba. 143 What did this idol of the 
progressive bourgeoisie do? While insulting the Irish by his 
insolent replies to their demands for an amnesty, 1' he not only 
confirmed the monster Murray in his post, but endowed the 
position of the chief jailer with a nice fat sinecure as a token of his 
particular satisfaction!1 There's the apostle of bourgeois philan­
thropy for you! 
But something had to be done to pull the wool over the eyes of 
the public. It was essential to appear to be doing something for 
Ireland, and a law regulating the land question (LAND BILL) 144 was 
proclaimed with a great song and dance. All this is nothing but a 
pose with the ultimate aim of deceiving Europe, winning over the 
Irish judges and advocates with the prospect of endless disputes 
between landlords and farmers, conciliating the landlords with the 
promise of financial aid from the state and deluding the more 
prosperous farmers with a few mild concessions. 
In the long introduction to his grandiloquent and confused 
speech Gladstone admits that even the "benevolent" laws which 
liberal England bestowed on Ireland over the last hundred years 
have always led to the country's further decline.d And after this 
naive confession the same man persists in torturing those who 
want to put an end to this harmful and stupid legislation. 
a Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the 
English Convict Prisons, London, 1867. See also this volume, pp. 424, 426-28.— Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  83.—  Ed. 
c The Irishman, No. 19, November 6, 1869.— Ed. 
d Marx refers to Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on February 15, 
1870,  The Times, No. 26673, February 16, 1870.—Ed. 

=====第138页=====
106 Karl Marx 
II 
The following is an account taken from an English newspaper 
of the results of an enquiry into the death of Michael Terbert,a a 
Fenian prisoner who died at Spike Island Prison due to the bad 
treatment which he had received. 
On Thursday last1' Mr. John Moore, Coroner of the Middleton district, held an 
inquest at Spike Island Convict Prison,' on the body of a convict [...] named 
Michael Terbert, who had died in hospital. 
Peter Hay, governor of the prison, was called first. He deposed—The deceased, 
Michael Terbert, came to this prison in June, 1866; I can't say how his health was 
at the time; he had been convicted on the 12th of January, 1866, and his sentence 
was seven years' penal servitude; he appeared delicate for some time past, as will 
appear from one of the prison books, which states that he was removed on the 
recommendation of medical officers, as being unfit for cellular discipline. Witness 
then went into a detail of the frequent punishments inflicted on the deceased for 
breach of discipline, many of them for the use "of disrespectful language to the 
medical officer".01 
Jeremiah Hubert Kelly deposed—I remember when Michael Terbert came here 
from Mountjoy Prison; it was then stated that he was unfit for cellular 
discipline—that means being always confined to a celle; certificate to the effect was 
signed by Dr. M'Donnel: [...] I found him, however, to be in good health, and I 
sent him to work. I find by the recordf that he was in hospital from the 31st 
January, 1869, until the 6th February, 1869; he suffered then from increased 
affection of the heart, and from that time he did not work on the public works, but 
in-doors, at oakum; from the 19th March, 1869, until the 24th March,s 1869, he 
was in hospital, suffering from the same affection of heart; from the 24th April till 
the 5th May he was also in hospital from spitting of blood; from the 19th May till 
the 1st June he was in hospital for heart disease; from the 21st June till the 22nd 
June he was under hospital treatment for the same; he was also in hospital from 
the 22nd July till the 15th August, for the same — from 9th November till the 13th 
December for debility, and from 20th December to the 8th February, when he died 
from acute dropsy; on the 13th November he first appeared to suffer from dropsy, 
and it was then dissipated; I visit the cells every day, and I must have seen him 
when under punishment from time to time; it is my duty to remit, by 
recommendation, that punishment, if I consider the prisoner is not fit to bear it; I 
think I did so twice in his case. 
As a medical man, did you consider that five days on bread and water per day 
was excessive punishment for him, notwithstanding his state of health in Mountjoy 
and here? — I did not; the deceased had a good appetite; I don't think that the 
treatment induced acute dropsy, of which he died  [....] 
a See The Irishman, No. 34, February 19, 1870.— Ed. 
b L'Internationale has "On Thursday, February 17".— Ed. 
c L'Internationale has "Spike-Island Prison".— Ed. 
d L'Internationale has no quotation marks here.— Ed. 
e The words "that means being always confined to a cell" are omitted in 
L 'Internationale.—Ed. 
f L'Internationale has "I remember".— M 
s L'Internationale has "March 26".— Ed. 

=====第139页=====
The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners 107 
Martin O'Connell, resident apothecary of Spike Island, was next examined— 
Witness mentioned to Dr. Kelly last July that while the deceased was labouring 
under heart disease he should not have been punished; [...] he was of opinion that 
such punishment as the deceased got was prejudicial to his health, considering that 
he was an invalid for the past twelve months [...] he could not say that invalids were 
so punished, as he only attended cells in Dr. Kelly's absence; he was certain, 
considering the state of the deceased man's health, that five days continuously in 
cells would be injurious to his health; [...] The Coroner then [...] dealt forcibly with 
the treatment which the prisoner had received [...] alternating between the hospital 
and the punishment cell. 
The jury returned the following verdict: "We find that Michael Terbert died in 
hospital at Spike Island Convict Prison, on the 8th of February, 1870, of dropsy; he 
was twenty-five years of age,a and unmarried. We have also to express in the 
strongest terms our total disapproval of the frequent punishment he suffered in 
cells on bread and water for several days in succession during his imprisonment in 
Spike Island, where he had been sent in June, 1866, from Mountjoy Prison, for the 
reason that in Dr. M'Donnell's opinion he was unfit for cellular discipline at 
Mountjoy; and we express our condemnation of such treatment." 
Written on February 21, 1870 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in the newspaper L'Inter­
nationale, Nos. 59 and 60, February 27 Translated from the French 
and March 6, 1870 r , . . 
The account of the enquiry into 
Terbet's death is reproduced from 
The Irishman 
L'Internationale has "36 years of age".— Ed. 

=====第140页=====
108 
Karl Marx 
[CONCERNING THE CONFLICT 
IN THE LYONS SECTION]145 
Citizens! The Lyonese section of the International Working 
Men's Association, in virtue of a resolution passed at the Congress 
of Basle, 1869, to the effect that the General Council shall act as 
umpire in cases where differences arise between members of the 
Association,3 has appealed to the Council to decide between Albert 
Richard on one side and Schettel, Cormier, A. Blanc, Chanoz and 
Vindry on the other side, the latter being members of the old 
section of Lyons. 
The General Council, having examined the documents sent by 
that section, declares the accusations made to be without the least 
foundation and confirms the verdict of the two special commis­
sions appointed on that subject: the first at the Congress of 
Lausanne, 1867, and the second at Geneva, 1869, and maintains 
Albert Richard in the post of Corresponding Secretary of the 
International Working Men's Association conformably to the Rules 
and Regulations. 
Considering also that the call made by the old members upon 
the radical burgesses to give a decision in this case which ought 
only to have been known to the members of the Association is 
contrary to the Rules, spirit, and interest of the Association and of 
a nature of profiting the enemies, the General Council censures 
energetically the conduct of the old members of the section. 
The General Council takes advantage of the position in which it 
is placed by this misunderstanding to remind all the members of 
a Marx refers to the resolution of the Basle Congress adopted on September 9, 
1869 (see Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's 
Association, London [1869], p. 21).— Ed. 

=====第141页=====
Concerning the Conflict in the Lyons Section 109 
the Association that before any publication or any public action it 
should be apprised of it, as this mode of proceeding is calculated 
to excite personal animosities which should be carefully avoided at 
all times, and produces divisions in our ranks, and can only be 
useful to our adversaries at a time when all the activity, all the 
strength, and all the energy of our members should be concen­
trated for the speedy triumph of the principles of the Internation­
al Working Men's Association. 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the Minute 
March 8, 1870 Book of the General Council 
First published in L'Internationale, No. 63, 
March 27, 1870, under the signature of 
Eugène Dupont 

=====第142页=====
110 
Karl Marx 
THE GENERAL3  COUNCIL OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
TO COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
OF THE RUSSIAN SECTION IN GENEVA146 
Citizens, 
At its meeting of March 22, the General" Council declared by 
unanimous vote that your programme and rulesb accord with the 
general rules of the International Working Men's Association. It 
immediately admitted your section into the International. I am 
pleased to accept your proposal to take on the honourable duty of 
being your representative on the General2 Council. 
You say in your programme: 
"...that the imperial yoke oppressing Poland is a brake equally hampering the 
political and social emancipation of both nations—the Russian just as much as the 
Polish." 
You might add that Russia's violent conquest of Poland provides 
a pernicious support and real reason for the existence of a military 
regime in Germany, and, as a consequence, on the whole 
Continent. Therefore, in working on breaking Poland's chains, 
Russian socialists take on themselves the lofty task of destroying 
the military regime; that is essential as a precondition for the 
general emancipation of the European proletariat. 
A few months ago I received from St. Petersburg Flerovsky's 
work The Condition of the Working Class in Russia.147 This is a real 
eye-opener for Europe. Russian optimism, which is spread over the 
Continent even by the so-called revolutionaries, is mercilessly 
exposed in this work. It will not retract from its worth if I say that 
in one or two places it does not fully satisfy criticism from the 
a "Chief"  in the Russian original.— Ed. 
b "Pervaya russkaya sektsiya. Programma", "Ustav russkoi sektsii", Narodnoye 
Dyelo,  No. 1, April 15, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第143页=====
The General Council to the Russian Section in Geneva 111 
purely theoretical point of view. It is the book of a serious 
observer, a courageous worker, an unbiased critic, a great artist 
and, above all, of a person intolerant of oppression in all its forms 
and of all national anthems, and ardently sharing all the sufferings 
and all the aspirations of the producing class. 
Such works as Flerovsky's and those of your teacher Cher-
nyshevsky do real honour to Russia and prove that your country is 
also beginning to take part in the movement of our age. 
Fraternal greetings, 
Karl Marx 
London, March 24, 1870 
Printed in Narodnoye Dyelo, No. 1, Gene- Printed according to the news-
va, April 15, 1870 paper 
Translated from the Russian 

=====第144页=====
112 
Karl Marx 
CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATION 
The Russian Bakunin (although I have known him since 1843, I 
shall here ignore everything not absolutely necessary for the 
understanding of what follows) met Marx in Londona  shortly after 
the foundation of the International. There the latter took him into 
the Association, for which Bakunin promised to work to the best 
of his ability. Bakunin went to Italy and received there from Marx 
the Provisional Rules and Address to the Working Classes^ answered 
"very enthusiastically" and did nothing. After some years, during 
which nothing was heard from him, he turned up again in 
Switzerland. There he joined, not the International, but the League 
de la paix et de la liberté. 149 After the congress of this Peace League 
(Geneva, 1867) Bakunin got on to its Executive Committee, but 
found opponents there, who not only denied him any "dictatorial" 
influence, but watched him closely as being "suspect as a Russian". 
Shortly after the Brussels Congress of the International (September 
1868) the Peace League held its congress at Berne. Here Bakunin 
acted the FIREBRAND and—be it remarked en passant—denounced 
the occidental bourgeoisie in the tone in which Muscovite optimists 
are accustomed to attack Western civilisation—to palliate their own 
barbarism. He proposed a number of resolutions, which, absurd in 
themselves,  were intended to instil fear into the bourgeois cretins and 
allow Monsieur Bakunin to leave the Peace League and enter the 
International with éclat. It suffices to note that the pro­
gramme proposed by Bakunin to the Berne c Congress150 contains 
•' On November 3, 1864.— Ed. 
b Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association, 
London, 1864.— Ed. 
c The manuscript mistakenly has "\Lausanne".— Ed. 

=====第145页=====
Confidential Communication 113 
such absurdities as the "equality of classes", "abolition of the right of 
inheritance as the first step of the social revolution", etc.— empty 
babblings,3 a garland of ostensibly horrifying hollow fancies, in short 
an insipid improvisation, calculated purely to make a certain 
short-lived effect. Bakunin's friends in Paris (where a Russian b  has a 
seat on the editorial board of the Revue Positiviste) and in London 
proclaim to the world Bakunin's resignation from the Peace League 
as un événement' and declare his grotesque programme — that olla 
podrida 6 of outworn platitudes—wonderfully awe-inspiring and 
original. 
Bakunin meanwhile had joined the Branche Romande of the 
International (in Geneva). It took him years to decide upon this 
step.  But it did not take days for Monsieur Bakunin to decide to 
transform the International and turn it into an instrument of his 
own. 
Behind the back of the London General Council—which was 
informed only when everything was apparently already arranged— 
he founded the so-called Alliance des Démocrates Socialistes. 151 The 
programme of this society"' was none other than that proposed by 
Bakunin at the Berne Peace Congress. The society thereby 
proclaimed itself from the outset as a propaganda society of the 
specifically Bakuninist cult, and Bakunin  himself,  one of the most 
ignorant men in the field of social theory, suddenly appeared here as 
the founder of a sect. The theoretical programme of this Alliance 
was however pure farce. The serious aspect of the affair lay in its 
practical organisation. This society was to be international, with its 
Central Committee in Geneva, that is, under Bakunin's personal 
direction. At the same time it was to be an "integral" part of the 
International Working Men's Association. Its BRANCHES were to be 
represented at the "next congress" of the International (in Basle) 
and were at the same time to hold their own congress in separate 
sittings, side by side with the other, etc., etc. 
The human material which at first stood at Bakunin's disposal 
consisted of the majority at that time of the Comité Fédéral 
a See Deuxième Congrès de la Paix et de la Liberté convoqué pour le 22 septembre 
1868 à Berne. Programme, Berne [1868], and "Discours de M. Bakounine" in 
Discours prononcés au Congrès de la Paix et de la Liberté à Berne (1868). Par 
M. M. Mroc/.kowski et Bakounine, Geneva, 1869, pp. 5-23.— Ed. 
>> G. N. Vyrubov.— Ed. 
' An event.— Ed. 
d Hotch-potch.— Ed. 
c Programme et Règlement de l'Alliance internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste, 
Geneva [1868] (see this volume, pp. 207-09).— Ed. 

=====第146页=====
114 Karl Marx 
Romand of the International in Geneva. J. Ph. Becker, whose 
propagandist zeal at times runs away with his head, was pushed 
forward to the front of the stage. In Italy and Spain Bakunin had 
a few allies. 
The General Council in London was fully informed. However, 
it let Bakunin proceed undisturbed up to the moment when he 
found it necessary to send the General Council, through 
J. Ph. Becker, the Rules (and programme) of the Alliance des 
Démocrates Socialistes for approval. The General Council answered 
with a thoroughly reasoned resolution—wholly "judicial" and 
"objective" in tone, but full of irony in its "considerations"— 
which concluded as follows: 
1. The General Council does not admit the Alliance as a branch 
of the International. 
2. All the paragraphs of the Rules of the Alliance referring to 
its relations with the International are declared null and  void. 
The considerations for this resolution demonstrated clearly 
and forcefully that the Alliance was nothing but an instrument to 
disorganise the International."1 
The blow was unexpected. Bakunin had already turned the 
Égalité, central organ of the French-speaking members of the 
International in Switzerland, into his own organ, and had, in 
addition, started at Lode a little private journal of his own, the 
Progrès. The Progrès is playing this role up to the present day 
under the editorship of a fanatical adherent of Bakunin, a certain 
Guillaume. 
After several weeks' reflection the Central Committee of the 
Alliance finally sent its answer to the General Council, over the 
signature of Perron, a Genevese. In its eagerness to serve the good 
cause, the Alliance was ready to sacrifice its independent organisation, 
but on one condition—namely, that the General Council declare 
its recognition of the Alliance's "radical" principles. 
The General Council replied: It was not its function to sit in 
judgment on the theoretic value of the programmes of its various 
sections. It had only to see that those programmes contained 
nothing directly contradictory to the letter and spirit of the Rules. It must 
therefore insist upon the absurd phrase about the égalité des  classes 
being struck from the programme of the Alliance and replaced 
by the abolition des classes (which was done). For the rest, the 
Alliance could enter the International after dissolving its own 
independent international organisation, and supplying the General 
a See this volume, pp. 34-36.— Ed. 

=====第147页=====
Confidential Communication 115 
Council with a list of all its BRANCHES3  (which, nota bene, was not 
done). 
The incident was therewith closed. Nominally, the Alliance 
dissolved  itself;  actually, it remained in existence, under the 
leadership of Bakunin, who at the same time controlled the 
Genevese Comité Romand Federal of the International. 
To its former press organs were added the Federacion of 
Barcelona and, after the Basle Congress, the Naples Eguaglianza. 
Bakunin now attempted to reach his goal—the transformation 
of the International into his personal instrument—by other means. 
Through our Romance Committee at Geneva he proposed to the 
General Council the inclusion of the "inheritance question" in the 
agenda of the Basle Congress.b  The General Council agreed, in 
order to be able to deal a direct blow to Bakunin. Bakunin's plan 
was this: the Basle Congress, in accepting the "principles" (?) put 
forward by Bakunin at Berne, will show the world that it is not 
Bakunin who has come over to the International, but the 
International that has gone over to Bakunin. Obvious result, the 
London General Council (of whose hostility to the warming up of 
the vieillerie Saint-Simoniste c Bakunin was fully aware) would have 
to resign and the Basle Congress would transfer the General Council 
to Geneva, that is, the International would come under the 
dictatorship of Bakunin. 
Bakunin set a complete conspiracy going to secure a majority at 
the Basle Congress. Even false mandates were not lacking, such as 
Monsieur Guillaume's mandate for Locle, etc. Bakunin himself 
begged mandates from Naples and Lyons. Every kind of slander 
against the General Council was spread abroad. Some were told 
that élément bourgeois dominated the Council, others that it was the 
seat of communisme autoritaire, etc. 
The results of the Basle Congress are well known. Bakunin's 
proposals were not accepted and the General Council remained in 
London. 
The annoyance which followed this failure—perhaps Bakunin 
had based all kinds of private speculations on the assumption of 
success—found expression in the irritable comments of the Egalité 
and Progrès. These papers meanwhile were assuming more and 
more the posture of official oracles. Now one, now another Swiss 
section of the International was excommunicated because, contrary 
a See this volume, pp. 45-46.— Ed. 
b See "The International Working Men's Association. Council Meeting. Tuesday, 
April 13 [1869]", The Bee-Hive, No. 392, April 17, 1869.— Ed. 
c Saint-Simonian old rubbish.— Ed. 

=====第148页=====
116 Karl Marx 
to Bakunin's explicit instructions, it had taken part in the political 
movement, etc. Finally the rage against the General Council, so 
long restrained, broke out openly. The Progrès and Égalité 
derided, attacked, and declared that the General Council was not 
fulfilling its duties, for example in regard to the quarterly bulletin; 
that the General Council must give up its direct control over 
England and have an English Central Committee established 
alongside it, to deal with English affairs only; that the resolutions 
of the General Council on the imprisoned Fenians went beyond its 
functions, since it should not deal with questions of local politics. 
Moreover, the Progrès and Égalité took up the cudgels for 
Schweitzer and categorically demanded that the General Council 
declare itself officially and publiquement' 1 on the Liebknecht-
Schweitzer question. The newspaper Le Travail (in Paris), into 
which Schweitzer's Paris friends smuggled articles in his favour, 
was praised on that account by the Progrès and Égalité, the latter 
calling upon the Travail to make common cause against the 
General Council. b 
The time had now come for action to be taken. What follows is 
an exact copy of the circular sent by the General Council to the 
Central Committee of the Romance Federation in Geneva. The 
document is too long for me to translate into German [original in 
French].0 
The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland 
in Geneva. 
At its extraordinary meeting on January 1, 1870, the General 
Council resolved: 
1) We read in the Egalité of December 11, 1869: 
"It is certain that the General Council is neglecting extremely important 
matters.... We remind the General Council of its obligations with Article 1 of the 
Regulations: 'The General Council is commissioned to carry the resolutions of 
the Congress into effect'.... We could put enough questions to the General Council 
for its replies to make up quite a long report. They will, come later. Meanwhile, 
etc." 
The General Council does not know of any article, either in the 
Rules or in the Regulations, which would oblige it to enter into 
correspondence or into polemic with the Egalité or to provide 
"replies" to "questions" of any newspaper whatsoever. 
The Federal Council of Romance Switzerland alone represents the 
a Publicly.— Ed. 
b L'Égalité, Nos. 42, 43 and 47, November 6, 13 and December 11, 1869; Le 
Progrès, No. 25, December 4, 1869.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp.  84-91.—  Ed. 

=====第149页=====
Confidential Communication 117 
branches of Romance Switzerland at the General Council. When 
the Federal Council addresses requests or reprimands to us 
through the only legitimate channel, that is to say through its 
secretary, the General Council will always be ready to reply. But 
the Romance Federal Council has no right either to abdicate its 
functions in favour of the Égalité and the Progrès, or to let these 
newspapers usurp its functions. Generally speaking, the General 
Council's correspondence with the national and local committees 
cannot be published without greatly prejudicing the Association's 
general interests. 
Consequently, if other organs of the International were to follow 
the example of the Progrès and the Égalité, the General Council 
would be faced with the alternative of either discrediting itself 
publicly by its silence or violating its obligations by replying 
publicly. The Égalité joins the Progrès in inviting Le Travail to 
demand an explanation from the General Council. That is almost 
a League of Public Welfare. 152 
2) Now, assuming that the questions put by the Egalité  come  from 
the Romance Federal Council, we shall reply to them, but only on 
condition that such questions shall not in the future be communi­
cated to us in the same way. 
3) Question of a Bulletin. 
In the resolutions of the Geneva3 Congress, which are inserted 
in the Regulations, it is laid down that the national committees 
shall send the General Council documents dealing with the 
proletarian movement0 and that the General Council shall 
thereupon publish a bulletin in the different languages "as often as 
its means permit" ("As often as its means permit, the General Council 
shall publish a report, etc.").c 
The General Council's obligation was thus made dependent on 
conditions that have never been fulfilled. Even the statistical inquiry 
prescribed by the Rules, ordered by consecutive General 
Congresses, and demanded yearly by the General Council, has never 
been made. As far as the means are concerned, the General Council 
would have long since ceased to exist had it not been for local 
contributions from England and the personal sacrifices of its 
members. 
a The manuscript mistakenly has "Lausanne".— Ed. 
b Congrès ouvrier de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs tenu à Genève du 3 au 
8jeptembre 1866, Geneva, 1866, pp. 13 and 26.~Ed. 
c Rules of the International Working Men's Association, London [1867], p. 6. (The 
quotation in brackets is given in English in the manuscript.)—Ed. 

=====第150页=====
118 Karl Marx 
Thus,  the Regulations passed at the Geneva3 Congress have 
remained a dead letter. 
As regards the Basle Congress, it did not discuss the fulfilment 
of an existing regulation. It discussed the possibility of issuing a 
bulletin in good time and it did not pass any resolution. 
For the rest, the General Council believes that the original 
purpose of such a bulletin is at the moment perfectly fulfilled by 
the different organs of the International published in the different 
languages and exchanged among them. It would be absurd to do 
by costly bulletins what is being done already without any expense. 
On the other hand, a bulletin which would print what is not 
contained in the organs of the International would only help our 
enemies to see behind the scenes. 
4) Question of separating the General Council from the Federal 
Council for England. 
Long before the foundation of the Egalité, this proposition 
was periodically made inside the General Council by one or two 
of its English members. 153 It was always rejected almost unani­
mously. 
Although revolutionary initiative will probably come from 
France, England alone can serve as the lever for a serious 
economic Revolution. It is the only country where there are no 
more peasants and where landed property is concentrated in a few 
hands.  It is the only country where the capitalist form, that is to 
say, combined labour on a large scale under capitalist masters, now 
embraces virtually the whole of production. It is the only country 
where the great majority of the population consists of  WAGES-LABOURERS. 
It is the only country where the class struggle and the organisation of 
the working class by the TRADES  UNIONS  have acquired a certain 
degree of maturity and universality. It is the only country where, 
because of its domination on the world market, every revolution in 
economic matters must immediately affect the whole world. If 
landlordism and capitalism are classical features in England, on the 
other hand, the material conditions for their destruction are the most 
mature here. The General Council now being in the happy position 
of having its hand directly on this great lever of  the proletarian revolution, 
what folly, we might say even what a crime, to let this lever fall into 
purely English hands! 
The English have all the material necessary for the social 
revolution. What they lack is the spirit of generalisation and 
revolutionary ardour. It is only the General Council that can provide 
The manuscript mistakenly has "Lausanne".— Ed. 

=====第151页=====
Confidential Communication 119 
them with this, that can thus accelerate the truly revolutionary 
movement in this country, and consequently  everywhere.  The great 
results we have already achieved in this respect are attested to by the 
most intelligent and influential of the newspapers of the ruling 
classes, as for example, The Pall Mall Gazette, Saturday Review, The 
Spectator and The Fortnightly Review, to say nothing of the so-called 
radicals in the COMMONS and the LORDS who, a little while ago, still 
exerted a great influence on the leaders of the English workers. 
They accuse us publicly of having poisoned and almost exting­
uished the English spirit of the working class and of having pushed 
it into revolutionary socialism. 
The only way to bring about this change is to act like the General 
Council of the International Association. As the General Council we 
can initiate measures (for example, the founding of the Land and 
Labour League*54) which later, in the process of their execution, 
will appear to the public as spontaneous movements of the English 
working class. 
If a Federal Council were formed apart from the General 
Council, what would be the immediate results? Placed between the 
General Council of the International and the General Council of  TRADES 
UNIONS,150  the Federal Council would have no authority whatever. 
On the other hand, the General Council of the International would 
lose control of the great lever. If we had preferred the showman's 
chatter to serious and unostentatious work, we would perhaps 
have committed the mistake of replying publicly the Égalités 
question as to why "the General Council permits such a 
burdensome combination of functions". " 
England cannot be treated simply as a country along with other 
countries. It must be treated as the metropolis of capital. 
5) Question of the General Council Resolutions on the Irish Amnesty'1 
If England is the BULWARK of landlordism and European 
capitalism, the only point where official England can be struck a 
great blow is  Ireland. 
In the first place, Ireland is the BULWARK of English landlordism. 
If it fell in Ireland, it would fall in England. In Ireland this is a 
hundred times easier because the economic struggle there is concen­
trated exclusively on landed property, because this struggle is at the 
same time national, and because the people there are more 
revolutionary and more exasperated than in England. Landlord­
ism in Ireland is maintained solely by the English army. The 
moment the forced Union156 between the two countries ends, a 
1 See this volume, p.  83.—  Ed. 

=====第152页=====
120 Karl Marx 
social revolution will immediately break out in Ireland, though in 
outmoded forms. English landlordism would not only lose a great 
source of its wealth, but also its greatest moral force, i. e., that of 
representing the domination of England over  Ireland.  On the other 
hand, by maintaining the power of its landlords in Ireland, 
the English proletariat makes them invulnerable in England 
itself. 
In the second place, the English bourgeoisie has not only 
exploited Irish poverty to keep down the working class in England 
by forced immigration of poor Irishmen, but it has also divided the 
proletariat into two hostile camps. The revolutionary fire of the 
Celtic worker does not go well with the solid but slow nature of 
the Anglo-Saxon worker. On the contrary, in all the big industrial 
centres in England there is profound antagonism between the Irish 
proletarian and the English proletarian. The average English 
worker hates the Irish worker as a competitor who lowers wages 
and the  STANDARD  OF LIFE.  He feels national and religious antipathies 
for him. He regards him somewhat like the  POOR  WHITES  of the 
Southern States of North America regarded black slaves. This 
antagonism among the proletarians of England is artificially 
nourished and kept up by the bourgeoisie. It knows that this 
scission is the true secret of maintaining its power. 
Moreover, this antagonism is reproduced on the other side of 
the Atlantic. The Irish, chased from their native soil by the bulls 
and the sheep, reassemble in the United States where they 
constitute a huge, ever-growing section of the population. Their 
only thought, their only passion, is hatred for England. The 
English and American governments—that is to say, the classes 
they represent—play on these feelings in order to perpetuate the 
international struggle which prevents any serious and sincere 
alliance between the working classes on both sides of the Atlantic, 
and, consequently, their common emancipation. 
Ireland is the only pretext the English Government has for 
retaining a big standing army, which, if need be, as has happened 
before, can be used against the English workers after having done 
its military training in Ireland. 
Lastly, England today is seeing a repetition of what happened 
on a monstrous scale in ancient Rome. Any people that oppresses 
another people forges its own chains. 
Thus,  the position of the International Association with regard 
to the Irish question is very clear. Its first concern is to advance 
the social revolution in England. To this end a great blow must be 
struck in Ireland. 

=====第153页=====
Confidential Communication 121 
The General Council's resolutions  on the  Irish amnesty3 serve 
only as an  introduction  to other resolutions157 which will affirm 
that, quite apart from international justice,  it is a  precondition  to the 
emancipation  of the  English working class  to transform  the  present 
forced Union—i.  e., the  enslavement  of Ireland—into equal  and  free 
confederation  if  possible, into complete separation  if need  be. 
For the  rest,  the  doctrines  of the  Egalité  and the  Progrès 
on the  CONNEXION,  or rather, the  NON-CONNEXION,  between the social 
movement  and the  political movement have never,  as far as we 
know, been recognised  by any of our  Congresses. They  run  counter 
to our  Rules.  The  Rules  say: 
"That  the  economical emancipation  of the  working classes  is [...] 
the great  end to  which every political movement ought  to be  subordinate 
as a means."  h 
The words  "as a  means"c were omitted  in the  French translation 
made  in 1864 by the  Paris Committee.0 When questioned  by the 
General Council,  the  Paris Committee excused itself  by the 
difficulties  of its  political situation. 
There  are  other mutilations  of the  authentic text  of the  Rules. 
Thus,  the  first clause  of the  preamble  to the  Rules reads: 
"The struggle  for the  emancipation  of the  working classes 
means  ... a  struggle  ... for  equal rights  and  duties,  and the  abolition  of 
all class fule."e 
The Paris translation  has  "equal rights  and  duties", that  is it 
reproduced  the  general phrase which  may be  found virtually  in all 
democratic manifestoes  of the  last hundred years  and  which means 
different things  in the  mouth  of different classes,  but  leaves  out 
the concrete demand:  "the  abolition  of  classes". 
Further,  in the  second clause  of the  preamble  to the  Rules  we 
read: "That  the  economical subjection  of the man of  labour  to 
the monopoliser  of the  means  of  labour, that  is, the  sources  of life, 
etc." 
The Paris translation substitutes  the  word "capital"  for "the 
means  of  labour, that  is, the  sources  of life",  an  expression which 
includes  the  land  as well  as the  other means  of labour. 
;1 See  this  volume,  pp. 3-4 and  83.— Ed. 
b Here  and  below quotations from  the  Provisional Rules  are  given  in English  in 
the manuscript  (see  present  edition,  Vol. 20, p.  14).— Ed. 
1 Marx uses  the  English phrase  and  gives  the  French equivalent "comme 
moyen"  in brackets.—  Ed. 
(1 Congrès  ouvrier.  Association Internationale  des Travailleurs.  Règlement Provisoire 
[Paris, 1864],  p. 1.— Ed. 
e See  present  edition,  Vol. 20, p.  14.—  Ed. 

=====第154页=====
122 Karl Marx 
/ The original authentic text was restored in the French 
translation published in Brussels in 1866.a 
6) Liebknecht-Schweitzer Question. 
The Egalité writes: 
"Both these groups belong to the International". That is incorrect. 
The Eisenachers' group (which the Progrès and the Égalité would 
like to turn into Citizen Liebknecht's group) belongs to the 
International. Schweitzer's group does not belong to it. 
Schweitzer himself explained at length in his newspaper, the 
Social-Dernokrat, why the Lassallean organisation could not join the 
International without destroying  itself.b  Without realising it, he was 
speaking the truth; His artificial sectarian organisation is opposed 
to the real organisation of the working class. 
The Progrès and the Egalité have summoned the General 
Council to state publicly its "opinion" on the personal differences 
between Liebknecht and Schweitzer. Since Citizen /. Ph. Becker 
(who is slandered as much as Liebknecht in Schweitzer's paper c) is 
a member of the Égalité's editorial  board,  it seems most strange that 
its editors are not better informed about the facts. They should 
have known that Liebknecht, in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt, 
publicly invited Schweitzer to accept the General Council as arbiter 
of their differences^ and that Schweitzer no less publicly refused to 
acknowledge the authority of the General Council. 6 
The General Council has employed all possible means to put an 
end to this scandal. It instructed its Secretary for Germanyf to 
correspond with Schweitzer; this has been done, but all attempts 
by the Council have broken down in the face of Schweitzer's firm 
resolution to preserve at all cost his autocratic power together with 
the sectarian organisation. 
It is up to the General Council to determine the favourable 
moment when its public intervention in this quarrel will be more 
useful than damaging.g 
By order of the General Council etc." 
a Manifeste de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs suivi du Règlement 
provisoire, Bruxelles, 1866, pp. 15-18.— Ed. 
b A reference to the leading article in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 82, July 16, 
1869.—  Ed. 
c Der Social-Demokrat, No. 24, February 24, 1869.— Ed. 
d W. Liebknecht, "Erklärung. Leipzig, 18. Februar 1869", Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt, No. 8, February 20, 1869.— Ed. 
e Der Social-Demokrat, No. 24, February 24, 1869.— Ed. 
f Karl Marx. — Ed. 
s In his "Confidential Communication" Marx omitted Point 7 of the 
circular.— Ed. 

=====第155页=====
Confidential Communication 123 
The French Committees (although Bakunin had been actively 
intriguing in Lyons and Marseilles and had won over a few young 
hotheads), as well as the Conseil Général Belge 3 (Brussels), have fully 
endorsed this circular of the General Council. 
The copy for Geneva was delayed somewhat (because Jung, 
Secretary for Switzerland, was very busy). It therefore crossed with 
an official letter from Perret, Secretary of the Central Committee 
of the Romance Federation in Geneva, to the General Council. 158 
The crisis had broken out in Geneva before the arrival of our 
letter. Some members of the editorial board of the Egalité had 
opposed the policy dictated by Bakunin. Bakunin and his followers 
(including six editors of the Égalité) wanted to force the Geneva 
Central Committee to dismiss the unruly members. The Geneva 
Committee, however, had long grown tired of Bakunin's despot­
ism and saw itself with great displeasure being forced by him into 
opposition to the other German-Swiss Committees, the General 
Council, etc. It therefore endorsed the attitude of those members 
of the Égalité editorial board who opposed Bakunin. Thereupon 
Bakunin's six followers resigned from the editorial board, hoping 
thereby to put an end to the publication of the paper. b 
In answer to our letter the Geneva Central Committee declared 
' that the attacks in the Egalité had been made without its approval, 
that it had never endorsed the policy preached therein and that in1 
future the paper would be edited under the strict supervision of 
the Committee, etc.159 
Bakunin thereupon retired from Geneva to Ticino. As far as 
Switzerland is concerned, he now has a say only in the  Progrès  (Locle). 
Shortly afterwards Herzen died. Bakunin, who from the time 
that he decided to set himself up as director of the European workers' 
movement had denied his old friend and patron Herzen, hastened 
to sing his praises immediately after his death. c Why? Herzen, 
though personally wealthy, allowed the pseudo-socialist, Pan-Slavist 
party in Russia, which was friendly towards him, to pay him 
25,000 francs annually for propaganda. By his paean of praise 
Bakunin directed this stream of money to himself and— malgré sa 
haine de l'héritage 6—thereby entered financially and morally upon 
the "Her zen heritage" sine beneficio inventarii. e 160 
a Belgian General Council.— Ed. 
b See L'Égalité, Nos. 2 and 3, January 8 and 15, 1870.— Ed. 
c Marx means Bakunin's tribute to Herzen published in the form of letters in 
La Marseillaise, Nos. 72 and 73, March 2 and 3, 1870, and reprinted in Le Progrès, 
Nos.  10, 11 and 12, March 5, 12 and 19, 1870.— Ed. 
d Despite his hatred of inheritance.— Ed. 
e Without benefit of inventory.— Ed. 

=====第156页=====
124 Karl Marx 
At the same time a COLONY of young Russian REFUGEES settled in 
Geneva, students whose intentions are really honest and whose 
sincerity is proved by the adoption of the fight against Pan-Slavism as 
the chief point of their programme.'' 
They publish a paper in Geneva called La Cause du Peuple. h 
ABOUT two weeks ago they applied to London, sending in their 
Programme and Statutes,' and requesting permission to form a 
Russian branch.161 Permission was given. 
In a separate letter to Marx they asked him to represent them 
provisionally on the General Council. That too was done.d At the 
same time they indicated — and apparently wished to excuse them­
selves to Marx on this account—that in the immediate future they 
would have to expose Bakunin publicly, since the man spoke in 
two entirely different tongues, one in Russia, another in Europe.162 
The game of this very dangerous intriguer—at least in the 
domain of the International—will soon be played out. 
Written on about March 28, 1870 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 2, 
No. 15, 1902 Translated from the German and 
the French 
a "Pervaya russkaya sektsiya. Programma", Narodnoye Dyelo, No. 1, April 15, 
1870.—  Ed. 
b Narodnoye  Dyelo.—  Ed. 
c "Ustav russkoi sektsii", Narodnoye Dyelo, No. 1, April 15, 1870.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp.  110-11.—  Ed. 

=====第157页=====
125 
Karl Marx 
[TO THE INTERNATIONAL METALWORKERS' SOCIETY] 
London, April 18, 1870 
Dear Friends, 
About a fortnight agoa the Executive Committee of the 
AMALGAMATED ENGINEERS finally invited the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association to send delegates to 
discuss the establishment of direct links with the metalworkers in 
Germany and the engineers in Paris. They now request you to 
answer the following questions before they come to a decision 
about you: 
1) The number of hours of work per day? 
2) How many working days a week? Is Sunday a working day? 
3) The amount of wages? 
4) Is overtime paid and at what rates? 
5) The number of members? 
6) How much is their contribution per week? 
7) Has the trade union anything to do with funds for sick  relief, 
etc.? 
8) Which trades are covered by the union? 
With fraternal greetings 
Karl Marx 
Written on April 18, 1870 
First published in Die Tagwacht, No. 16, 
May 5, 1870 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a On April 7.— Ed. 

=====第158页=====
126 
Karl Marx 
[RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
ON THE BEE-HIVE] 1M 
Considering, 
1) that the different International sections of the Continent and 
the United States have been advised by the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association to subscribe to the 
Bee-Hive newspaper as the official organ of the General Council 
and the representative in the English press of the Working-Class 
movement3; 
2) that the Bee-Hive has not only erased from the official 
reports of the General Council such resolutions as might displease 
its patrons, but, by way of suppression, has systematically 
misrepresented the tenor of consecutive sittings of the General 
Council; 
3) that mainly since its recent change of proprietorship,165 while 
still pretending to be the exclusive organ of the working class, the 
Bee-Hive has, in reality, become the organ of a capitalist fraction 
who want to keep the proletarian movement in their leading 
strings and use it as a means for the furtherance of their own class 
and party purposes; 
The General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association, in its sitting of the 26th of April 1870, has 
unanimously resolved to sever its connection with the Bee-Hive, 
and to publicly announce this resolution to its different sections in 
England, on the Continent, and in the United States. 
Drawn up in early May 1870 Reproduced from Marx's manu­
script pasted into the Minute Book 
Adopted by the General Council of  the  General Council 
on May 17, 1870 
First published in Der Volksstaat, 
No. 38, May 11, 1870 
a Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association, 
London, 1864, p.  15.—  Ed. 

=====第159页=====
127 
Karl Marx 
[CONCERNING THE PERSECUTION OF THE MEMBERS 
OF THE FRENCH SECTIONS]166 
DECLARATION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
On the occasion of the last pretended complot, the French 
Government has not only arrested many members of our Paris 
and Lyons sections, but insinuated by its organs that the 
International Working Men's Association is an accomplice of that 
pretended complot. 3 
According to the tenor of our Statutes, it is certainly the special 
mission of all our branches in England, on the Continent, and in 
the United States, to act not only as centres for the organisation of 
the working class, but also to aid, in their different countries, all 
political movements tending to the accomplishment of our 
ultimate end, viz., the economical emancipation of the working class. 
At the same time, these Statutes bind all the sections of our 
Association to act in open daylight. If our Statutes were not formal 
on that point, the very nature of an Association which identifies 
itself with the working classes, would exclude from it every form 
of secret society. If the working classes, who form the great bulk 
of all nations, who produce all their wealth, and in the name of 
whom even the usurping powers always pretend to rule, conspire, 
they conspire publicly, as the sun conspires against darkness, in 
the full consciousness that without their pale there exists no 
legitimate power. 
If the other incidents of the complot denounced by the French 
Government are as false and unfounded as its insinuations against 
a See Le Moniteur universel, Nos. 121, 122, 125, 128, May 1, 2, 5, 8, 1870; La 
Presse, May 2, 1870; Le Constitutione^ May 1, 1870; Le Figaro, No. 122, May 2, 
1870.—  Ed. 
6-133 

=====第160页=====
128 Karl Marx 
the International Working Men's Association, this last complot will 
worthily range with its two predecessors of grotesque memory. 167 
The noisy and violent measures against our French sections are 
exclusively intended serving one single purpose—the manipulation 
of the plebiscite. 
Adopted by the General Council on 
May 3, 1870 
First published as a pamphlet, Declaration 
of the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association, on May 4, 
1870 Reproduced from Marx's manu­
script pasted into the Minute 
Book of the General Council, 
and checked with the text of the 
pamphlet 

=====第161页=====
état» vùfakfaL  £* a—-*»—**-  •£  *«fp*t&W ', /}{**— *^»MU+ **ÙÊ[  if*  &++J*4^ 
J^, it i/f, £*t*i*,-r.*>  Oratio-*,  0t*  *-C4?F  /*-•  &f***f  ' « 
^y. ^W ¥t„  ecu/Fed  -fa *JÉZ&^I,  r/îk, /St*t+*à£m*£-yfi~^«^&z^ 
WE O6I4^CIA2£&*  *****  *H.H^^£CM2H6  té, * /rud*i*/r*{ flf#?f a*n<-n4f~fi£Tr+iyUA»-L^ 
\*» «*^  »ÖL« »»*jii "'t**~ij'*»«>Wi  ^»-*  Wi  <J^i-^o  <J^U»~Î  vw~* ** "' 
J «*WJ«^  «YJ«JI.  ^^  ^JUUJ  U-A.,^\^:.  K«»^^  v'^*" 
**^\à  -iU^.jsA  ^\^ »^J^ . vu ^..J«*  *\^ 
^'^W  ^W-A^  Vk.^^Us*  J l.W^~ ~W 
,4**-»»A •^ v*~vxH 
^;-^\  v— A-^ r^ ^«^  <t^ s^^f^ 
Page  of the  Minute Book with Marx's manuscript 
of "Concerning  the  Persecution 
of the  Members  of the  French Sections" 

=====第162页=====
} 

=====第163页=====
131 
Karl Marx 
[DRAFT RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
ON THE "FRENCH FEDERAL SECTION IN LONDON"] 168 
Considering, 
that addresses, resolutions and manifestoes emanating from a 
French society in London which stylesXitself: "International Working 
Men's Association, French Federal Branch", have recently been 
published by continental papers and ascribed to the "International 
Working Men's Association"169; 
that the "International Working Men's Association" is at present 
undergoing severe persecutions on the part of the Austrian and 
French Governments which eagerly catch at the most flimsy 
pretexts for justifying such persecutions; 
that under these circumstances the General Council would incur 
a serious responsibility in allowing any society not belonging to the 
"International" to use and act in its name; 
the General Council hereby declares that the so-called London 
French Federal Branch has since two years ceased to form part of 
the "International" and to have any connection whatever with the 
General Council in London or any Branch3 of that Association on 
the continent. 
London, 10 May 1870 
Adopted by the General Council on 
May 10, 1870 
First published in The Penny Bee-Hive, 
No. 418, May 14, 1870 Reproduced from Marx's manu­
script pasted into the Minute Book 
of the General Council 
a The words "in London or any Branch" and "on the continent" were inserted by 
Eccarius when the resolution was being discussed by the General Council.— Ed. 

=====第164页=====
132 
Karl Marx 
[RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
ON THE CONVOCATION OF THE CONGRESS 
IN MAINZ]170 
Considering, 
That by the Basle Congress Paris was appointed as the 
meeting-place for this year's Congress of the International 
Working Men's Association; 
That the present French regime continuing, the Congress will 
not be able to meet at Paris; 
That nevertheless the preparations for the meeting render an 
immediate resolution necessary; 
That article 3 of the Statutes obliges the Council to change, in 
case of need, the place of meeting appointed by the Congress3; 
That the Central Committee of the German Social-Democratic 
Working Men's Party has invited the General Council to transfer 
this year's Congress to Germany171; 
The General Council has in its sitting of the 17th of May 
unanimously resolved that this year's Congress of the International 
Working Men's Association be opened on the 5th September next 
and meet at Mayence. 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the Minute 
May 17, 1870 Book of the General Council 
First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 42, 
May 25, 1870 
a Rules of the International Working Men's Association, London [1867], p. 4.— Ed. 

=====第165页=====
133 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE GERMAN 
SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS' PARTY1' 
86 Mornington Street, 
Stockport Road, Manchester 
London, June 14, 1870 
Dear Friends, 
Today I received a letter from Stumpf (Mainz), in which he 
says,  among other things: 
"Liebknecht authorises me to write to you that because of the Reichstag 
elections, which are to be held precisely at that time, it might be better to hold the 
congress here on October 5. Last Monday 3 the congress in Stuttgart173 also came 
out in favour of October 5. I hear that Geib is authorised to write to you in this 
matter." 
Liebknecht and the other members of the International ought at 
least to be familiar with its Rules, which expressly state: 
"§ 3. The General Council may, in case of need, change the 
place, but has no power to postpone the time of meeting."h 
When I spoke in the General Council in favour of your urgent 
invitation to have the congress moved to Germany, I naturally 
assumed that you had taken all the circumstances into considera­
tion. According to the Rules there can be no question of 
postponing the congress. 
Another passage in Stumpfs letter is also far from reassuring. 
In it he says: 
"I have just come from the Burgomaster. He wants a solvent citizen to 
guarantee that if the Schweitzer people were to start a fighting, the town would be 
recompensed for any damage in the Electoral Hall of Marble, which has been 
promised to us for the congress, etc." 
a June 6.— Ed 
h Rules of the International Working Men's Association, London [1867], p. 4. Italics 
by Marx and Engels. — Ed. 

=====第166页=====
134 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
You proposed the towns of Mainz, Darmstadt or Mannheim, 
thus in fact assuming, vis-à-vis the General Council, the responsibility 
of ensuring that the congress can be held in any of these towns 
without scandalous scenes which would make the International, and 
the German working class in particular, the laughing-stock of the 
whole world. I hope that you have taken all the necessary 
precautions in this respect. 
What is the numerical proportion of Schweitzer supporters in 
Mainz and district to your own people? 
In the event that a scandal cannot be avoided, steps must be 
taken in advance to ensure that it rebounds on its instigators. The 
plan of the Prussian police to obstruct the international congress in 
Mainz—which they are unable to prevent from convening by 
direct means—through their tool, the Schweitzer organisation, or 
to prevent the peaceful holding of its sessions, must be denounced 
in the Volksstaat, Zukunft and in other German papers open to us. 
As soon as this had been done in Germany, the General Council 
would then arrange for similar articles to be published in 
London, Paris, etc. The International can stand a conflict with 
Mr. Bismarck, but not alleged spontaneous "typical German factional 
brawls between workers" labelled "struggles of principle". 
I daresay that Stumpf —in collaboration with you—will see to it 
that the delegates find cheap lodgings. 
Salut et fraternité 
Karl Marx 
I take this opportunity of sending the Committee my kindest 
regards. Ever since the Schweitzerites in Forst informed the 
Burgomaster in advance of their intention to create mayhem and 
he allowed matters to take their course, the connection between 
these gentlemen and the police is an established fact. Perhaps 
Stumpf could enquire of the Schweitzerites through the Bur­
gomaster of Mainz whether they have been instructed "to fight". 
It is anyway high time these people were exposed in the press 
everywhere as police agents pure and simple, and next time they 
try their hand at "fighting" they should be given a taste of their 
own medicine. This is naturally out of the question at the 
congress, but in the meantime they can be given a thrashing fit to 
put them off fighting for good. The manner in which Herr 
Bismarck is portraying these things in the English press is evident 
from the enclosed cutting, which is doing the rounds of all the 

=====第167页=====
To the Committee of the German S.-D. Workers' Party 135 
papers. The North German Correspondence is an organ founded by 
Bismarck with Guelphic money.174 
With kindest regards 
F. Engels 
Written on June 14, 1870 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 51, 
June 26, 1872 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第168页=====
136 
Karl Marx 
GENERAL COUNCIL RESOLUTION 
ON THE FEDERAL COMMITTEE 
OF ROMANCE SWITZERLAND 175 
THE GENERAL COUNCIL TO THE ROMANCE 
FEDERAL COMMITTEE 
Considering, 
That although a majority of delegates at the Chaux-de-Fonds 
Congress elected a new Romance Federal Committee, this majority 
was only nominal; 
That the Romance Federal Committee in Geneva, having always 
fulfilled its obligations to the General Council and to the 
International Working Men's Association, and having always acted 
in conformity with the Association's Rules, the General Council 
does not have the right to relieve it of its title, 
The General Council, at its meeting of June 28, 1870, 
unanimously resolved that the Romance Federal Committee 
residing in Geneva shall retain its title, and that the Federal 
Committee residing in Chaux-de-Fonds shall select another, local 
title of its own choosing. 
In the name and by order of the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association, 
H. Jung, 
Secretary for Switzerland 
London, June 29, 1870 
Adopted at the General Council meeting Printed according to the news 
of June 28, 1870 paper 
First published in Le Mirabeau, No. 53, Translated from the Frencl. 
July 24, 1870 

=====第169页=====
137 
Karl Marx 
THE LOCK-OUT OF THE BUILDING TRADES 
AT GENEVA 176 
THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
TO THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN 
OF EUROPE AND THE UNITED STATES 
Fellow-Workers, 
The Master Builders of Geneva have, after mature considera­
tion, arrived at the conclusion that "the entire Freedom of 
Labour"3 is best calculated to promote the happiness of the 
labouring poor. In order to secure this blessing to their 
work-people, they resolved to carry into practice, on June 11th, a 
trick of English invention, viz., the lock-out of upwards of 3,000 
mechanics till then in their employ. 
Trade Unionism being of recent growth in Switzerland, the 
same master builders of Geneva used to indignantly denounce it as 
an English importation. Two years ago, they taunted their men 
with a lack of Patriotism for trying to transplant on Swiss soil such 
an exotic plant as the limitation of the working day with fixed 
rates of wages per hour. They never doubted but there must be 
some keen mischief-mongers behind the scene, since their own 
native workmen, if left to themselves, would naturally like nothing 
better than drudging from twelve to fourteen hours a day for 
whatever pay the master might find it in his heart to allow. The 
deluded men, they publicly asserted, were acting under dictation 
from London and Paris, much the same as Swiss diplomatists are 
wont to obey the behests from St. Petersburg, Berlin, and Paris. 
However, the men were not to be cajoled, taunted, or intimidated 
into the persuasion that limiting the daily hours of toil to ten, and 
fixing the rate of wages per hour was something derogatory to the 
a Here and below Marx describes the builders' strike of 1868 according to 
J. Ph. Becker's book Die Internationale Arbeiter-Association und die Arbeitseinstellung in 
Genf im Frühjahr 1868, Geneva, 1868, pp. 6, 7, 38 and 39.— Ed. 

=====第170页=====
138 Karl Marx 
dignity of a Free Citizen, nor could they by any provocation be 
inveigled into acts of violence affording the masters a plausible 
pretext for enforcing public repressive measures against the 
unions. 
At last, in May, 1868, M. Camperio, the then Minister of Justice 
and Police, brought about an agreement that the hours of labour 
should be nine a day in winter, and eleven a day in summer, 
wages varying from forty-five to fifty centimes an hour. That 
agreement was signed in the presence of the Minister by both 
masters and men. In the spring of 1869 some masters refused to 
pay more wages for a day's labour of eleven hours, than they had 
paid during winter for nine hours. The matter was again 
compromised by making 45 centimes an hour, the uniform rate of 
wages for artisans in the building trade. Although clearly 
comprised in this settlement, the plasterers and painters had to toil 
away on the old conditions because they were not then yet 
sufficiently organised to enforce the new ones. On the 15th of 
May last, they claimed to be put on a level with the other trades, 
and on the flat refusal of the masters, struck work the following 
week. On the 4th of June, the master builders resolved that if the 
plasterers and' painters did not return to work on the 9th, the 
whole of the building operatives should be locked out on the 11th. 
This menace was carried into effect. Not satisfied with having 
locked out the men, the masters publicly called upon the federal 
government to forcibly dissolve the union3 and expel the 
foreigners from Switzerland.177 Their benevolent and truly liberal 
attempts at restoring the freedom of labour, were, however, 
baffled by a monster meeting, and a protest on the part of the Swiss 
non-building operatives.178 
The other Geneva trades have formed a committee to manage 
the affairs for the men locked-out. Some house owners who had 
contracted for new buildings with the master builders, considered 
the contracts broken, and invited the men employed on them to 
continue the work as if nothing had happened. This proposal was 
at once accepted. Many single men are leaving Geneva as fast as 
they can. Still there remain some 2,000 families deprived of their 
usual means of subsistence.13 The General Council of the Interna­
tional Working Men's Association, therefore, calls upon all honest 
working men and women, throughout the civilised world, to assist 
a The French text has: "International Association".— Ed, 
b See L'Égalité, No. 24, June 18, 1870.— Ed, 

=====第171页=====
The Lock-out of the Building Trades at Geneva 139 
both by moral and material means the Geneva building trades in 
their just struggle against capitalist despotism. 
By order of the Council, 
B. Lucraft, Chairman 
John Weston, Treasurer 
George Eccarius, Gen. Sec. 
256, High Holborn, London, W.C., 
July 5th, 1870 
Adopted by the General Council on Reproduced from the leaflet 
July 5, 1870 
First published as a leaflet 

=====第172页=====
140 
Frederick Engels 
[NOTES FOR THE PREFACE TO A COLLECTION 
OF IRISH SONGS]179 
Some of the Irish folk-melodies are of ancient origin, others 
have emerged in the last 300-400 years, a good number as late as 
the last century, many of these composed by Carolan, one of the 
last Irish bards. These bards, or harpists—poets, composers and 
singers in one person—used to be very numerous: every Irish 
chieftain kept his own at his castle. Many also travelled around the 
country as wandering minstrels, persecuted by the English, who 
quite rightly saw in them the main bearers of the national, 
anti-English tradition. The old songs about the victories of Finn 
Mac Cumhal (whom Macpherson stole from the Irish and turned 
into a Scot under the name of Fingal in his Ossian,3180  which is 
entirely based on these Irish songs), about the splendour of the 
old royal palace of Tara, about the heroic feats of King Brian 
Borumha, and the later songs about the struggles of the Irish 
chieftains against the Sassenach (English) were preserved by these 
bards in the living memory of the nation; and they also celebrated 
in song the deeds of contemporary Irish chieftains in their 
struggle for independence. But when the Irish people were utterly 
crushed in the seventeenth century by Elizabeth, James I, Oliver 
Cromwell and William of Orange, b robbed of their land holdings 
in favour of English intruders, outlawed and turned into a nation 
of pariahs, the wandering minstrels were hounded as fiercely as 
the Catholic priests, and towards the beginning of this century 
a [J. Macpherson,] Fingal, an Ancient Epic Poem in Six Books, together with Several 
Other Poems composed by Ossian, the Son of Fingal, translated from the Gaelic Language (in 
The Works of Ossian, 1765).— Ed. 
b William III.— Ed. 

=====第173页=====
Notes for the Preface to a Collection of Irish Songs 141 
they gradually died out. Their names are forgotten, of their verses 
only fragments remain; the most beautiful legacy which they 
bequeathed to their enslaved but undefeated people are their 
melodies. 
Poems in the Irish language are all composed in stanzas of four 
lines.  For this reason, most of the melodies, especially the older 
ones,  are based on this four-line rhythm, although the link is often 
somewhat obscured. This rhythm is often followed by a refrain or 
a coda on the harp. Many of these old melodies are known only by 
their Irish names or opening words, even though in most of 
Ireland Irish is now only understood by old people, or not at all. 
But the greatej- part of the melodies, being more recent, already 
have English names or texts. 
The melancholy that prevails in most of these melodies is even 
today the expression of the national mood. How could it be 
otherwise among a people whose rulers are always inventing new, 
more up-to-date methods of oppression? The latest method, 
introduced forty years ago and carried to extremes for the past 
twenty years, is the mass eviction of the Irish from house and 
home, and that—in Ireland—is tantamount to deportation. Since 
1841 the population of the country has decreased by two and a 
half million, and more than three million Irishmen have emig­
rated. All in the interests and at the behest of the large 
landowners of English origin. If this goes on for another thirty 
years,  the only Irishmen left will be those in America. 
Written on about July 5, 1870 
First published, in Italian, in the journal 
Movimento Operaio, No. 2, Milan, 1955 Printed according to the manu­
script 

=====第174页=====
142 
Karl Marx 
CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATION TO ALL SECTIONS 181 
1) The General Council requests all sections to give their 
delegates formal instructions concerning the advisability of chang­
ing the venue of the General Council for  1870-71. 
2) In the event of agreement on the change, the General 
Council will propose Brussels as the venue for the General Council 
that year. 
Written on July 14, 1870 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Translated from the French 
Moscow, 1960 

=====第175页=====
143 
Karl Marx 
PROGRAMME FOR THE MAINZ CONGRESS 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL 182 
1) On the need to abolish the public debt. Discussion of the 
right to equitable compensation. 
2) Relationship between the political action and the social 
movement of the working class.183 
3) Practical means of converting landed property into social 
property (see Note). 
4) On the conversion of banks of issue into national banks. 
5) Conditions of cooperative production on a national scale. 
6) On the need for the working class to draw up general statistics 
of labour, in conformity with the Geneva Congress resolutions of 
1866. a 
7) Reconsideration by the Congress of the question of the means 
to do away with war. 
Note to Point 3: The Belgian General Council has proposed this 
question: 
"The practical means of forming agricultural sections within the International and 
of establishing solidarity between agricultural proletarians and proletarians of other 
industries." 
a See The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of 
Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869], p. 4.— Ed. 

=====第176页=====
144 Karl Marx 
The General Council of the International Association believes this 
question is contained in Point 3. 
Written on July 14, 1870 
First published as a leaflet, The Fifth 
Annual Congress of the International Work­
ing Men's Association, on July 12, 1870 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Translated from the French 

=====第177页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE HISTORY OF IRELAND] 

=====第178页=====
Written between May and the first half of Printed according to the manu-
July 1870 script 
First published in Marx-Engels Archives, 
Russian edition, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 

=====第179页=====
147 
NATURAL CONDITIONS 
The country whose history is to occupy us is situated in the 
north-western corner of Europe, an island of 1,530 German or 
32,500 English square miles. But between Ireland and the rest of 
Europe another island lies transversally, three times the size, which 
we for brevity's sake usually refer to as England; it completely 
encloses Ireland from the north, east and south-east, only leaving 
it a clear view in the direction of Spain, Western France and 
America. 
The channel between the two islands, 50-70 English miles wide 
at the narrowest points in the south, 13 miles wide at one place in 
the north and 22 miles at another, enabled the Irish Scots in the 
north to emigrate to the neighbouring island and found the 
Kingdom of Scotland even before the 5th century. In the south it 
was too wide for the boats of the Irish and the Britons and even 
posed a serious obstacle to the Romans' flat-bottomed coasting 
vessels. But when the Frisians, Angles and Saxons, and after them 
the Scandinavians, ventured out on to the high seas, out of 
sight of land, in their keeled vessels, this channel was no longer an 
obstacle. Ireland became the object of raids by the Scandinavians 
and easy prey for the English. As soon as the Normans had 
formed a strong, uniform government in England, the influence 
of the larger neighbouring island made itself felt—in those days 
this meant a war of conquest.185 
Then, in the course of the war, there followed a period when 
England attained supremacy at sea, thus ruling out the possibility 
of successful foreign intervention. 
Once the whole of the larger island was finally united in a single 
state,  it was then bound to attempt the complete assimilation of 
Ireland, too. 

=====第180页=====
148 Frederick Engels 
If this assimilation  has  succeeded,  the  whole process belongs  to 
history. History  is its  judge,  but it  could never  be  reversed.  If, 
however, assimilation  has  failed after seven hundred years  of 
struggle;  if instead  all the  intruders  who  swept  in over Ireland  in 
waves,  one  after  the  other, were assimilated  by Ireland;  if,  even  at 
present,  the  Irish  are no  more English,  or "West Britons",  as they 
are called, than  the  Poles  are  West Russians after  a mere century 
of oppression;  if the  struggle  is still not at an end and  there  is no 
prospect  of any end at all  except through  the  extermination  of the 
oppressed  RACE—if  all  this  is so,  then  all the  geographical excuses 
in the  world will  not  suffice  to prove that England's calling  is to 
conquer Ireland. 
In order  to  understand  the  soil conditions  of  present-day 
Ireland,  we  must  go  back  a long way, right back  to the age  when 
the so-called carboniferous system  was  formed.* 
The centre  of Ireland, north  and  south  of the  line from Dublin 
to Galway, forms  a wide plain  at an  average height  of 100-300 feet 
above sea-level. This plain,  the  ground-plan—as  it were—of  all 
Ireland, comprises  the  massive layer  of limestone, which forms  the 
middle stratum of the carboniferous system  (CARBONIFEROUS LIMESTONE) 
and immediately  on top of  which  lie the  coal-bearing strata  (the 
COAI MEASURES  a proper) in England and elsewhere. 
In the  south,  as in the  north, this plain  is surrounded  by a 
mountain chain which mainly follows  the  coastline  and  almost 
exclusively consists  of older rock formations, which have broken 
through  the  limestone: granite, mica-schist, Cambrian, Cambro-
Silurian, Upper Silurian, Devonian  and the  argillaceous schist  and 
sandstone, rich  in copper  and  lead, belonging  to the  bottom layer 
of the  carboniferous system  and  containing,in addition, some gold, 
silver,  tin,  zinc, iron, cobalt, antimony glance,  and  manganese. 
Only  in a few  places  is the  limestone itself high enough  to form 
mountains:  in the  centre  of the  plain,  in Queen's County,186 rising 
to 600  feet,  and in the  west,  on the  southern shore  of Galway  Bay, 
rising  to just over  1,000  feet (Burren Hills). 
* Unless otherwise  stated,  the  geological data given here  are  taken  from: 
J. Beete  Jukes,  The  Student's Manual  of Geology,  New  Edition,  Edinburgh,  1862. 
Jukes  was the  local director  of the  geological survey  of Ireland  and is  therefore  the 
leading authority  on this  topic,  which  he treats  in particular  detail. 
a The  terms  in small caps  are  given  in English  in the  manuscript after their 
German  equivalents.—  Ed 

=====第181页=====
-ÏÇLS ~~~-  >*::ym~jJ^0L-~*/>~ Jt^9v 
-j£. 
^W-y<V *•—*•« V"*  -»••"^-  ye**  C**~*£L  . -*^ 
^ 
'.£- Ä. 
f/^jf&u-:*, ajL^.zZy/rA  j^"P^^^p 
First page of Engels' History of Ireland 

=====第182页=====

=====第183页=====
The History of Ireland 151 
In several places in the southern half of the limestone plain 
there are isolated ranges of 700-1,000 feet [above] sea-level and of 
considerable extent, formed by the coal-bearing strata. They occur 
in synclines in the surface of the limestone, protruding from it as 
plateaus with fairly steep sides. 
"The escarpments in these widely separated tracts of coal-measures are so 
similar, and the beds composing them so precisely alike, that it is impossible to 
suppose otherwise than that they originally formed continuous sheets of rock, 
although they are now separated by sixty or eighty miles.... This belief is strongly 
confirmed by the fact, that there are often, between the two larger areas, several 
little outlying patches in which the coal-measures are found capping the summits of 
small hills [...] and that wherever the undulation of the limestone is such as to b^ing 
its upper beds down beneath the level of the present surface of the ground, we 
invariably find some of the lower beds of the coal-measures coming in upon them" 
(Jukes, p. 286).a 
Yet other factors, which would lead us into too much detail here 
and can be found in Jukes, pp. 286-89, leave no doubt that, as 
Jukes says, the entire central plain of Ireland is a result of 
denudation, so that, the coal-measures and the upper limestone 
deposits having been washed away—an average thickness of at 
least 2,000-3,000 feet, perhaps 5,000-6,000 feet of stone,—it is 
now principally the bottom layers of limestone that have emerged 
on the surface. Even on the highest ridge of the Burren Hills, 
County Clare, which consist of pure limestone and are 1,000 feet 
high, Jukes found (p. 513) yet another small outcrop of the 
coal-measures. 
In fact, in the south of Ireland there are still some fairly 
significant tracts possessing coal-measures; but among them only 
isolated spots contain coal thick enough to make mining worth­
while. Moreover, the coal itself is anthracitic, i.e. it contains little 
hydrogen and cannot be used for all industrial purposes without 
additives. 
In the north of Ireland there are also several not very extensive 
coalfields whose coal is bituminous, i.e. ordinary pit-coal rich in 
hydrogen, and whose stratification does not entirely match that of 
the coal districts further south. It is, however, quite evident that 
the coal-measures were washed away here too: large pieces of coal, 
along with sandstone and blue clay from the same formation, have 
been found on the surface of a limestone valley to the south-east 
of one of these coalfields in the direction of Belturbet and Mohill. 
Large blocks of coal have frequently been found in the course 
of well-sinking in the drift of this area; and, in some cases, the 
a J. Beete Jukes, The Student's Manual of  Geology,  pp. 285-86.— Ed. 

=====第184页=====
152 Frederick Engels 
amounts of coal were so considerable that it was thought that 
deeper excavation would lead to a coal seam (Kane, Industrial 
Resources of  Ireland,  2nd edition, Dublin, 1845, p. 265). 
It can be seen that Ireland's misfortune is ancient indeed: it 
commences immediately after the coal-measures were deposited. A 
country whose coal deposits have been washed away, situated right 
next to a larger country with plenty of coal, was for a long time 
condemned by nature, as it were, to play the part of a farming 
land vis-à-vis the future industrial country. This sentence, pro­
nounced millions of years ago, was not carried out until this 
century. What is more, we shall see later how the English gave 
nature a helping hand by immediately and violently trampling 
underfoot almost any sign of burgeoning industry in Ireland. 
More recent Secondary and Tertiary deposits187 occur almost 
solely in the north-east; among them of chief interest to us are the 
Keuper strata in the Belfast area, which contain more or less pure 
rock-salt to a thickness of up to 200 feet (Jukes, p. 554), and the 
chalk, which covers the whole of County Antrim, the chalk itself 
being overlaid with basalt. Generally speaking, the history of 
Ireland's geological development came to a halt from the end of 
the Carboniferous Period to the Ice Age. 
It is known that after the end of the Tertiary Epoch there was a 
period when the lowlands of the middle latitudes of Europe were 
submerged beneath the sea and when such cold temperatures 
prevailed in Europe that the valleys of the islands of mountain still 
protruding were covered with glaciers right down to the sea. The 
icebergs, which detached themselves from these glaciers, carried 
large and small boulders from the mountains out to sea, until the 
ice melted and the boulders and other debris transported by the 
ice sank to the bottom—a process that still occurs daily along the 
coasts of the polar regions. 
During the Ice Age Ireland, too, with the exception of the 
mountain tops, was submerged beneath the sea. The maximum 
extent of this submergence may not have been the same 
everywhere, but one may assume it to have been, on average, 
about 1,000 feet below the present level; the granite mountains 
to the south of Dublin must have been submerged by over 1,200 
feet. 
If Ireland were to sink only 500 feet, the mountain ranges alone 
would be left, forming two semi-circular groups of islands on 
either side of a broad sound stretching from Dublin to Galway. 
Were the land to sink even lower, these islands would shrink in 
size and in number until, at a drop of 2,000 feet, only the peaks of 

=====第185页=====
The History of Ireland 153 
the outermost mountains would be left sticking up out of the 
water.* 
As this submersion slowly took place, the limestone plain and 
the mountainsides must have been cleared of a great deal of older 
rock that had overlain them; there then followed the deposition of 
the "drift" peculiar to the Ice Age over the entire area that was 
covered by water. The matter produced by the weathering of the 
mountain islands, and the finely ground particles of rock scraped 
out of the valleys by the slowly but powerfully moving glaciers— 
earth, sand, gravel, stones, smoothly polished blocks in the ice 
itself,  sharp-edged ones on its surface—all this was carried out to 
sea by the icebergs as they detached themselves from the shore, 
and eventually sank to the bottom. Depending on the cir­
cumstances, the layer thus formed consists of clay (deriving from 
argillaceous schist), sand (from quartz and granite), limestone 
gravel (from limestone mountains), marl (where finely ground 
limestone was mixed with clay) or of mixtures of all these 
components; in every case, however, it contains a quantity of 
stones, some large, some small, sometimes rounded, sometimes 
jagged, and some the size of those colossal erratic boulders which 
occur even more frequently in Ireland than on the North German 
Plain or between the Alps and the Jura. 
When the land was subsequently raised up out of the sea once 
more, this newly formed surface acquired, more or less, its 
present-day composition. In Ireland little washing-away seems to 
have taken palace in the process; with few exceptions, the drift 
covers all the flat land in a layer of varying thickness, extends to 
the valleys in the mountains and is often found high up on the 
mountainsides, too. The rocks occurring in it are chiefly lime­
stone; for this reason, the entire layer is commonly termed LIMESTONE 
GRAVEL3 here. Numerous large limestone boulders are also scattered 
over all the lowlying land, one or more in almost every field. 
Obviously, near the mountains besides the limestone, the local 
rocks originating there (particularly granite) are also found in 
large quantities. Granite from the northern shore of Galway Bay 
occurs in the plain to the south-east, in large quantities as far as 
the Galton Mountains, and in odd instances as far as Mallow 
(County Cork). 
* Of Ireland's 32,509 English square miles, 13,243 lie between sea-level and 250 
feet; 11,797 are 251-500 feet above sea-level;  5,798  are 501-1,000 feet; 1,589 are 
1,001-2,000  feet; 82 square miles are 2,001 feet or more above sea-level. 
a In the manuscript this term is given in English in brackets after the German 
equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第186页=====
154 Frederick Engels 
The north of the country is covered with drift to the same 
height above sea-level as the central plain; between the various 
more or less parallel chains of mountains traversing it, the south 
displays a similar deposit, deriving from local rocks of chiefly 
Silurian formation, and occurring in large quantities particularly 
in the valley of the Flesk and the Laune near Killarney. 
The traces of the glacier on the mountainsides and the valley, 
floors in Ireland are very common and unmistakable, particularly 
in the south-west. Only in Oberhasli and here and there in 
Sweden do I recall having seen more distinct traces of ice of every 
kind than in Killarney (in the Black Valley and the Gap of 
Dunloe). 
The elevation of the land during or after the Ice Age seems to 
have been so pronounced that Britain was for a while connected 
by dry land not only with the Continent but with Ireland as well. 
At least, this seems to be the only explanation for the similarity of 
the fauna of these countries. Of the extinct large mammals 
Ireland had the mammoth, the Irish giant stag, the cave-bear, a 
species of reindeer, and others in common with the Continent. In 
fact, an elevation of less than 240 feet above the present level 
would be sufficient to join Ireland and Scotland, and one of less 
than 360 feet to join Ireland and Wales with wide ridges of land.* 
The fact that at some time after the Ice Age Ireland occupied a 
higher level than at present is proved by the underwater peat 
bogs with upright treestumps and roots which occur all along the 
coast, and are identical in every respect with the lowest layers 
of the adjoining inland peat bogs. 
Insofar as it is suitable for agriculture, the soil of Ireland is 
accordingly almost entirely composed of "drift" from the Ice Age; 
here,  thanks to its schist and limestone origin, it is an extremely 
fertile light loam, unlike the barren sand with which the Scottish, 
Scandinavian and Finnish granites have covered such a large part 
of North Germany. The diversity of the rocks which have laid 
down their deposits on this soil—and continue to do so— 
provided it with a corresponding diversity of the mineral elements 
* See Map 15a in Stieler's schooJ-atlas,a 1868. This map, as well as No. 15d of 
Ireland in particular, gives a very clear picture of the nature of the terrain. 
a A. Stieler, Hand-Atlas über alle Theile der Erde und über das Weltgebäude, Gotha, 
1864.—  Ed 

=====第187页=====
The History of Ireland 155 
necessary for the vegetation; and if one of these, lime, is often 
absent from the surface soil, there is nevertheless an abundance of 
limestone boulders of different sizes everywhere—quite apart 
from the underlying limestone bed—so that it can easily be added. 
When the well-known English agronomist Arthur Young travel­
led in Ireland in the 1770s he did not know what surprised him 
more, the natural fertility of the soil, or the barbaric treatment 
meted out to it by the farmers. "A light, dry, soft, sandy loam 
soil" prevails wherever the land is any good at all. In the "Golden 
Vale"  of Tipperary and elsewhere, too, he found 
"the same sandy reddish loam I have already described, incomparable land for 
tillage". From there, in the direction of Clonmel, "the whole way, through the 
same rich vein of red sandy loam I have so often mentioned. I examined it in 
several fields, and found it to be of an extraordinary fertility, and as fine turnip 
land as ever I saw". 
Further: 
"The rich land reaches from Charleville, at the foot of the mountains, to 
Tipperary," (the city), "by Kilfennan, a line of twenty-five miles, and across from 
Ardpatrick to within four miles of Limerick—sixteen miles."—"The richest land is 
the Corcasses on the Maag, near Adare, a tract of five miles long, and two broad, 
down to the Shannon... When they break this land up, they sow first oats, and get 
twenty barrels an acre" (14 stone or 196 pounds per barrel), "or forty common 
barrels, and do not reckon that an extra crop; they take ten or twelve in succession 
[...] till the crops grow poor, and then they sow one of horse beans, which refreshes 
the land enough to take ten crops of oats more; the beans are very good.... Were 
such barbarians ever heard of?" 
Further, near Castle Oliver, County Limerick: 
"The finest soil in the country is upon the roots of mountains; it is a rich, 
mellow, crumbling, putrid, sandy loam, eighteen inches to three feet deep; the 
colour a reddish brown. It is dry, sound land, and would do for turnips 
exceedingly well, for carrots, for cabbages; and, in a word, for everything. I think 
upon the whole it is the richest soil I ever saw, arid such as is applicable to every 
purpose you can wish. It will fat the largest bullock, and at the same time do 
equally well for sheep, for tillage, for turnips, for wheat, for beans; and, in a word, 
for every crop [...]. You must examine into the soil before you will believe that a 
country, which has so beggarly an appearance, can be so rich and fertile." 
On the river Blackwater near Mallow 
"there are tracts of flat lands, in some places one quarter of a mile broad; the grass 
everywhere remarkably fine. It- is the finest sandy land I have anywhere seen, of a 
reddish-brown colour; would yield the greatest arable crops in the world, if in 
tillage. It is five feet deep, and [...] burns into good brick; yet it is a perfect sand. 
The banks of this river-^from its source to the sea—are equally remarkable for 
beauty of prospect, and fertility of soil."—"Friable, sandy loams, dry but fertile, are 
very common, and they form the best soils in the kingdom for tillage and sheep. 
Tipperary and Roscommon abound particularly in them. The most fertile of all are 
the bullock pastures of Limerick, and the banks of the Shannon, in Clare, called 

=====第188页=====
156 Frederick Engels 
the Corcasses.... Sand, which is so common in England, and yet more common 
through Spain, France, Germany, and Poland—quite from Gibraltar to Peters­
burg—is nowhere met with in Ireland, except for narrow slips of hillocks upon the 
sea coast. Nor did I «ver meet with or hear of a chalky soil."* 
Young's verdict on the soil of Ireland is summarised in the 
following sentences: 
"If I was to name the characteristics of an excellent soil, I should say that3 upon 
which you may fat an ox, and feed off a crop of turnips. By the way I recollect 
little or no such land in England, yet it is not uncommon in Ireland" (II, p. 271). 
"Natural fertility, acre for acre over the two kingdoms, is certainly in favour of 
Ireland" (II, Part 2, p. 3).—"As far as I can form a general idea of the soil of the 
two kingdoms, Ireland has much the advantage" (II, Part 2, p. 12). 
In 1808-10, Edward Wakefield, another Englishman versed in 
agronomy, travelled around Ireland and presented the results of 
his observations in a most valuable work.** His comments are 
better arranged, more lucid and more complete than those in 
Young's travel book; on the whole, however, they are both 
accurate. 
On the whole, Wakefield finds no great diversity of soil in 
Ireland. Sand only occurs on the shore (it is so rare inland that 
large quantities of sea-sand are transported to the interior in order 
to improve the peat and loam soil), chalky soil is unknown (the 
chalk in Antrim, as mentioned above, is covered by a layer of 
basalt, which after weathering produces an extremely fertile 
surface soil—chalk constitutes the poorest soil in England), 
"and tenacious clays, such as those found in Oxfordshire, in some parts of 
Essex, and throughout High Suffolk, I could never meet with in Ireland".b 
The Irish call any loamy soil CLAY0; there may be proper clay in 
Ireland, too, but in any case not on the surface as in some parts of 
England. There is limestone or calcareous gravel almost 
everywhere, he says. 
"The former is a useful production, and is converted into a source of wealth 
that will always be employed with advantage."d 
Mountains and peat bogs do, of course, reduce the fertile 
surface considerably. In the north, he says, there is little fertile 
* A Tour in Ireland by Arthur Young, 3 vols., London, 177.... The above 
passages are in Vol. II, pp. 28, 135, 143, 154, 165 and Part 2, p. 4.188 
** An Account of  Ireland,  Statistical and Political. By Edward Wakefield. London, 
1812,  2 vols., in 4°.189 
a Author's italics.— Ed. 
b E. Wakefield, An Account of  Ireland...,  Vol. I, Ch. Ill, p. 79.— Ed. 
c Engels gives this English word in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed. 
d Ibid.— Ed. 

=====第189页=====
The History of Ireland 157 
land; yet here, too, there are extremely luxuriant valleys in every 
county, and even in deepest Donegal, at the foot of the wildest 
mountains, Wakefield unexpectedly came across a very fertile 
area. The intensive cultivation of flax in the north is in itself 
sufficient indication of the soil's fertility, since this plant never 
thrives in poor soil. 
"A great portion of the soil of Ireland throws out a luxuriant herbage, 
springing up from a calcareous subsoil, without any considerable depth. I have 
seen bullocks of the weight of 180 stone, rapidly fattening on land incapable of 
receiving the print of a horse's foot, even in the wettest season, and where there 
were not many inches of soil. This is one species of the rich soil of Ireland, and is 
to be found throughout Roscommon, in some parts of Galway, Clare, and other 
districts.  Some places exhibit the richest loam that I ever saw turned up by a 
plough; this is the case throughout Meath in particular. Where such soil occurs, its 
fertility is so conspicuous, that it appears as if nature had determined to counteract 
the bad effects produced by the clumsy system of its cultivators.—On the banks of 
the Fergus and Shannon, the land is of a different kind, but equally productive, 
though the surface presents the appearance of marsh. These districts are called 
'the caucasses'" (thus writes Wakefield, differing with Young); "the substratum is a 
blue silt, deposited by the sea, which seems to partake of the qualities of the upper 
stratum; for this land can be injured by no depth of ploughing.—In the counties 
of Limerick and Tipperary there is another kind of rich land, consisting of a dark, 
friable,  dry, sandy loam which, if preserved in a clean state, would throw out corn 
for several years in succession. It is equally well adapted to grazing and tillage, and 
I will venture to say, seldom experiences a season too wet, or a summer too dry. 
The richness of the land, in some of the vales, may be accounted for by the 
deposition of soil carried thither from the upper grounds by the rain. The subsoil 
is calcareous, so that the very richest manure is thus spread over the land below, 
without subjecting the farmer to any labour" (Vol. I, pp. 79, 80). 
Where there is a thinnish layer of sticky loam immediately on 
top of the limestone, the land is no use for arable farming, 
yielding only miserable crops of corn; but it provides excellent 
sheep-walks, which go on improving it, producing a thick grass 
mixed with plenty of white clover and...a (Vol. I, p. 80). 
Dr. Beaufort*- writes that in the west, particularly in Mayo, 
there are a great many  TURLOUGHS—flat  areas of differing sizes 
which, though not perceptibly fed by any streams or rivers, are 
covered with water in winter which drains away in summer 
through underground fissures in the limestone, leaving behind a 
firm, fertile grazing land. 
"Independently of the caucasses," continues Wakefield, "the richest soil in 
Ireland is to be found in the counties of Tipperary, Limerick, Roscommon, 
Longford, and Meath. In Longford there is a farm called Granard Kill, which 
* Beaufort, Revd. Dr., Memoir of a Map of Ireland, 1792, pp. 75, 76. Quoted in 
Wakefield, Vol. I, p. 36. 
a Omission in the manuscript. Wakefield has: "...and wild burnet".— Ed 

=====第190页=====
158 Frederick Engels 
produced eight crops of potatoes without manure. Some parts of the County of 
Cork are uncommonly fertile, and upon the whole, Ireland may be considered as 
affording land of an excellent quality, though I am by no means prepared to go 
the length of many writers, who assert, that it is decidedly acre for acre richer than 
England" (Vol. I, Lpp. 80-81]). 
The last remark, which is aimed at Young, stems from a 
misunderstanding of the statement by Young quoted above.3 
Young does not say that Ireland's soil is more productive than 
England's, taking them both in their present state of cultivation, 
which is naturally much higher in England; Young simply says 
that the natural fertility of the soil in Ireland is greater than in 
England, and Wakefield does not directly dispute this. 
A Scottish agronomist, Mr.  Caird,  was sent to Ireland in 1849, 
after the last famine,b by Sirc Robert Peel to report on means of 
improving the agriculture there. In his report, published soon 
afterwards, on the West of Ireland, the worst hit part of the 
country except for the extreme north-west, he says: 
"I was much surprised to find so great an extent of fine fertile land. The 
interior of the country is very level, and its general character stony and dry; the 
soil dry and friable. The humidity of the climate causes a very constant vegetation, 
which has both advantages and disadvantages. It is favourable for grass and green 
crops,*  but renders it necessary to employ very vigorous and persevering efforts to 
extirpate weeds. The abundance of lime everywhere, both in the rock  itself,  and as 
sand and gravel beneath the surface, are of the greatest value." 
Caird also confirms that the whole of County Westmeath 
consists of the finest pasture land. Of the region north of Lough 
Corrib (County Mayo) he writes: 
"The greater part of this farm" (a farm of 500 acres) "is the finest feeding land 
for sheep and cattle—dry, friable, undulating land, all on limestone. The fields of 
rich old grass are superior to anything we have, except in small patches, in any part 
of Scotland I at present remember. The best of it is too good for tillage, but about 
one half of it might be profitably brought under the plough... The rapidity with 
which the land on this limestone subsoil recovers  itself,  and, without any seeds 
being sown, reverts to good pasture, is very remarkable."** 
* "GREEN CROPS"  d include all cultivated fodder crops, root vegetables of all 
kinds and potatoes; everything but corn, grass and garden produce. 
** Caird, The Plantation Scheme, or the West of Ireland as a field for investment, 
Edinburgh, 1850. The above passages are on pp. 6, 17-18, 121. In  1850-51,  Mr. 
Caird wrote travel reports for The Times on the condition of agriculture in the 
main counties of England. 
a See this volume, pp. 156.— Ed. 
b That of 1846-47.— Ed. 
c At this point in the manuscript the word "Ministry" appears above the word 
"Sir".— Ed. 
d Engels gives these English words in brackets after the German equiva­
lent.— Ed. 

=====第191页=====
The History of Ireland 159 
Finally let us hear what a French authority says*: 
"Of the two divisions of Ireland, that of the north-west, embracing a fourth of 
the island, and comprehending the province of Connaught, with the adjacent 
counties of Donegal, Clare and Kerry, resembles Wales, and even, in its worst 
parts,  the Highlands of Scotland. Here again are two millions of unsightly hectares, 
the frightful aspect of which has given rise to the national proverb, 'Go to the devil 
or Connaught'**. The other, or south-east and much larger division, since it [...] 
includes the provinces of Leinster, Ulster and Munster, equal to about six millions of 
hectares, is at least equal in natural fertility to England proper. It is not 
all, however, equally good; the amount of humidity there is still greater than in 
England. Extensive bogs cover about a tenth of the surface; more than another 
tenth is occupied with mountains and lakes. In fact, five only out of eight millions 
of hectares in Ireland are cultivated" (pp. 9, 10).—"Even the English admit that 
Ireland, in point of soil, is superior to England. [...] Ireland contains eight millions 
of hectares. Rocks, lakes, and bogs occupy about two millions of these, and two 
millions more are indifferent land. The remainder—that is to say about half the 
country—is rich land, with calcareous subsoil. What better could be conceived?" 
(p. 343). 
It is evident that all the authorities are agreed that the soil of 
Ireland contains all the elements of fertility to an unusual degree, 
with regard to both its chemical constituents and its physical 
composition. The extremes—sticky, impenetrable clay, which 
allows no water through, and loose sand, which does not retain it 
for an hour—are nowhere to be found. Yet Ireland has another 
disadvantage. While the mountains are mainly along the coast, the 
watersheds between the different river basins in the interior of the 
country are mostly very low-lying. The rivers are not able to drain 
off all the rainwater into the sea, and this gives rise to extensive 
peat bogs in the interior, particularly on the watersheds. In the 
plain alone  1,576,000  acres are covered by peat bogs. These are 
mostly depressions or hollows in the terrain, largely former 
shallow lake basins, which have gradually become overgrown with 
moss and bog plants and filled up with their decayed remains. 
Like our North German bogs they are no use except for 
peat-cutting. With the present system of agriculture their edges 
can only slowly be brought under cultivation. The floor of these 
former lake basins consists of marl everywhere which derives its 
limestone content (ranging from 5 to 90%) from the shells of the 
freshwater mussels in the lake. Thus, each one of these peat bogs 
contains within itself the material for its own reclamation and 
cultivation. In addition, most of them are rich in iron stone. Apart 
* Léonce de Lavergne, Rural Economy of England, Scotland and  Ireland. 
Translated from the French. Edinburgh, 1855. 
** As we shall see, this proverb owes its origin not to the dark mountains 
of Connaught but to the darkest period in the entire history of Ireland.190 
7-733 

=====第192页=====
160 Frederick Engels 
from these lowland bogs there are another  1,254,000  acres of 
mountain bogs, a result of deforestation in a damp climate and 
one of the peculiar beauties of the British Isles. Wherever flat or 
gently domed peaks were deforested—which occurred on a mass 
scale in the 17th and first half of the 18th centuries to keep the 
ironworks supplied with charcoal — the effects of the rain and mist 
encouraged the formation of a layer of peat, which later continued 
down the slopes where conditions were favourable. The entire 
ridge of mountains which bisects Northern England from north 
to south as far as Derby is covered by such moors; and where 
large clusters of mountains are shown on the map of Ireland there 
are also mountain bogs in abundance. The peat bogs of Ireland are 
not, however, by any means irrevocably lost to agriculture; rather, in 
due course we shall see what rich fruits some of them are capable of 
yielding with the appropriate treatment, not to mention the 2 million 
hectares ( =  5 million acres) contemptuously referred toby Lavergne 
as "indifferent land". 
The climate of Ireland is determined by its position. The Gulf 
Stream and the prevailing south-west winds bring it warmth, 
making for mild winters and cool summers. In the south-west, 
summer lasts far into October, which, according to Wakefield 
(Vol. I, p. 221), is here considered the favourite month for 
sea-bathing. Frost is rare and does not last long; snow hardly ever 
lies on the ground for long on the plain. Around the bays of 
Kerry and Cork, which face south-west and are sheltered from the 
north, spring weather prevails all winter long; there, as in some 
other places, myrtle thrives in the open (Wakefield cites an 
example of a country estate with myrtle trees 16 feet high, the 
twigs of which were used to make stable brooms, Vol. I, p. 55), 
and laurel, arbutus and other evergreen plants grow into tall trees. 
Even in Wakefield's day the farmers in the south left their 
potatoes out all winter, without any being damaged by frost since 
1740.  On the other hand, Ireland does bear the brunt of the first 
heavy downpour from the heavy Atlantic rain clouds. The average 
rainfall in Ireland is at least 35 inches, considerably more than the 
average for England, but certainly less than that for Lancashire 
and Cheshire, and scarcely more than the average for the whole of 
the West of England. Nevertheless, the Irish climate is decidedly 
more pleasant than the English. The leaden skies which so often 
drip away unceasingly for days on end in England, are mainly 

=====第193页=====
The History of Ireland 161 
replaced by continental April skies there; the fresh sea breezes 
bring the clouds swiftly out of the blue but drive them away again 
just as swiftly, unless they promptly fall to earth in a sudden 
shower. And even rain that continues for days, such as occurs in 
late autumn, does not have the chronic air of English rain. The 
weather, like the inhabitants, has a more acute character, it moves 
in sharper, more sudden contrasts; the sky is like an Irish woman's 
face,  rain and sunshine follow on each other suddenly and 
unexpectedly, but there is no room for the grey English boredom. 
The oldest report on the Irish climate is provided by the Roman 
Pomponius Mela (De situ orbis) in the first century A. D. It says: 
"Beyond Britain lies Hibernia, almost equal to it in extent but otherwise similar; 
of a rather long shape, with skies adverse to the ripening  seed;  but abounding in grass 
not only luxuriant but also sweet, so that a small part of the day suffices for the cattle 
to eat their fill, and if they are not removed from the pasture they will go on 
grazing until they burst." 
"Coeli ad maturanda semina iniqui, verum adeo luxuriosa herbis, nan 
laetis modo, sed etiam dulcibus!" Translated into modern English 
this passage may be found with others in a work by Mr. Goldwin 
Smith,  sometime Professor of History at Oxford and now at 
Cornell University in America. He tells us that it is difficult to reap a 
wheat harvest in a large part of Ireland, and continues: 
"Its'1  natural way to commercial prosperity seems to be to supply with the 
produce of its grazing and dairy farms the population of England." * 
From Mela to Goldwin Smith and up to the present day how 
often the assertion has been made—particularly since 1846 191 by 
the noisy chorus of Irish landowners — that Ireland has been 
condemned by its climate not to supply the Irish with bread but to 
supply the English with meat and butter, and that consequently it 
is the vocation of the Irish people to be shipped over the ocean in 
order to make way for cows and sheep in Ireland! 
It is clear that to establish the facts with regard to the Irish 
climate is to solve a political issue of great topicality. To be sure, 
the climate only concerns us here insofar as it is of importance for 
agriculture. The observations of natural scientists who have 
measured the rainfall are, given the present inadequate state of 
* Goldwin Smith, Irish History and Irish Character, Oxford and London, 1861 
[p. 3J.—-We know not what to admire more in this work, which sets out to justify 
English policy in Ireland under a mask of "objectivity", the ignorance of the 
professor of history or the hypocrisy of the liberal bourgeois. We shall meet with 
both again.1' 
11 Engels has "Ireland's".— Ed. 
h Cf. this volume, p.  283.—  Ed. 
7* 

=====第194页=====
162 Frederick Engels 
such observations, only of secondary value for our purposes; it is 
not so much a matter of how much rain falls, but far more how and 
when it falls. The judgments of the agronomists are the ones that 
carry the most weight here. 
Arthur Young considers Ireland to be decidedly damper than 
England; hence the astonishing ability of the soil to produce grass. 
He speaks of cases where turnip and stubble fields, left 
unploughed, have yielded a plentiful hay harvest the following 
summer, something which is unknown in England. Further, he 
mentions that Irish wheat is much lighter than that of drier 
countries; the fields are full of grass and weeds even with the best 
management, and harvests are so wet and difficult to gather that 
the yield suffers greatly thereby (Young, Tour, Vol. II, p. 100). 
At the same time, however, he draws attention to the fact that 
the soil of Ireland counteracts the wetness of the climate. The soil 
is stony everywhere and thus lets the water through more easily. 
"Harsh, tenacious, stony, strong  LOAMS,  difficult to work,- are not uncommon in 
Ireland, but they are quite different from English  CLAYS.  If as much rain fell upon 
the clays of England (a soil very rarely met with in Ireland, and never without 
much stone) as falls upon the rocks of her sister island, those lands could not be 
cultivated. But the rocks here are clothed with verdure; those of limestone, with 
only a thin covering of mould, have the softest and most beautiful turf imaginable" 
(Vol. II, Part 2, pp. 3, 4). 
The limestone is, as is well known, full of cracks and fissures 
which allow superfluous water to pass through rapidly. 
Wakefield devotes a highly detailed chapter to the climate,3 
gathering together all earlier observations up to his own time. 
Dr. Boate (Natural History of  Ireland,  1645)I92 describes the winters as 
mild, 3-4 frosts per year, seldom lasting more than 2-3 days; the 
Liffey in Dublin scarcely freezing over once in 10-12 years. March is 
usually dry and fair, but this is followed by a lot of rain; there are 
rarely 2-3 consecutive days in summer that are completely dry; in 
late autumn the weather is fine again. Very dry summers are rare; 
scarcities are never due to drought but mostly caused by the wet. On 
the plains there is little snow, so that the cattle could stay outside all 
year round. Occasionally, though, there are snowy years, such as 
1635, when people were hard put to find shelter for their cattle 
(Wakefield, Vol. I, p. 216 ff.). 
At the beginning of the last century Dr. Rutty (Natural History of 
the County of Dublin)h started exact meteorological observations, 
a E. Wakefield, An Account of  Ireland...,  Vol. I, Chapter VI ("Climate").— Ed. 
b J. Rutty, An Essay towards a Natural History of the County of Dublin, Dublin, 
1772.—  Ed. 

=====第195页=====
The History of Ireland 163 
which covered fifty years, from 1716-1765. Over this period the 
ratio of south and west winds to north and east winds was 73:37 
(10,878 south and west against 6,329 north and east). The 
prevailing winds were westerly and south-westerly, followed by 
north-westerly and south-easterly; the least frequent being north­
easterly and easterly. In summer, autumn and winter westerly and 
south-westerly winds prevail; easterly winds are most common in 
the spring and summer, when they are twice as frequent as in 
autumn and winter; north-easterly winds occur chiefly in the 
spring, and are also twice as frequent then as in autumn and 
winter. As a result, temperatures are more even, the winters 
milder, the summers cooler than in London, though the air is 
more humid. Even in the summer, salt, sugar, flour, etc., absorb 
moisture from the air, and the corn has to be kiln-dried, which 
does not occur in some parts of England (Wakefield, Vol. I, 
pp. 172-81). 
At that time, Rutty was only able to compare the Irish climate 
with that of London, which, like the climate of the whole of 
Eastern England, is certainly drier. But if he had had access to 
material on the West and particularly the North-West of England, 
he would have found that his description of the Irish climate—the 
distribution of the winds over the year, the wet summers, in which 
sugar, salt, etc., spoil in unheated rooms—is entirely applicable to 
this area, except that the latter is colder in winter. 
Rutty also kept lists of the meteorological character of the 
seasons.3 In the 50 years mentioned there were 16 cold, late or too 
dry springs; slightly more than in London. Further, 22 hot and 
dry, 24 wet, 4 changeable summers; somewhat damper than in 
London, where the number of dry or wet summers was the same; 
further, 16 fine, 12 wet and 22 changeable autumns, again 
somewhat wetter and more changeable than in London; and 13 
frosty, 14 wet and 23 mild winters, which is considerably wetter 
and milder than in London. 
According to rain measurements made in the Botanical Gardens 
in Dublin during the ten year period'  1802-11,  the total monthly 
precipitation, in inches, was as follows: December,  27.31;  July, 
24.15;  November, 23.49; August, 22.47; September, 22.27; 
January, 21.67; October, 20.12; May, 19.50; March, 14.69; April, 
13.54;  February, 12.32; June, 12.07; average per year, 23.36 
(Wakefield, Vol. I, p. 191). These ten years were unusually dry; 
Kane (Industrial Resources, p. 73) gives the average for 6 years in 
;> J. Rutty, An Essay..., Vol. II, p.  471.—  Ed. 

=====第196页=====
164 Frederick Engels 
Dublin as 30.87 inches, and Syrnons (English Rain Fall)* a figure of 
29.79 inches for 1860-62. But how little such measurements mean 
with the quickly passing, purely local showers of Ireland, unless 
they cover a long series of years and are undertaken at a large 
number of stations, is proved among other things by the fact that 
three stations in Dublin itself recorded for the rainfall in 1862: 
one 24.63,  the second 28.04, and the third 30.18 inches. 
According to Symons, the average precipitation of twelve stations 
in all parts of Ireland (varying from 25.45 to 51.44 inches) 
amounted to just under 39 inches for the years 1860-62. 
In his book on the climate of Ireland Dr.  Patterson  says: 
"The frequency of our showers, and not the amount of rainfall  itself,  has 
caused the popular notion about the wetness of our climate.... Sometimes, the 
spring sowing is a little delayed because of wet weather, but our springs are so 
frequently cold and late that early sowing is not always advisable. If frequent 
summer and autumn showers make our hay and corn harvests risky, then vigilance 
and diligence would be just as successful in such exigencies as they are for the 
English in their  'CATCHING' HARVESTSb,  and improved cultivation would ensure that 
the seed-corn would aid the peasants' efforts."* 
In Londonderry the number of rain-free days varied from 113 
to 148 over the 10 years 1791-1802, averaging over 126. Belfast 
showed the same average. In Dublin, the figure varied from 168 
to 205, averaging 179 (Patterson, ibid.). 
According to Wakefield's report, harvests in Ireland occur as 
follows: wheat mostly in September, more rarely in August, 
seldom in October; barley usually somewhat later than wheat, and 
oats about a week later than barley, thus fairly frequently in 
October. After lengthy researches, Wakefield comes to the 
conclusion that the material for a scientific description of the Irish 
climate was far from sufficient, and nowhere expresses the opinion 
that there are any serious obstacles to corn production. Rather, he 
finds,  as we shall see, that the losses suffered during wet 
harvest-times are due to entirely different factors, and says 
explicitly: 
"The soil of Ireland is so fertile, and the climate so favourable, that under a 
proper system of agriculture, the island will produce not only a sufficiency of corn 
for its own use, but a superabundance which may be ready at all times to relieve 
England when she may stand in need of assistance" (Vol. II, p. 61). 
* Dr. W. Patterson, An Essay on the Climate of  Ireland,  Dublin, 1804, p. 164. 
11 G. }. Symons, British Rainfall over the British Isles, London, Stanford, 
1862.—Ed 
b Engels gives the English words "catching harvests" in brackets after their 
German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第197页=====
The History of Ireland 165 
At that time, 1812, England was, of course, at war with everyone 
in Europe and America,195 and the import of corn was rendered 
much more difficult; the need for corn was paramount. Nowadays 
America, Romania, Russia and Germany supply enough corn, and 
it is cheap meat that is now in demand. And so the Irish climate is 
no longer suitable for arable farming. 
Corn has been grown in Ireland since ancient times. In the 
oldest Irish laws, written down long before the arrival of the 
English, the "sack of wheat" is already a fixed measure of value; 
in the tributes of subjects to tribal chiefs and other chieftains 
wheat, barley malt and oatmeal occur almost regularly in 
particular stipulated quantities.* After the English invasion the 
growing of corn decreased during the continuing struggles, 
though without ever ceasing entirely. From 1660 to 1725 it 
increased again, then falling off once more until about 1780; from 
1780-1846 more corn was again sown, although the main crop was 
potatoes, and since 1846 both corn and potatoes have been 
steadily losing ground to cattle grazing. If the climate is not suited 
to the growing of corn, would it have persisted for more than a 
thousand years? 
Admittedly there are parts of Ireland which are less suitable for 
growing wheat on account of the more frequent rains always 
found near the mountains—especially in the south and west. As 
well as good years, these areas often experience series of wet 
summers, as in 1860-1862, which inflict great harm on the wheat. 
But wheat is not Ireland's main cereal crop, and Wakefield even 
complains that too little of it is grown owing to lack of 
markets—there was no other market but the nearest mill. 
Similarly, barley was grown almost solely for the illicit stills 
(evading taxation). The main cereal in Ireland was and is oats. In 
1810, at least ten times as much oats was grown as all the oilier 
cereal crops put together; and as the oats harvest is later than that 
of wheat and barley, it occurs more often in late September and in 
October, when the weather is generally fine, especially in the 
south. And anyway oats can tolerate a good deal of rain. 
We have already seen above that, with regard to the amount 
* Ancient Laws and Institutes of Ireland—Senchus Mor, ï VOLS., DUBLIN, PRINTED FOR 
HER MAJESTY'S STATIONARY OFFICE, AND PUBLISHED BY ALEXANDER THOM  (London, 
Longmans) 1865 and 1869. 194 See Vol. II, pp.  239-51.  The value of a sack of wheat 
was one screpall (denarius) of 20-24 grains of silver. The value of the srrepall has been 
established by Dr. Pétrie, in The Ecclesiastical Architecture of  Ireland,  anterior to the 
Anglo-Norman Invasion, Dublin, 1845, 4°, pp. 212-19. 

=====第198页=====
166 Frederick Engels 
and distribution of rainfall over the seasons, the climate of Ireland 
corresponds almost exactly to that of north-west England. The 
rainfall in the mountains of Cumberland, Westmoreland and 
North Lancashire is far higher than in any Irish station known to 
me (in Coniston  96.03,  in Windermere 75.02 inches, average from 
1860 to 1862), and yet hay is made there and oats are grown. In 
the same years, the rainfall in South Lancashire varied from 25.11 
in Liverpool to 59.13 in Bolton, the average of all the observations 
being approximately 40 inches; in Cheshire it varied from 33.02 to 
43.40,  the average being about 37 inches. In Ireland, as we have 
seen, it was not quite 39 inches in the same years. (All figures 
from Symons.) In both counties, cereals of all kinds, particularly 
wheat, are grown; Cheshire, it is true, was principally engaged in 
cattle-breeding and dairy farming until the last outbreak of cattle 
plague, but since most of the livestock died off, the climate has 
suddenly proved to be excellent for wheat. If the cattle plague had 
reached Ireland and caused such terrible devastation there as it 
did in Cheshire, instead of hearing about Ireland's natural calling 
as cattle pasture we should now have to listen to the passage from 
Wakefield where he predicts that Ireland is destined to be 
England's granary. 
Looking at the matter impartially, undeterred by the interested 
outcry of the Irish landowners and the English bourgeoisie, we 
find that Ireland has areas which are more suited in their soil and 
climate to cattle-breeding, others more suited to arable farming, 
and yet others, the vast majority, which are equally suited to both, 
as is the tcase everywhere. Compared with England, Ireland is on 
the whole better for cattle-breeding; but compared with France, 
England itself is better for cattle-breeding. Does it follow that the 
whole of England should be turned into cattle pastures, that the 
entire farming population—with the exception of a few 
shepherds—should be sent to the factory towns or to America, in 
order to make room for cattle that is bound for France to pay for 
silks and wines? But that is exactly what the Irish landowners, 
wishing to raise their ground-rents, and the English bourgeoisie, 
wishing to depress wages, are demanding for Ireland; Goldwin 
Smith has said it plainly enough. And yet the social revolution 
entailed by such a transformation from arable land to pasturage 
would be far more violent in Ireland than in England. In England, 
where large-scale farming predominates and the farmhands have 
already been largely supplanted by machinery, it would mean 
uprooting a million at most; whereas in Ireland, where small-scale 
farming and even spade-farming predominate, it would mean 

=====第199页=====
The History of Ireland 167 
uprooting four million people, the extermination of the Irish 
people. 
It is evident that even facts of nature become national issues of 
contention between England and Ireland. But it is also evident 
that the public opinion of the ruling class in England—and this 
alone makes itself heard on the Continent—changes according to 
fashion and its own interests. Today England needs corn quickly 
and surely—and Ireland is just made for growing wheat; 
tomorrow England needs meat—Ireland is no good for anything 
but cattle pasture. The five million Irishmen are by their mere 
existence a slap in the face of all the laws of political economy. 
They must go, let them end up where they will! 

=====第200页=====
168 
OLD IRELAND 
The classical Greek and Ron-an authors and the fathers of the 
Church give very little information about Ireland. 
However, there exists a native literature that is still comparative­
ly rich despite the loss of many Irish writings in the wars of the 
16th and 17th centuries. It consists of poems, grammars, 
glossaries, annals and other historical writings and law-books. With 
very few exceptions, however, this entire literature, covering the 
period at least from the 8th to the 17th centuries, exists in 
manuscript only. As far as the Irish language is concerned, 
printing has only been in existence for a few years, that is, only 
since the language began to die out. Thus, only a tiny part of this 
rich material is accessible. 
Of the annals the most important are those by Abbot Tigernach 
(died 1088), those of Ulster, and particularly those of the Four 
Masters. The latter were compiled in 1632-36 under the supervi­
sion of Michael O'Clery, a Franciscan monk, with the help of three 
other Seanchaidhes (students of antiquity), in the monastery of 
Donegal from materials which have nearly all been lost now. They 
were published from the extant original manuscript from Donegal 
in a critical edition with English translation by O'Donovan in 
1856.*  The earlier editions by Dr. Charles O'Conor (the first part 
of the Four Masters, the Annals of Ulster, etc.) are unreliable in text 
and translation.1917 
Most of these annals begin with the mythical prehistory of 
Ireland, taking as their basis the old folk legends, which were spun 
out interminably by the bards of the 9th and 10th centuries and 
* Annala Rioghachta Eireann. Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters. 
EDITED, WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION, BY DR. JOHN O'DONOVAN. 2ND EDIT.,  Dublin, 
1856,  7 vols, in 4°. 

=====第201页=====
The History  of Ireland 169 
then put  into proper chronological order  by monastic chroniclers. 
Thus,  the  Annals  of the Four Masters begin  in the year  of the world 
2242,  when Ceasair,  a granddaughter  of Noah, landed  in Ireland 
40 days before  the  flood; other annals trace  the  forebears  of the 
Scots,  the  last immigrants  to arrive  in Ireland,  in a  direct line back 
to Japhet  and  relate them  to  Moses,  the  Egyptians  and the 
Phoenicians, just  as our  mediaeval chroniclers traced  the  forebears 
of German tribes back  to Troy, Aeneas,  and  Alexander  the  Great. 
The Four Masters devote only  a couple  of pages  to these  old  fables 
(in which  the  only valuable element,  the  genuine  old  folk legend, 
cannot  be distinguished  to this day);  the  Annals  of Ulster omit  it 
completely; even Tigernach states with  a critical audacity extraor­
dinary  for  his day  that all the  monuments  of the Scots before King 
Cimbaoth (supposedly  300  B.C.)  are  uncertain.  But  when  a new 
national life  was  awakened  in Ireland  at the end of the  last 
century,  and  with  it fresh interest  in Irish literature  and  history, 
these monastic fables were considered  to be the  most important 
parts.  With truly Celtic enthusiasm,  and  specifically Irish naivety, 
belief  in these tales  was  declared  to be an  essential ingredient  of 
national patriotism; this  did, of  course, give  the  super-clever 
English scholars—whose  own  achievements  in philological  and 
historical criticism  are  justifiably famous  in the  rest  of the 
world — the desired pretext  for  rejecting everything Irish  as sheer 
nonsense.* 
Since  the  thirties  of the  present century, however,  a far  more 
critical spirit  has  come over Ireland, particularly through Pétrie 
and O'Donovan.  The  above-mentioned studies  by  Pétrie a prove 
that there  is complete agreement between  the  oldest preserved 
inscriptions from  the 6th and 7th  centuries  and the  annals,  and 
* One of the  most naive products  of that time  is The  Chronicles  of Eri,  being  the 
History  of the Gaal Sciot Iber,  or the  Irish People, translated from the original manuscripts 
in the  Phoenician dialect  of the Scythian language  by O'Connor, London,  1822,  2 vols. 
The Phoenician dialect  of the  Scythian language  is, of  course, Celtic Irish,  and the 
original manuscript  is just any  verse chronicle.  The  publisher  is Arthur O'Connor, 
an exile  of 1798,196  uncle  of the  subsequent leader  of the  English Chartists, 
Feargus O'Connor,  an  alleged descendant  of the old  O'Connors, kings  of 
Connaught,  and,  to a  certain extent, pretender  to the  Irish throne. Before  the  title 
there  is a  portrait  of him, a  handsome, jovial, Irish face, with  a striking 
resemblance  to his  nephew Feargus, grasping  a crown  in his  right hand. 
Underneath  it says:  "O'CONNOR—CEAR-RIGE, HEAD  OF HIS  RACE,  AND  O'CONNOR, CHIEF 
OF THE  PROSTRATE PEOPLE  OF HIS  NATION:  'Soumis,  pas  vaincus [Subjected  but 
undefeated]'." 
:1 G. Pétrie,  The Ecclesiastical Architecture  of Ireland,  anterior  to the Anglo-Norman 
Invasion, Dublin, 1845.— Ed. 

=====第202页=====
170 Frederick Engels 
O'Donovana is of the opinion that these begin to report historical 
facts as early as the 2nd and 3rd centuries A.D. For us it is fairly 
immaterial whether the credibility of the annals commences a few 
hundred years earlier or later, for they are, as far as that period is 
concerned, unfortunately, almost entirely useless for our purpose. 
They contain short, dry notices of deaths, accessions to the throne, 
wars,  battles, earthquakes, plagues and Scandinavian raids, but 
little that has any bearing on the social life of the people. If the 
entire legal literature of Ireland was published, they would assume 
quite a different significance; many dry notices would acquire new 
life through explicatory passages in the law-books. 
These law-books, which are very numerous, are nearly all 
awaiting the moment when they will see the light of day. In 1852, 
on the insistence of Irish students of antiquity, the English 
Government approved the appointment of a commission for 
publishing the old laws and institutions of Ireland. But how? The 
commission consisted of three lords (who are never far away when 
there is public money to be expended), three lawyers of the highest 
rank, three Protestant clergymen, Dr. Pétrie, and an officer who is 
Head of the Irish Survey. Of all these gentlemen only Dr. Pétrie and 
two of the clergymen, Dr. Graves (now Protestant Bishop of 
Limerick) and Dr. Todd, could claim to understand anything of the 
commission's task; of these, Pétrie and Todd have since died. The 
commission was given the duty of arranging the copying, translation 
and publication of the old Irish manuscripts of a legal content and 
were authorised to employ the necessary people for the job. They 
employed the two best men available: Dr. O'Donovan and Professor 
O'Curry, who copied a good many manuscripts and made a rough 
translation; but before anything was ready for publication, both 
died. Their successors, Dr. Hancock and Professor O'Mahony, then 
took up the work. So far, the two volumes already mentioned, 
containing the Senchus Mor, have come out. The publishers admit 
that only two of the members of the commission, Graves and Todd, 
have taken part in the work, by making some notes in the proofs. 
The officer, Sir Th. Larcom, put the original maps of the survey of 
Ireland at the disposal of the publishers for the verification of place 
names; Dr. Pétrie soon died, and the other gentlemen 
restricted their activities to conscientiously drawing their salaries 
for 18 years. 
This is the way public duties are carried out in England, and 
a J. O'Donovan, Annala Rioghachta Eireann. Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the 
Four Masters, from the earliest period to the year 1616, Dublin, 1856.— Ed. 

=====第203页=====
The History of Ireland 171 
even more so in Ireland under English rule. Without jobbery,* 
nothing works. No public interests may be satisfied without a tidy 
sum of money or some fat sinecures for lords or government 
protégés coming out of it. With the money which this utterly 
superfluous commission has swallowed up, we in Germany would 
have printed the complete unprinted historical literature—and 
even better. 
The Senchus Mor is to the present day our main source on 
conditions in old Ireland. It is a collection of ancient legal 
regulations which, according to the introduction (added later),3 
was compiled at the behest of St. Patrick and on his advice 
brought into harmony with Christianity, which was rapidly 
spreading in Ireland. The High King of Ireland, Laeghaire 
(428-458,  according to the Annals of the Four Masters); the 
Vice-Kings Core of Munster and Daire, probably a prince of 
Ulster; further, three bishops: St. Patrick, St. Benignus and 
St. Cairnech; and finally three law scholars, Dubthach, Fergus and 
Rossa; these are the men who are said to have composed the 
"commission" that compiled the book, and no doubt they worked 
harder for the money than the present commission, which only 
had to publish the work. The Four Masters gives the year of 
composition as 438. 
The text itself is obviously based on ancient pagan material. The 
oldest legal formulae contained in it are all composed in verse, 
with a fixed metre and what is known as consonance, a kind of 
alliteration, or rather consonantal assonance, which is peculiar to 
Irish poetry and often leads into rhyme proper. Since it has been 
established that the old Irish law-books were translated in the 14th 
century from the so-called Fenian dialect (Bérla Feini), the 
language of the 5th century, into the Irish current at the time 
(Introduction [Vol. I], p. XXXVI et passim), it is understandable 
that in Senchus Mor as well the metre has been obliterated to a 
certain extent in many places; but it does emerge often enough, 
along with occasional rhymes and strongly "consonant" passages, 
in order to lend the text a certain rhythmic fall. It is generally 
enough simply to read the translation in order to uncover the 
* JOBBERY  is the name given in England to the practice of exploiting 
government offices to one's own personal advantage, or to that of one's relations 
and friends; also using public money for indirect bribery to further the ends of a 
party. The individual act is called a JOB. The English colony in Ireland is the main 
hotbed of jobbery. 
a Ancient Laws of  Ireland,  Vol. I, London, 1865 (Introduction to Senchus 
Mor).—  Ed. 

=====第204页=====
172 Frederick Engels 
verse formulae. In between, however, there are numerous 
passages of undoubted prose, particularly in the second  half;  while 
the verse formulae are certainly very ancient and have been 
handed down in the traditional way, these prose insertions seem to 
originate from the compilers of the book. The Senchus Mor is, by 
the way, quoted several times in the glossary compiled in the 9th 
or 10th century and ascribed to Cormac, the King and Bishop of 
Cashel, and was undoubtedly written down long before the 
English invasion. 
All the manuscripts (the oldest seem to date from the beginning 
of the 14th century or earlier) contain a number of mostly 
consistent glosses and longer commenting notes on the text. The 
glosses are wholly in the spirit of the old glossaries, with word-play 
deputising for etymology and the explanation of words. The notes 
are of very different value, often badly distorted and many of 
them incomprehensible, at least without some knowledge of the 
other law-books. The age of both is uncertain; but the greater part 
is probably younger than the English invasion. Since, for all that, 
they only show very few traces of any developments in law beyond 
the scope of the text, and even then only in the more precise 
establishment of detail, the larger, purely explicatory part can 
safely be used, with discretion, as a source for the older period, 
too. 
The Senchus Mor contains: (1) the law of distraint, i.e. just about 
the whole legal procedure; (2) the law on hostages, which were 
handed over by people of different territories during disputes; 
(3) the law concerning Saerrath and Daerrath (see below)197; and 
(4) family law. From this book we derive a good deal of useful 
information on the social life of the age; but as long as many 
expressions remain unexplained and the other manuscripts are 
• ot published, there is much that is still obscure. 
Apart from the literature, the architectural monuments, 
churches, round towers, fortifications and inscriptions give us an 
idea of the condition of the people before the English arrived. 
Of the foreign sources, we need only mention a few passages on 
Ireland in the Scandinavian sagas and the life of St.Malachias by 
St. Bernard,3 which do not have much to offer; we then come 
straightway to the first Englishman to have written about Ireland 
from first-hand knowledge. 
Sylvester Gerald Barry, called Giraldus Cambrensis, Archdeacon 
of Brecknock, was a grandson of the amorous Nesta, daughter of 
a St. Bernard, De Vita S. Malachiae.—Ed. 

=====第205页=====
The History of Ireland 173 
Rhys ap Tewdwr, Prince of South Wales, mistress of Henry I of 
England and ancestress of almost all the Norman captains who 
took part in the first conquest of Ireland. He went to Ireland in 
1185 with John (later "Lackland") and in the following years 
wrote first Topographia Hibernica, an account of the land and its 
inhabitants, and then Hibernia Expugnata, the highly biased history 
of the first invasions. We are principally concerned with the first 
work here. Written in highly pretentious Latin, full of the maddest 
belief in miracles and all the clerical and national prejudices of the 
time and the RACE of its vain author, the book is still of great 
importance, being the first report in any detail by a foreigner.* 
After this the Anglo-Norman sources on Ireland naturally 
become more abundant; there is, however, still little information 
to be gained with regard to the social conditions of the part of the 
island that remained independent, and permitting one to draw 
conclusions about the old state of affairs. Not until the end of the 
16th century, when Ireland was first systematically and completely 
subjugated, do we receive more detailed reports on the actual 
living conditions of the Irish people, naturally with a strong 
English bias. We shall see that, in the course of the 400 years that 
have elapsed since the first invasion, the condition of the people 
has changed only slightly, and not for the better. But for this very 
reason, the more recent writings—Hanmer, Campion, Spencer, 
Davies, Camden, Moryson,199  et al. —to whom we shall have 
frequent recourse, are one of our main sources for a period five 
hundred years earlier, and an indispensable, badly needed 
complement to the scanty original sources. 
The mythical prehistory of Ireland tells of a series of 
immigrations, taking place one after the other and mostly ending 
with the subjugation of the island by the new immigrants. The 
three last are: that of the Firbolgs, that of the Tuatha-de-Dananns, 
and that of the Milesians or Scots, who are supposed to have come 
from Spain. Popular Irish writing of history summarily turns the 
Firbolgs (fir  = Irish fear, Latin vir, Gothic vair: man) into Belgians, 
the Tuatha-de-Dananns (tuatha  = Irish people, region, Gothic thiuda) 
as necessary into Greek Danai or Germanic Danes. O'Donovan is 
* Giraldi Cambrensis Opera, ed. J. S. Brewer, London, Longmans,  1863. 198 — A 
(weak) English translation of the historical works including the two works already 
mentioned (The Historical Works of Giraldus Cambrensis) was published in London 
by Bohn in 1863. 

=====第206页=====
174 Frederick Engels 
of the opinion that there is some historical basis for at least the 
above-mentioned immigrations. In the annals there occurs in the 
year 10 A.D. an insurrection of the Aitheach Tuatha (translated in 
the 17th century by Lynch, an expert on the old language, as 
plebeiorum hominum gensd), in other words, a plebeian revolution, in 
which the entire aristocracy (Saorchlann) was slain. This points to 
the Scottish conquerors' dominion over the older inhabitants. 
From folk-tales about the Tuatha-de-Dananns, O'Donovan con­
cludes that the latter, transformed by later popular belief into 
elves of the mountain forest, survived into the 2nd or 3rd century 
A.D.  in scattered mountain areas. 
It is beyond doubt that the Irish were a mixed people, even 
before the English settled among them in their masses. As today, 
in the 12th century the predominant type was already fair-haired. 
Giraldus (Top. Hib., Ill, 26) says of two strangers that they had 
long yellow hair, like the Irish. Nevertheless, there are still two 
completely different types of black-haired people, particularly in 
the west. One is tall and well-built with handsome features and 
curly hair, a type one feels one may have encountered before, in 
the Italian Alps or in Lombardy; this type occurs chiefly in the 
south-west. The other, thick-set and short in build, with coarse, 
straight black hair and a flat, almost negroid face, is more often 
found in Connaught. Huxley attributes this dark-haired element 
in the originally blond Celtic population to an Iberian (i.e. Basque) 
admixture,200 which is no doubt partly true, at least. By the time 
the Irish make their first definite appearance in history, though, 
they have become a homogeneous people with a Celtic language, 
and there is no longer any trace of alien elements apart from the 
(mostly Anglo-Saxon) slaves acquired through battle or barter. 
The pronouncements of the ancient classical writers about this 
people do not sound very edifying. Diodor relates that the Britons 
who inhabit the island called Iris (or Irin? It is the accusative 'Ipiv) 
eat human beings. b Strabo goes into more detail: 
"Concerning this island" (lerne) "I have nothing certain to tell, except that its in­
habitants are more savage than the Britons, since they are man-eaters as well as heavy 
eaters"  (iroXvcpci-yoi; according to another reading  Tror\<pâ-yoC,  cabbage-eaters), "and 
since, further, they count it an honourable thing, when their fathers die, to devour 
them, and openly to have intercourse, not only with other women, but also with their 
mothers and sisters." 0 
a J. O'Donovan, op. cit., Vol. I, p.  95.—  Ed. 
b Diodorus Siculus, Bibliothecae historicae, Vol. 5.— Ed. 
c The Geography of Strabo, with an English translation by Horace Leonard Jones, 
8 volumes, London, 1917-32.— Ed. 

=====第207页=====
fhe Historv of Ireland 175 
Patriotic Irish historians have waxed not a little indignant over 
these alleged slanders. It remained for more recent research to 
show that, cannibalism, and particularly the eating of parents, is 
probably a transitional stage of all peoples, It may corne as some 
consolation to the Irish to learn that the ancestors of the modern 
Berliners still subscribed to the same practical point of view a good 
thousand years later: 
" ..aber Weleta'm. die in Germania sizzent. tie wir Wilzc heizen, die ne saunent 
si h nicht /e <hedenne da/ sie iro patentes mit niêren rente ezen sulîn, danne die 
Winnie'"' 1 iNotker, <|iioted in Jacob Grimm's Rechtsalte rthüm  er} 1 p. 488). 
And under English rule, we shall see the consumption of human 
flesh in Ireland make its return more than once. As regards the 
"phairerogamia" (to borrow Fourier's phrase') with which the 
Irish are reproached, such things occurred among all uncivilised 
peoples, and even more so among the particularly amorous Celts. 
It is- interesting to note that even then the island bore its present 
native name: his, frin and jerne are identical with Eire, Erinn, 
and that Ptolemy already knew the present-day name of the 
capital, Dublin, Eblana (with the correct accent ''Eß\ai>tt). d This 
is all the more remarkable as the Irish Celts have since times 
immemorial called it by another name, Athciiath. and Duibhlinn — 
the black pool —  is for them the name of a place on the River 
Li f fey. 
Moreover we find in Pliny's Natural History, IV7, 16, the following 
passage: 
"The Britons travel there" (to Hibernia) "in boats of willow branches, over 
which animal hides have been sewn together."' 
And later Solinus says of the Irish themselves: 
"'They sail the sea between Hibernia nnd Britannia in boats of willow blanches 
which they (over with cowhides" (G. Jul. Solini Cosmographia, Ch. 25). 
In 1810, Wakefield found that all along the west coast of 
Ireland "no other boats occurred except ones which consisted of a 
wooden frame covered over with a horse- or oxhide". These boats 
•' "But the Weletabi who livt in Germany and whom we call Wilze are not 
ashamed to sav that they ha\e more right to eat their parents than the worms 
have."—  F.d. 
'' }. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer, Groningen, 1828.— Ed. 
' Cli, Fourier, le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire, ou invention du procédé 
d'industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées, Paris, 1829, 
pp. 399-400.— f7/. 
(1 Glaudius l'tolemaeus, Geographia, Book II, Chapter 2, Lipsiae, 1845.— Ed. 
' Bliny the Elder, Natural History. Lugduni Batavorum, 1635.— Ed. 
8-733 

=====第208页=====
176 Frederick Engels 
were of different shapes according to the area, but they were all 
distinguished by being uncommonly light, so that an accident 
rarely occurred. Of course, they were of no use for the high seas, 
for which reason fishing was only possible in the bays and between 
the islands. In Malbay, County Clare, Wakefield saw boats like 
these, 15 feet long, 5 feet wide and 2 feet deep; two cowhides 
were used for one boat, the hair to the inside, the outside tarred; 
it was equipped for two oarsmen. A boat like this cost about 30 
shillings (Wakefield, Vol. II, p. 97). Instead of plaited willow—a 
wooden frame! What progress in 1,800 years and after almost 700 
years of "civilising" treatment at the hands of the world's foremost 
maritime nation! 
For the rest, however, some symptoms of progress soon become 
noticeable. Under King Cormac Ulfadha, who is thought to have 
ruled in the second half of the 3rd century, his son-in-law, Finn 
Mac Cumhal, is said to have reorganised the Irish militia, the 
Fianna Eirionn* probably after the model of the Roman legion, 
with a distinction between light troops and troops of the line; all 
later Irish armies of which we have details distinguish between 
kerne—light—and galloglas—heavy—infantry, or troops of the 
line.  The heroic deeds of this Finn were celebrated in many old 
lays,  some of which still exist; these, and perhaps a few 
Scottish-Gaelic traditions, form the basis of Macpherson's Ossian 
(Irish Oisin, son of Finn), in which Finn appears as Fingal and the 
scene has been switched to Scotland.201 In Irish folk-lore Finn lives 
on as Finn Mac-Caul, a giant to whom some miraculous feat of 
strength is attributed in almost every locality of the island. 
Christianity must have found its way to Ireland quite early, at 
least on the east coast. Otherwise, there is no explanation for the 
fact that even long before St Patrick so many Irishmen played an 
important part in ecclesiastical history. Pelagius the Heretic is 
usually considered to have been a Welsh monk from Bangor; but 
there was also an ancient Irish monastery of Bangor, or rather 
Banchor, near Carrickfergus. And that he comes from here is 
proved by Hieronymus, who describes him as "stupid and heavy 
with Scottish gruel" ("scotorum pultibus praegravatus").3 It is the first 
* Feini, Fenians, is the name given to the Irish nation throughout the Senchus 
Mor. Feinechus, Fenchus, the law of the Fenians, often stands for Senchus or for 
some other, lost law-book. Feine, grad feine, is also the designation of the plebs, the 
lowest free class of people. 
a S. Eusebius Hieronymus, Commentariorum in Jeremiam Prophetam libri sex. 
Prologus. In: Patrologiae... Series latina, 1865.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
The History of Ireland 177 
mention of Irish oatmeal porridge (Irish lite, Anglo-Irish stirabout), 
which even then, before the introduction of the potato, was the 
staple food of the Irish people, and which it remained even 
afterwards, alongside the potato. The main disciples of Pelagius— 
Coelestius and Albinus—were also Scots, i.e. Irish. From his 
monastery Coelestius wrote, as Gennadius3 tells us, three detailed 
letters to his parents, from which it is evident that alphabetic writing 
was known in Ireland in the 4th century. 
In all the writings of the early Middle Ages the Irish are called 
Scots,  and the country Scotia. We find this term in Claudian, 
Isidor, Beda, the geographer of Ravenna, Eginhard and even in 
Alfred the Great: "Hibernia, which we call Scotland" ("Igbernia 
the ve Scotland hatadh").202  What is now Scotland was called 
Caledonia, a foreign name, or Alba, Albania, its native one; the 
transference of the name Scotia, Scotland, to the northern tip of 
the eastern island did not take place until the 11th century. The 
first great wave of emigration of Irish Scots to Alba is supposed to 
have occurred in the middle of the 3rd century; Ammianus 
Marcellinus knows of them there as early as A.D. 360. b The 
emigration took place by the shortest sea-route, from Antrim to 
the Kintyre peninsula; even Nennius mentions expressly that the 
Britons, who then occupied the entire Scottish lowlands as far as 
the Clyde and the Forth, had been attacked by the Scots from the 
west and by the Picts from the north.' The seventh of the old 
Welsh historical Triads20 * also relates that the gwyddyl ffichti (see 
below) came from Ireland over the Norse Sea (Môr Llychlin) to 
Alba and settled on the shores of this sea. The fact that the sea 
between Scotland and the Hebrides is called "Norse" proves, by 
the way, that this Triad is more recent than the Norse conquest of 
the Hebrides. Around the year 500 larger bands of Scots came 
over. These gradually formed a kingdom of their own, independ­
ent both of Ireland and of the Picts. In the 9th century under 
Kenneth MacAlpin they finally subjugated the Picts and formed 
the state to which some 150 years later the name Scotland, Scotia, 
came to be applied, probably by the Norsemen, for the first time. 
In the 5th and 6th centuries Old Welsh sources (Nennius, the 
Triads) mention raids by the gwyddyl ffichti or Gaelic Picts on 
Wales; these are generally interpreted as raids by Irish Scots. 
Gwyddyl is the Welsh form of gavidheal, as the Irish call 
a Gennadius, Illustrium virorum catalogus, Basiliae, 1529.— Ed. 
b Animianus Marcellinus, Rerurn gestarum..., Lipsiae,  1773.—  Ed. 
c Nennius, Historia Britonum, with an English version by Gunn, London, 1819, 
p. 15.—  Ed. 
8* 

=====第210页=====
178 Frederick Engels 
themselves. As for the origin of the term "Picts", we may leave it 
to others to investigate that. 
In the second quarter of the 5th century Patricius (Irish Patrick, 
Patraic, as the Celts always pronounce the "c" as "k" in the 
fashion of the ancient Romans) established the domination of 
Christianity without any violent upheavals. Traffic with Britain, 
which,had long existed, now became more lively; master-builders 
and artisans came over and taught the Irish, who had only known dry 
stone building until then, the use of mortar. But from the 7th to the 
12th century the latter was used only in church buildings, which is 
sufficient proof that its introduction is linked with that of 
Christianity, and further that from now on the clergy, the 
representative of foreign culture, was completely divorcing itself 
from the people in its intellectual development. While the social 
advance of the people was non-existent or extremely slow, the 
clergy soon developed a literary culture that was extraordinary for 
the time. It expressed itself chiefly in its zeal to convert the 
heathens and to found monasteries, as was the custom of the age. 
Columba converted the British Scots and the Picts; Gallus (the 
founder of St. Gallen) and Fridolin the Alemanni, Kilian the 
Franks of the Main, Virgilius the people of Salzburg; all five were 
Irish. Similarly, the Anglo-Saxons were converted to Christianity 
mainly by Irish missionaries. What is more, Ireland was considered 
all over Europe to be a nursery of learning, so much so that 
Charlemagne summoned an Irish monk, Albinus, to Pavia as 
teacher, whither he was later followed by another Irishman, 
Dungal. Of lthe large number of Irish scholars who were 
important in their day but are now mostly forgotten, the greatest 
was the "Father" or, as Erdmann calls him, the "Carolus Magnus3 
of mediaeval philosophy"—Johannes Scotus Erigena^ "He was the 
first with whom from then on true philosophy began," Hegel says 
of him.c Of all the West Europeans of the 9th century he alone 
understood Greek, and through his translation of the writings 
attributed to Dionysius, the Areopagite, he harked back to the last 
offshoot of the old philosophy, the Alexandrian Neoplatonic 
school.204 His teaching was very daring for his time: he denied 
the eternity of damnation, even for the devil, and comes very close 
to pantheism. For this reason, contemporary orthodoxy did not 
shrink from slandering him. It was all of two centuries before the 
a Charlemagne.— Ed 
h John the Scot.— Ed. 
c G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie, Vol. 3, Berlin, 
1836.—  Ed. 

=====第211页=====
The History of Ireland 179 
science founded by Erigena was developed further by Anselm of 
Canterbury.* 
But before this development of higher culture could influence 
the people, it was interrupted by the raids of the Norsemen. 
These raids, which form the staple ingradients of Scandinavian — 
particularly Danish — patriotism, came too late and emanated from 
nations too small for them to culminate in conquest, colonisation 
and the formation, of states on any large scale, as had been the 
case with the earlier incursions of the Germanic tribes. As far as 
historical development is concerned, the advantages they be­
queathed are quite imperceptible compared with the immense 
and—even for Scandinavia—fruitless disturbances they caused. 
At the end of the 8th century, Ireland was far from being 
inhabited by a single nation. A supreme kingship over the whole 
island existed only for appearance, and even that was by no means 
permanent. The provincial kings, whose number and territory 
were continually changing, were constantly at war with one 
another, and the smaller local princes also had their private 
feuds.  On the whole, however, certain rules seem to have 
prevailed in these internal struggles which kept the devastation 
within definite bounds, so that the country did not suffer too 
much. But things were about to change. In 795, a few years after 
the first raid on England by this same predatory people, 
Norsemen landed on the island of Rathlin, off the coast of 
Antrim, and burnt everything down. In 798, they landed near 
Dublin and after that they are mentioned almost every year in the 
annals as heathens, foreigners, and pirates, never without the 
addition of losccadh (burning down) of one or several places. 
Their settlements in the Orkneys, Shetlands and Hebrides 
(Southern Isles, Sudhreyjar of the Old Norse sagas) served them as 
a base for operations against Ireland, as well as against what was 
to be Scotland, and against England. In the middle of the 9th 
century they were in possession of Dublin,** which, according to 
* More about Erigena's doctrine and works in Erdmann, Grundriss der 
Geschichte der Philosophie, 2nd edition, Berlin, 1869, Vol. 1, pp. 241-47. Erigena, 
who was not, however, a clergyman, gives an early example of Irish wit. During a 
meal with Charles the Bald, King of France (who was sitting opposite him), he was 
asked by the King how great was the difference between a Scot and a sot, to which 
Erigena replied, "The width of a table." 
** The claim bv Snorri in the Haraldsaga ' that the sons of Harald 
Fairhair—Thorgils and Frodi—were the first Norsemen to take possession of 
Dublin — that is, at least 50 years later than stated — is in direct contradiction with 
all the contemporary Irish sources, which for this period are unquestionably 
authentic. Snorri is obviously confusing Thorgils, son of Harald Fairhair, with the 
Thorgils mentioned below  ( = Turgesius). 

=====第212页=====
180 Frederick Engels 
Giraldus, they first rebuilt as a proper city, just as he attributed to 
them the construction of Waterford and Limerick. The name 
Waterford is itself merely the anglicisation — here nonsensical—of 
the Old Norse Vedhrafiördhr, which means either "Bay of Storms" 
(Wetterföhrde) or "Bay of Rams". The prime necessity of the 
Norsemen as soon as they had settled in the country was naturally 
to acquire fortified ports; the population of these towns long 
remained Scandinavian, but by the 12th century they had long 
since been assimilated by the Irish in language and customs. The 
disputes between the Irish princes greatly facilitated the depreda­
tions and settlement of the Norsemen, and even their temporary 
conquest of the whole island. The extent to which the Scandina­
vians themselves considered Ireland to be one of their regular 
pillage lands is indicated by the ostensible death-song of Ragnar 
Lodbrôk in the Snake Tower of King Ella of Northumberland, the 
Krâkumâl, composed about the year 1000. 2<)b In this song, the old 
pagan savagery makes one final outburst, as it were. On the 
pretext of singing the heroic deeds of King Ragnar, the raids of 
the entire Norse people in their own land as well as all along the 
coasts from Dünamünde to Flanders, Scotland (here called 
Skotland, perhaps for the first time) and Ireland are briefly 
described. Of Ireland it is said: 
"We hew'd with our swords, heap'd high the slain, 
Glad was the wolf's brother of the furious battle's feast; 
Iron struck brass-shields; Ireland's ruler, Marsteinn, 
Did not starve the murder-wolf or eagle; 
In Vedhrafiördhr the raven was given a sacrifice. 
We hew'd with our swords, started a game at dawn, 
A merry battle against three kings at Lindiseyri; 
Not many could boast that they fled unhurt from there. 
Falcon fought wolf for flesh, the wolf's fury devoured many; 
The blood of the Irish flow'd in streams on the beach in the battle."* 
By the first half of the 9th century a Norse Viking, Thorgils, 
called Turgesius by the Irish, managed to subjugate Ireland 
* "Hiuggu ver medh hiörvi, hverr lâthverr of annan; 
gladhr vardh géra brôdhir getu vidh sôknar laeti, 
let ei örn ne ylgi, sa er Irlandi styrdhi, 
(mot vardh malms ok rîtar) Marsteinn konungr fasta; 
vardh î Vedhra firdhi valtafn gefit hrafni. 
Hiuggu ver medh hiörvi, hâdhum sudhr at morni 
leik fyrir Lindiseyri vidh lofdhûnga threnna; 

=====第213页=====
The History of Ireland 181 
completely, but with his death in 844° his kingdom, too, 
disintegrated and the Norsemen were driven out. The invasions 
and struggles continued with varying success, until finally, at the 
beginning of the 11th century, Ireland's national hero, Brian 
Borumha, originally only king of part of Munster, rose to be ruler 
of all Ireland and confronted the concentrated force of the 
invading Norsemen in a decisive battle at Clontarf (not far from 
Dublin) on April 23 (Good Friday), 1014. As a result, the might of 
the invaders was broken forever. 
In anticipation of the imminent decisive battle, the Norsemen 
who had settled in Ireland, and on whom Leinster was dependent 
(the King of Leinster, Maolmordha, had ascended to the throne 
with their help in 999 and had kept it ever since thanks to them), 
sent messengers to the Southern Islands, and the Orkneys, to 
Denmark and Norway to request reinforcements, which duly 
arrived in large numbers. Njâl's Saga 207 tells how Jarl Sigurd 
Laudrisson prepared his departure in the Orkneys, how Thorstein 
Siduhallsoon, Hrafn the Red and Erlinger of Straumey went with 
him and how he arrived at Dublin (Durflin) on Palm Sunday with 
all his army: 
"Brodhir and all his army came too. Brodhir tried to learn by means of sorcery 
how the battle would go; the answer he got was this: if the battle were to be fought 
on Friday, King Brian would win the victory but lose his life, and if the battle were 
to be fought earlier, all Brian's opponents would lose their lives. Then Brodhir said 
that they should not join battle before Friday."*1 
fârr âtti thvî fagna (fell margr î gyn ûlfi, 
haukr sleit hold medh vargi), at hann heill thadhan kaemi; 
Yra blôdh î oegi aerit fell um skaeru." a 
Vedhrafiördhr is, as we have said, Waterford; I do not know whether Lindiseyri 
has been located anywhere. At any rate, it does not mean Leinster, as Johnstone 
translates it*; the eyri (sandy spit of land, Danish ore) indicates a quite definite locality. 
Valtafn can also mean falcon feed, and is mostly so translated here, but as the raven is 
Odin's holy bird, the word obviously carries both meanings. 
a In his translation, Engels reproduces the old alliterative verse of the 
original.— Ed. 
h J. Johnstone, Lodbrokar-Quida; or, the Death-Song of Lodbroc, London, 1782.— 
Ed. 
c More precisely:  845.—  Ed. 
d Apart from minor deviations reflecting Engels's rendering of the original text, 
the English translation here and below follows Njal's Saga, translated by Magnus 
Magnusson and Hermann Palsson, Penguin Books, 1960.— Ed. 

=====第214页=====
182 Frederick Engels 
We have two versions of the battle  itself:  that of the Irish annals 
and the Scandinavian one in Njâl's Saga. According to the latter: 
"King Brian had already reached the fortress" (Dublin) "with all his army. On 
Friday the army" (of the Norsemen) "came marching out of the fortress, and both 
armies drew up in battle array. Brodhir was on one flank and King Sigtrygg" (King 
of the Dublin Norsemen, according to the Annals of Inisfallen) "on the other. It 
should be said that King Brian did not wish to fight on Friday; so a wall of shields 
was formed round him, and his arm)' was drawn up in front of it. Ulf Hraeda was 
on the flank facing Brodhir, and on the other flank facing Sigtrygg were Ospak 
and King Brian's sons. In the centre was Kerthialfadh, with the banner aloft before 
him." 
When the battle got underway, Brodhir was chased by Ulf 
Hraeda into a wood where he found shelter. Jar! Sigurd had a 
great deal of trouble with Kerthialfadh, who reached the standard 
and slew the standard-bearer as well as the next man to seize the 
standard. Then they all refused to bear the standard, and Jarl 
Sigurd took the standard off its staff and hid it under his clothes. 
Soon afterwards, he was pierced by a spear, and, at this point, his 
part of the army seems to have been defeated. Meanwhile, Ospak 
had attacked the Norsemen in the rear, turning Sigtrygg's flank 
after a hard struggle. 
"And at this all his troops broke into flight. Thorstein Siduhallsson stopped 
running while the others were fleeing, and tied up his shoe-thong. Kerthialfadh 
asked him why he was not running like the others. 'Because,' said Thorstein, 'I 
cannot reach home tonight, for my home is out in Iceland.' Kerthialfadh spared his 
life." 
Now Brodhir saw from his hiding-place that Brian's army was 
pursuing the fugitives, and that few men were left to man the wall 
of shields. Then he ran from the woods, broke through the wall of 
shields and slew the King (Brian, who was 88 years old, was 
obviously unable to take part in the battle and had stayed in the 
camp). 
"Then Brodhir shouted, 'Let the word go round that Brodhir has felled 
Brian.' " 
But the pursuers returned, surrounded Brodhir and took him 
alive. 
"Ulf Hraeda slit open his belly and led him round an oak tree so that his 
intestines wound round the trunk; and Brodhir did not die before they had all 
been pulled out of him. Brodhir's men were all slain." 
According to the Annals of Inisfallen the Norse army was 
divided into three sections. The first consisted of the Dublin 
Norsemen and 1,000 Norwegian volunteers, who were all clad in 

=====第215页=====
The History of Ireland 183 
long coats of mail; the second, of the Irish auxiliaries from 
Leinster under King Maolmordha; the third, of reinforcements 
from the islands and from Scandinavia under Bruadhair, the 
commander of the fleet which had brought them, and Lodar, the 
Jarl of the Orkneys. Opposing them, Brian also drew up his army 
in three sections; the names of the leaders, however, do not agree 
with those given in Njâl's Saga. The report of the battle itself is 
unimportant; shorter and clearer is that of the Four Masters, which 
folows: 
"A.D.  1013" (given instead of 1014 owing to a recurrent error). "The 
foreigners of all western Europe assembled against Brian and Maelseachlainn" 
(usually called Malachy, King of Meath under Brian's sovereignty) "and they 
brought with them ten hundred men in coats of mail. A fierce, furious, violent and 
bitter battle was fought between them, the like of which had never been seen in 
those days, at Cluaintarbh" (ox-meadow, now Clontarf) "on the very Friday before 
Easter. In this battle were slain Brian, 88 years old, Murchadh, his son, 63 years 
old, Conaing, his nephew, Toirdhealbhach, his grandson..." (There follow a 
multitude of names.) "The" (enemy) "troops were finally driven back from the 
Tulcainn to Athcliath" (Dublin) "by Maelseachlainn by dint of heavy fighting, 
intrepidity and laying about the foreigners and the Lein Sterinen; and there fell 
Maelmordha, son of Murchadh, son of Finn, King of Leinster ... and there were 
also innumerable dead among the men of Leinster. Also slain were Dubhgall, son 
of Amhlanibh" (usually called Anlaf or Olaf) "and Gillaciarain, son of Gluniairn, 
two subordinate commanders (tanaisi) of the foreigners, Sichfrith, son of Lodar, 
Jarl of the Orkneys (iarla insi h Oirt), Brodar, leader of the men from Denmark, 
who was the man who slew Brian. The ten hundred men in coats of mail were cut 
to pieces, and at least 3,000 of the foreigners were slain there." a 
Njârs Saga was written down in Iceland about a hundred years 
after the battle; the Irish annals are based, at least in part, on 
contemporary reports. The two sources are completely indepen­
dent of each other; not only do they agree on the main points, but 
they also complement each other. We only learn from the Irish 
annals who Brodhir and Sigtrygg were. Sigurd Laudrisson is there 
called Sichfrith, son of Lodar; Sigfrith is, in fact, the correct 
Anglo-Saxon form of the Old Norse name Sigurd, and the 
Scandinavian names in Ireland — on coins as well as in the 
annals—mainly occur not in the Old Norse but in the Anglo-
Saxon form. The names of Brian's subordinate commanders have 
been modified in Njâl's Saga to suit the Scandinavian tongue; one 
of them, Ulf Hraeda, is even wholly Old Norse, but it would be 
rash indeed to infer, as some do, from this that Brian, too, had 
Norsemen in his army. Ospak and also Kerthialfadh seem to be 
Celtic names; the latter perhaps distorted from the Toirdbeal-
a Annales IV Magistrorum. In: Rerum Iliberniinrvm Saiptores, Vol. III. 
But kinghamiae,  1 820.— Ed. 

=====第216页=====
184 Fiederick Engels 
bhach mentioned in the Four Masters? The dates—the Friday after 
Palm Sunday in one, the Friday before Easter in the other—agree 
perfectly, as does the site of the battle; although it is called 
Kantaraburg in Njâl's Saga (otherwise = Canterbury), 208 it is 
explicitly said to be right by the gates of Dublin. The course of the 
battle is described most accurately in the Four Masters. The 
Norsemen were driven back from the plain of  Clontarf,  where 
they attacked Brian's army, over the Tolka, a small river flowing 
past the northern side of Dublin, towards the city. The fact that 
Brodhir killed King Brian is mentioned in both sources; the exact 
details are given only in the Nordic one. 
It is evident that our knowledge of this battle is fairly detailed 
and authentic, considering the barbarism of the times. There 
would not be many 11th-century battles about which we have such 
definite and consistent reports from both parties. This did not 
deter Professor Goldwin Smith from describing it as a "SHADOWY3 
conflict" (loc. cit.,b p. 48). In the esteemed professor's head the 
most robust facts do, indeed, very often assume a "shadowy" 
form. 
After the defeat at Clontarf the raids of the Norsemen became 
less frequent and less dangerous. The Dublin Norsemen soon 
came under the dominion of the neighbouring Irish princes and 
in a generation or two were assimilated by the native population. 
As the sole recompense for the havoc they had wreaked, the 
Scandinavians left the Irish three or four cities and the beginnings 
of a trading urban population. 
The further back in history we go, the fainter are the 
characteristics distinguishing peoples of the same tribe one from 
the other. On the one hand, this is due to the nature of the 
sources, which become scantier the older they are, confining 
themselves to essentials; on the other hand, however, it is due to 
the development of the peoples themselves. The individual 
branches of the tribe were the closer to one another, were more 
alike, the smaller the distance separating them from the original 
stock. Jacob Grimm' quite rightly always treated all reports from 
the Roman historians describing the campaign of the Cimbri209 to 
Adam of Bremen and Saxo Grammaticus, all the literary 
a Engels gives this English word in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed. 
b Irish History and Irish Character, Oxford and London,  1861.—  Ed 
c J. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer, Göttingen, 1828.— Ed. 

=====第217页=====
The History of Ireland 185 
monuments from Beowulf and the Hildebrandslied to the Eddas 210 
and the sagas, all the law-books from the Leges barbarorum 21 ] to the 
Old Danish and Old Swedish laws and the Germanic precedents, 
as equally valuable sources for the German national character, 
German customs and legal procedure. The specific character may 
only be of local significance, but the character reflected in it is 
common to the whole tribe; and the older the sources, the more 
these local differences tend to disappear. 
Just as the Scandinavians and the Germans of the 7th and 8th 
centuries were less different than today, originally the Irish Celts 
and Gallic Celts must have been more alike than are the Irishmen 
and Frenchmen of today. We should not, then, be surprised to 
find a number of traits in Caesar's description of the Gaulsa which 
Giraldus twelve centuries later ascribes to the Irish, and which we 
find in the Irish national character even today, despite the 
admixture of so much Germanic blood....212 
Gaius Julius Caesar, Commentarii de hello Galileo. — Ed. 

=====第218页=====

=====第219页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY 
MATERIALS 

=====第220页=====

=====第221页=====
189 
Karl Marx 
[NOTES FOR AN UNDELIVERED SPEECH ON IRELAND] 213 
I. EXORDIUM. THE EXECUTION 
Since our last meeting3 the object of our discussion, Fenianism, 
has entered a new phase. It has been baptised in blood by the 
English Government. The Political Executions at Manchester 
remind us of the fate of John Brown at Harpers Ferry.b They 
open a new period in the struggle between Ireland and England. 
The whole Parliament and liberal press responsible. Gladstone. 
Reason: to keep up the hypocrisy that this was no political, but a 
common criminal affair. The effect produced upon Europe quite 
the contrary. They seem anxious to keep up the Act of the Long 
Parliament.214 English [have] a divine right to fight the Irish on 
their native soil, but every Irish fighting against the British 
Government in England is to be treated as an outlaw. Suspension of 
the Habeas Corpus Act.215 State of siege. Facts from The Chronicle. 
Governmental organisation of "Assassination and Violence".216 Case 
of Bonaparte.217 
II. THE QUESTION 
What is Fenianism?c 
a The meeting of the General Council of the International held on November 
19, 1867.— Ed. 
b Here the following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "But the 
slaveholders have at least treated John Brown as a rebel, not as a common 
felon." — Ed. 
' See this volume, p. 194.— Ed. 

=====第222页=====
190 Kar! Marx 
III. THE  LAND QUESTION 
nK.ckF.Asi- : or POITI.A  I ION 
1846 
1841:  8,222,664' 
1866: 5,571,971 
2,650,693 
1855:  '  6,604.665]  in 1!  years  1,032,69  4 
1866: 5,571,971  r 
1,0:32,694 
Population  not  only decreased,  but the  number  of the  deaf-
mutes,  the  blind,  the  decrepit,  the  lunatic,  and  idiotic increased 
relatively  to the  numbers  of the  population. 
INCRFASF  OF  UVF.-STOCK  FROM  IS.V, lO  1 .Si'Wi 
In the  same period from  1855 to 1866 [the]  number  of the 
live-stock increased  as follows: cattle  by 178,532, sheep  by 667,675, 
pigs by 315,918.  If we take into account  the  simultaneous decrease 
of horses  by 20,656,  and  equalise  8 sheep  to 1 horse total increase 
of live-stock: 996,877, about  one  million. 
Thus  1,032,694  Irishmen have been displaced  by  about  one 
million cattle, pigs,  and  sheep. What  has  become  of them?  'The 
emigration list answers. 
FMK,RA  nO\ 
From 1st May 1851  to 31  December 1866: 1,730,189. Character  of 
that emigration. 
The process  has  been brought about  and is  still functioning 
upon  an  always enlarging scale  by the  throwing together  or 
consolidation of farms (eviction)  and bv the  simultaneous conversion 
of tillage into pasture. 
From 1851-1861 [the] total number of farms decreased  by 120,000, 
while simultaneously  the  number  of farms  of 15-30 acres increased 
by 61,000, that  of 30  acres  by 109,000 (together 170,000).  The 
decrease  was  almost exclusively owed  to the  extinction  of farms 
from less than  one to  less than  15  acres. Lord Dufferin."  'The 
increase means only that amongst  the  decreased number  of farms 
there  is a  larger portion  of farms  of large dimension. 
••- Years.—  Ed. 
h See  this volume,  p. 4?!S.  - Ed. in 25  Jahren ;' 1801:  5,319,867 
2,650,693 

=====第223页=====
Notes for an Undelivered Speech on Ireland 191 
HOW IHK l'ROCKSS WORKS 
a) The People. 
The situation of the mass of the people has deteriorated, and their 
state is verging to a crisis similar to that of 1846.a The relative 
surplus population now as great as before the famine. 
Wages have not risen more than 20% since the potato famine. 
The price of potatoes has risen nearly 200%; the necessary means 
of life on an average by 100%. Professor Cliffe Leslie, in the London 
Economist dated February 9, 1867, says: 
"Aftet a loss of -/;, of the population in 21 years, throughout most of the island, 
the rate of wages is now onlv Is. a day: a shilling does not go further than 6d. did 
21 years ago. Owing to this rise in his ordinary food the labourer is worse off than 
he was 10 years ago." 
b) The  Land. 
\) Decrease of land under crops. 
Decrease in cereal crops: Decrease in green crops: 
1861-1866: 470,917 acres 1861-1S66: 128,061 acres 
2) Decrease per Statute Acre oj every crop. There has been decrease 
of yield in wheat, but greater 1847 to 1865 per cent: the exact 
decrease: oats 16.3, flax 47.9. tut nips 36.1, potatoes 50%. Some years 
would show a greater decrease, but on the whole it has been gradual 
since 1847.b 
Since the exodus, the land has been underfed and overworked, 
partly from the injudicious consolidation of farms, and, partly, 
because, under the corn-acre system,"18  the farmer in a great 
measure trusted to his labourers to manure the land for him. 
Rents and profits may increase, although the profit of the soil 
decreases. The total produce may diminish, but that part of it, 
winch is converted into surplus produce, falling to landlord and 
greater fanners, instead of to the labourer. And the price of the 
surplus produce has ; isen. 
So result: Gradual expulsion of the natives, gradual deteriora­
tion and exhaustion of the source of national life, the soil. 
a See Ulis volume, p.  205.—  F.d. 
u M.ux used the data of this paragraph in his "Outline of a Report on the Irish 
Question..." csce this volume, p. 204).- Ed. 
1 Marx used this passage in his "Outline of a Report on the Irish Question..." (see 
this volume, p.  204).••---Ed. 

=====第224页=====
192 Karl Marx 
PROCESS OF CONSOLIDATION 
This process has only begun; it is going on in rapid strides. The 
consolidation has first attacked the farms of under one to under 
15 acres. It will be far from having reached the English point of 
consolidation, if all farms under 100 acres have disappeared. Now 
the state was this in 1864: 
The total area of  Ireland,  including bogs and waste  land: 
20,319,924 acres. Of those 3/5 = 12,092,117 acres, still form farms 
from under 1 to under 100 acres, and are in the hands of 569,844 
farmers; 2/5 = 8,227,807, form farms from 100 till over 500  acres,  and 
are in the hands of 31,927 persons. Thus to be cleared off 
2,847,220, if we number only the farmers and their families. 
This system [is a] natural offspring of the famine of 1846, 
accelerated by the abolition of corn-laws,219 and the rise in the 
price of meat and wool, now systematic. 
Clearing of the Estate of  Ireland,-  transforming it in an English 
agricultural district, minus its resident lords and their retainers, 
separated from England by a broad water ditch. 
CHANGE OF CHARACTER 
OF THE ENGLISH RULE IN IRELAND 
State only tool of the landlords. Eviction, also employed as 
means of political punishment. (Lord Abercorn. England. Gaels in 
the Highlands of Scotland.220) Former English policy: displacing the 
Irish by English (Elizabeth), roundheads221 (Cromwell). Since 
Anne 18th-century politico-economic character only in the protec­
tionist measures of England against her own Irish colony; within 
that colony making religion a proprietary title. After the Union2'2 
[the] system of rack-renting and middlemen, but left the Irish, 
however ground to the dust, holder of their native soil. Present 
system, quiet business-like extinction, and government only 
instrument of landlords (and usurers). 
From this altered state: 
1st) Distinguishing character of Fenianism: Socialist, lower-class 
movement. 
2) Not Catholic movement. 
Priests leaders as long as Catholic Emancipation223 and their 
leader, Daniel O'Connell, remained leader of the Irish movement. 

=====第225页=====
Notes for an Undelivered Speech on Ireland 193 
Ridiculous Popishism of the English. High Catholic priests against 
Fenianism. 
3) No representative leader in the British Parliament. Character of 
O'Connell's physical force movement.224 Extinction of Irish party 
in Parliament. 
4) Nationality. Influence of European movement, and English 
phraseology. 
5) America,  Ireland,  England—three fields of action, leadership of 
America. 
6) Republican, because America republic. 
I have now given the characteristics of Fenianism. 
IV. THE ENGLISH PEOPLE 
A cause of humanity and right, but above all a specific English 
question. 
a) Aristocracy and Church and Army. (France, Algiers.225) 
b) Irish in England. Influence on wages, etc. Lowering the 
character of the English and Irish. The Irish Character. Chastity of 
Irishmen. Attempts at education in Ireland. Diminution of crimes. 
Convicted in Ireland 
Committed for trial: Convicted: 
1852 17,678 10,454 
7866 4,326 2,418 
The decrease in the numbers of persons committed for trial in 
England and Wales, since 1855, is partly due to the Criminal 
Justice Act of 1855, authorising Justices to pass sentences for short 
periods with the consent of the prisoners, instead of committing 
for trial to the sessions. 
Birmingham. Progress of the English people. Infamy of the 
English press. 
c) The Foreign Policy. Poland, etc. Castlereagh. Palmerston.226 
V. THE REMEDY 
Foolishness of the minor parliamentary propositions. 
Error of the Reform League.227 
Repeal as one of the articles of the English Democratic Party. 
First published in Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, 
Moscow, 1960 Reproduced from the manuscript 

=====第226页=====
194 
Karl Marx 
[OUTLINE OF A REPORT ON THE IRISH QUESTION 
DELIVERED TO THE GERMAN WORKERS' 
EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY 
IN LONDON ON DECEMBER 16, 1867]228 
I 
What distinguishes Fenianism? Actually, it originates from the 
Irish Americans, Irishmen [living] in America. They are the 
initiators and LEADERS. But in Ireland itself the movement took root 
(and is still really rooted) only in the mass of the people, the LOWER 
ORDERS. That is what characterises it. In all earlier Irish movements 
the people only followed the aristocracy or MIDDLE-CLASS MEN, and 
always the Catholic churchmen. The Anglo-Irish chiefs and the 
priests during the rising against Cromwell; even James II, King of 
England, was at the head in the war against William III; the 
Protestant Republicans of Ulster (Wolfe Tone, Lord Fitzgerald) in 
the 1798 revolution,229 and, finally, in this century the BOURGEOIS 
O'Connell supported by the Catholic clergy, who also played a 
leading role in alLearlier movements excepting 1798. The Catholic 
clergy decreed a ban on Fenianism, which it did not lift until it 
realised that its attitude would deprive it of all influence on the 
Irish masses. 
II 
Here is what baffles the English: they find the present regime 
mild compared with England's former oppression of Ireland. So 
why this most determined and irreconcilable form of opposition 
now? What I want to show—and what even those Englishmen who 
side with the Irish and concede them the right to secession from 
England do not see—is that the [oppression] since 1846, though 
less barbarian in form, has been in effect destructive, leaving no 
alternative but Ireland's voluntary emancipation by England or 
life-and-death struggle. 

=====第227页=====
Outline  of a  Report  on the  Irish Question 195 
III 
Concerning past history  the  FACTS  are  available  in any  history 
book. Hence,  I shall give only  a few,  firstly,  to  clarify  the 
difference between  the  present epoch  and the  past  and,  secondly, 
to bring  out a few  points about  the  character  of those  who are 
now called  the  Irish people. 
A) THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND 
BEFORE  THE  PROTESTANT REFORMATION 
1172. Henry  II.  Conquered less than  1/3 of  Ireland.  NOMINAL 
CONQUEST.  A gift from Pope Adrian  IV  (Englishman). Some  400 
years later another Pope (under Elizabeth) (1576), Gregory XIII, 
took back  the  present from  the  English (Elizabeth).230  The  "ENGLISH 
PALE". 231 CAPITAL:  Dublin. Mixing of English  COMMON  COLONISTS  with 
Irish,  and of  ANGLO  Norman nobles with Irish chiefs. Otherwise, 
the war of  conquest  was  conducted (originally)  as  against  RED 
INDIANS.  NO  English reinforcements sent  to  Ireland until  1565 
(Elizabeth). 
B)* PROTESTANT EPOCH.* ELIZABETH. JAMES  I. CHARLES  I. 
CROMWELL. COLONISATION PLAN  (16TH  AND 17TH  CENTURIES) 
Elizabeth.  The  plan  was to  exterminate  the  Irish  at least  up to 
the RIVER  Shannon,  to take their  LAND  and  settle English colonists  in 
their place,  etc. In  battles against Elizabeth  the  still Catholic 
Anglo-Irish fought with  the  NATIVES  against  the  English.  The 
avowed plan  of the  English.  * Clearing  the  island  of the  natives,  and 
stocking  it with loyal Englishmen. They succeeded only  to plant  a 
landowning aristocracy. English Protestant "adventurers"232 (mer­
chants, usurers),  who  obtained from  the  English crown  the 
confiscated lands,  and  "gentlemen undertakers",  who  were  to 
plant  the  ceded estates with native English families. 
James  I. Ulster. (Jacobite plantation, 1609-12.) British undertak­
ers, "to  stock  the  confiscated, stolen lands with Irish". *Not until 
1613 are  IRISH  considered  ENGLISH  subjects; previously they were 
looked upon as  "OUTLAWS-  and  ENFMIES-  and the  IRISH  PARLIAMENT  ~33 
governed only  the  Pale. Persecution  of Catholics. 
* Elizabeth settled Munster, James  I, Ulster,  but  Leinster  and 
Connaught have  not yet  been purged. Charles  I tried  to purge 
Connaught. 

=====第228页=====
196 Karl Marx 
Cromwell: First national revolt of  Ireland,  its 2nd complete conquest, 
partial re-colonisation (1641-60). 
Irish Revolution of 1641. August 1649 Cromwell landing in 
Dublin. (Followed by Ireton, Lambert, Fleetwood, Henry Crom­
well.) In 1652 the 2nd complete conquest of Ireland completed. Division 
of spoils: the Government  itself,  the "adventurers" who had lent 
£360,000 for the 11 years of war, the officers and soldiers, by the 
Acts of the English Parliament, 12 August 1652, and 26 September 
1653.'M  Smite the Amalekites235 of the Irish Nation hip and thigh, 
and replant the re-devastated [land] with new colonies of 
brand-new Puritan English.* — Bloodshed, devastation, depopula­
tion of entire counties, removal of their inhabitants to other 
regions, sale of many Irish into slavery in the West Indies. 
By engaging in the conquest of Ireland, Cromwell put paid to the 
English Republic. 
Thence the Irish mistrust of the English people's party. 
*C) RESTORATION OF THE STUARTS. WILLIAM III. 
SECOND IRISH REVOLT, AND THE CAPITULATION ON TERMS.23'' 
1660—1692"* 
The BRITISH were then more numerous in Ireland than at any 
other time. * Never higher than 3/11, never lower than 2/11 of the 
Irish population. 
1684. Charles II begins to favour the Catholic interest of 
Ireland, and to enlist a Catholic army. 
1685. James II gives full rein to the Catholics of Ireland. 
Catholic army increased and favoured. The Catholics soon began 
to declare that the Acts of Settlement must be repealed and the 
proprietors of 1641 re-established. James calls some Irish regi­
ments to England. 
1689. William III in England, 12 March 1689: James landed 
at Kinsale at the head of Irish soldiers. Limerick capitulates to 
William III, 1691. Shameful violation of the treaty, already under 
William III, still more under Anne. 
D) IRELAND DEFRAUDED AND HUMBLED TO THE DUST. 
1692-JULY 4, 1776 
a) All notions of "planting" the country with English and Scotch 
yeomen or tenant farmers were discarded.* Settling German and 
In the manuscript there follows "(1701) (Anne)".— Ed. 

=====第229页=====
Outline of a Report on the Irish Question 197 
French Protestants attempted. French Protestants in the towns 
(woollen manufacturers) flee the English protectionist and mercan­
tile system. 
* 1698. The Anglo-Irish Parliament (like obedient colonists) passed, 
on the command of the mother country, a prohibitory tax on Irish 
woollen goods export to foreign countries. 
1698. In the same year, the English Parliament laid a heavy tax 
on the import of the home manufactures in England and Wales, 
and absolutely prohibited their export to other countries. She struck 
down the manufactures of Ireland, depopulated her cities, and 
threw the people back upon the land. 
The Williamite (imported lords) absentees.237 Cry against absentee 
landlords since 1692. 
Likewise legislation of England against Irish cattle. 
1698: Molyneux pamphlet for the independence of the Irish 
Parliament (i.e. the English Colony in Ireland) against the English.3 
Thus began the struggle of the English Colony in Ireland and the 
English Nation. Simultaneously, struggle between the Anglo-Irish Colony 
and the Irish Nation. William III resisted the shameful attempts of 
the English and Anglo-Irish Parliaments to violate the treaties of 
Limerick and Galway. 
ß) Queen Anne. (1701-13; George until 1776). 
Penal Code239, built up by the Anglo-Irish Parliament with assent of the 
English Parliament. Most infamous means to make Protestant 
Proselytes amongst the Irish Catholics by regulations of "Property". 
A code for the transfer of "Property" from Catholics to Protestants, 
or to make "Anglicanism" a proprietary title. (Education. Personal 
disabilities.) (No Catholic able to be a private soldier.) To teach the 
Catholic religion was a transportable felony, to convert a 
Protestant to Catholicism an act of treason. To be a Catholic 
Archbishop—banishment, if returning from banishment—act of 
high treason; hanged, disembowelled alive, and afterwards quar­
tered. Experiment to coerce the mass of the Irish nation into the 
Anglican religion. Catholics deprived of vote for members of Parlia­
ment239 
This Penal Code intensified the hold of the Catholic Priesthood upon 
the Irish people. 
The poor people fell into habits of indolence. 
During the palmy days of Protestant ascendancy and Catholic 
degradation, the Protestants did not encroach upon the Catholics in 
numbers* 
a W. Molyneux, The Case of Ireland's Being Bound by Acts of Parliament in 
England  Stated,  Dublin, 1698.— Ed. 

=====第230页=====
198 Karl Marx 
E) 1776-1801. TIME OK TRANSITION 
a) Before dealing with this transition period, what was the result 
of English terrorism? 
* English incomers absorbed into the Irish people and Catholicised. 
The towns founded by the English Irish. 
No English colony (except Ulster Scotch) but English landowners. 
The North American Revolution forms the first turning-point in Irish 
history. 
ß) 1777 the British army surrendered at Saratoga Springs to 
the American "rebels". British cabinet forced to make concessions to the 
Nationalist (English) party in  Ireland. 
1778. Roman Catholic Relief Billa (passed by the Anglo-Irish 
Parliament).240 (Catholics were still excluded from acquiring by 
purchase, or as tenants, any freeholds241 interest.) 
1779. Free trade with Great Britain. Almost all restraints put upon 
Irish industry swept away. 
1782.  The Penal Code still further released. The Roman 
Catholics allowed to acquire freehold property for life, or in fee simple, 
and—to open schools. 
1783.  Equal rights of the Anglo-Irish Parliament!" 
Winter 1792-93. After the French Government had annexed 
Belgium, and England resolved upon French war, another portion 
of the Penal Code was released. Irish could become Colonels in 
Army, elective franchise for Irish Parliament etc. 
Rebellion of 1798.c Belfast Republicans (Wolfe Tone, Lord 
Fitzgerald). Irish peasants not ripe. 
Anglo-Irish House of Commons voted for the Act of Union passed in 
1800.242 By the Legislature and Customs Union of Britain and 
Ireland closed the struggle between the Anglo-Irish and the English. The 
colony protested against the illegal Act of Union.* 
1801-1846 
a) 1801-1831. At this time (after the end of the war243) a 
movement for emancipation of Catholics under way among Irish 
and English (1829). 
a The Bill for Relieving His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects from Certain 
Pains and Penalties Imposed on Them by an Act of King William.— Ed. 
b An Act for Removing and Preventing All Doubts Which Have Arisen, 
of Might Arise, Concerning the Exclusive Rights... (The Renunciation 
Act, 1783).—Ed. 
c See this volume, p. 194.— Ed. 

=====第231页=====
Outline of a Report on the Irish Question 199 
From 1783,  * legislative independence of  Ireland,  shortly after 
which duties were imposed on various articles of foreign manufac­
ture,  avowedly with the intention of enabling some ot ner people 
to employ some of their surplus labour etc. The natural consequence 
was, that Irish manufactures gradually disappeared as the Act of 
Union came into effect. 
Dublin 
Master woollen manufacturers 1800 
Hands employed 
Master woolcombers 
Hands employed 
Carpet manufacturers 
Hands employed 
Silk-loom weavers at work 91 1840 12 
4,918 " 602 
30 1834 5 
230 " 66 
13 1841 1 
720 " 0 
2,500 1840 250 
Kilkenny 
Blanket manufacturers 1800 
Hands employed 56 
3,000 1822 42 
925 
Balbriggan 
Calico-looms at work 1799 2,500 1841 226 
Wicklow 
Handlooms at work 1800 1,000 1841 
Cork 
Braid weavers , 1800 1,000 
Worsted weavers " 2,000 
Hosiers " 300 
Woolcombers " 700 
Cottonweavers " 2,000 1834 40 
90 
28 
110 
220 
etc. The linen industry (Ulster) did not compensate for this.a 
"The cotton manufacture of Dublin, which employed 14,000 operatives, has been 
destroyed; the 3,400 silk looms have been destroyed; the sergeb  manufacture, 
which employed 1,491 operatives, has been destroyed; the flannel manufacture of 
Rathdrum, ihe blanket manufacture of Kilkenny, the camlet' trade of Bandon, the 
worsted manufactures of Waterford, the ratteen and frieze manufactures of 
Carrick-on-Suir have been destroyed. One business alone survives! ... That 
fortunate business — which the Union Act has not struck down — that favoured, and 
a This sentence is in German in the manuscript.— Ed, 
h Marx gives the German equivalent Sersche in brackets.— Ed. 
' Marx gives the German equivalent Camelot in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第232页=====
200 Karl Marx 
privileged, and patronised business is the Irish coffin-maker's" (Speech of 
T. F. Meagher, 1847).* 
Every time Ireland was about to develop industrially, she was 
CRUSHED and reconverted into a purely AGRICULTURAL LAND. 
After the latest General Census of 1861: 
* Agricultural Population of Ireland 
(including all cottiers244 and farm labourers with 
their families)* 4,286,019 
In the 798 TOWNS (of which many were in fact 
small market towns)  1,512,948 
5,798,967 
Therefore (1861) approximately 4/5 purely agricultural, and 
actually perhaps 6/7 if market towns are also counted. 
Ireland is therefore purely  * agricultural: "Land is life" (Justice 
Blackburne). Land became the great object of pursuit. The people 
had now before them the choice between the occupation of land, 
at any rent, or starvation. System of rack-renting. 
"The lord of the land was thus enabled to dictate his own terms, and therefore 
it has been that we have heard of the payment of £5, 6, 8, and even as much as 
£10 per acre. Enormous rents, low wages, farms of an enormous extent, let by 
rapacious and indolent proprietors to monopolising landjobbers, to be relet by 
intermediate oppressors, for five times their value, among the wretched starvers on 
potatoes and water." 
State of popular starvation.* 
Corn Laws in England245 create a monopoly to  A CERTAIN  EXTENT for 
the export of  IRISH CORN  to England.  * The average export of grain 
in the first 3 years following the passage of the Act of Union about 
300,000 qrs, 
1820 over 1 million qrs, 
1834 yearly average of 2V2 million qrs. 
Amount to pay rent to  absentees,  and interest to mortgagees (1834), 
over 30 million dollars (about 7 million pounds sterling). Middlemen 
accumulated fortunes that they would not invest in the improve­
ment of land, and could not, under the system which prostrated 
manufactures, invest in machinery etc. All their accumulations 
were sent therefore to England for investment. An official 
document published by the British Government shows that the 
transfers of British securities from England to Ireland, i.e., the 
investment of Irish capital in England, in the 13 years following 
the adoption of free trade in 1821, amounted to as many millions 
of pounds sterling, and thus was Ireland forced to contribute 

=====第233页=====
Outline of a Report on the Irish Question 201 
cheap labour and cheap capital to building up "the great works of 
Britain".* 
Many pigs and export of same. 
1831-1841.  Accretion of Ireland's population from  7,767,401  to 
8,175,238 
In 10  YEARS  407,837 
In the same period there emigrated (somewhat more 
than 40,000 per  YEAR)  450,873 
The total being 858,710 
* O'Connell. Repeal Movement, Lichfield-House Contract with 
Whigs.246 Partial famines. Insurrection Acts, Arms Acts, Coercion 
Acts.** 
IV 
THE PERIOD OF THE LAST 20 YEARS (FROM 1846). 
* CLEARING OF THE ESTATE OF IRELAND* 
Earlier,  REPEATED CASES OF PARTIAL FAMINE. NOW GENERAL. 
This new period was ushered in by the potato blight (1846-47), 
starvation and the consequent exodus. 
Over one million die, in part directly from hunger, in part from 
DISEASES, etc. (caused by hunger). In 9 years, 1847-55, 1,656,044 left 
the country. 
The revolution of the old agricultural system was, originally, but a 
natural result of the barren fields. People fled. * (Families clubbed 
together to send away the youngest and most enterprising.) * Hence, 
of course, the pooling of small leaseholds and substitution of 
pasturage for crop farming. 
However, soon circumstances arose whereby this became a 
conscious and deliberate system. 
Firstly, the chief factor: Repeal of the Corn Laws was one of the 
direct consequences of the Irish disaster. As a result, Irish corn 
lost its monopoly on the English market in the ordinary years. 
Corn prices dropped. Rents could no longer be paid. In the 
meantime, the price of meat, wool and other animal products 
has been rising steadily in the last 20 years. Tremendous growth of 
the wool industry in England. Pig-raising was partly connected with 
a In an earlier passage in his manuscript, after the words "if market towns are also 
counted" (this section, pp. 199-200), Marx outlines this paragraph thus: "b) 
1831-1847. O'Connel", after which the following words are crossed out:  "REPEAL 
MOVEMENT.  Lichfield-House Contract with Whigs. (Useless buildings etc.) Not to be 
forgotten that during the entire period successive  INSURRECTION ACTS, ARMS ACTS, 
COERCION  ACTS".— Ed. 

=====第234页=====
202 Karl Marx 
the old system. Now, chiefly sheep and horned cattle.* [Ireland] 
deprived of the English market now, as by the Act of Union of her 
own.* 
Contributing circumstances that made this systematic: 
Secondly: Reorganisation of agriculture in England. Caricature 
of same in Ireland. 
Thirdly: The despairing flight of starving Irish to England filled 
basements, hovels, WORKHOUSES in Liverpool, Manchester, Birming­
ham, Glasgow with *men, women, children in a state almost of 
starvation *. 
Act of Parliament passed (1847-48) that Irish  * landlords had to 
support their own paupers *. (The English Pauper Law is 
extended to Ireland.3) Hence, the Irish (especially English) 
landlords, mostly deep in debt, try *to get rid of the people and 
clear their estates*. 
Fourthly:  * Encumbered Estates Act (1853?)b: 
"The landlord was ruined, for he could collect no rents, and he was at the same 
time liable for the payment of enormous taxes for the maintenance of his poor 
neighbours. His land was encumbered with mortgages and settlements, created 
when food was high, and he could pay no interest; and now a law was passed, by 
aid of which property could be summarily disposed of at a public sale, and the 
proceeds distributed among those who had legal claims upon it."* 
ABSENTEE PROPRIETORS (English capitalists, INSURANCE SOCIETIES etc.) 
thereby multiplied, equally former MIDDLEMEN etc., who wanted to 
run their farms on modern economic lines. 
Eviction of farmers partly by friendly agreement terminating 
tenure.  - But much more EVICTION on a large scale (forcibly by 
CROWBAR  BRIGADE, beginning with the destruction of roofs), forcible 
EJECTION. (Also used as political retribution.) This has continued 
since 1847 to this day. (Abercorn, Viceroy of Ireland.) African 
razzias * (razzias of the little African kings). (People driven from 
the land. The starving population of the towns largely increased.) 
"The tenantry are turned out of the cottages by scores at a time.... Land agents 
direct the operation. The work is done by a large force of police and soldiery. 
Under the protection of the latter, the 'crowbar brigade' advances to the devoted 
township, takes possession of the houses.... The sun that rose on a village sets on a 
desert." (Galway Paper, 1852.) (Abercorn.)* 
Let us now see how this system affected the land in  Ireland, 
where conditions are quite different from those in England. 
a An Act to Amend an Act of the Tenth Year of Her Present Majesty, for 
Amending the Laws Relating to the Removal of the Poor.— Ed. 
b An Act for Continuing and Amending the Act for Facilitating the Sale and 
Transfer of Encumbered Estates in Ireland.— Ed. 

=====第235页=====
Outline of a Report on the Irish Question 203 
DECREASE OF CULTIVATED LAND. 1861-1866 
* Decrease in cereal crops Decrease in green crops* 
1861-65 428,041 acres 107,984 acres 
1866 42,876 acres 20,077 acres 
Total 470,917 128,061 
DECREASE OF * YIELD PER STATUTE ACRE OF EVERY CROP3 
1847-1865 per cent: the exact decrease: oats 16.3, flax 47.9, 
turnips 36.1, potatoes 50. Some years would show a greater 
decrease, but on the whole it has been gradual since 1847. 
Estimated Average Produce per Statute Acre 
Wheat Potatoes Flax 
cwts tons stones 
(14 lbs.) 
1851 12.5 5.1 38.6 
7866 11.3 2.9 24.9* 
Though Ireland exported considerable quantities of wheat in 
the past, it is now said to be good only for cultivating OATS'3 (the 
yield of which per acre also continuously decreases). 
In fact: 1866 Ireland shipped out only 13,250 qrs of wheat 
against 48,589 qrs shipped in (that is, almost fourfold). Meanwhile, 
it shipped out approximately one million qrs of oats (for 
£1,201,737). 
* Since the exodus, the land has been underfed and overworked, 
partly from the injudicious consolidation of farms, and partly 
because, under the corn-acre system,247 the farmer in a great 
measure trusted to his labourers to manure the land for him. 
Rents and profits (where the farmer is no peasant farmer) may 
increase, although the produce of the soil decreases. The total 
produce may diminish, and still greater part of it be converted 
into surplus produce, falling to the landlord and (great) farmer. 
And the price of the surplus produce has risen.* 
Hence, sterilisation (gradual) of the land, as in Sicily by the ancient 
Romans (ditto in Egypt). 
We shall speak of the livestock, but first about the population. 
a See this volume, p.  191.—  Ed. 
b This English word is given in the manuscript in brackets after the German 
equivalent Hafer. — Ed. 

=====第236页=====
204 Karl Marx 
DECREASE OF THE POPULATION 
1801:  5,319,867; 1841: 8,222,664; 1851: 6,515,794; 1861: 
5,764,543. If the trend continues, there will be 5,300,000 "in 1871, 
that is, less than in 1801. I shall now show, however, that the 
population will be lower still in 1871, even though the emigration 
rate remains constant. 
EMIGRATION 
Emigration ACCOUNTS naturally for part of the decrease. In 
1845-66 there emigrated 1,990,244, or approximately 2,000,000 
IRISH.  (Unheard of.) (About 2/5 of the TOTAL emigration from the 
UNITED KINGDOM in 1845-66 which was 4,657,588.) In 1831-41 
emigration approximately equalled half the accretion of population 
during the decade, and after 1847 it was considerably higher than 
the accretion. 
However, emigration alone *does not account for the decrease 
of the population since 1847*. 
DECREASE OF THE NATURAL ANNUAL ACCRETION 
OF THE POPULATION 
The accretion (annual) in 1831-41 was 1.1 per cent, or  ABOUT 
1 Vio Per  cent a year. If the population had increased in the same 
proportion in 1841-51, it would have been 9,074,514 in 1851. In 
fact, however, it was only 6,515,794. Consequently, the deficit was 
2,558,720. Out of this figure, emigration accounted for 1,274,213. 
That leaves  1,284,507  unaccounted for. Over a million, but not 
the whole deficit of 1,284,507, died in the FAMINE. Hence, evidently, 
natural population growth decreased in  1841-51. 
This is borne out by the decade of 1851-61. No FAMINE. The 
population decreased from 6,515,794 to 5,764,543. Absolute 
decrease:  751,251.  Yet emigration in this period was over 
1,210,000. Henoe there was an accretion of NEARLY 460,000 during 
the ten years. Because 751,251+460,000 = the number of 
emigrants= 1,211,251. Emigration claimed almost triple the accre­
tion. The rate of accretion was 0.7 per cent per year, hence 
considerably lower than the 1.1 per cent of  1831-41. 
The explanation is very simple.  * The increase of a population by 
births must principally depend on the proportion which those 
between 20 and 35 bear to the rest of the community. Now the 

=====第237页=====
Outline of a Report on the Irish Question 205 
proportion of persons between the ages of 20 and 35 in the 
population of the United Kingdom is about  1:3.98  or 25.06 per 
cent, while their proportion in the emigration even of the present 
day is about  1:1.89  or 52.76 per cent.* And probably still greater 
in Ireland. 
PHYSICAL  DETERIORATION OF THE POPULATION 
* In 1806, with a total population of 5,574,107, there was an 
excess of males over females by 50,469, whilst in 1867, with a total 
population of 5,557,196, there is an excess of the females over 
males.*  At the same time not only a relative, but an absolute increase 
in the number *of deaf-mutes,3 blind, insane, idiotic, and decrepit 
inhabitants. Contrasting 1851 with 1861, whilst the population had 
decreased enormously, the number of deaf-mutes had increased 
by 473, on their former total of 5,180; the lame and decrepit by 
225, on their former total of 4,375; the blind by  1,092,  on their 
former total of 5,767; the lunatic and idiotic, by the immense 
number of 4,118, on their former total of 9,980; mounting up, in 
1861,  notwithstanding the decrease in the population, to 14,098. 
WAGES 
Wages have not risen more than 20% since the potato famine. 
The price of potatoes has risen nearly 200%, and the rise* for 
essential foodstuffs has been 100% *on an average. 
Professor Cliffe Leslie, i-n the Economist of February 9, 1867, says: 
"After a loss of two-fifths of the population in 21 years, throughout most of the 
island, the rate of wages is now only Is. a day; a shilling does not go further than 
6d. did 21 years ago. Owing to this rise in the ordinary food the labourer is worse 
off than he was ten years ago." 
Partial famines, especially in Munster and Connaught.* 
Bankruptcy of SHOPKEEPERS PERMANENT. Market towns, etc., fall into 
decay. 
THE  RESULTS  OE THIS PROCESS 
In 1855-66,  1,032,694  Irishmen replaced by 996,859 head of 
LIVESTOCK (cattle, sheep and pigs). That, in fact, was the accretion of 
;l After this English word Marx gives its German equivalent in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第238页=====
206 Karl Marx 
LIVESTOCK  during that period, with  the  DECREASE OF HORSES  (20,bob) 
compensated  by  four sheep  [to one  horse], which  are  therefore 
subtracted from  the  accretion. 
*co\soi  m vi  ION oi i•  \KMS* 
From  1851 to 1861 the  TOTAL DECREASE  of  EARMS  was 120,000. 
(Though  the  number  of  15-30 acre  RKMS  and  EAKMS  of .'50  acres 
and over increased.) Thus, the decrease affected particularly farms 
of one to  under  15  acres. 
In 1861 about  3/-, of the  area (Ireland's total area: 20,3-19,924 
acres)  or 12  million acres was held  by  569,844 tenants who worked 
plots  of one up to  less than  100  acres, arid about L7:>  (8 million 
acres)  by  tenants with over  100 and 500  acres  and  over (31,927 
tenants). 
The process  of consolidation  in full gear. Ulster. (Cultivation  of 
flax; Scottish Protestant tenants.) 
The Times  etc.  officially congratulates Abercorn  as  Vicerouy  on 
this system.  He, too, is one of  these  DEVASTATORS.  Lord Dufferin: 
over-population etc.'1 
In sum,  it is a  question  of  life and  death. 
Meagher, Hennessy, Irishman. 
DECREASE  Ol '.RIME  IN  1RE1AND 
Committed (Convicted 
for trial 
1852 17,078 10,454 
1866 4,32b' 2,4 US 
V 
UNITED STATES AND FENIANISM 
Writ ten  on  about December  Hi, 181)7 
First published  in:  Marx  and  Engels, 
Works,  Second Russian Edition,  Vol. lb. 
Moscow,  1960 Printed according  to the  manu­
script 
See this volume,  pp.  428,  43.5.—  F.d. 

=====第239页=====
207 
Karl Marx 
[REMARKS ON THE PROGRAMME AND RULES 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE 
OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY]248 
[PROGRAMME AND RULES 
OF THE ALLIANCE]3 [MARX'S REMARKS] 
The socialist minority of the League of 
Peace and Freedom, having separated itself 
from the League as a result of the majority 
vote at the Berne Congress, the majority 
being formally opposed to the fundamental 
principle of all workers' associations—that of 
economic and social equalisation of classes and 
individuals—has thereby adhered to the 
principles proclaimed by the workers' con­
gresses  held in Geneva, Lausanne and Brussels. 
Several members of this minority, belonging 
to various nations, have suggested that we 
should form a new International Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy, merged entirely in the 
great International Working Men's Association, 
but having a special mission to study political 
and philosophical questions on the basis of 
the grand principle of the universal and 
genuine equality of all human beings on 
earth. 
Convinced, for our part, of the useful­
ness of such an enterprise that would 
provide sincere socialist democratsb of 
Europe and America with the means of 
being understood and of affirming their 
ideas,  without any pressure from the false 
socialism which bourgeois democracy finds 
necessary to apply these days, we consider it 
our duty, together with our friends, to take equality of classes! 
merged in and established 
against! 
So, the socialist democrats 
are not understood through 
the International 
a Programme et Règlement de l'Alliance internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste, 
Geneva [1868].— Ed. 
b The words in bold type were underlined by Marx. — Ed. 
9-733 

=====第240页=====
208 Karl Marx 
the initiative in forming this new organisa­
tion. 
Therefore, we have constituted ourselves 
as the central section of the International 
Alliance of Socialist  Democracy,  and we publish 
today its Programme and Rules. What modesty! They consti­
tute themselves as the centr­
al authority, clever lads! 
PROGRAMME 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
ALLIANCE OF SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY 
1) The Alliance declares itself atheist; it 
wants abolition of cults, substitution of sci­
ence for faith, and human justice for divine 
justice. 
2) It wants above all political, economic 
and social equalisation of classes and indi­
viduals of both sexes, commencing with 
abolition of the right of inheritance, so that 
in future enjoyment be equal to each per­
son's production, and so that, in conformity 
with the decision taken at the last workers' 
congress in Brussels", the land, instruments of 
labour, like all other capital, on becoming 
the collective property of the entire society, 
may be used only by the workers, that is, by 
agricultural and industrial associations. 
3) It wants for all children of both sexes, 
from birth, equal conditions of development, 
that is, maintenance, education and training 
at all levels of science, industry and the arts, 
being convinced that this equality, at first 
only economic and social, will gradually 
lead to greater natural equality of individu­
als, eliminating all kinds of artificial ine­
qualities, historical products of a social or­
ganisation as false as it is iniquitous. 
4) Being the foe of all despotism, not 
recognising any political form other than 
republican, and rejecting completely any 
reactionary alliance, it also rejects any politi­
cal action which does not have as its im­
mediate and direct aim the triumph of the 
workers' cause against Capital. 
5) It recognises that all the political and 
authoritarian states that exist at present and 
are more and more reducing their activities 
to simple administrative functions of public 
service in their respective countries, will have 
to dissolve into a universal union of free 
associations, both agricultural and industrial 
ones. As if one could declare—by 
decree—the abolition of 
faith! 
Hermaphrodite man! Just 
like the Russian commune! 
The old Saint Simon 
panacea! 
Empty phrase! 
If they are reducing them­
selves they will not have to 
dissolve, but will disappear 
spontaneously. 

=====第241页=====
Remarks on the Programme and Rules of the Alliance 209 
6) Since the social question can only have 
a final and real solution on the basis of 
international or universal solidarity of the 
workers of all countries, the Alliance rejects 
any policy based on so-called patriotism and 
on rivalry between nations. 
7) It wants the universal association of all 
local associations on the basis of Liberty. There is rivalry and rivalry, 
my dear Russian! 
RULES 
1) The International Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy constitutes a branch of the Inter­
national Working Men's Association and 
accepts all its general rules. 
2) The Founder Members of the Alliance 
are organising provisionally a Central Bureau 
at Geneva. 
3) Founder Members belonging to the 
same country constitute the national bureau 
of their country. 
4) The national bureaus shall establish in 
all regions local groups of the Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy, which, through their 
respective national bureaus, shall ask the 
Central Bureau of the Alliance to admit them 
into the International Working Men's Associa­
tion. 
5) All local groups shall form their 
bureaus according to the customary proce­
dure accepted by the local sections of the 
International Working Men's Association. 
6) All members of the Alliance shall pay 
a monthly contribution of ten centimes, half of 
which shall be retained for their own needs 
by each national group, and the other half 
shall go to the Central Bureau for its general 
requirements. 
In countries where this sum is judged to 
be too high, the national bureaus, in accord 
with the Central Bureau, shall have the 
power to reduce it. 
7) At the annual Working Men's Con­
gress the delegation of the Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy, as a branch of the International 
Working Men's Association, shall hold public 
meetings in a separate building. The International Associa­
tion does not admit any 
"international branches". 
New Central Council! 
The Rules of the Interna­
tional do not recognise this 
"mediatory power". 
New taxes absorbing our 
own contributions! 
They want to compromise 
us under our own pat­
ronage! 
MEMBERS OF THE GENEVA 
INITIATORY GROUP 
J. Philipp Becker.— M. Bakunin.—Th. 
Rémy. —Antoine Lindegger. — Louis Nideg-Asinus Asinorum! And 
Madame Bakunin! 
9* 

=====第242页=====
210 Karl Marx 
ger.— Valerien Mroczkowsky. — Jean Zagor-
sky.— Phil.  Zöller. —A. Ardin.—Ch. Perron. — 
J. Gay —J. Friess —Fr. Rochat —Nikolai Zhu-
kovsky. — M. Elpidin. —Zampérini.—  E. Be­
cker. — Lours Weiss. — Perret. — Marauda.— 
Edouard Crosset. — A. Blanchard — A. Matis.— 
Ch. Raymond. — Mme.  Alexeyeva/ 1—Mme. 
Bakunin.— Mme. Suzette Croset.— Mme. 
Rosalie Sanguinède. — Mme. Désirée Gay.— 
Mme. Jenny Guinet.— Antoine Dunaud. — 
J. Maulet.— Guerry. —Jacques Courtois. — 
John Potot. — André Bel. — Fr. Bofféty. — 
Ch. Guyot. — Ch. Postleb. — Ch. Détraz. — 
J. Croset. —J. Sanguinède. — C. Jaclard. — 
L. Coulin. — Fr. Gay.— Blaise Rossety.—Jos. 
Marilly. —C. Brechtel. — L. Monachon. — Fr. 
Mermillod. — Donat-père. —L. J. Cheneval. — 
J. Bedeau. — L. H. Fornachon. — Pinière. — 
Ch. Grange. —Jacques Laplace.— S. Pella-
ton.—W. Rau.—Gottlob Walter.— Adolphe 
Haeberling. — Perrié. — Adolphe Catalan. — 
Marc Héridier. — Louis Allement. — A. Peller-
gin-Druart. — Louis de Coppet. — Louis Dup-
raz.—Guillmeaux. —Joseph Baquet. — Fr. Pis-
teur.—Ch. Ruchet. — Placide Margarittaz. — 
Paul Garbani. — Etienne Borret. —J. J. Sco-
pini. — F. Crochet. —Jean Jost. — Leopold 
Wucher.— C. Filliétaz. — L. Fulliquet. — Ami 
Gandillon. — V. Alexeyev. b—François Cheval­
lier. 
The Founder Members of the Internation­
al Alliance of Socialist Democracy, having 
decided to start a paper.under the name La 
Révolution, tö be the press organ of this new 
Association, the provisional Central Bureau 
will begin publication as soon as 300 shares, 
of 10 francs each and payable in four 
instalments quarterly, from January 1, 1869, 
have been subscribed. Accordingly, the provi­
sional Central Bureau is appealing to all 
national bureaus of the Alliance and inviting 
them to begin subscriptions in their own 
countries. As these subscriptions are consid­
ered voluntary gifts which give no right to 
receipt of the paper, the national bureaus are 
also requested to compile a list of sub­
scribers. 
The paper will appear once a week. Jules Johannard 
Eugene Dupont 0 
and they have the cheek to 
announce in Switzerland 
that I shall contribute arti­
cles to "La Révolution", 249 
without informing me! 
a Barteneva.— Ed. 
b Bartenev.— Ed. 
c The names Johannard and Dupont are written in Jung's hand.— Ed. 

=====第243页=====
Remarks on the Programme and Rules of the Alliance 211 
one year 
six months 
On behalf of the 
Bureau: Stibscription cost: 
6 fr. 
3 fr. 50 
provisional Central 
Secretary, Jean Zagorsky 
rue Montbrillant, 8. 
N. B. The national bureaus are requested 
to send the Central Bureau the money 
received for the shares and subscriptions 
before January 1. 
Remarks made by Karl Marx on De­
cember 15, 1868 
First published, in Russian, in Generalny 
Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1868-1870, 
Moscow, 1964 Printed according to the French 
leaflet containing Marx's remarks 
Translated from the French 

=====第244页=====
212 
Karl Marx 
[IRELAND FROM THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 
TO THE UNION OF 1801 
EXTRACTS AND NOTES]250 
I. FROM 1778 TO 1782. INDEPENDENCE 
A) IRISH PARLIAMENT BEFORE 1782 
Importance of the question for English working  class,  and working-class 
movement generally. 
Until 1800 Ireland, although conquered, remained separate and federate 
kingdom. Title of King up to peace of Amiens251 "George III, King of Great 
Britain, France, and  Ireland,  defender of the faith etc." 
The English usurpations in regard to the Parliament at Dublin 
principally calculated with view to mercantile monopoly on the one 
hand, and, on the other, to have the appelate jurisdiction in regard 
to the titles of landed estates in the last instance to be decided at 
London, only in English courts. 
Poynings' Law252 
A Statute of Henry VII, framed by his Attorney-General, Sir Edward Poynings, 
restrained the Irish Parliament from originating any law whatever, either in the Lords 
or Commons. Before any statute could be finally discussed, it was previously 
submitted to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and his Privy Council?5i for their 
consideration, who might at their pleasure reject it, or transmit it to England. The 
British Attorney-General and Privy Council were invested with a power either to 
suppress it altogether, or model it at their own will, and then return it to Ireland, with 
permission to the Irish Parliament to pass it into law. Already Molyneux etc. protested 
against this (17th century). Later, in the 18th century, Swift and Dr. Lucas.254 
Statute 6, George I255 
(It declared in fact the legislative supremacy of the British 
Parliament over Ireland.) 

=====第245页=====
^ 
t*U, 
Page of Marx's manuscript Ireland 
from the American Revolution to the Union 
of 1801 

=====第246页=====

=====第247页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 215 
Poynings' law reduced the Irish House of Commons to a mere instrument of the 
Privy Council of both nations, and, consequently, of the British Cabinet. 
George I, Statute, to neutralise the Irish legislation altogether, and to establish an 
appellant jurisdiction to the British Lords, whereby every decree and judgment of the 
Irish superior courts, which would tend to affect or disturb the questionable or bad 
titles of the British adventurers or  absentees'* 56 to Irish estates or Irish property, might 
be reversed or rendered abortive in Great Britain by a vote of the Scotch and English 
nobility. 
(This was re-enacted by the Union!) 
Many British Peers and Commoners, through whose influence this Statute of 
George I had been enacted, had themselves been deeply interested in effecting that 
measure, to secure their own grants of Irish estates. Under the 1st clause of this 
law England assumed a despotic power "and declared her inherent right to bind 
Ireland by every Statute in which she should be expressly designated". 
It was the success of that vicious precedent which had 
encouraged George III and his British Parliament to attempt to 
legislate for America. Cost them the North-American colonies.257 
General Character of Irish Parliament 
in the 18th Century Until the Upheaving 
Protestant Parliament. Only Protestants electors. In fact the 
Parliament of the Conquerors. A mere instrument, a mere serf in 
relation to the British Government. Compensated themselves by 
despotism against the Catholic mass of the Irish people. Penal 
Code against Catholics258 rigorously enforced. Only from time to 
time some efforts of that Parliament to resist the English 
commercial legislature ruining Irish industry and commerce, then 
principally carried on by the Protestant, Scotch-English part of the 
population. 
As to the internal composition of this Parliament etc. more will be 
said by and by. 
A new state of things opened with the American War of 
Independence and the disasters it brought upon England. 

=====第248页=====
216 Karl Marx 
B)a FIRST EFFECTS OF AMERICAN WAR 
OF INDEPENDENCE ON IRELAND PRIOR 
TO LEGISLATIVE INDEPENDENCE 
A) RELAXATION OF PENAL CODE AGAINST CATHOLICS 
American (United States) Declaration of Independence proclaimed 
by Congress, 4 July I776.h 
April 1777: Congress proclaims the Constitution (American) of 
American Republic.11 
War between England and America. 
6 February 1778: Treaties with France, by which independence of 
American Republic [was] recognised and France promised to 
support the Americans, until they had got rid of the English.259 
Great fermentation produced by the American events in 
Ireland. Many Irish, mainly Presbyterians from Ulster, emigrate to 
America, enrol under the United States banners and fight against 
England on the other side of the Atlantic. The Catholics, who for a 
long time had in vain supplicated for a relaxation of the Penal 
Code, moved again in 1776, in louder tones. 
1778: Irish Parliament relaxed the severity of the Penal Code, its 
worst features obliterated, Catholics were allowed to take leases of 
land. 
Curran said afterwards (1792, in debate on Catholic Emancipa­
tion): 
"What was the consequence even of a partial union with your countrymen? The 
united efforts of the two bodies restored that constitution which had been lost by 
their separation.[...] Your Catholic brethren shared the danger of the conflict, but 
you had not justice or gratitude to let them share the fruits of the victory. You 
suffered them to relapse into their former insignificance and depression. And, let 
me ask you, has it not fared with you according to your deserts? Let me ask you if 
the Parliament of Ireland can boast of being now less at the feet of the British 
Minister, than at that period it was of the British Parliament?" 
"But you affect to think your property in danger, by admitting them into the state.[...] 
Thirteen years ago you expressed the same fears, yet you made the experiment; you 
opened the door to landed property, and the fact has shown the fear to be without 
foundation."260 Then Protestant Ascendancy.261 Tithes and property of the Protestant 
Church in  Ireland. 
a In the manuscript this section is marked II, though the preceding section is 
marked "A" and the following "C".— Ed. 
b "Declaration of Independence in Congress, July 4, 1776. The Unanimous 
Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America".— Ed. 
c "Articles of Confederation, and Perpetual Union".— Ed. 

=====第249页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 217 
Main opposition to every innovation and useful measure on the 
part of  absentees.  Always steady adherents of the Minister for the 
time being. Their proxies in the Lords, and their influence in the 
Commons, were transferred to the Minister on a card or in a 
letter, and on every division in both Houses they formed a 
phalanx. 
B) THE VOLUNTEER ORGANISATION. 
THE FREE-TRADE MOVEMENT. 
FIRST CONCESSIONS OF ENGLAND 
On 4 July 1776 the Americans had proclaimed their Declaration 
of Independence. In the same year the Irish Catholics, as seen, 
demanded (they had before supplicated for) relaxation of the Penal 
Code, redress. 
In April 1777 Constitution of American Republic proclaimed. In 
1778 first redress of the Catholic grievances etc. This enabled the 
Irish Protestants, till now considered by the English as their gaolers 
and bailiffs, to move. 
To understand the movement from 1779-1782 (Legislative 
Independence), it becomes necessary briefly to allude to the state in 
which England found  herself. 
June 1778 commenced war between England and France.262 In 
1780 France sent not only, as she had done till then, money 
subsidies and men-of-war to America, but also an auxiliary army. 
(6,000 men under the Marquis of Rochambeau.) The French army 
landed on 10 July 1780 in Rhode Island, surrendered to him by 
the English. September 1780 English colonel Ferguson defeated in the 
West of North Carolina. 19 October 1781, Cornwallis (General) 
included by Washington in York Town (Virginia) had to capitulate. 
(5-6,000 men, many English men-of-war etc. were captured.) 
27 July 1778 sea-battle between French and English at Quessant. 
Undecided. 
Summer 1779: King of Spain3 accedes as ally to United States and 
France. His navy united with the French one. The hostile fleets 
assailed the English coast in June, and only the dissension amongst 
the French and Spanish Admirals saved Plymouth (August 1779) 
from the destruction of its wharfs and arsenals. 
In 1780 England was not defeated on the sea, but lost much in 
money and mercantile ships. 
a Charles III.— Ed 

=====第250页=====
218 Karl Marx 
26 February 1780 Russia invites all neutral maritime powers to 
Armed Neutrality.263  England pounces upon Holland. 5 August 
1782 naval battle between English and Dutch, at Doggersbank, in 
the North Sea. Undecided. 
On 30 November 1782 at Paris Preliminary Peace Treaty between 
United States and England. 
* * * 
1779. Great part of English army and navy consisted of 
Irishmen. In 1779 Ireland was left ungarrisoned, an invasion of 
Ireland by France threatened, English coast (Plymouth) menaced 
by united French and Spanish navy. Under these circumstances 
the Volunteers—the armed Protestantism of Ireland264—arose, 
partly for defence from the foreigner, partly for self-vindication. 
In less time than could have been supposed, from the commence­
ment of these armed associations, the whole surface of the island 
was covered with a self-raised host of patriot soldiers. 
* * =t-
At this place, it will be interesting to anticipate the whole of the 
history of this Volunteer force, because, in fact, it is the history of 
Ireland to the moment when, since 1795, on the one hand, the 
general popular, national and constitutional movement, represented by 
them, stripped off its merely national character and merged into a 
truly revolutionary movement, and, on the other hand, the British 
Government changed secret intrigue for brutal force intended to 
bring about, and succeeding in bringing about, the Union of 1800, 
i. e. the annihilation of Ireland as a nation, and its transformation 
into an out of the way country district of England. 
There are 4 periods of the Volunteer movement. 
J Period.  From 1779 to 1783: In its first formation the 
Volunteers, the armed Protestantism of Ireland, embrace all vital 
elements of all classes, noblemen, gentlemen, merchants, farmers, 
labourers. Their first object, emancipation from the commercial 
and industrial fetters which the mere mercantile jealousy of 
England had thrown around them. Then National Independence. 
Then Reform of Parliament and Catholic Emancipation as one of the 
conditions of National Resurrection! Their official organisation 
and the disasters of England give them new strength, but lay also 

=====第251页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 219 
the germ of their ruin, subordinating them to a weak, bigot, 
aristocratic Whig, the Earl of Charlemont. The first victories 
(commercial ones) of the Irish Commons they justly claim as their 
own victory. The votes of thanks by the Irish Commons exalt 
them. Catholic bodies enroll in them. The apogee of their power 
in 1783, when their delegates assembled in Dublin Rotunda, as 
Convention for Parliamentary Reform. The treason of their chief 
and the disavowal of them by the Irish House of Commons breaks 
their force and pushes them into the background. 
II Period.  From 1783 to 1791 (October). 
Still important as pressure from without upon Irish Parliament, 
especially House of Commons, and as armed and popular support 
of the national and reforming Opposition (minority) of the House of 
Commons. The aristocratic element and reactionary part of the 
middle-class withdrew, the popular element prevailing. 
The French Revolution (1789) finds both Catholic Committee 
(principally composed of Catholic noblemen) 
and Whig Club™5 
(Reformers) 
feeble and dispirited.266 
There was a steady decline of the Volunteer organisation, and of the strength 
of the Liberal Party until 1790. 
A different race of men from Whig Club orators or Catholic Lords now began 
to act on the public. 
In Dublin, John Keogh, a strong, rough-souled, sagacious merchant, and men of 
his stamp, sent the Catholic nobles flying in slavish dread. 
And in Belfast, Neilson, Russell, McCracken etc., headed a Protestant Party, 
which advocated Reform, but began soon to think of Republicanism. The 
government rendered fearful by the Regency dispute,™'7 and desperate by the 
French Revolution, began to push corruption and the principles of the Union3 
harder than ever. 
Theobald Wolfe Tone, the son of a man, half coachmaker and half farmer, a poor 
and briefless barrister, with a wife and a pack of children, resolved to redress the 
wrongs of the Catholics, restore representation in the Commons, and with these, or 
failing in them, to make his country an independent republic. Now he wrote a 
pamphlet in favour of the Catholic emancipation, called: "An Argument on Behalf of the 
Catholics of  Ireland,  by a Northern Whig, " and received every mark of gratitude from 
his new clients. 
In October, 1791, in Belfast he founded the first United Irish Society. 
From this moment, the movement of the Volunteers merges into 
that of the United Irishmen. The Catholic question became that of 
a Probably a slip of the pen; in his "Memoir of John Ph. Curran" prefixed to 
The Speeches of ... Curran, Thomas Davis writes (p. XX): "to push corruption and 
the principles of disunion".— Ed. 

=====第252页=====
220 Karl Marx 
the Irish people. The question was no longer to remove disabilities 
from the Catholic upper and middle  classes,  but to emancipate the Irish 
peasant, for the vast part Catholic. The question became social as to 
its matter, assumed French political principles as to its form, 
remained national. 
III Period.  From 1791 (October) to 1795 (after recall of Lord 
Fitzwilliam). 
The movement of the Volunteers merged into that of the United 
Irishmen. 
Public until 1794, when forced by the government measures to become secret. The 
United Irishmen increased in numbers, the Catholics in confidence, and the 
Volunteer Corps began to restore their array, and improve their discipline. 
Acme of their action: 
15 February 1793: A Volunteer Convention at Dungannon passed resolutions in favour 
of Emancipation and Reform, and named a permanent Committee. The Relief Bill 
of April 1793 was carried by this pressure.268 
But now, the Catholic higher  classes secede  from the movement; pitched 
against the ci-devanta Volunteers (merging into the Secret 
Societies of the United Irishmen) the aristocratic and stupidly, 
bigottedly middle-class yeomen. 
Coercive laws against military societies, drilling, and the whole machinery of the 
Volunteers passed on // March 1793, and the Alien Act, the Militia, Foreign 
Correspondence, Gunpowder and Convention Acts?69 in fact, a full code of  coercion passed 
by the same Parliament, that had passed the Catholic Relief Bill. 
The United Irishmen became a secret organisation. Recall of 
Fitzwilliam only left the decision to force. 
IV Period.  Volunteer movement merged into the revolutionary 
movement since 1795. 
* * * 
We now return to the development of the Volunteer Movement, 
1779-83,  and the Acts of Irish Parliament under this high popular 
pression. The Armed Associations, first provincial and local, strongest 
in the North (Ulster) and Dublin (Leinster). Only Protestants. First 
against Invasion. Protestant farmers rallied under this cry first. 
Catholics prohibited by statute from bearing arms in Ireland. 
However, they zealously assisted in forwarding those very associa-
a Former.— Ed 

=====第253页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 221 
tions into which they themselves had no admission. Their calmness 
and their patriotism gained them many friends, and a relaxation 
of intolerance appeared rapidly to be gaining ground, but it was 
not until the Volunteers had assumed a deliberative capacity, that the 
necessity of uniting the whole population of the country in the cause of 
independency became distinctly obvious. 
The first object of the Irish Volunteers—after the defence against 
invasion—was to free themselves mercantilely and industrially, an 
interest then almost wholly in the hands of the Protestants, although 
by its very nature a national interest. 
It was observed, that this British assumption of authority to 
legislate for Ireland, whatever colouring it might have received by 
the dissimulation or ingenuity of its supporters, had, in fact, for its 
real object the restraint of her commerce and the suppression of her 
manufactures, so far as they might interfere with the interests of England; 
because the management of the merely local concerns of  Ireland,  by 
her own Parliament, was altogether immaterial to Great Britain, 
unless where a commercial rivalship might be the probable 
consequence of successful industry and legislative encouragement. 
Peers [showed] no public spirit; the measures of the Commons 
might be suppressed by an act of the Privy Council; hence 
determined co-operation of the whole people necessary. 
The moment (the distress of England and the armed force of 
the Volunteers) was favourable. 
England, notwithstanding [the fact that] she had in some 
instances suspended, and in others prohibited, the exportation of Irish 
manufactures, inundated the Irish markets with every species of her 
own; a combination of the great capitalists of England to destroy 
Irish manufacture by inundation of the Irish market. 
Hence the Irish resolved to adopt a non-importation and non-
consumption agreement throughout the whole kingdom, by exclud­
ing not only the importation, but the consumption of any British 
manufacture in  Ireland.  No sooner was this measure publicly 
proposed, than it was universally adopted; it flew quicker than the 
wind throughout the whole nation. Meanwhile the Volunteer 
organisation spread; at length almost every independent Protes­
tant enrolled as a patriot soldier. Self-formed, self-governed, no 
commissions from the Crown, no connexion whatever with the 
Government, [they] appointed their own officers etc. Yet subordi­
nation complete. Their arms at first provided by themselves; but 
the extraordinary increase of their numbers rendered them at 
length unable to procure a sufficient- supply by purchase; they 
required arms from the Government; Government did not think it 

=====第254页=====
222 Karl Marx 
safe to refuse their demand; and, with an averted eye, handed out 
to the Volunteers 20,000 stands of arms from the Castle of Dublin.270 
Many men who had served in the United States against the 
Americans became their drill sergeants. At the head of the corps 
noblemen etc. Important in this movement the familiar association 
of all ranks. 
Under these circumstances: 
Sessions of the Irish Parliament 1779-80. After frivolous speech of 
the Lord Lieutenant (Harcourt?)3 in the House of Lords, and 
usual adulatory address moved in the Commons by Sir Robert 
Deane,h Grattan moved the following amendment: 
"That we beseech Your Majesty to believe, that it is with the utmost reluctance 
we are constrained to approach you on the present occasion; but the constant drain 
to supply absentees, and the unfortunate prohibition of our trade, have caused such 
calamity, that the natural support of our country has decayed, and our 
manufacturers are dying for want: famine stalks hand in hand with hopeless 
wretchedness; and the only means left to support the expiring trade of this 
miserable part of Your Majesty's dominions, is to open a free export trade, and let 
your Irish subjects enjoy their natural birthright."0 
Mr. Hussey Burgh, the Prime Sergeant (above the Attorney-
General) moved the following amendment: 
"That it is not by temporary expedients, that this nation is now to be saved from 
impending ruin.271 
Unanimously carried. 
Volunteers attributed rightly this unexpected success to their 
movement. It greatly increased both the numbers and confidence 
in Volunteer associations. 
Although even in both Houses of the British Parliament attention 
[was] called to the Irish distress and the dangerous state of that 
country, Lord North treated the whole [matter] with his usual 
superciliousness and frivolity. Nothing was done. 
The non-importation and non-consumption movement became now 
general in Ireland. At length, a general meeting was convened by 
the High Sheriff of the city of Dublin, and resolutions then entered 
into by the whole metropolis, which finally confirmed and 
consummated that judicious measure, and at length convinced 
a George Nugent-Temple Grenville, the Marquis of Buckingham, was the Lord 
Lieutenant of Ireland at the time. See his speech at the opening of the session of 
the Irish Parliament on October 12, 1779, in H. Grattan, The Speeches..., Vol. I, 
pp. 20-22.—Ed 
b Deane's address to George III on October 12, 1779, see H. Grattan, The 
Speeches..., Vol. I, p. 22.— Ed. 
c See J. Mitchel, The History of  Ireland..,  Vol. I, p. 126.— Ed. 

=====第255页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 223 
Great Britain, that Ireland would no longer submit to insult and 
domination. These resolutions were enforced with vigour and 
strictness. The Volunteers of Dublin resolved to consolidate, chose 
William, Duke of Leinster, for their  Chief.  This was the first 
measure of the Volunteers to form a regular army composed of 
every rank of society. Secret efforts of the Government to seduce 
the soldier from his officers, or to detach the most popular 
officers from the command of the soldiers—all in vain! 
The appointment of the Duke of Leinster to the command of 
the Dublin Volunteers, was quickly followed by that of other 
district generals; and the organisation of 4 provincial armies was 
regularly proceeded on. The Ulster army appointed the Earl of 
Charlemont its commander-in-chief, the other armies proceeded 
rapidly in their organisation. Provincial reviews were adopted; and 
everything assumed the appearance of systematic movement. Soon 
General Commander-in-Chief [was appointed]. 
Affairs now approached fast towards a crisis; the freedom of 
commerce being the subject most familiar to the ideas of the 
people, was the first object of their solicitude. "A free trade" 
became the watchword of the Volunteers, and the cry of the Nation; 
the Dublin Volunteer Artillery appeared on parade, commanded by 
James Napper Tandy, with labels on the mouths of their cannon: 
"Free Trade or Speedy Revolution." Lord North got now frightened. 
America already lost. On 24th November 1781 speech from the 
throne wherein he [the King] called the immediate attention of his 
British Parliament to the situation of  Ireland.  Now in hot haste these 
blockheads acceded to the Irish claims. The British Parliament met 
on 25 November, and the first Bills of concessions received the 
royal assent on 21 December 1781. Now these dunderheads 
passed Bills, distinctly repealing all the Acts which their predeces­
sors had declared absolutely essential to secure the prosperity of 
England from the dangerous industry of the Irish. 
Messages sent over to Ireland, much fuss made of the liberality 
and justice of Great Britain. Meanwhile North tried to pass over 
the year 1782, by continuing to open the Committee on Irish 
affairs from time to time, now and then passing a resolution in 
favour of that country, and thus endeavouring to wear out the 
session. 
Ireland at length perceived the duplicity of proceedings which, 
while they purported to extend benefits to Ireland?!, asserted the 
paramount authority of Great Britain, and converted its acts of 
concession into declaratory statutes of its own supremacy. 14 Irish 
Counties at once avowed to establish, at the risk of their lives and 

=====第256页=====
224 Karl Marx 
fortunes, the independence of the Jrish Legislature. The cry of "Free 
Trade" now accompanied with that of "Free Parliament". 
George III forced, from the throne (in his speech), to pass 
unqualified eulogiums on the Volunteer army, as expression of the 
loyalty and fidelity of the people. 
The Army in Ireland had been under the regulations of a British 
Statute, and the hereditary revenue of the Crown, with the aid of a 
perpetual mutiny bill,272 enabled the British Government to com­
mand at all times a standing army in  Ireland,  without the authority 
or the control of its Parliament. Volunteers became aware of this. 
Resolutions were entered into by almost every military corps, and every 
corporate body, that they would no longer obey any laws, save those 
enacted by the King, Lords and Commons of  Ireland. 
The salaries of the Judges of Ireland were then barely sufficient 
to keep them above want, and they held their offices only during the 
will of the British Minister, who might remove them at his pleasure: all 
Irish justice, therefore, was at his control. In all questions between 
the Crown and the people, the purity of the judge was 
consequently suspected. 
The Irish Parliament, at this period, met but once in 2  years,  and in 
the British Attorney-General was vested the superintendence of 
their proceedings and in the British Privy Council the alteration 
and rejection of their Statutes. 
9 October 1781. Irish House of Commons. Irish Parliament opened, speech of the 
Viceroy3 etc., after address to His Majesty passed, Mr. O'Neill (House of 
Commons) moved a resolution of thanks to "all the Volunteers of  Ireland,  for their 
exertions and continuance". Unanimously voted, and directed to be circulated 
throughout all Ireland, and to be communicated by the Sheriffs of the counties to 
the corps within their bailiwicks.b 
This resolution brought down the British Government to the 
feet of the Volunteers, and raised the Volunteers above the 
supremacy of Britain, by a direct Parliamentary approbation of 
self-armed, self-governed, and self-disciplined associations. 
These Volunteers by this time  exceeded  in number the whole regular 
military force of the British Empire. 
Portugal Affair: By the resolutions of the British Legislature, Ireland had been 
admitted to export her linen and woollen manufactures to Portugal, agreeable to the 
provisions of the Treaty of Methuen?7^ from which liberty she had been previously and 
explicitly prohibited by express statutes. Irish manufacturers tried immediately to 
improve this. Portuguese Ministry (under orders of the British Ministers) peremptorily 
a Frederick Howard, Earl of Carlisle.— Ed. 
b H. Grattan, The Speeches..., Vol. I, pp. 82-85; J. Mitchel, The History of 
Ireland...,  Vol. I, p.  135.—  Ed. 

=====第257页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 225 
refused, seized the Irish merchandise (this in 1782). Petition of the Dublin 
merchants to Irish House of Commons. In opposition to a motion of Fitzgibbon Sir 
Lucius O'Brien moved an amendment, calling upon the King, as King of  Ireland,  to 
assert the rights of that kingdom "by hostility with Portugal", [and] concluding with: 
"We doubt not that Nation (Ireland) has vigour and resources sufficient to maintain 
all her rights, and astonish all her enemies." 
House [did] not [have] the courage to pass it. 
Now [the] cry in the country, that their connection with England 
was only federative. This engrossed now almost the exclusive 
consideration of the armed associations of Ireland. 
Want of protection for personal liberty in  Ireland:  No Habeas Corpus 
Act:274 
Repeal of the English Statute of 6, George I asked by the armed Volunteers and 
corporate bodies3 etc. Catholic bodies now also entered the Volunteer army, officered by 
Protestants. Regular and public deliberative meetings of the armed Volunteers. 
The armed associations of Ulster first appointed delegates to declare the sentiments of 
their province, in a general assembly. Convention at Dungannon, 15 February 
1782.  Agreed upon the celebrated Declaration of Rights and Grievances. 
They were delegates from 25,000 Ulster soldiers, backed by the voice of about 
1 million inhabitants of that country. 
Declaration of the Volunteers 
at the Dungannon Convention. 
15 February 1782™ 
"Whereas it has been asserted that Volunteers, as such, cannot with propriety 
debate or give their opinions on political subjects, or the conduct of Parliament, or 
public men, resolved unanimously: That a citizen, by learning the use of arms, does 
not abandon any of his civil rights. That a claim of any body of men, other than the 
King, Lords, and Commons of  Ireland,  to make laws to bind this Kingdom, is 
unconstitutional, illegal, and a grievance; \ 
"that the power  exercised  by the Privy Council of both Kingdoms, under the pretence 
of the law of Poynings,h is unconstitutional and a grievance; 
"that the independence of judges is equally essential to the impartial administration 
of justice in  Ireland,  as in England; and that the refusal or delay of this right to 
Ireland, makes a distinction where there should be no distinction; may excite 
jealousy where perfect union should prevail; and is in itself unconstitutional and a 
grievance; that it is our decided and unalterable determination to seek a redress of 
these grievances ... redress, speedy and effectual; that as men, and as Irishmen, as 
Christians, and as Protestants, we rejoice in the relaxation of the penal laws against our 
Roman Catholic fellow-subjects; and that we conceive the measure to be fraught with 
the happiest  consequences  to the union and prosperity of the inhabitants of Ireland." 
4 members from each county of the province of Ulster were appointed to act as 
a committee for the Volunteer Corps, to call general meetings of the province. That 
a See this volume, p. 212.— Ed 
b Ibid., pp. 212, 215.— Ed. 

=====第258页=====
226 Karl Marx 
the said committee appoint 9 of their members to be a committee in Dublin, in 
order to communicate with all other Volunteer Associations in the other provinces, 
that may think proper to come to similar resolutions; and to deliberate with them 
on the most constitutional means of carrying them into effect. 
Earl of Bristol, Englishman by birth, British Peer and Protestant Bishop of Derrya 
(uncle of George Robert Fitzgerald), openly declares for the Volunteers (ditto for full 
Catholic Emancipation). 
In every Volunteer Corps of Ireland the Dungannon resolutions are accepted. 
About this time about 90,000 Volunteers are ready. 
As soon as the Dungannon Volunteers had received the 
concurrence of the armed associations, the Irish House of Commons 
assumed new aspect. The proceedings of the people without now 
told on their representatives within. The whole House appeared 
forming into parties. 
Their Sessions were biennial, and consequently their grants to 
Government were for 2 years at once; and till more money was 
required, their legislative [power] was inactive. They now deter­
mined on granting supplies to the Crown for 6 months only, as a hint 
that they would grant no more till their grievances were redressed: 
this had its effect. 
The proceedings of the Volunteers and municipal bodies 
became every day more serious and decisive, tone in House of 
Commons more menacing. 
Impracticable to proceed with Lord North any longer. About April 
1782 Marquis of Rockingham's Cabinet {James Fox etc.). Duke of 
Portland, nominated Lord Lieutenant of  Ireland,  arrived at Dublin 14 
April 1782, had to meet the Irish Parliament on the 16th April. 
C) DECLARATIONS OF IRISH LEGISLATIVE INDEPENDENCE276 
Message of George HI to British Parliament, 18 April 1782.277 
Stating: 
"that mistrusts and jealousies had arisen in Ireland, and that it was highly necessary to 
take the same into immediate consideration, in order to [effect] a final adjustment." 
British House of Commons in reply: express 
"their entire and cheerful concurrence in His Majesty's views of a final 
adjustment". 
The same words "final adjustment" were repeated, by the Irish 
Ministry, when a Union was proposed to the Irish Parliament in 
1800. 
Frederick Hervey.— Ed. 

=====第259页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 227 
Duke of Portland wanted to procrastinate. Grattan communicated to him, that 
this [was] impossible without provoking anarchy. House of Commons, 16 April 1782: 
Grattan on the point of proposing Independence motion, when Mr. Hely Hutchinson 
(Secretary of State in Ireland) rose and said, the Lord Lieutenant had ordered him 
to deliver a message from the King, importing that "His Majesty, being concerned to 
find that discontents and jealousies were prevailing amongst his loyal subjects of 
Ireland, upon matters of great weight and importance, recommended the House to 
take the same into their most serious consideration, in order to effect such a final 
adjustment as might give satisfaction to both kingdoms". 
Hutchinson accompanied this message, and his statement of his own views on 
the subject, with a determination to support a declaration of "Irish rights" and 
constitutional "independence". Hutchinson declared at the same time, that he had 
simply to deliver the message; he was therefore silent to all details and pledged the 
Government to none. Ponsonby proposed a short address. 
Grattan spoke: "America has shed much English blood, and America is to be 
free:  Ireland has shed her own blood for England, and is Ireland to remain in 
fetters?" etc. Proposes Amendment to Ponsonby's "short address", etc. "to assure 
His Majesty that his subjects of Ireland are a free people, that the Crown of Ireland 
is an imperial crown, inseparably connected with the Crown of Great Britain ... but 
that the Kingdom of Ireland is a distinct kingdom, with a Parliament of her own the 
sole legislature  thereof,  that there is no body of men competent to make laws to 
bind the nation but the King, Lords, and Commons of Ireland, nor any Parliament 
which hath any authority or power of any sort whatever in this country, save only 
the Parliament of Ireland; to assure His Majesty that we humbly conceive that in 
this right the very  essence  of our liberty exists, a right which we, on the part of all the 
people of Ireland, do claim as their birth-right, and which we cannot yield but with our 
lives." 
Brownlow seconded. George Ponsonby stated "that he most willingly consented 
[on behalf of Portland] to the proposed amendment, and would answer that the 
noble lord who presided in the Government of Ireland, wished to do everything in 
his power etc." and "he (Portland) would use his utmost influence in obtaining the 
rights of Ireland, an object on which he had fixed his heart". 
(1799.  Portland openly avowed in 1799 that he had never 
considered this concession of England in 1782 as finale) 
Unanimously Grattan's Motion was  passed. 
Shortly before and shortly after this scene very decided 
resolutions on the part of the Volunteer Corps. It was the 
unanimous firmness of the people, and not the abstract virtue of 
their delegates, which achieved this revolution. 
Fitzgibbon had declared [himself] a patriot; and Mr. John Scott, then 
Attorney-General, afterwards Lord Clonmel, even declared: "If the Parliament of 
Great Britain were determined to lord it over Ireland, he was resolved not to be 
their villain in executing their tyranny. That if matters should proceed to the 
extremity to which he feared they were verging, he should not be an insignificant 
subscriber to the fund for defending their common rights ... he had determined to 
throw his life and fortune into the scale." 
(This true man of the Pitt-Castlereagh school!) 

=====第260页=====
228 Karl Marx 
Immediately on this turn, Portland sent off 2 despatches to England, one to the 
Cabinet as a public document, the other, private and confidential, to Fox. Explained 
the reasons for the necessity of acceding.... Stated in conclusion that "he would 
omit no opportunity of cultivating his connexion with the Earl of Charlemont, who 
appeared entirely disposed to place confidence in his Administration, and to give a 
proper tone to the armed bodies over whom he had the most considerable influence". 
Parliament was meanwhile prorogued for 3 weeks, to wait for the King's Reply to 
their Declaration of Independence. Meanwhile reviews and discipline were continued 
with unremitting vigour by the Volunteer army, now about 124,000, of whom 
upwards of 100,000 effectives. Besides nearly V3 of the whole English army then 
Irish, ditto very many sailors Irish. 
(Portland's conduct in 1782 a premeditated tissue of dissimulation!) 
27 May 1782 Irish House of Commons met, pursuant to adjournment. 
Portland in his quasi throne speech: "King and British Parliament ... are united 
in a desire to gratify every wish expressed in your late Address to the Throne.... 
By the papers which, in obedience to His Majesty's commands, I have directed to 
be laid before you, you will receive the most convincing testimony of the cordial 
reception which your representations have met with from the Legislative of Great 
Britain, but His Majesty whose first and most anxious wish is to exercise his Royal 
Prerogative in such a manner as may be most conducive to the welfare of his 
faithful subjects, has further given it me in command to assure you of his gracious 
disposition to give his Royal assent to acts to prevent the suppression of Bills in the 
Privy Council of this Kingdom, and the alteration of them anywhere, and to limit the 
duration of the Act for the better Regulation and Accommodation of His  Majesty's  forces in 
this Kingdom, to the term of 2 years. The benevolent intentions of His Majesty ... 
unaccompanied by any stipulation or condition whatever. The good faith, the 
generosity, and the honour of this (the English) nation, afford them the surest 
pledge of a corresponding disposition, on your part etc."3 
Grattan the fool rose at once: 
"That as Great Britain had given up every claim to authority over  Ireland,  he had 
not the least idea that she should be also bound to make any declaration that she had 
formerly usurped that power. I move you to assure His Majesty of our unfeigned 
affection to His Royal Person and Government ... magnanimity of His Majesty, and 
the wisdom of the Parliament of Great Britain, that we conceive the resolution for an 
unqualified, unconditional repeal of the 6, George I, to be a measure of 
consummate wisdom and justice" 
and similar talk, and in particular 
"that no constitutional question between the two nations will any longer exist". 
Sir Samuel Broadstreet on the other hand declared: "The Irish Parliament 
actually sat at that moment under an English statute." Ditto  Flood,  David Walsh: 
"I repeat it, that until England declares unequivocally, by an Act of her own 
Legislature, that she had no right, in any instance, to make laws to bind Ireland, the 
usurped power of English Legislation never can be considered by us as relinquished ... 
we have the power to assert our rights as men, and accomplish our independence as 
a nation." 
3 For Portland's speech in Parliament on May 27, 1782, see H. Grattan, The 
Speeches..., Vol. I, p.  131.—  Ed. 

=====第261页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 229 
Grattan's address was triumphantly carried (only 2 votes against. The secretary 
Fitzpatrick had accelerated the vote by artifice). 
Beauchamp Bagenal proposed to appoint committee "to consider and report 
what sum the Irish Parliament should grant, to build a suitable mansion and 
purchase an estate for their deliverer" (i.e. Grattan). 
The British Cabinet now frightened. Their intolerance degenerated 
into fear. They had already signed the capitulation, and thought it 
impossible to carry it too soon into execution. America already 
lost. 
Bills to enact the concessions demanded by Ireland were, 
therefore, prepared with an expedition nearly bordering on 
precipitancy. The 6th of George I, declaratory of, and establishing 
the supremacy of England, and the eternal dependence of Ireland 
on the Parliament and Cabinet of Great Britain, was now hastily 
repealed, without debate, or any qualification by the British Legislature. 
This repeal obtained the royal assent, and a copy was instantly 
transmitted to the Irish Viceroy, and communicated by circulars to 
the Volunteer commanders. 
Chap. Ill: An Act, to repeal an Act made in the 6th year of the reign of his late 
Majesty King George I, entitled, An Act for the better securing the dependency of the 
Kingdom of Ireland upon the Crown of Great Britain. 
"Whereas, an Act was passed etc., may it please your excellent Majesty, that it 
may be enacted, and be it enacted, by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and 
with the advice and consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons, in 
this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that from and 
after the passing of this Act, the above-mentioned Act, and the several matters and things 
therein contained, shall be, and is, and are hereby repealed." 
Irish House of Commons, 30 May 1782. Bagenal resumed the subject of reward to 
Grattan; proposed £100,000. Mr. Thomas Conolly declared that "the Duke of 
Portland felt with the Irish people ... he (the Lord Lieutenant) begged to offer, as a 
part of the intended grant to Mr. Grattan, the Viceregal Palace in the Phoenix Park" 
— the King's best Palace in Ireland. 
The Viceroy of Ireland proposing, on behalf of the King of 
England, to Grattan to reward his services for having emancipated 
his country from the domination of Great Britain, was an incident 
as extraordinary as had ever occurred in any Government, and, 
emanating from that of England, told, in a single sentence, the 
whole history of her horrors, her jealousies, her shallow artifice 
and humbled arrogance. Was, of course, rejected by the Irish 
House of Commons. Grattan got £50,000 from that House. 

=====第262页=====
230 Karl Marx 
II. FROM 1782 (AFTER THE DECLARATION 
OF INDEPENDENCE) TO 1795 
General remark on this  period:  When Lord Westmoreland was 
removed from Ireland, in 1795, Ireland was in a most unexampled 
and progressive state of prosperity. Curran suggested even an 
intention to impeach Westmoreland for having permitted a part of 
12,000 troops (which, according to stipulation, should always 
remain in Ireland) to be drafted out of that kingdom for foreign 
service. 
A) FROM 1782 TO 1783. (THE FIASCO OF THE REFORM BILL 
AND THE GREAT DEFEAT OF THE VOLUNTEERS) 
Irish House of Commons: Bills to ameliorate, by partial concession, 
the depressed state of the Catholics, and some reward for their zeal 
and patriotism, were introduced, and had arrived to their last stages in 
the House of Commons, without any effective opposition. Opposed by 
bigotism in their latter stages, the Castle powers stirring on. Those 
Bills relaxing the severity of the Penal Code passed however through both 
Houses. The concessions [though] very limited, still afforded great 
satisfaction to the Catholics, as the first growth of a tolerating 
principle. Grattan still believed in the Whigs. But at length Fox 
himself,  wearied by a protracted course of slow deception, at once 
confirmed the opinions of the Irish people, and openly proc­
laimed to Ireland the inadequacy of all the measures that had 
heretofore been adopted. He took occasion in the British 
Parliament, on the repeal of the 6th George I being there alluded 
to, to state 
" that the repeal of that statute could not stand alone, but must be accompanied by a final 
adjustment, and by a solid basis of permanent connexion", that "some plans of that 
nature would be laid before the Irish Parliament by the Irish Ministers, and a treaty 
entered upon, which treaty, when proceeded on, might be adopted by both 
Parliaments, and finally become an irrevocable arrangement between the two countries".a 
By that speech, the Irish delusion of a final adjustment was in a 
moment dissipated, the Viceroy's duplicity became indisputably 
proved. 
Still Flood was feebly supported in Irish House of Commons, 
but [was supported] by the Volunteers. 
19 July 1782 Flood moved for leave to bring in a Bill "to affirm the sole 
exclusive right of the Irish Parliament, to make laws affecting that country, in all 
concerns external and internal whatsoever".1" 
a H. Grattan, The Speeches..., Vol. I, pp.  148-51.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 145-46.— Ed. 

=====第263页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 231 
Even the introduction of this Bill was negatived without division. 
Grattan! 
On the other hand [Parliament] passed [the] foolish motion of 
Grattan: 
"that leave was refused to bring in Mr. Flood's bill, because the sole and 
exclusive right to legislate for Ireland in all cases whatsoever, internally and 
externally, had been asserted by the Parliament of Ireland, and had been fully, 
finally and irrevocably acknowledged by the British Parliament"a 
(which was not true). (Fox himself had declared the contrary!) 
(Because of his scepticism Flood had been dismissed from his office of 
Vice- Treasurer. ) 
27 July 1782 the Parliament was prorogued. In the proroguing 
speech Portland stated amongst other things: 
" Your claims were directed by the same spirit that gave rise and stability to the 
liberty of Great Britain, and could not fail of success, as soon as the councils of that 
Kingdom were influenced by the avowed friends of the Constitution. 
"Convince the people in your several districts, as you are yourselves convinced, 
that every cause of past jealousies and discontents is finally removed; that both 
countries have pledged their good faith to each other, and their best security will be 
an inviolable adherence to that compact; that the implicit reliance which Great 
Britain has reposed on the honour, generosity, and candour of Ireland, engages 
your national character to a return of sentiments equally liberal and enlarged. 
Convince them that the two kingdoms are now one, indissolubly connected in unity  of 
constitution, and unity of interests."15 
Marquis of Rockingham died (1782). Fox and Lord North Coalition. 
Portland superseded by Earl Temple (who later became Marquis of 
Buckingham) (his Chief Secretary his brother Mr., afterwards  Lord, 
Grenville) (15 September 1782-3 June 1783). Temple made small 
reforms. Though he obtained no credit from the body of the people, 
he made considerable progress amongst the aristocracy of the patriots 
(Charlemont, Grattan etc.). 
The armed Volunteers had now assumed a deliberative capacity: 
Paraded as soldiers and debated as citizens. More than 150,000 
Volunteers now appeared upon the regimental muster-rolls. Strong 
accession to them of Catholics. They resolved no longer to obey, or 
suffer to be obeyed, any statute or law theretofore enacted in 
England, and to oppose their execution with their lives and 
fortunes. The magistrates refused to act under them, the judges 
were greatly embarassed, no legal causes could be proceeded on, 
under the authority of British Statutes, though naming Ireland, no 
counsel would plead them, no juries would find for them, the 
a Ibid., p. 166.— Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 170-72.— Ed. 

=====第264页=====
232 Karl Marx 
operation of many important laws, theretofore in force, was 
necessarily suspended. 
Parliament divided between Flood and Grattan, the latter (Whig 
spelt) always in the majority. This division of nation the British 
Administration wanted to foster. Baffled by the injudicious conduct  of 
some Members of the British Parliament. 
In the House of Commons (British) Sir George Young (Sinecure placeman in 
Ireland, although not Irish, viz. Vice-treasurer of Ireland) opposed the Bill of 
Concession to Ireland, and Repeal of 6, George I. Protested against the Power of 
King and Parliament to pass such bills. (He could not act against the will of the 
Ministers.) 
Lord Mansfield, notwithstanding the repeal of 6, George I, proceeded to 
entertain, in the Court of King's Bench,278 at Westminster, an appeal from the 
King's Bench of Ireland, observing that "he knew of no law depriving the British 
Court of its vested jurisdiction". The interest of money 5% in England, 6% in 
Ireland. Mansfield had placed very large sums of Irish mortgages to gain the 
additional 1%. Felt that they were not likely to gain any additional facilities by the 
appelant jurisdiction being taken from the British courts and transferred to Ireland 
herself:  hence his reluctance to part with it. 
Lord Abingdon, in the House of Lords, totally denied the authority of King and 
Parliament of England to emancipate Ireland; he moved for leave to bring in a 
Declaratory Bill to re-assert the right of England to legislate externally in the 
concerns of Ireland. 
The Volunteers beat to arms throughout the whole kingdom; 
above 120,000 paraded. All confidence in Great Britain dissipated. 
Flood gained much ground amongst the people. Now new panic of 
the British Ministry. Without waiting for further and peremptory 
remonstrances from Ireland, they passed the following Statute: 
Anno vicessimo tertio (1783) 
Georgii HI. Regis* 
Ch. XXVIII. An Act for removing and preventing all doubts which have arisen, or 
might arise, concerning the exclusive rights of the Parliament and Courts of  Ireland,  in 
matters of legislation and judicature; and for preventing any writ of error or appeal from 
any of His Majesty's Courts in that Kingdom from being received,  heard,  and adjudged, in 
any of His Majesty's Courts in the Kingdom of Great Britain. Whereas ... doubts have 
arisen whether the provisions of the said (their last) Act are sufficient to secure to 
the people of Ireland the rights claimed by them, to be bound only by laws enacted by 
His Majesty and the Parliament of that Kingdom, in all cases whatever etc. etc. ... be it 
declared and enacted ... that the said right claimed by the people of  Ireland,  to be 
bound only by laws enacted by His Majesty and the Parliament of that Kingdom, in 
all cases whatever, and to have all actions and suits at law or in equity, which may 
be instituted in that Kingdom, decided in His Majesty's Courts therein finally, and 
a The twenty-third regnal year (1783) of King George III (J. Mitchel, The 
History of  Ireland...,  Vol. I, p. 153).— Ed 

=====第265页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 233 
without appeal thence, shall be, and it is thereby declared to be established and 
ascertained for ever, and shall, at no time hereafter, be questioned or questionable. 
And be it further enacted ... that no writ of error or appeal shall be received or 
adjudged, or any other proceeding be heard by or in any of His Majesty's Courts 
in this Kingdom, in any action or suit at law or in equity, instituted in any of His 
Majesty's Courts in the Kingdom of Ireland, etc. etc. 
This measure brought into the British House of Commons by 
Mr. Townshend, passed through both Houses, and received the 
Royal assent without debate and with very little observation. In 
England held out a mere consequential declaratory part of a 
general constitutional arrangement entered into between the two 
nations. This measure came too late to satisfy the Irish people as 
to the purity of their own Parliament. It convinced them of either 
its inefficiency or corruption, or the Renunciation Act of the British 
Parliament would have been quite unnecessary. They had to secure 
their liberties. The Renunciation Act of Ireland had discredited 
the Irish Parliament with the Irish people. 
Mr. Flood had become most prominent among the Irish 
patriots. Grattan his enemy. The discussion on the English 
Renunciation Act led to the conclusion of the necessity to reform 
their own Parliament, because, without its comprehensive Reform, 
there was no security against the instability of events and the 
duplicity of England. 
Rotten borough system.279 Many members of the Irish House of 
Commons nominated by individuals (borough-mongers) and Peers, 
who in this way voted by proxy in the House of Commons. The 
King constitutionally nominated Peers, and the Peers created 
Commoners. The representation of the people in the Commons 
was purchased for money, and the exercise of that representation was 
sold for office. These purchases made by servants of the executive 
Government, in trust, for the uses and purposes of its ministers to 
carry measures. The Volunteers had the facts sifted. One Peer 
nominated 9 Commoners etc. Many individuals openly sold their 
patronage for money, to the best bidder, others returned members at 
the nomination of the Viceroy or his Secretary; and it appeared 
that the number of representatives elected freely by the people did 
not compose '/4 of the Irish Commons. The Volunteers at length 
determined to demand a reform of Parliament. Delegates from 
several Volunteer regiments again assembled at Dungannon, to 
consider the expediency and means of an immediate reform of 
Parliament. Flood [had] great influence now. 300 delegates, men 
of great influence, many of them members of the House of Lords 
and the Commons chosen by different corps. 

=====第266页=====
234 Karl Marx 
10 November 1783 was proclaimed for the first sitting of the Grand 
National Convention of Ireland at Dublin. [The delegates] arrived 
there escorted by small detachments of Volunteers from their 
respective counties. Rotunda chosen as their place of meeting 
(vis-à-vis the magnificent dome of the Commons' House of 
Parliament). Bishop of Derry and Earl of Charlemont rivals for the 
presidency. The British Ministers knew that if a reform of Parliament 
were effected in,  Ireland,  it could not be long withheld from England. 
Then the commercial jealousy of England. Charlemont, their fool. 
By intrigue he (supported by Grattan) [was] elected before the 
Earl of Bristol, Bishop of Derry, arrived. Collision in the 
Convention between Flood and the Bishop on one side, Charle­
mont and his friends on the other. 
After much deliberation, a plan of reform, framed by Mr. Flood 
and approved by the Convention, was directed to be presented by 
him to Parliament forthwith, and the sittings of the Convention were 
made permanent till Parliament had decided the question. 
Mr. Flood obeyed his instructions, and moved for leave to bring in a 
Bill of reform of the Parliament. The Government knew that the 
triumph of the Parliament implied not only the destruction of the 
Convention, but of the Volunteers. 
The Government refused leave to bring in Flood's Bill,a because 
it had originated from their (the Volunteers) deliberations. 
(Yelverton now Attorney-General.) (Furious speech of Fitzgibbon.)b 
Unprecedentedly violent debate. Bill was rejected by 158 to 49; 158 
of the majority were placemen and the very persons on whom the reform 
was intended to operate. Ditto 158 placemen who carried the Union 
Bill in 1800, which, if the Reform had succeeded, never could 
have been passed. An address to the King (moved by Conolly), 
offending against the Volunteers, carried.cEarl Charlemont, sup­
pressing this news, told the Volunteers, he had received a note 
from the House of Commons, which left no hopes of a speedy 
decision, the Convention ought to adjourn till Monday,d then to 
decide upon ulterior measures, if the Bill should be rejected. He 
had secretly decided that they should meet no more. On the 
Monday morning he repaired to the Rotunda before the usual hour 
of sitting; only his own immediate partisans present. He ad­
journed the Convention sine die. When the residue of the 
a "A Bill for the More Equal Representation of the People in Parliament, 
November 29,  1783."  See H. Grattan, The Speeches..., Vol. I, p.  191.—  Ed. 
b H. Grattan, The Speeches..., Vol. I, pp. 191-94.— Ed 
c J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., p. 38.— Ed 
d December 1  1783—  Ed 

=====第267页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 235 
delegates came, the door closed, the Convention dissolved. The 
Bishop became now the popular man. Charlemont went down. 
He, a bigot, hated the Catholics, Bishop was quite the opposite. 
Exclusion on the one side, and toleration on the other became the 
theme of partisans. The dispute ran high. The people began to 
separate. This effected all the mischief the Government expected. 
A Northern Corps, calling itself "Bill of Rights Battalion", says in Address to the 
Bishop among other things: 
"The gloomy clouds of superstition and bigotry, those engines of disunion, being 
fled from the realm, the interests of Ireland can no longer suffer by a diversity of 
religious persuasions. All are united in the pursuit of one great object—the 
extermination of corruption from our Constitution; nor can your Lordship and 
your virtuous coadjutors, in promoting civil and religious liberty, be destitute of the 
aid of all professions." 
Bishop answered in the same strain (dated 14 January 1784): in conclusion he 
said: 
"The hour is now come ... when Ireland must necessarily avail herself of her 
whole internal force to ward off foreign encroachments, or once more acquiesce 
under those encroachments, the better to exercise anew the tyranny of a part of the 
community over the dearest and inalienable rights of others. For one million of 
divided Protestants can never, in the scale of Human Government, be a 
counterpoise against 3 millions of united Catholics. But, gentlemen of the Bill of 
Rights Battalion, I appeal to yourselves, and summon you to consistency— Tyranny 
is not Government, and Allegiance is only due to Protection." 
The Government resolved (too impotent to act) to watch the 
progress of events. Many of the best patriots thought the Bishop's 
language too strong. The idea of coercing the Parliament very 
rapidly lost ground. No military language to Parliament etc. 
The people were severed, but the Government remained 
compact; the Parliament was corrupted, the Volunteers were 
paralysed, and the high spirit of the Nation exhibited a rapid 
declension. 
Weak ly foolish Charlemont, after the dissolution of the 
Convention, recommended a Reform Bill to be presented to 
Parliament, as emanating solely from civil bodies, unconnected 
with military character. Of course, the placemen, who had scouted 
the military Bill, because it was military, now rejected the civil Bill, 
because it was popular. Meetings of the Volunteers were 
suspended, their reviews continued, to amuse the languid vanity of 
their deluded general. 
The temperate (bourgeois parliamentary) system now gained 
ground. The Volunteers of Ireland survived these blows for some 
years.  The Whig orators (Grattan etc.) lost ground and influence. 
December 1783. Pitt Minister. Duke of Rutland Viceroy (!) 

=====第268页=====
236 Karl Marx 
B) FROM THE END OF 1783 TO 1791 
(FOUNDATION OF UNITED IRISHMEN) 
Pitt in England. 
Duke of Rutland (Lord Lieutenant) died October, 1787. 
Marquis of Buckingham (formerly Earl of Temple) second time 
Viceroy (16 December 1787-5 January 1790). 
John Fane, Earl of Westmoreland [Lord Lieutenant] (Hobart, 
afterwards Earl of Buckinghamshire, Chief Secretary) from 5 
January 1790 onwards (until 1795). 
In Irish House of Commons repeated attempts at Reform (Flood, 
Grattan, Curran etc.) failed. 
Place Bill, Pension Bill, Responsibility Bill, Inquiry into the Sale of 
Peerages and into the Police of Dublin the most material measures 
pressed by the Opposition during Westmoreland's Office, hence 
after the Revolution of 1789 in France. 
{The Place, Pension and Responsibility Bills proposed by 
Mr. Grattan, acceded to by the Viceroy, passed into laws. Place Bill—a 
bill to vacate the seats of members accepting offices under 
Government, omitting the term of bona fide offices, thereby leaving 
the Minister a power of packing the Parliament; this Bill one of 
the instruments of Castlereagh for carrying the Union.} 
[Up] to 1790 all these things as also Emancipation, Reform, Tithe 
questions failed. 
There was a steady decline of the Volunteer organisation, and of the strength 
of the Liberal party to 1790. We have Tone's word that when the French 
Revolution broke out, both Catholic Committee and Whig Club280—the Emancipation 
and Reform parties — were feeble and dispirited.3 
Irish House of Commons. February 14, 1785. Militia against Volunteers. Gardiner 
{on behalf of the Minister, and, as Curran told him, "in hope of being rewarded, 
by being raised to a higher rank", became actually Lord Mountjoy by the Union} 
moved a grant of £20,000 for clothing the Militia. This motion was levelled at the 
Volunteers, and therefore violently debated. One of the reasons of its being 
carried—the fool-rogueb Grattan went with the Government. Fitzgibbon, the 
Attorney-General, said amongst other things against Curran, who opposed the Bill 
and defended the Volunteers: "he (Curran) poured forth a studied panegyric of 
the Volunteers.... I shall even entrust the defence of the country to gentlemen, with 
the King's commission in their pockets, rather than to his (Curran's) friends, the 
beggars in the streets." 
Orde's Propositionsc and Regency Bills the things most important 
during this period as international questions between Ireland and 
a See Davis' "Memoir" in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., p. XIX.— Ed. 
b "The fool-rogue" was inserted by Marx.— Ed. 
c Marx means Orde's propositions regarding the trade between Ireland and 
Great Britain made on February 11, 1785. See H. Grattan, The Speeches..., Vol. I, 
pp. 214-17.— Ed 

=====第269页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 237 
England; before speaking of them, we shall, however, allude still to 
a few other objects treated in Parliament during the period 
1783-1791. 
Renewed efforts for reform made in 1784. In consequence of a requisition, 
Henry Reilly, Sheriff of the County of Dublin, summoned his bailiwick to the 
court-house of Kilmainham for the 25 October 1784, to elect members to a national 
congress. For this Mr. Reilly was attached by the King's Bench, on a crown motion, 
and on the 24 February 1785 Mr. Brownlow moved a vote of censure on the judges of 
that court, for the attachment. Speech of Curran. Motion rejected by 143 to 71.'A 
Shows still a great independent minority. 
PENSIONS, DISFRANCHISEMENT OF EXCISE OFFICERS, 
GOVERNMENT CORRUPTION 
The endeavour to regain by corruption what was surrendered to force, began in 
1782,  and increased greatly after the defeat of Orde's Propositions.281 
Pensions 
Pensions, 13 March 1786. Irish House of Commons. Bill of  Forbes  to limit the amount 
dj pensions. Defeated, i.e., adjournment ad Calendas Graecasb carried. As Curran said 
[the] object of the Bill [was] to "restrain the Crown from doing wrong by a physical 
necessity". "The Pension List, like charity, covers a multitude of sins ... coming 
home to the members of this House ... the Crown is laying a foundation for the 
independence of Parliament ... they" (the members of this House) "will have this 
security for their independence, that while any man in the kingdom has a shilling, they will 
not want one" (Curran). 
12 March 1787. (Forbes renewed his Bill for limiting Pensions. Curran supported 
him. Orde, Secretary. Also failed.) 
"The King's authority" (here) "delegated first to a Viceroy, and next it falls to a 
Secretary, who can have no interest in the good of the people, no interest in future 
fame etc.... What responsibility can be found or hoped for in an Fnglish  Secretary?  ... A 
succession of men" (these Secretaries), "sometimes with heads, sometimes with 
hearts, oftener with neither" (Curran). "Where will you look for Orde's 
responsibility as a Minister? You will remember his Commercial Propositions" 
(Curran). 
"A right honourable member opposes the principle of the Bill, as being in 
restraint of the Royal Bounty.... A gross and general application of the people's money 
to the encouragement of every human vice, is a crying grievance.... The pension list, at 
the best of times, was a scandal to this country; but the present abuses of it have gone 
beyond all bounds" (Curran). 
"That unhappy list has been degraded by a new species of prostitution that was 
unknown before: the granting of honours and titles, to lay the foundation for the grant of 
a pension; the suffering any man to steal a dignity, for the purpose that a barren 
See Davis' commentary in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., p. 42.— Ed. 
Until the Greek calends.— Ed. 

=====第270页=====
238 Karl Marx 
beggar steals a child. It was reducing the honours of the State from badges of dignity 
to badges of mendicancy" (Curran). The Bill would "restrain a Secretary from that 
shameful profusion of the public treasure.... It is a law necessary as a counterpoise of the 
Riot Act, [...] a penal law adopted from Great Britain, giving a new force to the executive 
magistrate. It is a Bill to preserve the independence of Parliament" (Curran). 
11 February 1790. Irish House of Commons (government corruption and patriot 
opposition proceeded, the public daily being more convinced that nothing but a 
reform of the Commons could save the Constitution of 1782 from the foul policy of 
the Ministers). Forbes moved an address describing and censuring several recent 
pensions. Curran supported it. Motion rejected by 136 to 92. 
Government Corruption 
House of Commons. 21 April 1789. Disfranchisement of Excise Officers' Bill. Bill 
rejected by 148 to 93. 
Curran's prophecy in his speech on that occasion was fulfilled. The English 
executive inflicted incompetent men and corrupt measures on Ireland, then took 
advantage of her own crime and our misfortunes to provincialise us, and now uses these 
very events as arguments against our independence. Curran said inter alia: 
"The opposition to this measure [...] comes from the avowed servants of the crown 
and of every administration ... the men sent to grind us are, in general, the refuse of 
Great Britain.... Cart-loads of excise officers — revenue troops—collected from 
every corner of the nation, and taking possession of boroughs on the eve of an 
election" (Curran). 
House of Commons. 25 April 1789. Dublin Police. 
Sir H. Cavendish moved two resolutions to the effect that the Dublin Police 
System was attended with waste, and useless patronage. Ministers opposed the 
Resolutions. Rejected by 132 to 78. 
Curran in support said among other things: 
"Advantage had been taken of some disturbances in 1784, to enslave the capital 
by a police. A watch of old men, at 4d. per night, was naturally ineffectual." 
House of Commons. 4 February 1790. Stamp Officers' Salaries. {Curran proposes to 
regulate, cut them down etc. Rejected by 141 to 81.} (This was one means of 
government corruption.) Westmoreland Viceroy, Hobart his Secretary. 
Curran says inter alia: the Earl of Temple (afterwards Marquis of Buckingham) 
incensed because of his failure in the Regency Bill increased the Revenue  Board,  the 
Ordnance, £13,000 addition to the infamous Pension List; (Under Lord Harcourt 
compact [was] made that the Board of Accounts and the management of the stamps 
(stamp duties had been granted in Harcourt's times} should be executed by one 
board.) Buckingham separated them in order to make  places  for members of Parliament. 
"Two country members prying into stamps!" "In proportion as you rose by union, 
your tyrant became appalled: but when he divided, he sunk you, and you became 
debased." "I rise in an assembly of 300  persons,  100 of whom have places or pensions.... 
I am showing the danger that arises to our honour and our liberty, if we submit to 
have corruption let loose among us ... the people now are fairly told that it is lawful to 
rob them of their property, and divide the plunder among the honest gentlemen 
who sell them to the administration." 
In his bold speech Curran alludes to the French Revolution. 
House of Commons. February 12, 1791. Government Corruption. {New attempt of 
Curran to prove the impurities of Government.} Curran's principal theme: "Raising 

=====第271页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 239 
men to the peerage for money, which was disposed of to purchase the liberties of the  people.  " 
"Miserable men introduced" (by these means) "into this House, like beasts of 
burden, to drudge for their employers." On the other hand "those introduced into 
the House of Lords, to frame laws, and dispose of the property of the Kingdom, 
under the direction of that corruption by which they have been raised". 
"I have  proof*  ... that a contract has been entered into by the present ministers to raise 
to the peerage certain persons, on condition of their purchasing a certain number of  seats  in 
this House." 
Curran states: "During the whole of last session" (1790) "we have, in the name of 
the people of Ireland, demanded from them the Constitution of Great Britain, and it 
has been uniformly denied. We would have passed a law to restrain the shameful 
profusion of a pension-list—it was refused by a majority. We would have passed a law 
to exclude persons, who must ever be the chattels of the government, from sitting in this 
House—it was refused by a majority. A bill to make some person, resident among you, 
and therefore amenable to public justice, responsible for the acts of your governors—has 
been refused to Ireland by a majority of gentlemen calling themselves her 
representatives [...] This uniform denial ... proof to them" (the people) "that the 
imputation of corrupt practices is founded in fact." 
The vain attempt—in 1790-91—of the Parliamentary Minority 
against government corruption proves on the one hand its increase, on 
the other the influence of  French  Revolution of 1789. It also-shows why, at 
last, foundation of United Irishmen [took place] in 1791, since all 
Parliamentary action proved futile, and the Majority of Parliament 
mere tool in the hands of the Government. 
* * * 
ATTKMPTS OF GOVERNMENT AGAINST IRISH INDEPENDENCE REPELLED 
ON OCCASION OF ORDE'S COMMERCIAL PROPOSITIONS 
AND THE REGENCY BILL 
a) Orde's Commercial Propositions. 
(Duke of Rutland, Lord Lieutenant)2*2 
In May, 1784, Griffith proposed in Irish House of Commons inquiry in the 
commercial intercourse between Britain and  Ireland.  He desired to show that Irish 
trade should be protected from English competition etc. 
Government took this proposal out of his hand. 
On 7 February 1785, Mr. Orde, the Chief Secretary, announced, and on 11 
February moved the 11 propositions on trade, commonly called the Irish'A propositions 
(in fact, of English origin). 
There were 4 principles established in these propositions: 
1) Taxes on all goods, foreign and domestic, passing between the 2 countries, 
should be equal 
'placing England and Ireland on the same footing, to the ruin of 
the latter.} 
a This word is underlined by Curran.— Ed 
10-733 

=====第272页=====
240 Karl Marx 
2) Taxes on foreign goods should always be higher than on the same articles produced in 
either island (this sacrificed the realities of French, Spanish, and American trade 
then increasing, to the profits of English competition). 
3) That the regulations should be unalterable (thus abdicating legislation). 
4) That the surplus of the hereditary revenue (hearth tax, and certain customs, and 
excises, over £656,000 a year) should be paid over to the English Treasury, for the 
support of the Imperial (English) navy. 
Yet this plan was proffered as a boon, a reciprocity plan; Orde (in contrast to 
Flood) hurried the Commons on to seize upon it, because otherwise the jealousy of 
the English monopolists might be awakened. The thing was a favour—to be paid for 
by £140,000 of new taxes, asked and voted in return for it. 
On the 22nd of February 1785 Pitt moved the Resolution in British House of 
Commons which declared that Ireland should be allowed the advantages (i.e. 
competition) of British Commerce as soon as she had "irrevocably" granted to 
England an "aid" (i.e. tribute) for general defence. North and the Tories, Fox and 
the Whigs — 
as a party manoeuvre— 
saw in English jealousy to Ireland a sure resource against the "heaven born 
Minister". Fox obtained adjournments, and all England "spoke out", from 
Lancashire to London, from Gloucester to York. Pitt sounded a parley. He 
submitted to some of their terms; retained all that was adverse to the Irish Constitution, 
suffered the loss of all that could by any ingenuity be serviceable to Irish trade. 
Returned the Act thus approved of by him in the form of 20 English propositions. 
The 11 propositions had been increased in England to 20, each addition a fresh 
injury. Half the globe, namely, all between Magellan and Good Hope, was (articles 3 
and 9) interdicted to Ireland's ships: interdicts were also laid on certain goods. The ivhole 
customs legislation of Ireland was taken away by clauses which forced her (art. 4) to 
enact (register) all navigation laws passed or to be passed by England; (art. 5 and 8) to 
impose all the colonial duties that England did; (art. 6 and 7) to adopt the same  system  in 
custom-houses that England did; and finally (art. 17 and 18) to recognise all patents and 
copyrights granted to England. 
Irish House of Commons. 30 June 1785: Orde moves the adjournment of the House till 
Tuesday fortnight. Curran opposes this. Adjournment is carried. Curran says: 
"When we had the 11 propositions before us, we were charmed with them. 
Why?—because we did not understand them. Yes, the endearing word reciprocity 
rang at every corner of the streets." 
23 July 1785. Orde moves new adjournment; Curran opposes; adjournment 
carried. 
11 August 1785. Curran asks Orde what has become of the 11 propositions "as of 
them only that Parliament could treat". They were "proposed as a  system,  of final and 
permanent commercial adjustment between the 2 kingdoms". "As a compensation for the 
expected advantages of this system, we were called upon 
{and they did so!} 
to impose £140,000 a year on this exhausted country." "We submitted." "We have 
oppressed the people with a ioad of taxes, as a compensation for a commercial 
adjustment: we have not got that adjustment." 
Curran plainly threatened that the people would take revenge 
against the persons who, in a thin House, would accept the 20 
propositions after the adjournment. He threatened that such a 

=====第273页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 241 
demand for surrender of the Constitution would be answered not 
merely "by words". All this is taken from Curran's speech of 23 
July.3 
12 August 1785. Orde moved his Bill (the 20 propositions). Opposed by Grattan, 
Flood,  Curran. Leave to bring in the Bill carried by 127 to 108 (=19 votes: this showed 
that the Bill would be rejected). 
Curran: "The commercial part of it" (the Bill) "is out of the question: for this 
Bill portends a surrender of the Constitution and the liberties of Ireland.... I fear 
the British Minister is mistaken in the temper of Ireland, and judges of it by 
former times. Formerly the business here was carried on by purchase of majorities ... 
things have changed. The people are enlightened and strong, they will not bear a 
surrender of their rights, which would be the consequence, if they submitted to this 
Bill. It contains a covenant to enact such laws as England should think proper: they would 
annihilate the Parliament of  Ireland.  The people here must go to the bar of the English 
House of Commons for  relief;  and for a circuitous trade to England, we are accepting 
a circuitous constitution.... A power to bind externally, would involve a power to 
bind internally. This law gives the power to Great Britain, of judging what would 
be a breach of the compact, of construing it; in fact, of taxing us as she pleased; 
while it gives her new strength to enforce our obedience. In such an event we must 
either sink into utter slavery, or the people must wade to a re-assumption of their 
rights through  blood,  or be obliged to take refuge in a Union, which would be the 
annihilation of  Ireland,  and what, I suspect, the Minister is driving  atb....  Civil war 
or a Union at best." 
15 August 1785: Orde, on presenting the Bill, abandoned it for the session, and for 
ever. Thereupon Flood moved: "Resolved—That we hold ourselves bound not to enter 
into any engagement to give up the sole and exclusive right of the Parliament of Ireland to 
legislate for Ireland in all cases whatsoever, as well externally as commercially and 
internally. " Curran supported him. Flood withdrew his motion, the House 
adjourned, and Orde's Propositions merged in a secret design for the Union. 
b) Regency Bill (1789)283 
George III mad for some time, concealed, in the end of 1788 could no longer be 
hid. In the ministers' draft of the address in answer to the Lord Lieutenant (Buckingham) 
(he had again become Viceroy in December 1787), they praised themselves. 
Irish House of Commons. February 6, 1789. Grattan moved amendment, 
substituting a general expression of loyalty. Curran spoke in support. "Every man 
sees the change of public administration that is approaching. " 
(People thought that Fox would become Minister under the Prince 
of Wales.3) 
"It has been delayed and opposed by a party in another kingdom. Upon what 
principle of wisdom or justice can Ireland enlist herself in that opposition etc?" 
Grattan's amendment was carried without a division although he called Buckingham 
"a jobber in a mask" 
a This sentence is in German in the manuscript.— Ed. 
b The words "or be obliged to ... is driving at" are italicised by Curran.— Ed. 
10* 

=====第274页=====
242 Karl Marx 
(Fitzherbert Buckingham's Chief Secretary), 
so prostrated was the Castle at the prospect of the Prince's Regency, with Fox as 
Premier. 
February 11, 1789: Ministers tried to postpone the discussion on the Regency. 
Their avowed motive to have from England the Resolutions of the British 
Parliament, appointing the Prince Regent of Great Britain with limited  powers.  These 
resolutions passed on 23 January, accepted by Prince on 31st January, but had not 
reached the Irish Government. The postponement was refused by the House. Conolly 
then moved an address to be presented to Prince, as Prince Regent of Ireland with full kingly 
powers. Motion passed without a division. 
February 12, 1789. Conolly moved the address. February 17 concurrence of 
Lords brought up and agreed.to. On 19 February presented to Buckingham. He 
refused to transmit it. February 20, 1789 agreed to transmit it by deputation. Vote of 
censure against Buckingham. 
February 27, 1789. Deputation (Conolly, O'Neil, etc.) deliver a letter to the 
Commons with answer of Prince Regent, thanking "warmly" the Irish Parliament. 
March 20, 1789. Still more fervent letter of the Prince Regent, announcing his 
father's recovery, read in the Irish House of Commons. 
Pitt, to maintain his power, had defended and carried in England, 
the right of election of the Regent, hence the right to restrain his 
power. 
The Irish in this case maintained the common Constitution 
against the oligarchic and ministerial encroachments of Pitt. 
* * * 
There are for this lapse of time two things still to be considered, 
1) the Tithe Riots etc., showing the state of the Catholic Irish 
peasantry at that time, and 
2) The Dublin Lord Mayor election, showing the influence of the 
French Revolution upon the (into the bargain Protestant) Irish 
middle-class. 
1) Tithe Riots etc. 
English Riot Act Introduced in  Ireland 284 
Irish House of Commons. January 19, 1787. Outrages in the South. Disturbances in 
the South caused by the misery of the people, Tithes, Rents, absenteeism,2^ bad tenures, 
harsh treatment etc. 
Towards the  close  of the 18 century (since end of 1791) political parties 
united themselves with the peasants (the republicans of the North). 
1786.' In the Lord Lieutenant's Opening Speech, he referred to the "frequent 
outrages"  ("Right  Boys" of Kilkenny, who were bound amongst each other by 

=====第275页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 243 
oath 2Sti). Yet the only Bill on disturbances brought in by Government was a Dublin 
Police Bill, against which the City petitioned. 
7 787 Viceroy's speech referred much more positively to the Southern outrages, 
and the debates on the Address in reply to it [were] violent. During this debate the 
government party (Fitzgibbon for instance) treated the disturbances as against the 
clergy, accused the landlords of grinding the  people,  and abetting the disturbances, and asked 
for fresh powers. 
House of Commons. 19 January 1787. Fitzgibbon, in [his] speech (1787) said the 
disturbances commenced in Kerry, the people assembled in a mass-house, there 
took an oath to obey the laws of Captain Right. Soon spread through the province of 
Munster. Their objects the tithes, then to regulate the price of lands, to raise the price  of 
labour, and to opjmse the collection of hearth-money and other taxes. "I am very well 
acquainted with the province of Munster, and I know that it is impossible for 
human wretchedness to exceed that of the miserable peasantry in that province. I know 
that the unhappy tenantry are ground to pou'der by relentless landlords' 1—far from being 
able to give the clergy their just dues, they have not food or raiment for  themselves,  the 
landlords grasp the whole; and ... not satisfied with the present extortion, some 
landlords have been so base as to instigate the insurgents to rob the clergy of their tithes, 
not in order to alleviate the distresses of the tenantry, but that they might add the clergy's 
share to the cruel rack-rents already  paid....  The poor people of Munster live in a more 
abject state of poverty than human nature can be supposed able to bear—their miseries are 
intolerable, but they do not originate with the clergy: nor can the legislature stand 
by and see them take the redress into their own hands. Nothing can be done for their 
benefit while the country remains in a state of anarchy." 
Longfield, a County Cork Gentleman, stated that the disturbances were 
exaggerated, though the distress was not. He accused the government of looking 
for a year at the disturbances, for a political purpose. 
Curran moved an amendment to the address (withdrawn without a division). Said 
inter alia: 
"Cease to utter idle complaints of inevitable effects, when you yourselves have 
been the causes ... the patience of the people has been totally exhausted; their 
grievances (have long) been the empty song of this House, but no productive effect 
has ever followed. The non-residence of the landholders, the tyranny of intermediate 
landlords. You denied the existence of the grievance, and refused redress.... No wonder 
that the peasantry should be ripe for rebellion and revolt.... Not a single man of 
property or consequence connected with the rebels.... 
"You were called on solemnly ... for a proper reformation in the representation of 
the people: did you grant it? No; and how does it at present stand? Why, Sir, seats in 
this House are bought and  sold.  They are set up to public sale; they have  become  an absolute 
article of commerce—a traffic of the constitution.... Saleable rotten boroughs. As they 
have bought the people for a sum of money, it is natural they should sell them.... 
The peasantry have formed hopes of  relief....  People, when oppressed, [...] though 
oppressed by law, will make reprisals; and these are the real causes of the 
disturbances. System of vile jobbing extends to commissions of the peace (24 
commissions of the peace sent down to the County of Clare in one post) and to the sheriffs. 
You may talk of commerce expanding ... but what, in God's name, have they to do 
with the wretched peasantry?" 
House of Commons. 19 February 1787. "Right Boy Bill". One clause of the 
Government, [which was] abandoned, was directing magistrates to demolish mass-houses 
a The passage "to exceed that of ... relentless landlords" is italicised by 
Davis.—  Ed. 

=====第276页=====
244 Karl Marx 
at which combinations shall be  found,  or unlawful oaths administered. Curran resisted the 
Bill altogether: 
Curran: "The people are too much raised by a consciousness of their strength 
and consequence to be proper objects of so sanguinary a code as that now proposed...." 
He alludes to pamphlet of Dr. Woodward, Bishop of Cloyne, in defence of tithes 
"tending manifestly to revive the dissensions from which we had so recently emerged, and 
to plunge us into the barbarism from which we were emerging, or, perhaps to imbrue us in 
the bloodshed of a religious war".... (The Bill was committed by 192 to 31.) 
20 February 1787. Discussion of the same Bill, by which a Riot Act  passed.  O'Neill 
moved to limit it to Cork, Kerry, Limerick, and Tipperary. (Limiting motion rejected by 
176 to 43.) In the Bill Todesstrafe —capital punishment—for tendering an oath 
etc. 
"I fear," said Curran, "that, as the coercion is so great, and as no means are taken 
for the relief of the poor, rebellion will go in the dark ... until the whole Kingdom set in a 
flame." 
13 March 1787. Tithes. Grattan having moved a resolution that if tranquillity 
were restored, at the opening of the next session, the House would consider the Tithe 
Question. Motion lost, without a division. Curran supported Grattan's Motion. 
Curran: "A law of pains and penalties severe beyond all example of any former 
period.... The offence was local and partial ... the causes of such offence were 
universal.... The abject and miserable state of the peasantry of  Ireland.  The Secretary" 
(Englishman!) "declares he is a stranger to their  distresses,  and will not hold out any hope 
that they should be ever considered by the Parliament!" ..."The honourable gentlemen 
could not let the Riot Act pass without accompanying it with an express disavowal 
of all intention to alleviate, or even at any period, however distant, to listen to their 
complaints." "Who are to execute it" (that law)? "That very body of men in the class 
above the peasants, who have been represented as adverse to the rights of the clergy, 
and are said to have connived at these offences." ... "But whatever may be the idea 
of an English Secretary, this House must be too wise to say that inveterate evils can 
receive any sanction from any length of time." 
2) Election of Lord Mayor of Dublin (1790)™ 
Disputed election for the Mayoralty of Dublin, connected with the attempt of the 
English Government to govern or provincialise Ireland by corruption. Hence the 
burgesses of Dublin pledged themselves in their guilds not to return any one as 
Lord Mayor or Member of Parliament for the city, who held a place or pension from 
the Government Alderman James was a Police Commissioner. Under the old 
Corporation laws the Lord Mayor and Aldermen sat and voted in one chamber, the 
Sheriff and Common Councilmen in a  second.  16 April 1790 the former chose 
Alderman James as mayor elect for the ensuing year, the Common Council 
rejected him. Seven other names afterwards sent down were similarly rejected. 
Then the Common Council elected Alderman Howison; Napper Tandy led the 
popular party. The Aldermen repeated their election of James. This dispute came 
before the Privy Council, where Curran pleaded for the Common Council. Privy 
Council decided for a new  election.  Aldermen re-elect James and Councilmen Howison. 
This whole process, with interference of the Privy Council, repeated several times. 
On 10 July 1790 Curran pleads for the Common Council before the Privy 
Council, presided by Fitzgibbon (became Lord Chancellor, and Lord Clare, in June 
1789.) 

=====第277页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 245 
He flagellated that fellow masterly. 
Privy Council decided for James, he resigned, on 5th August 1790 Howison chosen 
by the Aldermen, approved by the Common Council and Privy Council Thus this 
struggle ended in utter defeat of the Government. 
On 16 July, in the Common Council, Napper Tandy carried 17 Resolutions 
censuring the Privy Council, Aldermen, and summoned meeting of freemen and 
freeholders 288 at the Exchange. This meeting held on 20 July, Hamilton Rowan in 
the chair, adjourned to 3d August, after appointing a committee to prepare a state 
of facts. 
3d August that State of Facts read, and James's resignation was announced. 
Sir E. Newenham denounced Fitzgibbon, who on 24 July had in House of Peers 
made audacious speech, where he read a Resolution of the Whig Club'21*9 and 
attacked them, until Lords Charlemont and Moira avowed the Resolution. (Whig Club 
founded in Dublin, summer 1789.) 
Whig Club, [which] met on 2d August, drew up a Report against Fitzgibbon. 
Fitzgibbon had become so unpopular, that the guild of merchants, who had, in 
the previous winter, voted him an address in a gold box, for services to their 
trading interests, expunged the resolutions on 13 July, 1790, as "disgraceful". 
From the above-quoted "State of Facts", August 3, 1790. (Aggregate meeting of the 
citizens of Dublin, held at the Royal Exchange.) Among other things it said: 
"That we do acknowledge, that for the last 10 or 11 years the citizens of Dublin 
did take an active part for the liberty of their country etc. etc.; 
"that we do acknowledge [that] the freedom of the City of Dublin [was] refused to 
His Excellency etc. the Earl of Westmoreland etc.; 
"that we do not deny that many among us did, on a former occasion, favour the 
scheme of Protective Duties etc.; 
"that we do acknowledge to have expressed our approbation of the conduct of 
the minority of the late Parliament in the last session ... that those measures had no 
other view, meaning or object, save corruption only: ... that the nation was told by 
a very high authority (Fitzgibbon) ... that in order to defeat an opposition in 
Parliament, this nation had been, in the Administration of the Marquis of 
Townshend, bought in by the Government, and sold by the Members of Parliament 
for half a million, and that if opposition continued to the present Administration, 
this nation must be bought and sold again etc. etc." 
The Judges, dependent on the Crown, the Army independent 
of Parliament, the Legislature at the feet of the British Attorney-
General, and the people bound by the laws of Scotch and English 
Delegates. {The two last points apply to the period before 1782.} 
C) FROM OCTOBER 1791 TO COMMENCEMENT OF APRIL 1795 
(LORD FTTZWILLIAM'S RECALL 
AND REPLACEMENT BY LORD CAMDEN) 
{From  October 1791 to 4 January 1795. (Arrival of Fitzwilliam.) 
(Continuation of Lord Westmoreland's Government. (His Secretary 
Major Hobart.) } 

=====第278页=====
246 Karl Marx 
French events during this time: 1793. Duke of York, 8 September 
thrashed by Houchard, has to abandon the siege of Dunkirk, Dutch 
and English thrown back into Flanders.3 The allies were repulsed 
on the Upper Rhine, towards the end of December they had to 
abandon the whole territory as far as Worms. The Republicans 
were victorious in the South and West of France as well. In October 
1793 they subdued the rebellious Lyons and in December 1793 the 
English-held Toulon, drove the Spanish over the Pyrenees and 
attacked them on their own territory. 
1794. 18 May, Moreau and Souham won a total victory over the 
Duke of York at Tourcoing. 
26 June 2nd battle of Fleurus (Jourdan). Belgium quickly 
conquered. The leaders of the English and Dutch troops were 
compelled to think only of the defence of the Netherlands. 
October and November the Dutch lost all their frontier fortresses. 
October Jourdan compelled the Austrians to abandon the entire 
left bank of the Rhine up to Mainz, 26 October he entered 
Coblenz. On the entire left bank of the Rhine, only Mainz and 
Luxembourg remained in the hands of the allies. 
27 December Pichegru in Holland. 
1795. 20 January 1795 Pichegru's entry into Amsterdam.-
Batavian Republic. 
September Düsseldorf in Jourdan's hands, Mannheim in Picheg­
ru's. The Austrians had to withdraw across the Main. Clairfait 
defeated the French army at Mainz on 29 October. Pichegru and 
Jourdan had to retreat. An armistice towards the end of the year. 
Moreau was given the command of the Rhine army. 
At the beginning of 1795 a peace treaty with the leaders of the 
Vendée. (The Peace of La Mabilois.) Pitt landed an émigré army 
at Quiberon on 27 June 1795 etc. On 20 July it was crushed by 
Hoche etc. 290 
{February and March 1796 Stoff let, Charette etc. were court-
martialled and executed by firing-squad. July 1796 he [Hoche] 
reported to the Directory that the civil war in the West had been 
brought to an end. } 
1796. 1797. Bonaparte in Italy. 
:l The next passage, up to and including the words "1796, 1797. Bonaparte in 
Italy", is in German in the manuscript.— Ed. 

=====第279页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 180J 247 
First United Irishmen Society founded by Theobald Wolfe Tone in October  1791. 291 
Their avowed (and by the mass of the Societies alone wished for) objects were 
Union between Catholics and Protestants, perfect Emancipation for the Catholics (Belfast 
had proposed this already in 1783) and Popular Representation for the men of both 
creeds. (Tone and others of the leading men for independent Republic. Without the 
c ruelty of Government they would have been overruled by the Whigs, and outvoted in 
the Societies.) 
The Belfast Society met publicly, as did all the United Irish Societies until 1794. The 
Catholics, on their part, were rapidly advancing in political spirit and information. 
Keogh and the leading (not aristocratic and Whiggish) Catholics 
were  United. 
The Confederation extended to Dublin, received the support of the leading 
citizens, and of many of the Volunteer Corps. Its chief organ was The Northern Star: 
the first number of this paper, printed 4 January 1792 (manager Samuel Neilson), 
occupied itself chiefly with French politics. The Evening Star appeared in Dublin 
soon after, but The Press did not commence until 28 September 1797. 
Returning now to Westmoreland's Administration, we remark that 
Catholic Emancipation and Parliamentary Reform were the two cries! 
Irish House of Commons. 18 February 1792. Catholic Emancipation. 
These proceedings began by the presentation of a petition from the Protestants of 
County of Antrim for the Bill. 
Some small thing was proposed by Grattan. (Rejected.) 
Curran. "At Cork, the present Viceroy was pleased to reject a most moderate 
and modest petition from the Catholics of that city. The next step was to create a 
division amongst the Catholics themselves: the next was to hold them up as a body 
formidable to the English Government, and to their Protestant fellow-subjects.... It 
is not a question merely of the sufferings or their relief—it is a question of your own 
preservation ... a partial liberty cannot long subsist ... alienation of 3 millions of our 
people, subserviency and corruption in a fourth ... the inevitable  consequence  would be 
an Union with Great Britain. And if any one desires to know what thai would be, I 
will tell him. It would be the emigration of every man of  consequence  from  Ireland;  it 
would be the participation of British taxes, without British trade; it would be the extinction 
of the Irish name as a people etc." 
The petition for the Catholics rejected with indignation, by 208 to 23. This 
rejection inflamed the Catholics. 
DOINGS OK CATHOLICS, UNITED IRISHMEN 
AND ADMINISTRATION UNTIL CATHOLIC RELIEE BILL 
OK 1793 292 
In March, 1792, the Catholic Committee,29^ or rather Convention (for it was a 
body of delegates) met, and Tone was named its secretary. The agitation by means 
of these societies became most vigorous. The shining3 progress of the French 
•' In his "Memoir" Davis has "stirring". See J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., 
p. XXL— Ed. 

=====第280页=====
248 Karl Marx 
Revolution, and the organisation of the political societies in England and 
Scotland 294 aided them. The United Irishmen increased in number, the Catholics 
in confidence, and the Volunteer Corps began to restore their array, and improve 
their discipline. The ministry grew alarmed. "In December (1792) the Catholics 
thundered out their demands ... they were supported by all the spirit and 
intelligence of the Dissenters.295 Dumouriei was in Brabant—Holland was prostrate 
before him." (Wolfe Tone.) 
7 December 1792. Government Proclamation against all seditious meetings: In this 
proclamation we read: "The first battalion of National Guards were to have paraded, 
clothed like Frenchmen etc." This proclamation answered by the United Irishmen. 
16 December 1792, Rowan (of Dublin) Chairman, when the address was voted, 
Dr. Drennan wrote it. 
The main content of this proclamation,3 on account of which 
Rowan and Drennan were prosecuted, was: 1) It called the 
Volunteers to arms: 
"To your formation was owing the peace and protection of this island; to your 
relaxation has been owing its relapse into impotence and insignificance. 2) Elective 
franchise to the whole body of the people ... reform in representation. 3) Universal 
Emancipation and representative legislature, in these 4 words lies all our power.... 
We, therefore, wish for Catholic Emancipation without any modification, but still we 
consider this necessary enfranchisement as nearly the portal to the temple of 
national freedom.... The Catholic cause is subordinate to our  cause,  and included in 
it; for, as United Irishmen, we adhere to no sect, but to society—to no party, but the 
whole people, ... were it (Catholic Emancipation) obtained tomorrow, tomorrow 
would we go on as we do today, in the pursuit of that Reform, which would still be 
wanting to ratify their liberties as well as our own. 4) For both these purposes it 
appears necessary that provisional conventions should assemble preparatory to the 
convocation of the Protestant Convention (this then to communicate with the 
Catholic Committee or Convention in Dublin).... If a Convention on the one part 
does not soon follow, and is not soon connected with that on the other, the common 
cause will split into the partial interest—the people will relapse into inattention and 
inertness—too probably, some local insurrections, instigated by the malignity of our 
common enemy, may commit the character, and risk the tranquillity of the  island...  The 
15th of February approaches....,296  Let parochial meetings be held as soon as possible; 
let each parish return delegates; let the sense of Ulster be again declared from 
Dungannon.... Citizen Soldiers etc." (This address was issued in meeting at a fencing 
school, Dublin, several corps of Volunteers with their side-arms going there, as well 
as Napper Tandy etc.) 
In December 1792 Rowan was arrested on an information and admitted-to bail.b 
The prosecution of the "Northern Star" of Belfast for publishing the Declaration 
and Address of the "Irish Jacobins (name of the society) of Belfast" on 15 December 
1792. 
The Declaration of the "Irish Jacobins" says among other things: 
;1 Marx means the proclamation "The Society of United Irishmen at Dublin. To 
the Volunteers of Ireland" quoted according to Davis' commentary in J. Ph. 
Curran, The Speeches..., pp. 154-55. The division of the text into points is by 
Marx.— Ed. 
'' The following two semences are in German in the manuscript.— Ed. 

=====第281页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 249 
Declaration 
"1st) Resolved—That this Kingdom (meaning the Kingdom of Ireland) has no 
national government, inasmuch as the great mass of the people are not represented 
in Parliament. [...] 3d) That the people of Ireland can never effectually constitute 
their own laws, without an extension of the elective franchise to all its citizens. 4th) 
That the elective franchise can never be obtained without a cordial, steady, and 
persevering union of all the Irish people of every denomination. 5) That the penal 
code of statutes which have for upwards of a century doomed our fellow-citizens, 
the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, to a state little inferior to the unlettered African, 
is a disgrace to the land we live in. [...] 7) That to obtain this most desirable end 
(natural rights of men) we entreat our fellow-citizens of every denomination in 
Ireland, England, and Scotland, to turn their thoughts to a National Convention, in 
order to collect the sense of the people as to the most effective means of obtaining 
a radical and complete Parliamentary reform, an object without which these kingdoms 
must for ever remain wretched etc." 
"Address. The Irish Jacobins 
of Belfast to the Public" 
Among other things: "Where the mode of government is not derived from all 
the people clearly expressed, that nation has no constitution; need we say this is the 
case with Ireland; it possesses only an acting government [...]: in such a 
government the supreme authority has more power to oppress the subject than to 
defend his rights.... Out of 5 millions of people (meaning the Irish people) 90 
individuals actually return a majority of the House of Commons, who instead of 
representing the voice of the nation, are influenced by English interests, and that 
aristocracy whose baneful exertions have ever tended to sap the vital principles etc. of 
this unhappy and wretched country.... By unanimity and perseverance this divided 
land will be liberated from the shackles of tyranny.... It is by procuring a renovated 
representation that liberty will be  established  in this country; this can only be accomplished by 
a National Convention. The Roman Catholics are already convened; let the Protestants 
follow their peaceful example." 297 
15 February 1793: Volunteer Convention, said to represent  1,250,000  people, met 
at Dunganaon, passed resolutions in favour of Emancipation and Reform, and named 
a permanent Committee. This, doubtless, assisted the carrying of the Relief Bill, but it 
made the Ministry resolve to crush the Protestants, while it conciliated the Catholics. 
Irish House of Commons. 10 January 1793. Lord Westmoreland opens Parliament 
[with a speech]. Complained of the discontent of  Ireland,  but said nothing of the 
corruption, extravagance, and alien policy of ministers. It complained of the invasion of 
Holland by France, but was silent of the European conspiracy against the Republic. 
It recommended a relaxation of Catholic fetters, but not the motives: English 
declaration of war against France, Custine had conquered the Rhine (21 October 
1792),  Dumouriez's battle of Jemappes (6 November 1792) and annexation of 
Belgium. The speech also stated that Government had increased the military 
establishment, and recommended the formation of a militia. This last was a stroke 
against the Volunteers. The Address moved was echo to the speech, Grattan moved a 
trivial amendment. 
Catholics had acquired spirit and organisation by Wolfe Tone, Keogh, Byrne, 
Todd Jones and M'Cormick. The Catholic Committee negotiated with the Government, the 

=====第282页=====
250 Karl Marx 
successes of France compensated them for the  baseness  of their [Catholic] aristocracy. 
Supported by the United Irishmen. 
In opposition to the Catholic Committee and the United Irishmen, the Ministry 
stimulated Protestant bigotry and Catholic division. Out of doors they got the 
exclusive Corporation of Dublin to address the other Irish Corporations against 
Emancipation, and they intrigued with the Aristocracy (lay and clerical) of the 
Catholics. In Parliament they found the relics of the old exclusion Party. 
11 January 1793: Curran supported Grattan's amendment which was  carried. 
"Parliament has become unpopular in the country.... How could the credit of 
Parliament survive its independency? ...More than half of us have no connexion 
with the people.... The disunion of the people from this House raises from 
this—the people are not represented. And to restore the Union ... wanted a radical 
Reform of the Commons.... Without them (the Catholics) the country cannot be saved. 
Give them no qualified Emancipation.... A hated Government, an unpopular Parliament, a 
discontented people.... The Catholic Petition (1792) has been  rejected  by the influence of the 
Irish Administration." 
Early in January 1793d Curran unsuccessfully resists the Attorney-General's 
motion for the committal of M'Donnell, the printer of the Hibernian Journal, for 
publishing that the House was not free and independent. 
On January 14, 1793 (so persuasive were French victories) Grattan obtained a 
Committee of the Whole House on Parliamentary Representation, and moved resolutions 
[pointing out] among other things that of the 300 members only 84 [are] returned by 
counties, counties of towns and cities, together with the University, while the 
remaining 216 [are] returned by boroughs and manors. Finis: "Resolved—That the 
state of the representation of the people in Parliament requires amendment." 
Curran supported this. He said: 
"The Catholic Question must precede a Reform. Their place in the state must be 
decided first.... Ireland feels, that without an immediate Reform her liberty is gone." 
Motion lost by 71 to 153. 
But the Opposition had already yielded to the Ministers Indemnity for their violent 
Proclamations against the Republican Volunteers: they had consented to the Militia and 
Gunpowder Bills, and therefore the Resolutions were resisted. 
11 March 1793 another Government Proclamation, forbidding military societies, 
drilling, and the whole Machinery of the Volunteers, without naming them. 
April 1793: Relief Bill of the Catholics passed, admitting Catholics to the 
franchise, the bar, the University, and to all the rights of  property;  but excluding them 
from Parliament, from State Offices, and from all, indeed, that the Bill of 1829 
conceded?^ 
The Bill of 1793 was brought in 10 days after the declaration of 
war against France.b 
The same Parliament which passed the Relief Bill, passed the Alien Act, the 
Military Foreign Correspondence, Gunpowder, and Convention Acts, in fact, a full code of 
coercion and a Secret Committee. It got 20,000 Regulars and 16,000 Militia. 
Convention Bill: 
"A law," says Curran, "not to restrain but to promote insurrection." The law 
declares that no body of men may delegate a power to any smaller number, to act, 
think, or petition for them. 
11 According to Davis, on January 29, 1793. Cf. his commentary in J. Ph. 
Curran, The Speeches..., p. 152.— Ed. 
b On February 21,  1793.—  Ed 

=====第283页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 251 
This [is] in fact a bill to prevent assemblies of the people to petition against 
grievances. According to the Convention Act it is a high misdemeanour in any part 
of the people to assemble for the purpose of choosing any persons to act for them in 
framing petitions or other representations for the producing of any change in 
anything established by law. It was intended to put an end to societies formed and 
forming, in 1793, for the purpose of procuring a Parliamentary Reform. (Cobbett.)'299 
Thus armed, the Government commenced its crusade of 
prosecuting and persecuting, and obtained fresh laws from time to 
time,  and, after the truce of 1795, drove the quarrel to an 
Insurrection and to the Union. 
7 794.  The agitation continued. (Government prosecutions against Volunteers, 
United Irishmen etc.) The United Irishmen Society was changed into a secret and 
secretly organised  body.  The Catholics still laboured; the French had conquered; their 
Government aroused by the Irish Jacobin Resolutions of Belfast, and the suggestions 
of some Irish patriots, bethought themselves to assist the discontented Irish 
to effect a separation. Rev. Jackson sent there as an agent, put himself in 
communication with Tone. Betrayed; arraigned for treason (after arrest), hanged. 
29 January 1794, Curran as defender of Rowan: 
"But now, if any aggregate assembly meets, they are censured; if a printer 
publishes their resolutions, he is punished; rightly, to be sure, in both cases, for it 
has been lately done. If people say, let us not create tumult, but meet in delegation, 
they cannot do it ... the law of last session has for the first time declared such 
meetings to be a crime." 
The informer system is flourishing. 
FROM 4 JANUARY 1795 TO THE END OF MARCH 1795. 
LORD FITZWILLIAM 
4 January 1795, Lord Fitzwilliam, 
Whig, who had opposed Pitt, 
[was] sent by him to Ireland, charged with the carrying of Catholic Emancipation 
(and Reform  Bill),  and pacification of Ireland. The apparent causes [were] the rapid 
progress of the United Irishmen and the French armies, who had driven the Spaniards 
behind the Pyrenees, the Austrians behind the Rhine, destroyed the Duke of York's 
army, and prepared the occupation of Holland in the winter 1794-95.a 
But from papers published (correspondence between Fitzwilliam and 
Lord Carlisleh) [it is] evident that Pitt (this was, perhaps, second 
thought, when the King's and Beresford's influence prevailed) has 
•' See Davis' commentary in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., p.  233.—  Ed. 
b Marx refers to [Carlisle] "A Letter ... to Earl Fitzwilliam, in Reply to His 
Lordship's Two Letters" (London, 1795) and "A Letter from Earl Fitzwilliam to the 
Earl of Carlisle" (1795). Further on Marx cites facts according to Mitchel's History 
of Ireland..,  Vol. I, pp. 218-19.—Ed. 

=====第284页=====
252 Karl Marx 
chosen him as tool to agitate the Irish, inflame them, and drive 
them into Rebellion. 
Fitzwilliam was one of the most indulgent landlords of Ireland 
and very popular. What Pitt wanted, was to raise the Catholics to 
the height of expectation, and by suddenly recalling Fitzwilliam, to 
drive them into commotions, which would throw the Protestants 
into the arms of England for protection, whilst the horrors would 
be aggravated by the mingled conflicts of parties, Royalists and 
Republicans. 
Pitt had sent Fitzwilliam to Ireland with unlimited powers. 
The day Fitzwilliam arrived, peace was proclaimed throughout 
all Ireland. The day he quitted it, she prepared for insurrection. 
Irish House of Commons. 22 January 1795 Fitzwilliam opens with plausible 
speech. Grattan outdid the Ministers in servile adulation3 (as to the Address). An 
Emancipation Bill300 was read a first time, but ample supplies were  voted,  £2 millions 
loan was voted, and Anti-Gallican frenzy got upon certain classes. Fitzwilliam 
recalled. 
Ill 
B) LORD CAMDEN'S ADMINISTRATION. 
APRIL 1795-END OF JULY 1798 
Camden's arrival attended by almost insurrectionary outrages. 
The Beresfords assaulted, Clare (Lord Chancellor, i.e. Fitzgibbon) 
almost killed in his carriage. 
Camden's Chief Secretary Mr. Pelham (Earl Chichester) afterwards 
replaced by his nephew Stewart (Lord Castlereagh). 
Camden became extremely popular amongst the armed associations 
which were raised in Ireland under the title of Yeomen. He was 
considered the guardian of that Institution. 
Irish House of Commons. 4 May 1795. Second Reading of the Emancipation Bill. 
Rejected by 155 to 84. 
Fitzwilliam's recall was a triumph for the separation party. An Irish Republic 
now became the only object of the United Irish. The bulk of the Presbyterians of 
Down, Antrim, and Tyrone joined, as did multitudes of Protestants and Catholics in 
Leinster. At this time the Catholics of the North were Defenders or Ribbonmen.301 Both 
sides made ready for the worst. 
An Insurrection Act passed, making death for any one to take an oath of 
Association; another allowing the Lord Lieutenant to proclaim countries [in a state of 
siege],  in which case no one could go out at night; and magistrates obtained the 
power of breaking into  houses,  and transporting to the navy all persons whom they suspected 
Other acts—granting indemnity for magistrates guilty of any illegality—giving the Lord 
a Davis wrote "he outdid ministers in loyalty". See J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., 
p. 233.—  Ed 

=====第285页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 253 
Lieutenant the power of arrest without bail— licensing the introduction of foreign troops 
(Germans),  and establishing the Yeomanry Corps—followed each other in quick 
succession. 
The Yeomanry consisted of the Tory Gentry, and their dependants, undisciplined 
and unprincipled, legal banditti. No villainy but was perpetrated by them. 
Whipping, pitch-capping, half or whole hanging, sending to serve in the navy—as 
the leisure or facilities of the officer allowed.302 
1795. Among the papers found by Jackson View of  Ireland, 
by Tone: 
"The Established Churchmen in Ireland have engrossed, besides the whole 
church patronage, all the profits and honours of the country exclusively, and a 
very great share of the landed property. Aristocrats, adverse to any change, 
decided enemies of the French Revolution. Dissenters ... Republicans [...]. Catholics, 
the great body of the people, in lowest degree of ignorance, ready for any change, 
because no change can make them worse. The whole peasantry of Ireland, the 
most oppressed and wretched in Europe, may be said to be Catholic. Within these 
2 years [they] have received a certain degree of information, [...] various 
insurrections, [...] bold, hardy race, and make excellent soldiers. [...] Defenders. [...] 
They are so situated that they have but one way left to make their sentiments 
known, and that is by war. [...] All Parliamentary, Grand Jury etc. Acts proceeding 
from aristocrats, whose interest is adverse to that of the people." 
Defenders (in the North). The Lords' Committee of 1793 describes 
them 
"as poor ignorant labouring men", [fighting] for Catholic cause, relieved from 
hearth-money, tithes, county cesses, lowering of their rents. First they appeared in 
County Louth, April 1793, several of them armed; assembled mostly in the night, 
forced into the houses of Protestants and took from them their arms. Spread soon 
through the counties of Meath, Cavan, Monaghan and other parts adjacent. The 
Secret Committee tried to connect them with Catholic Gentlemen, and the crown 
prosecMtors  tried to trace them to the United Irishmen Association and French gold. 
Before Drogheda, Spring Assizes, April 23, 1794, Drogheda Defenders, declared not 
guilty. Dublin Defenders,. December 22, 1795. James Weldon, connected with them, 
hanged. 
House of Commons. February 3d, 1796. Indemnity Bill. 
25 February 1796. Insurrection Bill (it gave the right of arbitrary transportation to 
magistrates). 
Curran: "It is a Bill for the rich, and against the poor."'d "What is a Bill which 
puts the liberty of the poor man, who has no visible means of living but labour, in 
the discretion of the magistrates? [...] In Ireland," where poverty [is] general, "it 
constitutes poverty a crime." "Let the rich men of Ireland, therefore, fear when they 
enact a law against poverty, lest poverty should enact a counter-law against riches." 
"Gentlemen have reasoned to prove that he who should be transported by this law 
would only be sent into an honourable retirement, where he might gain glory by 
fighting for his country from which his poverty had expelled him." 
Irish Flouse of Commons. 13 October 1796. French War. Camden opened 
[Parliament with the call:] resist invasion! (Hoche's force was just assembling at Brest, 
•' Here and below in this paragraph italics is by Curran.— Ed. 

=====第286页=====
254 Karl Marx 
and Wolfe Tone,. Grouchy, and a part of that expedition, reached Bantry Bay on the 22 
December and did not leave it till the 28.) Camden denounced also "popular passion 
and popular opinion". 
Curran. "Government encourages every attack upon the reputation of the 
Catholics, and the most wicked and groundless prosecutions against their lives." "Look at 
the scene that has been 'exhibited for 2 years in one of your counties, of robbery, 
and rape, and murder, and extermination" (of the Catholics). "...Law can give 
them no protection under a hostile and implacable government." 
Ponsonby's Amendment defeated by 149 to 12. Then the Attorney-General 
moved for leave to bring in a Bill, similar to such as have been enacted on like 
occasions in England, to empower the Lord Lieutenant, to take up and detain all such 
persons as were suspected of  treasonable  practices. Leave being given, the Bill  was  forthwith 
presented, read a first and second time, and committed for the morrow. 
14 October 1796. Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act. Leave to bring it in 
granted, read, 2 times, etc. all in a few minutes in the morning after midnight. 
17 October 1796. Catholic Emancipation Bill. Rejected. 
6 January 1797. Hoche's Expedition^ Secretary Pelham brought down a message 
from the Lord Lieutenant full of English palaver, in reference to France and 
especially the expedition of Hoche. 
Curran. "You have already laid a shilling on the brogues of your beggar 
peasants; will you impose another shilling upon them? [...] What wealth they have? 
Seven pence per day." 
24 February 1797. Internal Defence. Sir Laurence Parsons moved an Address for 
an increase of the d< nestic army, especially the Yeomen infantry. Grattan supported, 
and the Ministers opposed, the Address. Neither party foresaw how the patriots of 
the Clubs would turn into the scourges of the People— traitors to their country and 
their oath, when under the bribe of payment, the compulsion of discipline, and the spirit 
of the army. 
Curran. "At this moment the gaols are crowded ... they3 make a demand of 
redress an act of treason." 
Since end of March 1796 whole counties of Ireland proclaimed 
(put in state of siege). 
House of Commons. March 18, 1797: Disarming of Ulster. Message of Lord 
Camden. (Pelham is still Secretary.) General Lake—cowardly, infamous, cruel—was 
to disarm the inhabitants together with the magistrates. Lake's Proclamation. Belfast, 
13 March 1797. 
19 March 1797. Grattan: "The Lord Lieutenant attaints one entire province of 
Ireland of High Treason."b Amendment of Grattan. 
20 March 1797. Amendment rejected by 127 to 16. 
Curran. "The North is deeply discontented. By what? Your own laws, your 
Convention Act, Gunpowder Act, Insurrection Act. The first denies the natural 
right of sufferers—the right of petition or complaint; the second, the power of 
self-defence ... the third, the defence of a jury against the attempts of power." 
May 15, 1797. Last speech of Curran in the House of Commons, secedes from 
it, ditto Grattan; the Opposition ceased to attend, and House adjourned on 3 July 
1797. Castlereagh Chief Secretary. 
We have seen the decreasing minorities of the party who gallantly struggled to 
3 The Commoners.— Ed. 
b Marx quotes Grattan probably according to J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., 
p. 267; see also H. Grattan, The Speeches..., Vol. Ill, p. 299.— Ed. 

=====第287页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 255 
maintain the parliamentary constitution of Ireland. But they grew daily more 
powerless. The people looked to the United Irish Executive, to France, to arms, to 
Revolution. The Government persisted in refusing Reform and Emancipation, continued 
the suspension of the Constitution, and incessantly augmented the despotism of 
their laws, the profligacy of their administration, and the violence of their 
soldiery—they trusted to intimidation. Under these circumstances, the opposition 
determined to abandon the contest. 
The Government and the United Irishmen now face to face. The Government 
strengthened itself by spies on the United Irishmen (such as Maguane and others), the 
"battalion of testimony"  (Bird,  Newell, O'Brien etc.), free quarters, prosecutions, 
patronage, and calumny. 
Orr hanged 14 October 1797 for having (allegedly) administered the oath of the 
United Irish to a private soldier. The Oath is: first, to promote a brotherhood of 
affection among men of all religious distinctions; secondly, to labour for the 
attainment of Parliamentary Reform; 3dly, an obligation of secrecy, added to it 
when the Convention Law had made it criminal for any public delegation to meet 
for that purpose. The Insurrection Act makes the administering of such an oath 
felony of death. 
The United Irish Society of 1791 formed in 1791, for the achievement of 
Catholic Emancipation and Parliamentary Reform. In 1792-93 it increased, 
retaining its original objects. In 1794, the views of Tone and Neilson, who both 
desired an independent republic, spread; but the formal objects were unchanged, 
when, on 10 May 1795, the organisation of Ulster was completed. The recall of 
Fitzwilliam, the consequent disappointment of the Catholics, the accumulation of 
coercive laws, the prospects of the French Alliance, and the natural progress of a 
quarrel, rapidly spread the influence, and altered the whole character of the 
Society. The test of the Society was made more decisive, and less constitutional. In 
the autumn of 1796 the organisation was made military in Ulster. Towards the middle of 
1797, this system spread to Leinster. So far back as May 1796, the Executive had 
formally'" 1 communicated with France, through Lord Edward Fitzgerald. Only on J9 
February 1798 [it was] resolved "that they would not be diverted from their 
purpose by anything which could be done in Parliament". 
In the winter of 1796-97, the coming of the French was urged as a reason for 
immediate insurrection; but it did not prevail. In May, 1797, the order for the 
execution of the 4 soldiers of the Monaghan militia, was regarded by the militias as 
sufficient motive for action; but not so thought the Executive. In trie summer of 
1797 the militia regiments sent a deputation, offering to seize the Castle. The 
Northern leaders were for an outbreak, so was Lord Edward. Still nothing was 
done. And again, in the beginning of 1798, the people subjected to free quarters, 
whipping, burnings, and transportation, pressed for insurrection. Lord Edward 
disposed to it. Emmet wanted to wait for France, and thus they were, when the 
sleek traitor Reynolds of Kilkee glided into their councils through Lord Edward's 
weakness. Arthur O'Connor was arrested at Maidstone, in the act of embarking for 
France; on 12 March, a meeting of Leinster delegates, including Oliver  Bond, 
McCann etc., were arrested at Oliver Bond's warehouse, Dublin. MacNevin, Thomas 
Emmet, Sampson were not taken for some days. Warrant against Lord Edward, he 
escaped and lay concealed. New  Directory,  John Sheares one of it. On 19 May, just 4 
days before the rising was to take place, Lord Fitzgerald was pounced on, and on 
21st the two Sheares.b Thus the insurrection began, without its designers to lead it, 
and without time to replace them. 
A The word "formally" is italicised by Davis.— Ed. 
h Henry and John.— Ed. 

=====第288页=====
256 Karl Marx 
23 May 1798 insurrection commenced, 17 July Lord Castlereagh announced its 
final defeat. 
Before the outbreak of the insurrection, trials took place in February 
and March 1798." 
The insurgents during the struggle not treated as soldiers, but 
hanged. Burning every cottage, and torturing every cottager—the 
loyalists. Martial law proclaimed, and the courts of justice closed. 
No quarter on either side. Bills of attainder and all sorts of legal 
murder. Juries (packed) recorded the opinions given them by the 
judges. 
25 July 1798 the state prisoners' negotiation with Government. Their lives 
secured [by] Mr. Cooke, on behalf of the Ministers. On the other hand, they were 
to describe the United Irish affairs, so far as they could, without implicating 
individuals. Byrne, however, was hanged: compact was finally settled on 29 July, at 
the Castle, by "deputies from the gaols". The Government broke the compact. 
They, not only in their press, but by their indemnity act, described the United 
Leaders as confessing guilt, and craving pardon, neither of which they did. Instead 
of allowing them to go abroad, they were kept in gaol here for a year, and then 
thrust into Fort George, from whence thev were not released, till the Treaty of 
Amiens,304 in 18()2.b 
Within 12 days from the first rising, the people of Wexford had cleared their 
county, with the exception of Ross and Duncannon, two places unfit to resist a skilful 
attack. Similar successes attended the Kildare insurrection. 
Antrim and Down did not rise for a fortnight, and there, after similar blunders, 
and a shorter struggle, the Presbyterians were ousted. 
The Wexford men protracted the war; partly from a vague hope for foreign 
assistance, but still more from despair, for they could not trust the faith of their 
persecutors; and not a few of these heroic men died in the plains of Meath, in an 
effort to force their way into Ulster. 
The soldier having done his own work, and that of the assassin and brigand, too, 
[it was the turn of] the bow-string of the Attorney-General. Courts-martial hanged 
those taken in battle, and courts-civil slaughtered the prisoners. Most unaccountably 
the insurgents did not retaliate. They besides spared females, the loyalists did not. 
German and English troops were also employed in these affairs. 
PITT'S PLAN TO ENFORCE AND PROVOKE THE INSURRECTION 
1784. Independence assailed by Pitt under colour of commercial 
tariff. 
1789. The Prince Regent's Question determined to extinguish the 
Irish Legislature. 
•' This sentence is in German in the manuscript.— Ed. 
h J. Mitchel, The History of  Ireland...,  Vol. II, pp. 15, 19. 26. Further, till the end 
of the section, there follow excerpts from Davis' "Memoir" in J. Ph. Curran, The 
Speeches..., p. XXIV.—- Ed. 

=====第289页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 257 
1798. Rebellion used to terrify the minds of men out of common 
sense. 
1798-99 and 1598-99 It is here well worthy of reflection, that 
the exercise of free quarters and martial law, the suspension of all 
municipal courts of justice, the discretional application of the torture 
to suspected persons, executions in cold blood, and the various 
measures which Mountjoy and Carew, and the other officers of 
Elizabeth practised in Ireland by her authority, in 1598-99, were 
again judged to be expedient, and were again resorted to with 
vigour in  1.798-99,  200 years after they had been practised by the 
ministers of Elizabeth. 
United Irish Societies known to Government. 
Though it appeared, from public documents, that Government had full and 
accurate information of the United Irish Societies, and that their leaders and chiefs 
were fully known to the British Ministry, the Government did nothing to suppress, 
but everything to exasperate, the people.3 
Under Camden's Administration: 
Earl of Carhampton, Commander-in-Chief of Ireland, first expressed his 
dissatisfaction of Pitt's inexplicable proceedings. Although martial law was not yet 
declared, Carhampton ordered his troops to intervene, wherever insurrectionary 
movements occurred.15 This was prohibited by Camden. Carhampton found that 
troops in the garrison of Dublin were daily corrupted by the United Irishmen; he 
therefore withdrew them and formed two distinct camps on the South and the 
North, some miles from the capital. This measure also refused by the Lord 
Lieutenant whom Carhampton refused to obey. The King's sign manual was at 
length procured, ordering him to break up his camps, and bring back the garrison; 
this he obeyed and marched his troops into Dublin barracks. He then resigned his 
command, and publicly declared, that some deep and insidious scheme of the 
Minister was in agitation; for, instead of suppressing, the Irish Government was 
obviously disposed to excite, an insurrection. Mr. Pitt counted on the expertness of 
the Irish Government to effect a premature explosion. Free quarters were now 
ordered, 
{Free quarters rendered officers and soldiers despotic masters of 
the peasantry, their homes, food, property, and occasionally, their 
families. This measure was resorted to, with all its attendant 
horrors, throughout some of the best parts of Ireland, previous to 
the insurrection, and for the purpose of exciting it.} 
to irritate the Irish population; Slow Tortures0 were inflicted under the pretence of 
forcing confessions; the people were goaded and driven to madness. 
General Aberçromby, who succeeded as Commander-in-Chief, was not permitted to 
abate these enormities, and therefore resigned with disgust. {General Abercromby, in 
general orders, stated that the army placed under his command, from their state of 
a This paragraph and the text that follows it, till the end of the section, is 
Marx's rendering of the text from Mitchel's History of  Ireland..  (Vol. I, pp. 261-62) 
which is close to the original.— Ed 
b This sentence and the one that follows it are in German in the manuscript.— Ed. 
c Italics by J. Mitchel.— Ed. 

=====第290页=====
258 Karl Marx 
disorganisation, would soon be much more formidable to their friends than to 
their enemies, and that he would not countenance or admit free quarters.} 
Ireland was by those means reduced to a state of anarchy, and exposed to 
crime and cruelties to which no nation had ever been subject. The people could no 
longer bear their miseries. Pitt's object was now effected and an insurrection was 
excited 
United Irishmen and Pitt. 
(Poland and Prussia)305 
Until 1795 the United Irishmen were Protestants, of a minor division of the 
people. Many of them were Pitt's dupes. At the same time (1793 sqq) emissaries 
were sent from Berlin to Poland in order to form there Jacobinical Clubs, that they 
might offer a pretext for the introduction of new armies.306 
Exorbitation of the People. 
Castlereagh's Boast 
The Irish people were to be tormented, outraged, forced into actual rebellion. 
Recall of Lord Fitzwilliam involved the country in consternation and dismay. To 
this succeeded, to fret and exasperate, the Habeas Corpus Act Suspension Bill, the 
Searching for Arms Act, the Bill to transport persons not found at home from sunset to 
sunrise; further many persons were shot because, being terrified, they attempted to 
escape when challenged, or, being  seized,  they were consigned to Prussia. Ensor met 
some of them at Berlin, and the law indemnified the perpetrators of such 
prodigious deeds. Then the Yeomanry were raised: these committed dreadful 
outrages, particularly in the North; burning houses in open day, commanded by 
their officers, who were also magistrates. The Militia rivalled the Yeomanry. It is 
said that pitch-caps were invented by some bravos of the North Cork Militia. Still 
more ferocious the Dublin Corporation. The riding-house, in Marlborough Street, 
distinguished for Protestant loyalty, and torture was administered by the scourge and the 
triangle. Summary executions not uncommon in preparing the Irish for the Union; 
bodies of Irishmen, deluded by the British Ministry, irritated and inflamed, 
tortured, tormented, in phrensy and despair, grasped such arms as they could 
seize, and defied their enemies. This was called rebellion; and Castlereagh boasted that 
he had made the conspiracy explode. He charged that mine as well as fired it. 
PITT IN BRITISH PARLIAMENT DEFENDER OF THE UNION, 
IN ORDER TO PREVENT MEASURES OF PACIFICATION. 
CASTLEREAGH, 1797, IN IRISH PARLIAMENT 
Castlereagh had been reformer in Ireland as Pitt in England, till office made him 
explode. Declared 1792 for Irish Parliamentary Reform. Ditto 1793 for Grattan's 
motion for Parliamentary Reform. When, Io! the Ministry of Ireland was changed 
and Camden succeeded Lord Fitzwilliam. With the change of men Castlereagh's 
opinion of Reform was upset. In 1797, the serpent, the viper, and snake made 

=====第291页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 259 
another feat: he  declared  for a wise and well digested plan of Reform at a proper time. Yet 
then he has nearly completed the scheme of Ihe Union, and the extinction of the Parliament 
of his country. 
Pitt in British Parliament 
The reign of terror (Pitt thundered against the French one) prepared the Union. 
Pitt, while talking of the prodigious wickedness of interfering with prerogative 
orders and ancient customs, meditated during years of such verbose, political 
prudery, the end and ruin of the fundamental constitution of  Ireland.  At the very time 
when this his machination was completing, he defended, with swollen rhetoric, the 
independence of Ireland's Parliament. In the debate on the recall of Lord Fitzwilliam, 
in 1795, "he deprecated the discussion as a manifest violation of the independence of 
the Irish Parliament".;1  Two years later, in 1797. when Fox proposed to address His 
Majesty on the best means to tranquillise Ireland, this W. Pitt objected "on the 
unconstitutionality, the impropriety, and the danger to be apprehended from the 
interference of the British Parliament in the affairs of Ireland". This flagitious 
impostor deprecated any means for Ireland's prosperity; for he proposed, through 
its agonies and confusion, to effect its incorporate Union with Great Britain. 
LORD CORNWALLIS' ADMINISTRATION 
(AUGUST 1798 SQQ). CASTLEREAGH CHIEF SECRETARY. 
THE UNION TRICK 
Then there was Lord Cornwallis, the man thrashed by the Americans, during 
their War of Independence. As a governor for India, he was further qualified for 
destroying a nation's rights. 
(There he incorporated Tippoo Sahib for the East India Com­
pany.) 
Cornwallis was the intermediate agent between Pitt and Robert Stewart, commonly called 
Lord Castlereagh.h 
In India Cornwallis had defeated Tippoo Sahib, but concluded a 
peace which only increased the necessity of future wars.307 
19 October 1781, capitulation of Cornwallis by Yorktown. 
Quietness was almost restored. Cornwallis affected impartiality, whilst he was 
deceiving both parties. He encouraged the United Irishmen, and he roused the 
Royalists; one day he destroyed, the next day he was merciful. His system, 
however, had not exactly the anticipated effect. Everything gave reason to expect a 
restoration of tranquillity, it was through the impression of horror alone that an 
Union could be effected, and he had no time to lose, lest the country might recover 
its reason. 
Fortunate accident for him: A portion of an armament, destined by France to 
aid the Irish insurgents, had escaped the Irish cruisers, and landed about a 1,000 
•' Elisor's italics in this sentence.— Ed. 
b G. Ensor, Anti-Union. Ireland as She ought to Be, Newry, 1831, pp. 87, 88.— Ed. 

=====第292页=====
260 Karl Marx 
troops at Killala Bay (in the North-West of Ireland).3 They entered Killala without 
opposition, surprising the bishop and a company of parsons who were on their 
visitation. They were joined by a considerable number of peasantry, unarmed, 
unclothed, and undisciplined. But the French did their best to render them 
efficient. Marched into the country. Lord Hutchinson commanded the garrison of 
Castlebar, a few miles from Killala. His force numerous, with a good train of 
artillery. General Lake with his staff had just arrived. French attacked them. In a 
few minutes, the whole of the royal army was completely  routed.  About 900 French and 
some peasants took possession of Castlebar.b (This battle is called the Races of 
Castlebar.) The English fled in full haste to Tuam. 
A considerable part of the Louth and Kilkenny regiments (militia), not finding it 
convenient to retreat, joined the victors, and in. one hour were completely 
equipped as French riflemen. About 90 of these men were hanged by Cornwallis 
afterwards at Ballynamuck. The defeat of Castlebar, however, was a victory to the 
Viceroy; it revived all the horrors of rebellion, which had been subsiding, and the 
desertion of the militia regiments tended to impress the gentry with an idea, that 
England alone could protect the country. 
Lord Cornwallis was supine, and the insurgents were active in profiting by this 
victory; 40,000 of them were prepared to assemble at the Crooked  Wood,  in 
Westmeath, only 42 miles from Dublin, ready to join the French and march upon 
the metropolis. 
The French continued too long at Castlebar, and Lord Cornwallis at length 
collected 20,000 troops, with which he considered himself pretty certain of 
conquering 900 men. With above 20,000 men, he marched directly to the 
[Shannon] c to prevent the passage, but he was outmanoeuvred]: the insurgents 
had led the French to the source of that river, and it was ten days before 
Castlereagh, by the slowest possible marches, which tended purposely to increase the public 
terror, reached his enemy. After some skirmishes, in which the French [were] 
victorious, they capitulated at Ballynamuckd They were sent to Dublin and 
afterwards to France. 
Horrors now were everywhere recommenced; executions were multiplied. 
Cornwallis marched against the peasantry, still masters of Killala; and after a 
sanguinary conflict in the streets, the town was taken: some were slaughtered, many 
hanged, and the whole district was on the point of being reduced to subjection, when 
Cornwallis most unexpectedly proclaimed an armistice, and without any terms 
allowed the insurgents freely to disperse, and gave them 30 days, either to 
surrender their arms or be prepared for slaughter; leaving them to act, as they 
thought proper in the interval. This interval was terrific to the  loyalists;  the 30 days of 
armistice were 30 days of new horror, and the Government had now achieved the very 
climax of public  terror,  on which they so much counted for inducing Ireland to throw 
herself into the arms of the protecting country. And the first step of Pitt's project was 
fully consummated. 
a On August 22, 1798; then follow, up to the section "More about the Union", 
excerpts from J. Mitchel's History of  Ireland...,  Vol. II, pp. 27-39, 43, 45,  47-51, 
59-62,  76-77 and 79.— Ed. 
b On August 27, 1798.— Ed. 
c The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed. 
d On September 8, 1798.— Ed. 

=====第293页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 261 
THE UNION 
Pitt now conceived that the moment had arrived to try the effect 
of his previous measures to promote a Legislative Union. 
The Irish Peers, under Lord Clare's, Lord Chancellor's, despotism, [were] ready 
for anything. The lure of translation neutralised the scruples of Episcopacy. Single 
exceptions: Marly, Bishop of Waterford, and Dixon, Bishop of Down. The rebellion 
had commenced on 22 May 1798, and on 22 January 1799, an Union was proposed. 
40,000 British troops were then in Ireland. 308 
Pitt now conceived the moment to have come to try the effect of 
his previous measures to promote a Legislative Union, and 
annihilate the Irish Legislature. 
The measure first proposed indirectly by Speech from the Throne on 22 January 
1799. Lord Cornwallis' unexpected warfare against 900 Frenchmen, evidently 
intended more for terror than for victory. 
{ King's title was "George III, King of Great Britain, France, and  Ireland,  Defender 
of the Faith" etc. France was dropped on Amiens Peace.} 
Clare's (Fitzgibbon's) only check [was] the bar, which he resolved to corrupt. He 
doubled the number of bankrupt commissioners, revived some offices, created 
others, and under pretence of furnishing each County with a local judge, in 2 
months established 32 new offices, of £600-700 each. 
First Parliamentary debate on 22 January 1799, lasted till 11 o'clock of 23 January 
(22 hours). Government obtained majority of 1 by open sale of a certain Fox, 
lawyer. 
2nd debate on 5 o'clock of 23 January 1799, continued till late in the morning of 
the 24, Government defeated. In every debate upon that measure, it was insisted 
upon that Parliament was incompetent, even to entertain the question of the Union. In this 
sense spoke Saurin, since Attorney-General, Plunket, since Lord Chancellor, Sir John 
Parnell, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Bushe, since Lord Chief Justice, Lord 
Oriel, the then Speaker of the Irish House of Commons. 
Sir Lawrence Parsons and others showed by irrefutable facts that the country 
had been worked upon by the English Minister, to terrify the Irish gentry into a 
resubmission to those shackles from which the spirit of the Volunteers and the 
nation had but a few years before released them. It was argued that the 
insurrection, first organised and fostered by Pitt, and protracted by Cornwallis, had 
been suppressed by the Irish Parliament; and that the introduction of foreign and 
mercenary Germans, to immolate the Irish, instead of extinguishing, had added 
fuel to the insurrection. Then great point: the incompetence of Parliament to betray its 
trust. Act of Union in itself a nullity ab initio,* and a fraud upon the then existing 
constitution. 
Act of 23 George III "recognising the unqualified independence of Ireland, 
and expressly stipulating and contracting that it should endure for ever". 
24 January 1799 111 Members decided against Union, 105 for. Voted that 
night 216. Absent 84. 
House of Lords on 22 January 1799 in answer to the Viceroy's address voted for 
the Union. 
The Irish Lords lay prostrate before the Government, but the leaders were not 
inattentive to their own interest. The defeat of the Government in the Commons gave them 
11 From the beginning.— Ed. 

=====第294页=====
262 Karl Marx 
an importance they had not expected. The accounts of Lord Annesley etc. prove 
their corruption. A great proportion of the 1 V2 millions levied upon Ireland, and 
distributed by Castlereagh's Commissioners of Compensation, went into the pockets of 
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of Ireland. 
Cornwallis coquetted with the persons, assuming to themselves the title of 
"Catholic Leaders". The Catholic Bishops were generally decieved into the most 
disgusting subserviency. 
The members of the old opposition, who were returned to the new Parliament 
in 1797, did not exceed 50. 
Strongest cause of division amongst the Members [was] the Catholic Question. 
Cornwallis flattered the Catholics promising certain emancipation; the priests bowed 
before him. Never yet did any clergy so retrograde as the Catholic Hierarchy, on 
that occasion. Corruptly deceived. In 1798 the Catholics were hanged, in 1799 
caressed, in 1800 cajoled, in 1801 discarded. 
Mr. Pitt, by private dispatch to Cornwallis, desired that the measure should not 
be then pressed, unless majority of 50 [was] certain. Clare, the Chancellor, 
overhauled this. Thousands of addresses and petitions against any further 
discussion. As a punishment for the rejoicings at Dublin over the rejection of the 
Union, soldiers were ordered to fire amongst the people, of whom a few [were] 
killed and some wounded. 
It appears in full  proof,  that in proportion to their respective numbers, the 
British Commons, at the period of the Irish Union, [had] 1/4 more corrupted, 
corruptible, and influenced members than that of Ireland at any  period. 
5 and 6 February 1800. Union accepted by Irish House of Commons. 
Castlereagh compelled even felons in the gaols to sign Union petitions. 
English generals, who, at a moment when martial law  existed,  or a recollection of 
its execution was still fresh in every memory, could not fail to have their own 
influence over proclaimed districts and bleeding peasantry; tried to procure 
addresses to Parliament. 
Mr. Darby, High Sheriff of King's County,309 and Major Rogers of the artillery, 
had gone so far as to place 2 six-pounders towards the doors of the Court House, 
where the gentlemen and freeholders of the county were assembling to address as 
Anti-Unionists. 
In interval between old and new Parliament, the Parliamentary patrons had 
breathing-time after the preceding session, and began to tremble for their 
patronage and importance; some desperate step by Government became necessary 
to insure continuance of their support. Now unparalleled measure. 
Castlereagh publicly declared, first, that every nobleman, who returned Members 
to Parliament, should be paid, in cash, £15,000 for every Member so returned; secondly, 
that every Member who had purchased a seat in Parliament should have his purchase 
money repaid to him, by the Treasury in Ireland; thirdly, that all Members of 
Parliament, or others, who were losers by an Union, should be fully recompensed 
for their losses; and that £1,500,000 should be devoted to this service; in other 
terms,  all who supported this measure were, under some pretence or other, to 
share in the bank of corruption. A declaration so flagitious and treasonable was 
never publicly made in any country; [it] had its effect; before the meeting of 
Parliament he had secured a small majority of 8 above a moiety of the members. 
After the debate on the Union in 1800, he performed his promise, and brought 
in a Bill to raise 1 V2 million of money upon the Irish people, nominally to 
compensate, but really to bribe their representatives, for betraying their honour 
and selling their country. George III gives his assent to a Bill to levy taxes for the 
compensation of Members of Parliament, for their loss of the opportunities of 
selling what it was criminal to sell or purchase. 

=====第295页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 263 
The Union Bill but feebly resisted. The divisions of January and February 1800 
reduced the success of the Government to a certainty. 
Lord Shannon  received  for his patronage in the Commons £45,000 
The Marquis of Ely £45,000 
Lord Clanmorris, beside a British peerage £23,000 
Lord Belvidere, beside his douceur £15,000 
Sir Hercules Langrishe £15,000 
15 January 1800 Speech from the Throne, debate proceeded till past 10 o'clock 
on the 16th. (60 members absent. Not governmental ones.) 
5 February next division. The Union propositions, as passed by the British 
Parliament, were, after a long speech, laid before the House of Commons by 
Castlereagh. After a debate of the entire night, at 11 the ensuing morning, the 
division took place. 
Members 300, absent 27, rest 273. For Castlereagh's Motion 158, against 115, 
majority 43. (273 members present.) 
The House was surrounded by military, under the pretence of keeping peace, in 
fact, to excite terror. (British Regiment.) 
The Bishops Troy, Lanigan, and others, deluded by the Viceroy, sold their 
country, and basely betrayed their flocks, by promoting the Union. Rebellion had 
terrified the great body of Catholics who could not move. Besides the 1 V2 million 
Castlereagh also had unbounded  secret  service money from England. British clerks and 
officers were smuggled into the Irish Parliament to vote away the Constitution of the 
Country. By the subjugation of Ireland, England has gained nothing but an 
accumulation of debt, an accession of venality to her Parliament, an embarrassment 
in her councils and a progressive danger to the integrity of the empire. The name of 
Union has been acquired, but the attainment of the substance has been removed 
farther than ever. Castlereagh palpably purchased 25 Members before the second 
discussion in 1800, which made a difference of 50 votes in favour of Government. 
Thus Pitt and Castlereagh carried the Union. 
* * * 
More about the Union11 
The Irish Parliament were only delegates for a few years. How could they vote 
their own dissolution and extinction for ever? If the Irish Parliament was 
authorised to destroy the Constitution, why not the English? Why not pass a royal 
law? No appeal was made to the people. This was done in Scotland ; [they] did not 
dare doing it in Ireland. Even the rotten boroughs sickened at the sound. 
The Irish Parliament of 1800 elected in 1797 for 8 years. 
The Union carried during the reign of Martial Law\ On the other hand, 
Resolution of the English House of Commons in 1741: "that the presence of armed 
. soldiers,  at the election of members of Parliament, is a high infringement of the liberty 
of the subject, and an open defiance of the laws and constitution1." 
Martial Law Bill in Ireland from commencement of the rebellion in 1798, renewed 
1799, in 1800 revived, but in fact it was to be considered as a continuance of [the] 
a The heading is in German in the manuscript. This section is. Marx's rendering 
of a passage from Ensor's Anti-Union..., p. 126.— Ed. 

=====第296页=====
264 Karl Marx 
former act passed (1799); in 1801, the act of 1800 was continued, for a very short 
time,  by the United Parliament, without any inquiry! 
The Act of the Union is an Act of Conquest (Ensor). 
Ireland's Union with England—Cromwell's scheme. It was among the delusions of 
Monk. The English Government had no object by the Union, which means the 
extinction of Irish Legislature, but to deprive Ireland of its political consequence 
and authority, and subject her property and people to the mercy of England. 
The English Ministry, in guaranteeing Norway to Sweden, stipulated that Norway, 
by its union with Sweden, should enjoy an independent Parliament.311 
Just as the Union of Ireland with England was declared necessary, so had Lord 
Grenville declared: "Hampshire ought to be no more dear to us than Hanover." 
Popular Meetings (and Petitions) 
Despite Martial Law and the Suspension 
of All Guarantees for Popular Security. 
Ditto House of Commons during 1799A 
Popular indignation universal. Though sheriffs were chosen to obstruct 
petitioning, though the military opposed their assembling, and dispersed them; yet 
they met and protested, as at Birr, where Major Rogers actually marched with 
cannon against a county meeting. They met in Dublin, as in 1759, on the mere 
rumour of a projected Union. The people assembled in the towns of Belfast, 
Limerick, Drogheda, Newry, Maryborough, Carrickfergus, Pontadown, etc.; in the 
Counties of Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Wexford, Cavan, Longford, Tipperary, 
Galway, Monaghan, Fermanagh, Kilkenny, Meath, Carlow, the King's and Queen's 
Counties, Leitrim, Kildare, Down, Westmeath, Armagh, Clare, Louth, Donegal, 
Mayo, Wicklow, Tyrone, Antrim, Waterford. Thus the population in towns, cities 
and counties petitioned against that fatal measure, in spite of all terrors and 
opposition. 
The Irish Commons coincided with them. Though a mere fictitious representa­
tion, first by the borough system, and secondly by its election (a mere farce), for the 
annalist remarks: "through consternation of some, and hostility of others, it had little 
more than the formality of an election." Yet the House of Commons had in 1799 
rejected the Union by 111 to 105! 
Corruption etc. in 1800 
The English Government resumed the measure. Merciless profligacy. Vote with 
us or vacate your seat! Open, flagitious bribery! The bribe was administered in 
every form to wretches. Mr. Edgeworth relates that he was offered to vacate a seat, 
that a more convenient person might be elected in his place. Offices were granted 
simply, or divided among many; pensions added; endless promises. The Church 
afforded a great vent for the increase of prostitution; rectories and bishoprics were 
•' In this section and in the two sections that follow it Marx sets forth, very 
closely to the original, passages from Elisor's Anti-Union..., pp. 94-97 and 
110.—  Ed. 

=====第297页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 265 
granted thrice in succession to clerical friends of members, advocates for the Union. 
The army and navy, boards and  concessions,  were exposed at the Union mart; lawyers 
were to be advanced to the Bench, by voting away the Parliament. Commoners were 
to be made Lords, and Lords to be relorded with a superior title. 
So numerous were the superadded placemen alone in the Commons, that in the year 
of the Union 1800, 35 new writs were moved for the re-election of members, who had 
accepted places from England's Minister! The Lords, and the other boro[ughmong-
ers],a  of course, obtained a grand division of the Union-bribe—£622,000 was 
voted in the United Parliament, in 1801, [as] compensation for the borough-holdersl 
Only £622,000 paid, as a first instalment, by the borough-mongers of [England] to 
the borough-mongers of Ireland! 
Yet, after this overwhelming corruption, prompt payment, and endless 
expectancy, the minority opposed to the Union, in the first [division], in a House of 
Commons, of whom 84 only returned for the counties, counties of cities, and the 
University, and 216 for [boroughs and manors]. A simple bribe disqualifies a 
member from sitting in Parliament; and shall not such bribery, a small part of the 
corruption, dismiss the Act of Union from the Statute-Book? 
Just Punishment of the Traitorous 
Catholic Hierarchy and the Few Higher 
Class Catholics Who Joined Them 
Cornwallis (Pitt) had promised them full emancipation. Fulsome address from 
the Catholic clergy and Bishop Lanigan from Kilkenny to Cornwallis. Yet King 
George III, as will be seen from the following, accepted the Union as means to 
make no further concessions to the Catholics. Pitt in 1801 handed in his resignation, 
on pretext that King kept not his word as to Catholics. This [was] mere show. He 
wanted not to be minister during truce with Bonaparte.312 Re-entered afterwards 
the Ministry without stipulating any favour for Catholics. 
George III, in his letters, published by Lord Kenyon, declares that he was 
inclined to assent to the Union, believing that the Union would for ever preclude 
any further concessions to the Catholics. 
His words in his letter to Pitt, February 1, 1801, are: "When the Irish 
propositions were transmitted to me, by a joint message from both Houses of 
Parliament, I told the Lords and Gentlemen, sent on that occasion, that I would 
with pleasure, and without delay, forward them to Ireland; but that, as individuals, 
1 could not help acquainting them, that my inclination to an Union with Ireland 
was principally founded on a trust, that the uniting the established churches of the 
2 kingdoms would for ever shut the door to any further measures with respect to 
the Roman Catholics. "b 
On the Legality of the Union 
Attorney-General's Scott's (afterwards Lord Clonmel, principal agent of Pitt etc.) 
declaration of resisting the usurpation of England, in 1782, was repeated in 1800, 
by 2 successive Attorney-Generals of Ireland. Mr. William Saurin, in his place in 
a The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed 
b G. Ensor, Anti-Union..., p. 110.— Ed 

=====第298页=====
266 Karl Marx 
Parliament, declared that he considered the Irish representatives incompetent to exact a 
legislative Union; and that any statute, made by a Parliament, thus constituted, 
would not be constitutionally binding on the Irish people. [After becoming] Attorney-
General, [he] never afterwards repeated his scepticism. 
Mr. Plunket made the same declaration, but in rather stronger terms, as he 
vouched for his son as well as  himself;  and soon after became Attorney-General. 
In every debate upon that measure, it was insisted upon that the Parliament 
was incompetent, even to entertain the question of the Union. So Saurin, Plunket 
(since Lord Chancellor), Sergeant Ball, the ablest lawyer of Ireland, Fitzgerald, 
Prime-Serjeant of Ireland, Moore, since a judge, Sir John Parnell, then Chancellor of 
the Exchequer, Bushe, since Chief Justice, Lord Oriel, the then Speaker of the 
(Irish) House of Commons. 
January 1799. Irish House of Commons. Plunket (Solicitor-General for Ireland 
under Addington Cabinet) declared: "I tell [you] a that if, circumstanced as you are, 
you pass this Act, it will be a mere nullity, and that no man in Ireland will be bound to 
obey it." '' 
7 May 1802 Forster declared in the United House of Commons 1802 that 
Castlereagh, in Ireland, had made use of public money [for the pur]pose of 
obtaining votes in favour of the Union. 
Grey, May, 1806, House of Commons said that  ''these votes  for Union  were  purchased by 
corruption  '•'. 
"The ac[t of] a borough-mongers and placemen is irrevocable, against the Irish 
Nation!" (Ensor.)c 
Opinions of English Liberals 
and Radicals on the Union 
Lord Holland: The English were injured (by the Union) particularly by the 
means it affords to increased parliamentary corruption. This was foreseen by Lord 
Holland, who, in debating the Union preparatory to its enactment, said "that it was 
incompatible with the opinions of all those who wished for Parliamentary Reform". 
, {The Representative Irish Peers, thickening the ranks of the House of Lords, 
have strengthened the prerogative. The whole peerage of Ireland is a borough, of which 
the King is PatronX 
George Tierney said, speaking of the Union before it was enacted, that it would 
ruin Great Britain. It has ruined both England and Ireland. The subjugation of 
Ireland has made England's people a mere taxable commodity. Instead of the 
universal tranquillity, which Canning promised, when advocating the Union, the 
Union was followed by new and severe laws, extraordinary commissions, and 
unlimited agitation. Ireland is mocked with some of the minor forms of freedom. 
"Union of 1800 a ruin to the annexed, a torment to the annexing nation." 
(Barrington.) 
Cobbett. Political Register, 14 February 1807, in connection with 
the "Threshers" disturbances in West Ireland,313 lays the following 
ironical words in the mouth of an Irish exciseman: 
a The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed, 
b Cf. J. Mitchel, The History of  Ireland...,  Vol. II, p.  77.—Ed. 
c G. Ensor, Anti-Union..., pp. 97-98.— Ed. 

=====第299页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 267 
"He had no doubt but with an entire repeal of the Habeas Corpus Act, a due 
execution of the statutes for martial law, and the assistance of 60,000 regular 
troops, Ireland would become a valuable dependence to England, and produce so 
considerable a revenue, as to [be] able with the aid of Sir John Newport, in 
borrowing 2 or 3 millions a year, very nearly to pay the troops to keep the peace, 
the custom-house officers to collect the revenues, and the salaries and pensions of 
the 'friends of government'."3 
In connection with the Irish Insurrection Bill of 1807, which was still in force in 
1809: 
Cobbett, Political Register, 9 December 1809: "Angry with the Irish; because — 
because what? Why, because their existence endangers our safety] Angry with them, 
because they are alive, and have a desire to enjoy life! Sad dogs those Irishmen 
must be to desire to keep alive, when to keep (dive may be dangerous to usl" .... "We 
may, as I before observed, be angry with the Irish, because about 5 millions of them 
continue to be alive, we may hate them and curse them; we may wish their island 
sunk to the bottom of the sea; but, still they live, and live they will" .... "It is, 
therefore, as useless to be angry with them as it would be to be angry with thunder 
and lightning."13 
Cobbett. Political Register, 20 February 1811: 
"What an infamy to the English nation, who really seem to desire to be 
deceived with regard to Ireland; but, whose silly and base desire will be frustrated 
in spite of themselves; for hear and see and feel the truth they must. They may 
hide their heads in their hoods and cloaks as long as they will; they may, as long as 
they please, pay impostors to sooth their cowardly fears, but all will not do. 
Ireland! Ireland! Ireland! will, maugre all their miserable devices, present herself 
to them in her true and formidable shape."1 
Ensor. "Ireland with its foundations is pressed downward by the accumu­
lated burthens of England and her empire." (Pays 5 millions now for absentees etc. to 
England.)d 
Curran: She (Ireland) "thought the circulation of the political blood could be 
carried on only by the action of the heart within the body, and could not be maintained 
from without". "The instruments of our government have been almost simplified into 
the tax gatherer and the hangman." With the Union: "all semblance of national 
independence buried in that grave in which our legislation is interred, our 
property and our persons are disposed of, by laws made in another clime, and 
made like boots and  shoes  for exportation to fit the wearers as they may. ... It was, in fact, 
the real design of a rash, and arbitrary, and short-sighted projector, at once to 
deprive you of all power, as to your own taxation, and of another power of not very 
inferior importance, and which, indeed, is invariably connected with taxation, to rob 
you of all influence upon the vital question of peace and war; and to bring all within the 
control of an English minister. This very power, thus acquired by that detested Union, has 
been a millstone about the neck of England. From that hour to this she has been flaring 
away in her ruinous and wasteful war."e 
a Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, No. 7, February 14, 1807, Vol. XI, 
p. 255.—  Ea\ 
b Ibid., No. 23, December 9, 1809, Vol. XVI, pp. 866-74.— Ed. 
c Ibid., No. 15, February 20, 1811, Vol. XIX, pp.  420-21.—  Ed 
d G. Ensor, Anti-Union..., p. 118.— Ed 
e Marx quotes passages from Curran's speech made on October 17, 1812, at the 
General Election in Newry. See J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., pp. 465-66, 
468-69.—Ed. 

=====第300页=====
268 Karl Marx 
Ensor: "England paralysed at home and abroad." Castlereagh, advanced to be 
English minister by the Irish war. He taxed the English nation with "an ignorant 
impatience of taxation". "The whole House of Commons is a labyrinth of pretension, 
imposture, falsehood, injustice, and gloating corruption.... There is no shame, no 
regard to facts, no respect for consequences, since the Union, in the English 
Parliament."' a 
Morning Chronicle, 1828: "The hatred of the Union is the only point, we believe, 
as to which all Irishmen are  agreed.  It has been an unfortunate measure both for 
England and Ireland]"314 
Petty said: "England has constantly  -lost,  these 500 years, by the meddling with 
Ireland." b 
Loss to England315 
Irish Members—access of venality and corruption to the House of 
Commons. Increase [of] ministerial usurpation. 
"How the Irish Members precipitated themselves, when the Manchester Massacre 
was to be justified by Castlereagh, the manager of the Union! How they thronged to 
pass the 6 Acts!"316 (Ensor) 
"The French war strengthened the royal prerogative in England, as it increased the 
means of expenditure, and the fonds of corruption. These effected the Union, and the 
Union multiplied every scheme of rapine and prodigality." (Ensor.) 
Ireland—one of the pretexts of keeping a large standing army. 
By the Union, the military of one country, when transferred, are in effect 
foreign mercenaries. War service in time of peace. 
English House of Commons. "Increased members, and the increased and 
multiform business in the House of Commons, have lessened the attention of the 
great body of the members. The House of Commons, before the Union of Scotland 
and England, consisted of 513 members. At this period the business of the nation 
preceded application to private affairs. The legislature then met in the morning. 
The members were fined if they absented themselves when the Speaker took the 
Chair, and absence for a whole day was punished with an enhanced penalty. Now the 
House consists of 658 members, yet not a 10th are present when the Speaker takes 
the Chair on any day. Business is often transacted when there is, technically, no 
House." (Ensor.) 
"Every acquisition of a nation by a nation is injurious to the liberty of both. The 
accessory  country is a lapsed inheritance, while the people who make the acquisition are 
submissive to their own rulers, lest they might countenance any disturbance in the 
superadded nation; they submit at home for a barren, often expensive, superiority  abroad. 
[...] This the whole story of the Roman history ... as the world fell before the Roman 
aristocracy, the Roman citizens were pauperised and enslaved. [...] Every impeachment, of 
liberty in one country leads to its loss in another." (Ensor.) 
"Talk about revolutionary principles] The Duke of Clarence, afterwards 
William IV, called, in 1793, an effort to abolish the slave trade part of 'the levelling 
principles of the French Revolution'." 
a G. Ensor, Anti-Union..., p.  11.—  Ed 
b W. Petty, The Political Anatomy of  Ireland,  Dublin, 1769, p. 320 (quoted from 
G. Ensor, Anti-Union..., p. 31).— Ed 

=====第301页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 269 
"Say not, then, that England will never consent to relieve Ireland from the 
Union—repeat not that she will never be bullied or frightened. The English are the 
sport of frights.... When Englishmen proclaim, we will not be frightened: it is as 
the coward's song, surprised by the darkness of night. The English not be 
frightened! ... England not to be frightened by Ireland! The whole history of the 
connexion of the 2 countries betrays terror, paralysis, distraction. England's 
numerous laws against Ireland's trade, manufactures, and commerce — against her 
people, as a religious community, as a political society—prove that the fears of 
England have neither measure nor limit.... Nay, their jealousy, their suspicion, their 
alarm, confessedly induced them to force the Union on  Ireland,  by which they ensured the 
evil they laboured to prevent." (Ensor.) 
Confiscations in  Ireland 511 
Sir W. Petty says generally: "most of the lands of Ireland have been, within 150 
years, forfeited"? 
In fact, all Ireland has been confiscated, three times, again and again. On some 
occasions, such were the forfeitures, that the territory on sale, from the glut of the market, 
fell to V4 of its former annual value. Lawrence mentions, "that from 1654-1660, not 
only the adventurers318 and soldiers, but all persons who could command money, 
traded in land, and thereby obtained better estates in one year than by treble the 
sum they got ever before in 7 years' traffic". 
This upsetting and dislocation of property, by force of arms, were aggravated 
by wicked inquisitions, and the practices of the crown lawyers. When the head of a 
clan died, if the descent followed the Irish custom, the land was forfeited: for this 
custom was repugnant to the English code. [Yet, if]b this land were distributed 
according to the English law, that was reputed irregular, for it should have been 
transmitted, said the lawyers, according to the Brehon /aw.319 Thus the land was 
forfeited either way, and the Crown became the sole heir. By these means, whether 
in peace or alleged insurrection, property was subjected to chicane, and the people 
were systematically robbed. Sometimes the people revolted, e.g. under Edward II 
and Charles /.32() Harris states the reasons of this last insurrection thus: "The 
preposterous rigour, and unreasonable severity—the covetous zeal and uncharitable 
fury of some men  — and, lastly, the fear of utter extirpation." 
Scotch Union with England 
Scotland and England parts of the same island. But the population differed 
from that in England. In Scotland at that time there was peace at home and 
abroad. There were only 3,000 troops in Scotland (Defoe)} Again, when the 
Parliament of Scotland was to be elected, the electors were apprised that they were 
to depute members to decide respecting the Union of the 2 countries. When Union 
[was] first proposed in the Scotch Parliament, 64 majority for Union. Scotland by 
•l W. Petty, op. cit., p. 359 (quoted from G. Ensor, Anti-Union..., p. 51).— Ed. 
b The manuscript is damaged here.— Ed. 
1 D. Defoe, The History of the Union of Great Britain, Edinburgh, 1709; quoted 
from G. Elisor, Anti-lTnion.. . p. 5r>.— Ed. 

=====第302页=====
270 Karl Marx 
the Union secured for itself the republican form of Church government. 
Presbyterianism became thus by law the religion of the State. By the Irish Union 
the religion of 1/iQ of the people was declared to be the State religion. Act of Union 
declares this to be the law for ever. Yet the repeal of the Scotch Union in the English 
House of Commons3 in 1713 [was] rejected by a majority of 4 voices.b 
[IRELAND FROM THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 
TO THE UNION OF 1801 
SUMMARY]321 
1) FROM 1778 TO 1782. 
(LEGISLATIVE INDEPENDENCE). 
(CATHOLICS) 
a) Penal Code up to 1778 in full vigour against the Catholics. 
State of Irish Parliament in 18th century until American War of 
Independence. Poynings' Law (a statute of Henry VII, by his Attorney-
General, Sir Edward Poynings). Statute 6, George I. 
Only some opposition to England on commercial matters. 
Influence of  absentees.  (Peers principally.) 
b) 1778 Irish Parliament relaxes severity of the Penal Code?22 
Catholics were allowed to take  leases  of land.  This [is a] consequence of 
the American war, and the treaty of France with America 
(6 February 1778). 
C) VOLUNTEER ORGANISATION. 
THE FREE TRADE MOVEMENT. 
FIRST CONCESSIONS OF ENGLAND 
June 1778 commenced war with France. Summer 1779 King of 
Spain accedes as ally to United States and France. Plymouth 
assailed by their united fleets (August 1779). Threatened invasion 
of Ireland. 
The Volunteers—armed Protestantism of Ireland?2^ {(26 February 
1780: Armed Neutrality founded by Russia.)} In 1779 Ireland left 
ungarrisoned. 
The Armed Associations first local and provincial, strongest in the 
North. First against Invasion. Protestant farmers rallied first under 
a See Debates in the English House of Lords on the Union with Scotland on 
June 2, 1713, in A Collection of the Parliamentary Debates in England, from the Year 
M. DC, LXVIII to the Present Time, Vol. VI, 1740.— Ed. 
b G. Ensor, Anti-Union..., pp. 54, 56-57. Ensor has: "... in the English House of 
Lords...".—  Ed. 

=====第303页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 271 
this cry. Catholics assisted. Soon cry of the Volunteers: "Free Trade" 
(i.e. Free Export) and emancipation of Irish industry and commerce 
from the shackles laid upon them by England (to free themselves 
mercantilely and industrially). England suspends, prohibits export 
of Irish manufactures, inundates Irish market with her own 
manufactures. Non-Importation and Non-Consumption Agreement. In 
the Volunteer movement Association of all ranks. 
Sessions of Irish House of Commons 1779-80 under this high 
popular pressure. 
Grattan moves an amendment to the address, where we find the 
following: 
"constant drain to supply absentees, and the unfortunate prohibition of our trade", 
demands to "open a free export trade". 
Amendment of Hussey Burgh (the Prime Sergeant): 
"that it is not by temporary expedients, that this nation is now to be saved from impending 
ruin".324 
Unanimously carried. Volunteers rightly attributed to them­
selves this success. Increase in their number and confidence. Lord 
North supercilious. Does nothing. Non-Importation and Non-
Consumption Act now general [cry] in  Ireland.  Dublin (city) 
Resolutions. Dublin Volunteers chose William, Duke of Leinster, for 
their  Chief.  Soon 4 provincial armies organised, Earl of Charlemont 
first commander-in-chief of the Ulster army, soon general com­
mander-in-chief. 
Free Trade became the watchword of the Volunteers. James 
Napper Tandy at the head of Dublin Volunteer Artillery, with labels 
on the mouths of their cannon: "Free Trade or Speedy Revolution". 
Meanwhile: 19 October 1781, Cornwallis capitulates at York Town 
(Virginia). 
30 November 1782. Paris Preliminary Treaty between United States 
and England. 
Lord North now frightened. America already lost. 
English House of Commons. 24 November 1781 speech from the 
throne. 25 November 1781 British Parliament meets, first Bills of 
concessions receive royal assent. 
2 December 1781. In hot haste these laws restrictive of commercial 
and manufacturai restraint are now revoked, but North tried, by 
considering them bit by bit, in longer intervals, to get over the 
session of 1782 and do no more. Now, on the contrary, the Irish 
Volunteers became aware that under the pretext of making 
concessions British Parliament asserts its legislative authority over 
Ireland. Free Parliament becomes now a watchword added to that 
11-733 

=====第304页=====
272 Karl Marx 
of Free Trade. 14 Irish counties at once avowed to establish, at the 
risk of their lives and fortunes, the independence of the Irish 
Legislature. 
Resolutions entered into by almost every military camp, and every 
incorporate body, that they would no longer obey any laws, save those, 
enacted by the King, Lords, and Commons of  Ireland. 
At that time: Poynings' Statute subjected Irish Legislature to 
British Attorney-General and British [Privy] Council. 6, George I to 
Statutes of British Parliament and British Appellant Jurisdiction. 
Standing army in Ireland independent of Parliament, under the 
regulations of a British Statute, Perpetual Mutiny Bill and hereditary 
Revenue of the Crown. 
Judges of Ireland hold their offices only during the will of the 
British Minister, and their salaries barely sufficient to keep them above 
want. 
Irish Parliament met but once in 2 years. In the British Attorney-
General was vested the superintendence of their proceedings, in 
the British Privy Council the alteration and rejection of their Statutes. 
Want of Protection for Personal Liberty in  Ireland:  No Habeas Corpus 
Act. 
9 October 1781. Irish House of Commons. Resolution of vote of thanks 
for the Volunteers, for their exertions, and continuance. Unanimous. 
These brought down the British Government to the feet of the 
Volunteers—self-armed, self-governed, self-disciplined associa­
tions;  by this time [they]  exceeded  in number the whole regular military, 
force of the British Empire. Now regular and public deliberative 
meetings of the Volunteers. Catholic bodies entered the Volunteer 
army, officered by Protestants. Cry: "that their connection with 
England was only federative". Repeal of 6, George I asked. 
The armed associations of Ulster first appointed delegates to declare 
their sentiments in a general Assembly. Convention at Dungannon, 
15 February 1782. Agreed upon the celebrated Declaration of Rights 
and Grievances. Delegates of 25,000 Ulster soldiers. 
Convention resolves to appoint 9 of their members to act as a 
Committee at Dublin, to communicate with the other Volunteer 
Associations, deliberate with them on carrying the Dungannon 
Resolutions into effect. In every Volunteer Corps of Ireland the 
Dungannon Resolutions accepted. 
Pressure of this on the Irish House of Commons. Its sessions [were] 
biennial, and, consequently, their grants for the Government for 2 
years at once. 1  hey now resolved on granting supplies to the Crown for 6 
months only. This had its effect. 

=====第305页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 273 
C) DECLARATION OF IRISH INDEPENDENCE 
Proceedings of Irish voluntary bodies and  corporate  bodies [became] 
every day more serious and decisive, tone in the House of 
Commons more menacing. Lord North no longer possible. 
April 1782. Marquis of Rockingham Cabinet (James Fox in it). Duke 
of Portland, nominated Lord Lieutenant of  Ireland,  arrives at Dublin 
14 April 1782, had to meet the Irish Parliament on 16 April. 
Message of George III to British Parliament, 18 April 1782, 
wherein necessity expressed 
"to come to a final adjustment with Ireland". 
British House of Commons express their full concurrence. 
House of Commons, 16 April 1782. Portland had wanted to 
procrastinate, Grattan communicated to him that [this was] 
impossible without provoking anarchy. Hely-Hutchinson, Lord 
Lieutenant had ordered him to communicate King's message for 
"a final adjustment". Grattan's amendment of the address in reply 
affirming Ireland to be a 
"distinct kingdom with a Parliament of her own the sole legislature  thereof"  etc. 
G. Ponsonby (on behalf of Portland^ seconded this. Unanimously 
passed.  Strictly before and after this scene firm Resolutions of the 
Volunteer Corps. Their firmness achieved this Revolution (even 
Fitzgibbon and John Scott, afterwards Lord Clonmel, on 16 April 
1782 frightened into patriotism). Immediately after this Portland 
sends two despatches to England, one public, the other private and 
confidential to Fox, as to the necessity of yielding (ascertaining at 
the same time that he would act on the Volunteers through 
Charlemont, on the House of Commons through dissension of 
Flood and Grattan). 
Irish Parliament prorogued for three weeks,  to wait on King's Answer. 
Meanwhile public reviews of the Volunteers (then 100,000 
effectives); nearly V3 of the whole English Army, besides, are 
Irish,  many sailors ditto. 
Irish House of Commons meets: 27 May 1782: Quasi Throne Speech 
of Portland. Will concede to all demands, British Parliament ready; 
King gives his Royal Assent to acts to prevent the suppression of Bills in 
the Privy Council of the Kingdom, limits the Act (Mutiny Bill) for Army 
to 2 years. (Besides much soft-sawder.) Grattan fool, address of 
thanks. 
"The British Government had given up every claim to authority over  Ireland"  (he 
says),  "that we conceive the resolution for an unqualified repeal of 6 George I to be a 
measure of consummate wisdom", "that no constitutional question between the 2 nations 
will any longer  exist.  " 
11* 

=====第306页=====
274 Karl Marx 
Grattan's Address carried (only 2 votes against). Bagenal proposes 
to appoint committee for sum to he voted hy Nation to 
Grattan. 
Britishers frightened. Precipitantly Bills enacted for making the 
concessions to Ireland. 6, George I repealed by British Parliament, 
obtains sanction of King, instantly transmitted to the Irish Viceroy, 
by him communicated to all the Volunteer Corps. 
Irish House of Commons, 30 May 1782. Bagenal's 
proposition for Grattan repeated. Portland offers him, as part of 
the intended grant, on the part of the Crown, the "Vice-Regal 
Palace in the Phoenix Park", the King's best palace in Ireland. Of 
course refused. Grattan got from House of Commons £50,000. 
II) FROM 1782 
(SINCE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE) 
TO 1795 
A) 1782-1783. (REFORM BILL DEFEATED. 
VOLUNTEERS HUMBLED) 
Some small measures to relax the severity of Penal Code against 
Catholics. Opposed by bigots and Castle325 influence. Passed 
however. The concessions very  limited. 
At length Fox himself declared in British Parliament that 
"the repeal of that Statute" (6, George I) "could not stand alone, must be 
accompanied by a final adjustment", "treaty, to be adopted by both Parliaments, to be 
entered upon ... to finally become an irrevocable arrangement between the 2 countries". 
By this Viceroy's duplicity [was] exploded, Grattan's stupidity 
exposed, Flood is now still feebly supported in the House of 
Commons, but strongly by the Volunteers. 
19 July 1782 Flood moves leave to bring in a Bill for the 
ascertaining of Irish legislative etc. independence. Even leave to 
bring in this Bill was negatived without a division. (Grattan!) 
27 July 1782. Irish Parliament. Prorogued by Portland. In his 
proroguing speech: "inviolable adherence to that compact etc." 
Marquis of Rockingham died 1782. Fox-North Coalition. Portland 
superseded by Earl of Temple (later Marquis of Buckingham). His Chief 
Secretary Mr., afterward Lord Grenville. His Administration from 
15 September 1782—3 June 1783. 
More than 150,000 Volunteers now on the Muster-rolls. Strong 
accession to them of Catholics. Resolved no longer to obey or suffer 
to be obeyed any law or statute passed in England for Ireland. 

=====第307页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 275 
Hence standstill. Magistrates, counsels acted ditto. Juries would not find 
for them. Action of many important laws suspended. 
Parliament divided between Flood and Grattan. The latter (Whig 
spelt) always in majority. British Administration resolved to foster the 
division of Nation thus  created.  Baffled by injudicious conduct of some 
Members of the British Parliament. 
Sir G. Young in British House of Commons. Lord Mansfield in the 
Court of King's Bench. Lord Abingdon in the House of Lords. 
Volunteers beat to arms throughout Ireland. Above 120,000. 
Flood [has the] upper hand amongst them. New panic of British 
Ministry. 
1783.  23 Act of George III. All right of legislative interference on the 
part of British Parliament, and appellant jurisdiction in England, 
repudiated. Without debate passed. 
This British Renunciation Act discredited the Irish Parliament with 
the Irish People. Showed either its insufficiency or corruption, or 
would have been superfluous. Reform of the Irish Parliament now 
the cry. 
Irish Parliament. Rotten Borough System. Members of House of 
Commons nominated by individuals, especially Peers, nominated by 
the King, voted by proxy in House of Commons. Membership purchased 
by money and its exercise sold for office. These purchases also made 
by servants of the Executive Government. The Volunteers had the 
facts sifted etc. 1 Peer nominated 9 Commoners etc. 'At of 
members only freely elected by people. New Delegates Assembly of 
Volunteers in Dungannon. 10 November 1783 was proclaimed for the 
first sitting of the Grand National Convention of Ireland at Dublin. 
Rotunda place of their meeting. British Ministers knew that if 
Reform [were effected] in Ireland [it] could not be withheld from 
England. Then commercial jealousy of England. Charlemont 
President by trickery. Plan of Reform passed, to be brought into 
the House of Commons by Flood. Sittings of Convention were made 
permanent till answer [was received]. 
The Government refused leave to bring in Flood's Bill, because it had 
originated from armed deliberation. 
The Government knew that the triumph of the Parliament implied 
not only the destruction of the Convention, but of the Volunteers. Bill 
rejected by 158 to 49. 158 of the majority were placemen, as in 1800. 
Address to the King, offending the Volunteers, carried. Charlemont 
adjourns the Convention by tricks. Now struggle between the bigots 
(Charlemont) and Emancipation (Catholic) amongst the Volunteers 
and People. (Earl Bristol, Bishop of Derry for full emancipation. 
Address in that sense by Belfast Volunteers.) Foolish Charlemont made 

=====第308页=====
276 Karl Marx 
new "civil", not military "Bill of Reform" to be introduced in 
House of Commons. Of course rejected. Now begins the Period of 
Moderate Parliamentarism. The Volunteers survived the blows for 
some years, but [were] decaying. The Whig Orators (Grattan etc.) 
lost ground and. influence. 
B) FROM THE END OK 178-i TO 1791 
(FOUNDATION OF UNITED IRISHMEN) 
December 1783. Pitt Minister. Duke of Rutland Viceroy. Orde 
Minister. Rutland died October 1787. 
Duke of Rutland Viceroy. (Orde Chief Secretary.) December 1783-
October 1787. 
In the House of Commons repeated useless attempts at Reform. 
Orde's Commercial Propositions. 
May, 1784. Griffith proposes House of Commons inquiry into the 
commercial intercourse between Ireland and Great Britain, Irish trade he 
wanted to be protected against English competition. Government took 
that proposal out of his hands. 
7 February 1785. Orde announced, and on 11 February 1785 
moved, 11 Propositions on Trade. This plan proffered as a boon of 
reciprocity. Favour [to be] paid for by £140,000 new taxes. 
22 February 1785. Pitt moved 20 Resolutions in the British 
House of Commons. Amended in English sense. Then sent to 
Ireland. Half the globe interdicted to Irish ships and interdicts laid on 
Irish goods. Whole Custom-House Legislation taken away from Ireland 
etc. (See p. 22a.) 
Irish House of Commons. On 15 August 1785, after different 
previous stormy sittings, Orde had to abandon his Bill for the session, 
[and] for ever. Orde's Propositions merged into a secret design for the 
Union. 
11 August 1785. Curran had threatened with opposition, "not only 
by words". 
12 August 1785. Curran: 
"the Bill portends a surrender of the Constitution and Liberties of  Ireland". 
Irish House of Commons. 14 February 1785. Bill for raising Militia. 
Against the Volunteers. (£20,000 for Militia.) 
1784 renewed effort for Reform. Henry Reilly, Sheriff of the County of 
Dublin, in consequence of a requisition, summoned his bailiwick 
a Here and further on Marx refers to the main section of his manuscript (see 
pp. 240-41 of this volume).—  Ed.  l 

=====第309页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 277 
etc. for the 25 October 1784, to elect members for a national 
congress.  For this attached by the King's Bench, on a Crown Motion. 
24 February 1785 Brownlow moved vote of censure on  the judges of 
that Court, for the attachment. Rejected by 113 to 71. 
The endeavour to regain by corruption what was surrendered to force, 
began in 1782, and increased greatly after the defeat of Orde's 
Propositions. 
Irish House of Commons 13 March 1786. Forbes moves to limit the 
amount of Pensions. This failed. 
12 March 1787. Forbes renewed his Bill. Failed again. 
No Ministerial Responsibility in  Ireland. 
Irish House of Commons January 19, 1787. Outrages in the South, 
caused by misery of the people, from tithes, rents, absenteeism, bad 
tenures, harsh treatment etc. (Since the end of 1791, United 
Irishmen, Political Parties united themselves with the peasants, the 
Republicans of the North.) 
1786. Lord Lieutenant's Opening Speech referred to "frequent 
outrages" in the South, "Right Boys" of Kilkenny. Yet the only Bill, 
brought in by Government, the Dublin Police Bill, against which 
the City of Dublin petitioned. 
1787. Viceroy's speech on this subject much more positive. 
Fitzgibbon accused the landlords of grinding the people, and 
abetting the disturbances against the clergy, asked for more 
powers. 
19 January 1787. Fitzgibbon said the disturbances commenced in 
Kerry etc. "Captain Right". Spread then through Munster etc. 
Their object the tithes, then to regulate the price of lands, raise the 
price of labour, oppose the collection of hearth-money and other taxes. 
Curran during the debates: 
"You may talk of commerce extending ... but what, in God's name, have they to do 
with the wretched peasantry?" 
19 February 1787. Right Boy Bill. Bill committed by 192 against 
31. By it Riot Act, introduced from England, passed. 
20 February 1787: Proposed to limit the Bill to Cork, Kerry, 
Limerick, Tipperary. Motion lost without a division. By this Bill 
capital punishment for tendering an oath etc. 
13 March 1787. Tithes. Grattan moved, that if tranquillity [were] 
restored, at the opening of the next session, the House would 
consider the Tithe Question. Motion lost, without a division. English 
Secretary declared 
"he was a stranger to the distress" and would "never have it considered by the 
Parliament". 

=====第310页=====
278 Karl Marx 
This Riot Act to be enforced by the very same landed proprietors 
whom Fitzgibbon had accused of grinding the peasant and 
instigating him against the clergy. 
Marquis of Buckingham (formerly Earl of Temple) second time 
Viceroy. 16 December 1737-5 January 1790. (Orde Secretary!) (Fitz-
herbert Chief Secretary.) 
Influence of French Revolution of 1789 commences during this  period. 
Irish House of Commons. 21 April 1789. Disfranchisement of Excise 
Officers' Bill, Rejected by 148 to 93. 
25 April 1789: Dublin Police. Motion 
"attended with waste, and useless patronage". Rejected by 132 to 78. 
Regency Bill, 1789. Ceorge III mad for some time, concealed, at the 
end of 1 788 it could no longer be hid. In the ministers' draft of the 
address in answer to Lord Buckingham they praised themselves. 
6 February 1789 Grattan moved amendment. ([People] believed 
that Fox would become Premier Minister under the Prince of 
Wales.) Carried without a division. 
11 February 1789 Ministers tried to postpone division on the 
Regency; their avowed motive to know the Resolutions of the British 
Parliament (appointing Prince Regent with limited powers). (These 
resolutions passed in England on 23 January, accepted by Prince 
31 January, but had not yet reached the Irish Government.) 
Postponement  refused.  Prince nominated Prince Regent of Ireland with 
unlimited Powers. Passed without division. 
12 February 1789 Conolly moves address, February 17 concur­
rence of L.ords, 19 February presented to Buckingham. Refused to 
transmit it, 20 February 1789 Deputation to Prince appointed. Vote 
of Censure against Buckingham. 27 February 1789 Deputation (of 
the Commons) send them letter with "warmest thanks" of the 
Prince, 20 March 1789 still more fervent letter of the Prince to 
Irish House of Commons on recovery of his father's health. 
ADMINISTRATION OK JOHN FANE, EARL OF WESTMORELAND 
(CHIEF SECRETARY HOBART, 
AFTERWARDS EARL OF BUCKINGHAMSHIRE) 
(5 JANUARY 1790—4 JANUARY 1795) 
House of Commons, 4 February 1790. Stamp officers' Salaries. 
(Proposed to cut them down and regulate them. Rejected by 141 to 
81.) (Curran in his speech alludes to the French Revolution.) 
11 February 1790. Forbes moves an address describing and 
censuring several recent pensions. Rejected by 136 to 92. 

=====第311页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 279 
Curran states, afterwards (speech in House of Commons, Feb­
ruary 12, 1791): 
"During the whole of the session of 1790, we have, in the name of the people 
of Ireland, demanded from them the Constitution of Great Britain, and it has been 
uniformly denied. We would have passed a law to restrain the shameful profusion of a 
pension-list—it was refused by a majority. We would have passed a law' to exclude 
persons, who must ever be the chattels of the government, from sitting in this House. 
Refused by a majority. A bill to make some person, resident among you, and therefore 
amenable to public justice, responsible for the acts of your governors ... refused. [...] This 
uniform denial ... proof to the people of  Ireland,  that the imputation of corrupt practices 
is founded in fact." 
Disputed Election of Lord Mayor in Dublin (1790) 
Citizens of Dublin pledged themselves to elect no one as Lord 
Mayor or Member of Parliament for the city, who held place or 
pension from Government. 
16 April 1790 Aldermen choose Alderman James, a Police 
Commissioner, Lord Mayor for the ensuing year. Rejected by the 
Common Council, ditto 7 other names. They elected Alderman 
Howison (Napper Tandy led the popular party). Aldermen re-elect 
James. Before the Privy Council. Orders new election. Same farce 
repeated. 
10 July 1790. Curran pleads before Privy Council for Howison. 
Privy Council for James, who resigns on 5 August 1790. Howison 
chosen [by the] Aldermen. 
16 July 1790. Napper Tandy in Common Council carried 
Resolutions censuring Privy Council, Aldermen, and summoned 
meeting of freemen and freeholders at the Exchange. Adjourned 
to 3 August to draw up State of Facts, which [was] done accordingly. 
24 July: Whig Club [passed] similar Resolutions. Their quarrel 
with Fitzgibbon.a 
Insurrectionary outrages at Dublin on Camden's arrival. Fitzwil-
liam's recall triumph for the Separation party. Irish Republic soon 
object of the United Irishmen. Bulk of the Presbyterians of Down, 
Antrim, Tyrone, joined by multitudes of Catholics and Protestants 
in Leinster. Catholics of the North Defenders or Ribbonmen. 
Irish House of Commons 4 May 1795. Second Reading of the 
Emancipation Bill. Rejected by 155 to 84. {An Insurrection Bill passed 
etc.,  law allowing the Lord Lieutenant to proclaim counties; 
a The next, 9th, page of the manuscript is missing.— Ed. 

=====第312页=====
280 Karl Marx 
magistrates obtained power of breaking into houses, and transport­
ing to the navy all whom they suspected. Indemnity for magistrates 
guilty of illegality—giving the Lord Lieutenant power of arrest 
without bail—licensing the introduction of foreign troops (German), 
establishing the Yeomanry Corps.} 
Irish House of Commons 3 February 1796. Indemnity Bill. 
25 February 1796. Insurrection Bill. {Right of arbitrary transporta­
tion to serve in the navy given to magistrates.) Curran: 
"bill for the rich, and against the poor". 
Since end of March 1796 whole counties of Ireland proclaimed. 
13 October 1796. French war. (Hoche was just assembling at 
Brest, and Wolfe Tone, Grouchy, and a part of the expedition, 
reached Bantry Bay on the 22 December, left it only the 28.) 
Camden opens Parliament. Resistance to France (Invasion!) and 
"popular passion and public opinion". 
Curran. Government has instigated persecution of Catholics, for 
2 years [they] murdered etc. in one of the counties. Ponsonby's 
Amendment to Address rejected by 149 to 12. Then [the] Bill (by 
Attorney-General) [was] passed, [the] Bill to empower the Lord 
Lieutenant to take up and detain all such persons, as were suspected of 
treasonable practices etc. It was read many times, once or twice 
committed for the morrow. 
14 October 1796. Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act. 
17 October 1796. Catholic Emancipation Bill rejected. 
6 January 1797. Hoche's Expedition. Pelham brings down message 
of Viceroy for new war taxes. 
24 February 1797. Internal Defence. Yeomanry Infantry etc. (p. 38).a 
18 March 1797. Disarming of Ulster. Message of Camden. 
(Proclamation of General Lake. Belfast. 13 March.) 
15 May 1797. Curran, Grattan etc. secede from the House. 
3 July 1797 House adjourned. Castlereagh Chief Secretary. 
14 October 1797. Orr hanged for having administered oath of 
the United Irishmen to a private soldier (proven only by an 
informer etc.) 
{10 May 1795. Organisation of Ulster (United Irishmen) com­
pleted. In autumn 1796 made military in Ulster. Towards the 
middle of 1797, this system spread to Feinster. Only 19 February 
1798 the Executive of the United Irishmen resolved 
"that they would not be diverted from their purpose by anything which could be done 
in Parliament". 
a See this volume, pp.253-54.— Ed. 

=====第313页=====
Ireland from the American Revolution to the Union of 1801 281 
(Lose time for action.) March 1798 Arthur O'Connor arrested, at 
Maidstone, in the act of embarking for France; 12 March, Oliver 
Bond,  McCann etc. at Oliver Bond's warehouse, Dublin. Shortly 
afterwards McNevin, Thomas Emmet, Sampson. New Directory. John 
Sheares one of it. 19 May, just 4 days before the insurrection was to 
take place, Lord Fitzgerald pounced upon, 21 May 2  Sheares.  Thus the 
insurrection began without its designers to lead it.} 
23 May 1798 the insurrection commenced (Dublin), 17 July 
Lord Castlereagh announced its final defeat. 
Treason trials were held in February and March 1798 before the 
beginning of the insurrection? Free quarters. Slow tortures, under the 
pretence of forcing confessions etc. Summary executions. At the 
outbreak of the insurrection martial law proclaimed. 
25 July 1798. Negotiations of leaders from gaol with the 
Government. Settled 29 July. (Released only by peace of Amiens, 
1802!) 
PITT'S PLAN TO ENFORCE AND PROVOKE THE REBELLION 
(P. 41 SQQ.)" 
1598-99 Elizabeth (Mountjoy and Carew); same 1798-99. 
Earl of Carhampton. General Abercromby. 
United Irishmen and Pitt. Prussia and Poles. 
Castlereagh boasted that he had made the conspiracy explode. He 
charged the mine as well as fired it. 
Pitt 1795 and 1797 opposed debates for pacification of Ireland 
in British Parliament on pretext that it was an encroachment on Irish 
independence. 
LORD CORNWALLLS GOVERNMENT. UNION 
Pitt, Castlereagh, Cornwallis. (19 October 1781 Cornwallis's Capitu­
lation at York Town, Virginia.) 
Cornwallis wants terror to carry the Union. 
Happy accident for him: 
22 August 1798 about 1,000 French, under Humbert, entered 
Killala Bay, carried Castlebar 27 August. 
1 This sentence is in German in the manuscript.— Ed. 
'' See this volume, pp. 256-59.— Ed. 

=====第314页=====
282 Karl Marx 
8 September surrendered at Ballinamuck. (Hardy's flotilla taken 
on 11 October with Tone, who died on 19 November.) 
Revival of horrors. 
40,000 troops in Ireland. Martial Law continuing (it was 
constantly renewed, and discontinued in 1801).a 
House of Commons 22 January 1799. Legislative Union first 
proposed in Speech from the Throne (debate lasted 22 hours, 
until the morning of 23 January). Government obtained majority of 
1, by open sale of certain Fox, lawyer. 
2nd debate, on 5 o'clock of 23 January 1799, lasted till morning 24. 
Government defeated. Ill members decided against Union, 105 
for. {Voters 216, Absent 84.) 
Lords Spiritual and Temporal use this House of Commons' 
Opposition to get money etc. out of Government, stipulated for 
their sale. 
Cornwallis bamboozles the Catholic Bishops; [their] disgusting 
subserviency. 
Petitions, Addresses, Dubliners fired into for their rejoicings. 
5 and 6 February 1800 Union accepted by Irish House of Commons. 
Still minority of 115 of a total of 273 votes. In interval between 
old and new Parliament corruption broadcast (pp. 48, 49b). 
Castlereagh's shameless measure. 
The House of Commons was surrounded by a British Regiment. 
Castlereagh palpably purchased 25 members before the 2nd 
division in 1800, which made a difference of 50 votes in favour of 
Government. Thus Pitt and Castlereagh carried the Union. 
Written in October-November 1869 Reproduced from the manuscript 
First published in Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 45, 
Moscow, 1975 
a The sentence in brackets is in German in the manuscript.— Ed, 
b See this volume, pp. 262-63.— Ed. 

=====第315页=====
283 
Frederick Engels 
[NOTES  ON  GOLDWIN SMITH'S BOOK 
IRISH HISTORY  AND  IRISH CHARACTER]™6 
1) GOLDWIN SMITH, 
IRISH HISTORY AND IRISH CHARACTER 
(PART OF  IT IN  NOTEBOOK  III  UNDER O'CONOR327) 
Gold win Smith, Irish History  and  Irish Character, Oxford  and 
London, Parker, 1861. 
Behind the cloak  of objectivity, the apologetic English bourgeois 
professor. Even from  a geographical point  of view, Ireland, he says, 
was destined to be subjugated by England, and he attributes the slow 
and incomplete conquest  to the width  of the Channel and  to the 
position  of Wales between England  and  Ireland. 
Ireland  is said to be a  GRAZING COUNTRY by nature, see Léonce  de 
Lavergne. 3 Smith thinks that 
"it is difficult, over  a great part  of the island, to get  in a  wheat harvest ... its natural 
way to commercial prosperity seems  to be to supply with the produce  of its grazing 
and dairy farms  the  population  of England" (p.  3). 
There are coalfields  in Ireland  (p. 4). 
The climate  is supposed  to  have debilitated  the  Irish  and  retarded their 
development,  in comparison with such  BRACED PEOPLE  as the  Scandinavians 
(and Laplanders?).  On  the other hand, the prospect  is held out  to 
the Irish 
of the  VILLAS  OF  NOBLES  and  MERCHANT  PRINCES,  such as can now be found in 
Scotland (p.  5) 
(lN THE GROUSE MOORS AND DEER  FORESTS!). 
Greatly deplores  the  lack  of moderation  in Irish eloquence. 
Nevertheless  the  Irishman complements  the  Englishman,  and it 
a Léonce  de  Lavergne,  The  Rural Economy  of England, Scotland  and  Ireland. 
Translated from  the  French. Edinburgh, 1855. See this volume,  p. 159.— Ed. 

=====第316页=====
284 Frederick Engels 
would be unfortunate if as a result of emigration the Celtic 
element were  DRAINED  OFF. 
Originally  the  clan  or tribe  [was] the  social form common  to all  Celts 
(and to other nations) 
in Wales  as well. Soon more intermingling  of the  different clans  in the  Irish plain 
and loosening  of ties within  the  clans;  on the  other hand [there existed]  the  rule  of 
the more powerful over those  who  were weaker,  the  beginnings  of monarchy.  The 
main prerogative  of the  king seems  to have been  the  exaction  of tribute, rather than 
regular jurisdiction. 
The  FACTION FIGHTS  of the  Irish,  TWO  YEAR OLDS  and  THREE YEAR OLDS,  are 
vestiges  of the old  clanships,  as are  also the  COUNTY  jealousies  and  COUNTY FIGHTS  a 
(cf. the FIGHT  between Cork and Tipperary on the emigrant ship). 
The  FAIRIES  too  have their  FACTION  and  COUNTY FIGHTS  b 
(cf. Kohl). 328 
The old  loyalty  to the  clan chief  and  submission  to his  will explain much  in the 
Irish character.0 
The land of the clan [was] communal property. In this context 
Smith realises that in Ireland it was never the Irishman, but only the 
Englishman who held land as private property, although he merely says 
that private property confronted the Irishman only 
in the  "form  of insecurity, degradation,  and  despair"  (p. 21). 
Sir John Davies, pp. 135, 136,d329 writes of the  CHIEFRIES  that 
"though they  had  some portions  of land allotted  to them", [their income]  "did  consist 
chiefly  in cuttings  and  cosheries  and  other Irish exactions, whereby, 
the English  LAWYER  says, 
"they  did  spoil  and  impoverish  the  people  at their pleasure.  And  when their 
chieftains were dead, their sons  or next heirs  did not  succeed them  but  their tanists 
who were elective  and  bought their election by strong  hand;  and by the  Irish custom  of 
gavelkind,  the  inferior tenancies were partable amongst  all the  males  of the  sept both 
bastards  and  legitimate  and  after partition made,  if anyone  of the  sept  had  died,  his 
portion  was not  divided among  his  sons,  but the  chief  of the  sept made  a new 
partition  of all the  lands belonging  to the  sept  and  gave everyone  his  part 
according  to his  antiquity." 
Quoted p. 22. 
The English LAWYERS  are supposed  to have called this,  and  TANLSTRY  in particular, 
"no estate,  but  only  a transient  and  scambling possession",  and  Davies  was  entirely 
a G. Smith,  op. cit, pp.  15-17.— Ed. 
b J. G.  Kohl, Reisen  in Irland,  Bd. I, Dresden  und Leipzig, 1843,  S. 34.— Ed 
c Ibid,  p. 19.— Ed. 
d Engels' note in the  margin: "Davies, excerpts,  pp. 4,  2." — Ed. 

=====第317页=====
Notes on Smith's Book Irish History and Irish Character 285 
in agreement with this and also with the king being obliged to compel the people, 
if necessary by force, to accept  CIVILITY,a 
i.e. the English law. 
How often a new division took place is not clear (!!), certainly not at every 
death. (See Hallam.b) 
Every two or three  years,  see Davies, excerpts, p. 82.c In any case it is 
obvious that because of the English conquest, the Irish up to 1600 
had not yet gone beyond communal property! But Smith (p. 24) 
asserts that as early as the 
"invasion the land which a member of a sept had occupied seems generally to have 
passed at his death, as a matter of course, to all his sons". 
This is wrong; see Davies, who considers that partition still exists 
at least in the northern part of Ireland.0 
Even today, he says, "spend me and defend me" is more natural to the Irish peasant 
than the relationship of landlord and tenant. 
The term  GAVELKIND  was introduced into Ireland by English  LAWYERS,  for they 
confused Irish law with the Kentish  GAVELKIND,  which knows no primogeniture either 
(P- 25). 
St. Bernard's pronouncement about the Irish Church, on the 
basis of which Henry II justified Adrian's Papal Bull,330 because it 
was necessary to bring the whole church under the sway of Rome 
in the face of external enemies, contains nothing but trash: 
1) They pay no first-fruits or tithes. 2) they do not properly marry 
(i.e. not in accordance with the formalities prescribed by Rome), 
nor do they go to confession (?), no one exhorts them to do penance and no one 
imposes a penance. Moreover, 3) there are far too few priests. But all this had 
already been put right by St. Malachy, as St. Bernard himself admits. (De vita St. 
Malachiae, ch. 8.) 
Giraldus Cambrensis however repeats the same accusations: 
they pay neither tithes nor first-fruits, disregard the "rites of marriage, do not 
come to church and marry the wives of deceased brothers".e In addition one can 
merely say that the hierarchy is incomplete, there are far too many bishops and for a 
long time there were no archbishops at all, and their  ORDINATIONS  are not quite lawful 
(P- 33).f 
a J. Davies, Historical Tracts, London, 1786, pp. 134-35.— Ed. 
b H. Hallam, The Constitutional History of England, from the Accession of 
Henry VII to the Death of George II, Vols. I-III, London, 1869.— Ed. 
c In the manuscript this is written above the preceding quotation.— Ed. 
d In the manuscript this remark is inserted between the lines.— Ed. 
c Giraldus Cambrensis, Topographia Hibernica, et Expugnatio Hibernica. Edited by 
James F. Dimock, London, 1867, p. 289.— Ed. 
f See St. Bernard, De Vita S. Malachiae..., Ch. 10; p. 33 refers to Smith's 
book.— Ed. 

=====第318页=====
286 Frederick Engels 
The only towns were those  of the  Danes 
(says  Davies). 3 
That heathen elements  are  still evident  in their religion  is obvious,  it was so 
everywhere. Thus  in Ireland  one can  find  "the  pledge  of blood"  in addition  to the 
touching  of a  relic when concluding  an agreement,  the  noisy, orgiastic  WAKES  which 
accompany funerals,  the  fact that  the  right  arm is not  baptised  etc. 
In Germany  and  England  one can  find quite different  things. 
FOSTERAGES  and the  special emphasis laid  on sponsorship  (GOSSIPREDE)  as being 
binding  for  life,  are  probably also  of pagan origin. Cambrensis:  "As for  their  own 
brethren  and  kinsmen,  the  Irish persecute them when living unto death,  and  avenge 
them when slain; while such love  and  fidelity  as they show  is confined  to their 
foster-brethren  and  foster-children." Quoted  p. 37.b 
Marriage however seems  to have been  in a bad way, for  Davies,  p. 146,c speaks 
of "their common repudiation  of their wives, their promiscuous generation  of 
children, their neglect  of lawful matrimony";  he  associates this with "their 
uncleanness  in apparel, diet,  and  lodging,  and  their contempt  and  scorn  of all 
things necessary  for the  civil life  of man". 
The fact that in law  BASTARD CHILDREN  are placed on a par with 
legitimate children  is connected with this  but  also with communal 
property. 
The Irish squire  of the  last century  is said  to have still eaten  at the  same table 
with the  RETAINERS  of his  HOUSEHOLD,  almost like  the old  clan chief  (p. 39). 
The laws of the conquerors against bards and  STROLLING SINGERS 
were directly  political, 
because they were  the  upholders  of the  NATIONAL  tradition.  As late as the end of the 
18th century there were still  a few old  travelling harpists/' 
But their Irish  can no  longer  be  understood  today. 
The Normans  in Ireland "formed only  a military colony,  or rather garrison, 
holding  its ground against  the  natives with difficulty,  and  living  in a  perpetual state 
of border  war".  From  the  outset therefore [they tried  to gain  the]  ASCENDANCY. 
The Pale331  was a  part  of feudal England  on the  other side  of the  Channel  (p. 56). 
The  ENGLISH INTEREST  and the  ANGLO-IRISH INTEREST  in the Pale arose already 
at that time.  The  Irish barons were jealous  of the  English officials  who  came from 
England,  etc., and of  those  who  also owned English  ESTATES,  and who for the  most 
part were absentees332  and  remained English. 
During the.Wars  of the  Roses 333 
a The  parenthesis  was  inserted later.— Ed. 
h Giraldus Cambrensis, op. cit., Vol. II, p. Ill; p. 37  refers  to Smith's book.— Ed. 
*•' The  page reference  — which  is not  given  in Smith's book—was presumably 
inserted  by Engels later.— Ed. 
d G. Smith,  op. cit., p. 43.— Ed. 

=====第319页=====
Notes  on Smith's Book Irish History  and  Irish Character  287 
the government  of the  Pale became  so weak that  it entrusted  the  policing  and 
keeping  of order  to the  private BROTHERHOOD  of St.  George.a 
(Moore sub anno 1472, not in the Chronology.)334 
The Statute of Kilkenny335 is said to be merely an act of 
self-defence AND there was  NOTHING PECULIARLY MALIGNANT  IN IT. That 
crimes against Irishmen were not punishable is said to have been the 
natural consequence of the fact that in Ireland two nations living 
in the same country were subject to two different codes of law! 
"An Irishman  who had  murdered  an Englishman would have been only fined  for 
it by his  BrehonH" 
Proof of this is 
the affair  of the  sheriff whom  an  Irish chief  was  prepared  to admit into  his 
territory, provided  the  government fixed  the  wergeld  to be  paid  for him  should  the 
case arise.b 
The quinque sanguines1 are correctly understood as 5 clans. 
English statesmen, such  as Spenser, Davies  and  Bacon,  who  were interested  in 
Ireland, regarded  "the  settlement  and  subjugation  of Wales  by Edward  I" as an 
ideal/1 
At any rate Davies, see pages 105-07, notebook 3,  2. e336 
Finally under Poynings' administration (Henry  VII)  every murder  was  made 
punishable according  to English lawf 
(i.e. within the Pale). Almost all his laws are said to have benefited 
Ireland,  because they placed  IMPERIAL  (here it is simply a euphemism 
for English)  INTERESTS  AND  POLICY  above  ASCENDANCY  (!). 
"It can  hardly  be doubted that  the  most obnoxious  of his  statutes,  as they tended  to 
make imperial policy  and  imperial interests paramount over  the  policy  aud  interests 
of ascendancy, were  at the  time  of their enactment beneficial  to the  Irish people"!! 
(p. 73). 
These Acts were effective only within the Pale, and not a trace 
of the Irish people could be found there! (Davies, pp. 136-39.)R 
He claims that with Henry VIII  and  Wolsey  "the  deep  and  reflecting statecraft 
of a politic  age now  began  to appear"  in the  Irish administration  of the  regents 
sent to Ireland  (p. 74). 
•' G. Smith,  op. cit., p. 66.— Ed. 
b Engels' note in the  margin: "Davies,  pp. 134, 135;  notebook  pp. 4, 2;  Spenser, 
p. 20."—  Ed. 
c Five bloods.  See  this volume,  p. 292.— Ed. 
d G. Smith,  op. cit., p.  71.—  Ed. 
e This note  was  inserted later.— Ed. 
f G. Smith,  op. cit., pp. 72-73.—  Ed. 
s The source reference  was  inserted later.— Ed. 

=====第320页=====
288 Frederick Engels 
Yes indeed, the French wars and the Wars of the Roses had come 
to an end! 
The war against the Geraldines 337 in the reign of Henry VIII was waged by 
both sides with great cruelty and caused much destruction; in addition there was 
treachery and perfidity on the part of the English against Fitzgerald and his five 
uncles, and against others as well. 
Under Elizabeth "there was corruption, corruption in the very vilest form, 
corruption which preferred war to peace because war held out hopes of lucre 
which peace threatened to destroy". 
Then, in the age of the adventurers, 
"the eagle took wing for the Spanish main, the vultures descended upon 
Ireland".... 
But in Ireland, too, Raleigh had a castle and an estate granted to 
him at Lismore. Wakefield, Vol. T, p.  70.a338 
"A dexterous use of intrigue, chicanery and the art of inciting to rebellion, 
procured for the sharper in Ireland wealth ... in the shape of confiscated lands" 
(p. 79). 
In 1561 Shane O'Neill came to England with a guard of  GALLOWGLASSES,  who were 
bareheaded, wore  GLIBS, SAFFRON  shirts, short skirts and shaggy cloaks and were 
armed with hatchetsb 
(at a time when muskets were in use!). 
P. 86. Elizabeth's expenditure for the war in Ireland amounted to at least 
£4-500,000 per annum, hence the counterfeit money. "Assuredly whoever may 
have profited by the misery and depression of Ireland, it has not been the English 
nation." (!!) "To the English nation Ireland has been a source of expense, danger, 
and weakness without intermission from the conquest almost down to the present 
hour." 
And à qui la faute?" Surely that of THE ENGLISH NATION! 
James is said to have been obliged to create  SHAM BOROUGHS,  not only to obtain a 
majority, but also because there were no real boroughs!!! (p. 96). 
Just as Potemkin's villages had likewise been a historical necessi­
ty.339 Good for the reformers. 
Sir Thomas Smith's first colonies "were planted in Down and Antrim on lands 
which were presumed in law to be vacant by the attainder of O'Neill". This failed, 
"the native occupants, says Hallam, not acquiescing in this doctrine of our lawyers". 
Arthegal in Spenser's Faerie Queene is  LORD DEPUTY  Gray. 
a Engels wrote the passage from "But in Ireland..." to "... Vol. I, p. 70." in the 
margin and marked the place for it in the text.— Ed. 
h G. Smith, op. cit., p. 80.— Ed. 
c Whose fault is  it?—Ed. 

=====第321页=====
Notes on Smith's Book Irish History and Irish Character 289 
"When the chieftains of the septs O'More and 0'Connella were attainted, in the 
reign of Mary" 
(King's and Queen's Counties),340 
"the septs pleaded that the chieftain could not by his attainder forfeit the sept land 
which he never had  possessed.  A feeling that the land was still theirs and that they 
were unjustly kept out of their possessions ... is perhaps not extinct even at the 
present day" (p. 101). 
To show his impartiality, Strafford also extorted considerable sums from the 
colonists of Londonderry, because they had committed a small formal  BREACH  OF 
THE COVENANT,  thus arousing the wrath of London, the mother city, against him and 
Charles.1' 
"It is not too much to say that the English Puritans regarded the Irish Catholics, 
after O'Neill's massacre, with the rage of the Orangeman341 towards the Papists 
added to the rage of the Englishman of Calcutta towards the Sepoy mutineer342 
(p. 113), 
so that on the whole, Cromwell countenanced as few murders as 
he possibly could. 
Cromwell's transportation of Irish rebels to the West Indies to 
be employed there as slaves is said to be less harsh 
"than the measure which the Catholic House of Austria dealt at the same time to 
the Protestants of Bohemia and other conquered provinces in the Thirty Years' 
War" (p. 114). 
To be looked up.34i 
In defence of the judicial murder of Archbishop Plunket [he says that] although 
Titus Oates' plot was an invention, "there was a Popish plot for the extirpation of 
Protestantism and liberty throughout Europe, of which the King of France0 was 
the powerful head, of which the Jesuits were the restless and unscrupulous agents, 
in which the King and the heir presumptive to the crownd were deeply engaged 
and which all but overthrew the religion and liberties of England in the next reign" 
(p. 119). 
Not a word about the breach of the Treaty of Limerick?44 
"James II issued a mandate nominating a Papist to the Professorship of the 
Irish language in Trinity College. It turned out that no such Professorship  existed" 
(p. 135). 
The money which the  ABSENTEES  take with them is said to be mainly expended on 
unproductive work and thus for the most part lost in any case; therefore it does not 
matter much that the money is not spent in Ireland (p. 144). 
What does the West End of London say to this? 
a A mistake in Smith's book, it should be "O'Connor".— Ed. 
>> Charles  II.—Ed. 
< Louis XIV.— Ed. 
d The Duke of York, later James II.— Ed. 

=====第322页=====
290 Frederick Engels 
In his Modest Proposal, Swift speaks of young unemployed Irishmen (A. D. 1729) 
"who either turn thieves for want of work or leave their dear native country to fight 
for the Pretender,a or sell themselves to the Barbadoes".b 
That is into slavery lasting for a longer or shorter time. 
He then proposes that some of the children be assigned to the butcher, and in his 
Maxims he suggests that the Irish be permitted to sell their surplus population into 
slavery/ 
Even before the reign of James II the potato is said to have been the symbol and 
REPROACH OF  IRELAND.  Under James II "an Irish deputation was followed about the 
streets of London by a mob with potatoes stuck on poles" (p. 150). 
Ireland's distress ... "overflowed to England, and bringing pauperism" (!) "and 
disease" (!!) "into our great cities, punished England for whatever share she may have 
had in Irish wrongs" (p. 151). 
According to Phelan's Remains, Vol. II, p. 42, the landlords preferred Catholic 
SERFS  to Protestant  TENANTS,  especially because the former always offered to pay 
the highest rent. The Protestants therefore emigrated to America. 
(No date mentioned.) 
MacGeoghegan says in his History of  Ireland'^ 45: "from calculations and researches 
made at the French war-office, it has been ascertained that from the arrival of the 
Irish troops in France in 1691, up to 1745, the year of the battle of Fontenoy, more 
than 450,000 Irishmen died in the service of France." 
In the independent Irish Parliament before the Union 
(according  to an INQUIRY MADE [in] 1784 FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE ENGLISH 
GOVERNMENT)  out of "300 seats 116 were shared among 25 proprietors (one 
nobleman had 16) and that the government could count on 86 votes of members 
for proprietary seats, the owners of which let them out for titles, places or 
pensions, 12 votes of their own, 45 votes of placemen, and 32 of gentlemen who 
had promises or had avowed their expectations" (Massey, History of England, 
Vol. Ill, p. 264). 
And what about the English Parliament of the time? 
Sir Jonah Barrington was JUDGE  OF THE HIGH COURT  OF ADMIRALTY IN 
IRELAND. 
Pitt would have given parliamentary reform and Catholic 
Emancipation to Ireland, but his 
"liberal policy ... was fatally arrested and the world" (!) "was flung into dismay, 
despair of liberty and absolutist reaction, by the tremendous eruption of absurdity, 
cruelty, and ultimately of military vanity and rapacity, which Frenchmen imagine to 
be the grandest and most beneficent event in history" (p. 165). 
No trace of objectivity remains here. 
"An alien and disaffected element incorporated in a nation can only be a source 
of internal division and weakness. It would be better in every point of view, that 
•' The Old Pretender, James Francis Edward Stuart, Chevalier de St. George.— Ed. 
b See G. Smith, op. cit., p. 147.— Ed. 
1 G. Smith, op. cit., p. 148. Smith has Modest Proposal instead of Maxims.— Ed. 

=====第323页=====
Notes  on Smith's Book Irish History  and  Irish Character  291 
the British Empire should  be reduced  to a  single island,  to England,  to Yorkshire, 
or Kent, than that  it should include anything which  is not  really  its own" (p. 179). 
!! Done—! After 700 years of struggle! 
Federation, he declares, is impossible between Ireland and 
England (he does not speak of a real federation with a federal parliament 
responsible for federal affairs, but only of a personal union). 
"This dog-collar-union,  two  independent parliaments  and two  independent 
governments linked together  by a  nominal allegiance  to the  same crown  ... must  be 
an irony  or a  nuisance"  and  would  end  either  in complete separation  or in the  rule 
of the  English parliamentary government over Ireland  too, as  between  1782 and 
1798,  as a  result  of corruption  and  intrigue  (p. 181). 
What about Sweden and Norway? And Austria-Hungary?346 
"The course  of events  has  left no  basis whereon Irish nationality  can be 
established."  The  Irish  and the  English  are  said  to be  composed  of the  same 
elements, although  in different proportions  ... "but  what  is of  most importance  and 
in fact almost decisive,  the  language  of both islands  is the  same"  (p. 183). 
Hence, the two are one nation and separation of any kind is 
absurd! As though the English language had not made the 
Irishman even more Irish! 
From  p. 184  onwards  [he  deals with]  "the  agrarian outrages,  of which  the 
surplus population  was the  main  cause"U* 
GOLDWIN SMITH. 
CONCLUSION 
(PASSAGES QUOTED WORD FOR WORD AND ADDENDA) 
"The dampness  of the  climate, while  it is the  source  of vegetable wealth  and 
vegetable beauty, could  not  fail to relax  the  energies  of the  people  and to  throw 
them back  in the  race  of nations  for  preeminence  in things requiring physical 
exertions.  We see  this when  we compare  the  early history  of the  Irish with that  of 
the Scandinavians, braced  to daring  and  enterprise  by the  climate  of the  North" 
(p. 4). 
Edward  III and  Henry  V fought  the  battles  of Crécy, Poitiers,  etc., in  France, 347 
"on these famous fields where,  in the  overthrow  of the  French chivalry  by peasant 
hands,  feudalism found  its grave!"  (p. 65, see  below  p. 7l).b 
Statute of Kilkenny: 
" There  is nothing peculiarly malignant  in the  attempt  of that Statute  to restore  a sharp 
division between  the  English  and the  natives.  The  object  of the  framers  was not to 
prevent  the  beneficial fusion  of the two  races into  one  nation,  but to  prevent  the 
one which they very naturally  and  rightly thought  the  more civilised, from 
degenerating into  the  barbarism  of the  other;  and at the  same time  to check  the 
increase  of the  'rebel' elements  in the  country  ... the  same legislators forbid, under 
a After this paragraph there follows  the  note:  "(For the end see p.  5)".—  Ed. 
b See  this volume,  p. 292.—  Ed. 

=====第324页=====
292 Frederick Engels 
the severest penalties, the making of private war upon the Irishry,348 and the 
exciting them to war" (p. 68). 
(Very kind!) 
"It sounds shocking that the killing of an Irishman by an Englishman should 
have been no felony and that it should have been a good plea to an indictment for 
murder that the murdered person was not an Englishman nor a member of one of 
the five 'bloods' or septs which had been admitted within the pale of English law. 
But nothing more is in fact implied in this than that the Irish were not under the English 
but under the native or Brehon jurisdiction. The existence of two races in the same 
country under different laws, and with different punishments for crimes, 
inconceivable as it appears now" 
(he does not know the Levant!), 
"appeared quite natural at a time when the distinction of races was far stronger 
and when law was the peculiar custom of the race, not a set of principles common 
to all mankind. It would have been the same in England had the Anglo-Saxons 
succeeded in obtaining from {William} the Conqueror 'the laws of Edward the 
Confessor'. One kingdom would then have contained two nations, ' the Normans 
and the Saxons, living under different penal codes. The rule of impunity held good 
for both sides. An Irishman who had murdered an Englishman would have been 
only fined for it by his Brehon. The Government having on one occasion desired 
a native chief to receive a sheriff into his territories, the chief consented, but at the 
same time desired the Government to say what sum of money, or eric, they set 
upon the sheriff's head, in order that, if he was killed, that sum might be duly 
assessed upon the sept" (p. 69). 
England as a government is said to have always been well 
disposed towards Ireland: 
"The truth is that the Plantagenet Government, when it found time to attend to 
Ireland, intended not evil but good to the Irish peof>le (p. 68).... The English 
Government was not unwilling to admit the Irishry to the English law. Five whole 
septs" (!!) "the five bloods ... were admitted collectively, and individual denization 
seems to have been freely granted" (pp. 69-70). 
But the bad Irish barons did not want this and it is they who 
frustrated the good intentions of the government (pp. 68, 69). 
"The idea that the English Government deliberately excluded the Irish from the pale of 
humanity vanishes away" (p. 70). 
(Certainly—in his mind!) 
"From the ruins of the feudal aristocracy which the Wars of the Roses had laid in the 
dust, arose the powerful monarchy of the Tudors" (p. 71). 
Hence it had not found its grave as a result of those battles in 
France! 
"At no period of the struggle" (Henry VIII and Elizabeth) "unhappily could 
England put forth her whole power to strike, in mercy, a decisive blow" (p. 77). 

=====第325页=====
Notes ci Smith's Book Irish History and Irish Character 293 
Under Elizabeth: 
"Finally, there was corruption; corruption in the very vilest form; corruption which 
preferred war to peace because war held out hopes of lucre which peace 
threatened to destroy. The great events and discoveries of the Elizabethan era 
produced a love of adventure which broke forth in every direction, and varied in 
the dignity of its objects and its character, from the height of heroism to the depth 
of baseness. The eagles took wing for the Spanish main; the vultures descended 
upon Ireland. A daring use of his sword procured for the adventurer in the 
Spanish colonies romantic" (!) "wealth in the shape of ingots and rich bales; a 
dexterous use of intrigue, chicanery and the art of inciting to rebellion, procured 
for the sharper in Ireland wealth less romantic but more solid and lasting in the 
shape of confiscated lands" (p. 79). 
"The reign" (of James I) "began well, with a broad act of oblivion" (?). "Even 
the arch-rebel Tyrone was received into favour" 
(! after all, he had made his peace even before the death of 
Elizabeth!) (p. 94). 
By the judgment of the King's Bench349 (1605) which stated that Irish  TENURE 
was unlawful, and introduced English law, "the chiefs gained a boon by having their 
demesne lands and their territorial rights finally made hereditary instead of 
elective" (p. 95). 
Ten years later living in exile and completely expropriated these 
chiefs (those of them that still lived in 1605) were able to ponder 
what a BOON it was! 
"There seems no reason to doubt that it was in honest pursuance of the same 
policy of civilising and conciliating" (!!) "the Irish, by giving them English institutions, 
that a Parliament more regular and comprehensive than any which had preceded, 
was called for all Ireland, without distinction of race or religion." (??) "It is true 
that the Government took active measures to obtain a majority, and that it created a 
number of rotten, or rather of sham boroughs. But it does not seem that freedom 
of election was otherwise" (!!) "interfered with" (!) (pp. 95-96).... "It was necessary 
to create sham boroughs, not only to give the Government a majority, but also 
because real boroughs there were none" (!!!) (p. 96). 
"It appears, to say the least, extremely doubtful whether the lands of Tyrone and 
Tyrconnel, on which the Ulster colony was planted, had been forfeited for any real 
offence and whether the plot in which these noblemen were alleged to have been engaged, 
was not invented by the teeming brain of officials desirous of sharing their estates. They 
fled, it is true, but not from justice; for justice, when the forfeiture of land was in 
prospect, there was none" (p. 100). 
He asserts that in 1640 and 1641, Richelieu and the Pope3 
fomented civil war in England and Ireland, and the Irish officers 
who had returned from France and Spain also added fuel to it. 
Then came the Catholic rising 
"with that great massacre of the Protestants in Ulster which is connected with the 
name of Sir Phelim O'Neill.350 To doubt that there was a great massacre seems 
a Urban VIII.— Ed. 

=====第326页=====
294 Frederick Engels 
idle, since Clarendon," a contemporary, well informed and sober writer, reckoned the number 
of persons killed at 40 or 50,000" (!). "It seems not less idle to doubt which party 
struck the first blow; as well might it be doubted which party struck the first blow 
in the Sicilian Vespers.351 An abstract of depositions describing some of the scenes 
which occurred in the massacre has been preserved by Rush worth (Collections, 
Vol. IV, p. 405).b It presents an appalling but perfectly credible picture of the 
vengeance which a people brutalised by oppression wreaks, in the moment of its 
brief triumph, on the oppressor. Well might phantoms of horror haunt the  accursed  spots 
and the ghosts of the murdered be heard to shriek from beneath the bridge at Portnadown" 
(pp. 107-08). 
This is again very vague! 
"Under the Protectorate" (Cromwell) "... the Protestant community at least (in 
Ireland) presented a picture of prosperity such as the island had never before seen" (??) 
(p. 114). 
This sycophant regards Macaulay as A GREAT WRITER. 
"It would be as easy to sing of the siege of Troy after Homer, as to write about the 
siege of Londonderry after Macaulay" (p. 120). 
While he advises the Irish (see Preface) 
"to pay more attention to general causes" 
so as to be able to explain away such infamies in an objective 
manner, he always attributes the actions of the Irish to petty 
parochial causes. Thus under James II: 
"The Irish people, it has been justly observed, in entering upon the civil war, were 
moved, not by attachment to the House of Stuart or to its political principles, but, 
like the Highland Clans, by motives of their own ... probably the mass of James's 
party, though they were fighting for the Catholic religion, were fighting less for the 
Catholic religion than for that old and terrible subject of Irish civil wars, the  land" 
(p. 121). 
(That is their own land!). 
"Land had been the great source of contention and misery in Ireland throughout her 
history" (p. 125). 
Not the Englishmen's greed for land, but the land itself must be 
blamed  for it. ITS CHITTY THAT'S DONE IT. 
"Their descendants" (the descendants of Cromwell's landlords) "became 
probably the very worst Upper Class with which a country was ever afflicted. The 
habits of the Irish gentry grew beyond measure brutal and reckless, and the 
coarseness of their debaucheries would have disgusted the crew of Comus. Their 
drunkenness, their blasphemy, their ferocious duelling, left the squires of England far 
behind" (!). "If there was a grotesque side to their vices which mingles laughter to 
a E. H. Clarendon, The History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in  Ireland,  Begun in 
the Year 1641, Oxford, 1712.r-Ed. 
b J. Rushworth, Historical Collections of Private Passages of State..., London, 
1682.—  Ed. 

=====第327页=====
Notes on Smith's Book Irish History and Irish Character 295 
our reprobation, this did not render their influence less pestilent to the community 
of which the malice of destiny had made them the social chiefs. Fortunately their 
recklessness was sure, in the end, to work, to a certain extent, its own cure; and in 
the background of their swinish and uproarious drinking bouts, the Encumbered 
Estates Act rises to our view" (p. 140).352 
"In 1778 the increasing spirit of toleration began sensibly to exert its power" and 
the worst  PENAL  LAWS were repealed. In "1778 Lord North proposed (somewhat 
under duress, it is true) large relaxations of the iniquitous and absurd restrictions 
on Irish trade ... two years later the same minister, taught wisdom by his American 
disasters, proposed and carried further concessions. Twenty years more, and 
Mr. Pitt, having come into power instinct with all the liberal ideas of the new era, 
extinguished one" (!) "source of misery and discord by giving Ireland a full measure 
of Free Trade" 
(that is with England!) 
"as an article of the Union" (!!) (pp. 158-59). 
The "nice spirit of toleration", the "liberal ideas of the new 
era", etc., have brought all this about. Not the Englishman's fear 
of the Americans and French! These are the "general causes" 
which have to be kept in mind, but by no means the real ones! 
"Among the phantoms of hatred and suspicion which arose from this field of 
carnage, was the horrible idea that the English Government had intentionally 
stimulated the Irish people into rebellion in order to pave the way for the Union. 
No evidence in support of this charge can be produced" (p. 176). 
"A nation must be very shallow or very depraved which, in the meridian light 
of modern philosophy, can imagine that a mere extension of its territory, 
unsanctioned by nature and morality, can add to its greatness" (p. 179). 
And this when the English have been engaged in conquests 
throughout the century! 
Conclusion: 
"The original source of the calamities of Ireland was the partial character of the 
Norman Conquest, which caused the conquerors instead of becoming an upper 
class,  to remain a mere hostile settlement or Pale.... The next great source of 
mischief was the disruption of Christendom at the period of the Reformation and 
the terrible religious wars which ensued upon that disruption and into which both 
nations, in common with the other nations of Europe, were drawn. Then Ireland 
became a victim to the attempt of Louis XIV, which was in part a sequel of the 
religious wars, to destroy the liberty and religion of England through his vassals, 
the House of Stuart. Finally the French Revolution breaking out into anarchy, 
massacre and atheism, at the moment when the Government of England under Pitt 
had just entered on the path of reform and toleration, not only arrested political 
progress in this as in other cases, but involved Ireland in another civil war" 
(p. 193). 
Again fine "general causes"! As general as possible! 
Preface: 
"It" (this book) "would serve a good purpose if it should fall into the hands of any 
popular writer on Irish history, and induce him to pay more attention than writers 

=====第328页=====
296 Frederick Engels 
on that subject have generally paid to general causes, to cultivate the charities of 
history and in the case of the rulers as well as of the people, to take fair account of 
misfortunes as well as of crimes." 
On Ireland's  INDEPENDENCE,  p. 180: 
"Independence would of course be feasible in itself if it could only be accompanied 
by geographical separation; but so close a neighbourhood would involve contact and 
contact would bring on collision" 
(hence as on the Continent where the countries are in direct 
contact?); 
"rivalry, jealousy, hostility would spring up all the more certainly because there 
would be between the two countries the memory of a former union and of a recent 
divorce; and Ireland, menaced by the power of England, would become the ward 
and the vassal of France, or some other foreign power which for its own purposes 
would constitute itself her protector." 
All this applies also to Russia and Poland, to Hungary and 
Austria and indeed between 1815 and 1859 to Austria and Italy, 
and to every case of subjugation. It is appropriate that England's 
former infamies have to serve as a pretext for the infamies 
committed at the present time. 
Federation in this case requires two partners of equal strength, "but it could not 
be naturally or usefully formed between two states one of which is far more 
powerful than the other, since in the Federal Council the vote of the more 
powerful would always prevail". 
Written in November 1869 
First published in Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 45, 
Moscow, 1975 Printed according to the manu­
script 

=====第329页=====
297 
Frederick Engels 
VARIA ON THE HISTORY 
OF THE IRISH CONFISCATIONS 
16th Saeculum." Henry VIII 
1536. Parliament in Dublin introduces the  OATH OF SUPREMACY  to the King and 
he is given the privilege of taking the first-fruits of all  ECCLESIASTICAL LIVINGS.  Quite 
different in the doing, however, and the subsequent insurrections were directed, 
among other things, against the Oath. Refusal to take the  OATH OF SUPREMACY  was 
high treason in Ireland just as in England (Murphy, p. 249).b 
16th Saeculum. Edward VI and Mary 
Confiscations in Queen's and King's Counties. During the reign of Edward VI, the 
O'Moores of Leix and the O'Connors of Offaley carried on a feud with some lords 
of the Pale,c 
as was usual in Ireland. 
The government qualified this as rebellion. General Bellingham, later Lord 
Deputy, was sent against them and forced them to submit. They were advised to see 
the King and submit to him in person as O'Neill had done successfully in 1542.d 
O'Moore and O'Connor, unlike O'Neill, were imprisoned and their estates 
confiscated. But that was not the last of the clans. The inhabitants declared that the 
land belonged to the clans, not to the chiefs, who therefore could not forfeit it, and 
were, at most, liable to forfeiting their private domains. They declined to move out. 
The government sent troops, and had^ the land cleared after unintermittent 
fighting and extermination of the population (Murphy, p. 255). 
This was the pattern for all subsequent confiscations under 
Elizabeth and James. The Irish were denied all rights against the 
11 Century.— Ed. 
b J. N. Murphy,  Ireland,  Industrial, Political, and Social, London, 1870, pp. 248, 
249.—  Ed. 
c Ibid., p. 254.— Ed. 
d In Murphy's book no date is given.— Ed. 

=====第330页=====
298 Frederick Engels 
Anglo-Irish of the Pale, with resistance treated as rebellion. From 
then on that sort of thing became usual. 
By Acts in the 3rd and 4th years of the reign of Philip and Mary, c. 1 and 2, 
the LORD DEPUTY,  the Earl of Sussex,3 was endowed with "full power and authority 
[...] to give and to grant to all and every Their Majesties' subjects, English or Irish 
[...], at his election and pleasure, such estates in fee simple, fee tail,354 leases for 
term of years, life or lives" in these two counties "as for the more sure planting or 
strength of the countries with good subjects shall be thought unto his wisdom and 
discretion meet and convenient" (Murphy, p. 256). 
16th Saeculum. Elizabeth 
English policy under Elizabeth: to keep Ireland in a state of 
division and strife. 
"Should we exert ourselves," the English Government averred, "in reducing 
Ireland to order and civility, it must soon acquire power, consequence and riches. 
The inhabitants will be thus alienated from England; they will cast themselves into the 
arms of some foreign power, or erect themselves into an independent and separate 
state.  Let us rather connive at their disorders, for a weak and disordered people 
can never attempt to detach themselves from the Crown of England." Thus Sir 
Henry Sidney and Sir John Perrot, successive  LORD DEPUTIES  (the last-named the 
best that they ever had, held the post in 1584-87), describe this  HORRID POLICY,  against 
which they protest (Leland, Vol. II, p. 292b and Murphy, p. 246). Perrot's intention 
of granting the Irish equal rights with the Anglo-Irish and obviating confiscations was 
blocked by the English party in Dublin. 
(Yet he it was who had O'Donnell's sonc brought aboard a ship, 
filled with drink and borne away.) 
Tyrone's rebellion, among other things, against religious persecution: "He and 
other lords of Ulster entered into a secret combination, about this time, that they 
would defend the Roman Catholic religion ... that they would suffer no sheriffs nor 
garrisons to be within the compass of their territories, and that they would [...] 
jointly resist all invasions of the English" (Camden).355 The conduct of Deputy 
Mountjoy in this war is described by Camden: "He made incursions on all sides, 
spoiled the corn, burnt all the houses and villages that could be found, and did so 
gall the rebels, that, pent in with garrisons and streightened more and more every day, 
they were reduced to live like wild beasts, skulking up and down the woods and 
deserts" (Murphy, p. 251). 
See Holinshed, Chronicles0 (p. 460) on how Ireland was laid waste 
in this war. Half the population is said to have perished. 
a Thomas Radcliffe.— Ed. 
b Th. Leland, The History of Ireland from the Invasion of Henry II, Vols. I-III, 
London, 1773. Here and below quoted from Murphy.— Ed. 
c Hugh O'Donnell, "Red Hugh".— Ed. 
d Holinshed, Chronicles of England, Scotland, and  Ireland,  Vol. VI, London, 
1807.—  Ed. 

=====第331页=====
Varia  on the History  of the  Irish Confiscations 299 
According  to the  RETURNS  for 1602 by  John Tyrrell,  the  Mayor  of Dublin, prices 
there climbed: wheat from  36/-  to 180/- the  QUARTER,  barley malt from  10/-  to 43/-
and OAT  MALT  from  5/- to  22/-  the  BARREL,  peas from  5/- to  40/-  the  PECK,  oats 
from  3/4 to 20/- the  BARREL, BEEF  from  26/8 to  160/-  the  CARCASS, MUTTON  ditto 
from  3/- to 26/-,  VEAL  ditto from  10/-  to 29/-,  lamb from  1/- to  6/-, and a  pig from 
8/- to 30/-  (Leland,  Vol.  II, p.  410). 
Desmond  was  deprived  of his estates  in all  counties  of Munster except Clare,  and 
also in Dublin. They were worth £7,000  per  annum.  The  Irish Parliament  of 1586 
expropriated  140  landowners  by confiscation  in Munster alone under  the Act  of the 
28th year  of Elizabeth's reign,  c. 7 and 8.  MacGeoghegan lists  the  names  of the 
GRANTEES  of Desmond's  ESTATES  a; some  of these families  are  still, and up to 1847 
nearly  all were,  in possession. 
(? probably  cum  grano  salis). 
The annual Crown rent  on  these  ESTATES  was 2d to 3d per  acre, with  no 
indigenous Irish admitted  as  TENANTS  and the  government undertaking  to keep 
adequate garrisons. 
Neither provision  was  observed. Some estates were abandoned  by the  GRANTEES 
and reoccupied  by the  Irish. Many  of the  UNDERTAKERS  stayed  in England  and 
appointed  AGENTS,  "ignorant, negligent,  and  corrupt" (Leland,  Vol.  Ill, p.  311). 
17th Saeculum. James  I 
Penal  Laws against Catholics (Elizabeth,  in the  2nd  year  of reign, 
1560,  c. 1,  Irish [Statutes,  Vol.  I, p.  275])356  are  applied more  and 
more  from  the  very beginning  of the  reign  of James  I, it 
becoming  dangerous  to practise [Catholicism]. 
Under Elizabeth  2 c. 1, the  FINE  of 12d was  imposed  for  every  NON-ATTENDANCE 
AT PROTESTANT CHURCH  and, in  1605,  under James, imprisonment  was  added  by 
RO.YAL PROCLAMATION  alone  and,  hence, unlawfully. This  did not  help. Besides,  in 
1605  all Catholic priests were ordered  out of  Ireland  in 40  days  on pain  of death. 
SURRENDERS  OF  ESTATES  AND  REGRANTS  (see  Davies, 7b).357 These followed  the 
pronouncement of  TANISTRY  and  GAVELKIND358  as unlawful by the  COURT  OF KINGS 
BENCH359  in the  HILARY TERM  in the  third year  of the  reign  of James  I. A  Royal 
Proclamation stipulated  SURRENDER  [of  estates]  and  REGRANT  under  new  valid titles. 
Most Irish chiefs came forward  to receive incontestable title  at last,  but  this was 
made conditional  on their giving  up the  clan relationship  in favour  of the  English 
LANDLORD-TENANT  relationship (Murphy,  p. 261). 
This in 1605  (see  "Chronology"360). 
PLANTATION OF  ULSTER.According  to  Leland, Irish  UNDERTENANTS  and  SERVANTS 
were  TACITLY EXEMPTED  from  the  OATH  OF  SUPREMACY,  whereas  all the  other 
planters were compelled  to take  it. 
Carte  says 361 that  all  Irish settlers  and the  NATIVES  who  were 
allowed  part  of their land were exempted,  but  this was  irrelevant 
•' Engels took the  reference  to MacGeoghegan's History  of Ireland (Dublin,  1844) 
from Murphy,  pp.  257-58.—  Ed. 

=====第332页=====
300 Frederick Engels 
because it [the taking of the Oath] could not be enforced anyway. 
The Scottish Presbyterians in Ulster also refused to take the  OATH OF 
SUPREMACY,  and this was suffered by the authorities (Murphy, p. 266). 
That may have been useful for the Irish as well. 11 
Carte estimates  the  number  of English settlers  in Ulster  in 1641 at  20,000  and 
of Scottish settlers  at 100,000 (Ormonde,  Vol. I, p.  I77).b 
Sir Arthur Chichester,  LORD DEPUTY,  was  rewarded  for his  services  in this 
PLANTATION  with  the  territory  of Innoshowen  (?) "and all the  lands possessed  by 
O'Dogherty,  a tract  of country  far  exceeding  the  allotments generally made  to 
nothern undertakers" (Leland,  Vol. II, p. 438). As  early  as 1633  these ESTATES 
were valued  at £10,000  per  annum (Strafford's State Letters?  Vol. II, p. 294). 
Chichester  was the  ancestor  of Marquis  of Donegal,  who  would have  had  £300,000 
per-annum  for his  Belfast estate alone,  if one of his  ancestors  had not  surrendered 
it to others under long LEASES (Murphy,  p. 265). 
The  PLANTATION  of Ulster culminated the first period, with a new 
means discovered for confiscation:  DEFECTIVE  TITLES.  This is effective 
under James and Charles, until Cromwell renews the invasion. See 
extracts from Carte [Ormonde],  2 1/b362 
Another nice pretext for confiscation was that 
old Crown rents, long forgotten  by  Crown  and  landowners, were still  due  from 
many  ESTATES.  These were  now  pulled  out and,  wherever unpaid,  the  ESTATE  was 
FORFEITED.  Nor  receipts existed,  and  that  was  enovigh (Murphy,  p. 269). 
Concerning the attempt to confiscate Connaught (see "Chronol­
ogy", and O'Conor, Catholics),363 recall James' dirty trick: 
when  the  people  of Connaught  SURRENDERED  their titles  to a  specially appointed 
ROYAL COMMISSION  in 1616 and had  these  RECONVEYED  BY NEW  PATENTS, THEY 
PAYING  £3,000  FOR THEIR ENROLMENT  IN CHANCERY,  the  titles  were  not  registered.  A 
new commission  was  named  on this pretext  in 1623  to declare them null  and  void  by 
reason  of deliberate default,  an oversight that depended  not on the  landowners  but 
the government. (See Carte, Ormonde, [Vol.  I,] pp. 47 and  48.) In the  meantime, James 
died. 
A COURT  OF  WARDS  for  Ireland  was  established  in 1614;  Carte avers  in 
Ormonde,  Vol. I, p. 517,  that no lawful  BASIS  existed  for it as for  that  in England. 
Meant  to bring  up Catholic heirs  in the  Protestant religion  and  English customs.  Its 
president  was the  goodd  Sir  William Parsons,  who had  helped plan  it.e 
a In the  manuscript  the  last two  sentences  are  written  in the  right-hand, blank 
column, opposite  the  preceding sentence.— Ed. 
b Th.  Carte,  An  History  of the  Life of James, Duke  of Ormonde, from  his  Birth  in 
1610,  to his  Death  in 1688,  London,  1736. For  quoting this work Engels made  use 
of Murphy's book  and of his own  excerpts from it.— Ed. 
c Letters  and  Dispatches, with  an Essay towards  His  Life by  Sir G.  Radcliffe, London, 
Vols.  I-II,  1739.— Ed. 
d The  word "good" does  not  occur  in Murphy.—  Ed. 
e Quoted according  to Murphy,  pp.  269-70  and  277-78.—  Ed. 

=====第333页=====
Varia  on the History  of the  Irish Confiscations  301 
17th Sâeculum.  Charles  I 
That  the  Irish insisted  in the  "GRACES"  364 that "three score years' possession"  (of 
an ESTATE)  "should conclude  His  Majesty's title" was quite understandable,  for  this 
was the  "law  of England" (Strafford, State Letters, Vol.  I, p.  279)  by the Act of the 21st 
year of James' reign (Murphy,  p. 274). 
Yet English  law  applied  to the  Irish only  in so far as it  suited  the 
[English]  Government. 
Strafford wrote  to the  English Secretary  of State  on December  16,  1634, that  in 
his Irish Parliament  "the  Protestants  are the  majority,  and  this may be of  great  use 
to confirm  and  settle  His  Majesty's title  to the  plantations  of Connaught  and 
Ormond;  for this  you may be  sure  of, all the  Protestants  are for  plantations,  all the 
others  are against them;  so as  these, being  the  great number,  you can  want  no help 
they can  give  you  therein.  Nay, in  case there  be no  title  to be  made  out to  these 
countries  in the  crown,  yet  should  not I  despair, forth  of reasons  of state,  and for 
the strength  and  security  of the  Kingdom,  to have them passed  to the  King  by an 
immediate  Act of  Parliament" (State Letters,  Vol. I, p. 353). 
Outside Connaught,  too,  money  was  extorted continuously  on 
pain of  INQUIRY  INTO  TITLES. 
The O'Byrnes  of Wicklow,  for  example, twice paid £15,000  to preserve  a portion 
of their  ESTATES,  while  the  City  of London paid £70,000  to prevent confiscation  of its 
PLANTATIONS  in Colrain  and  Derry  for  alleged breach  of covenant (Leland, Vol.  Ill, 
p. 39). 
The COURT  OF  HIGH  COMMISSION  established by Wentworth in the year 1633, 
after  the  English model,365 "with  the  same formality  and the  same tremendous 
powers" (Leland, Vol.  Ill, p.  29),  and  this naturally without Parliament's consent,  in 
order-"to bring  the  people here  to a  conformity  in religion,  and, in the way to  that, 
raise,  perhaps,  a good revenue  to the  Crown" (January  31, 1633,  State Letters, 
Vol. I, p. 188). The  Court  saw to it  that  all newly-appointed officials, doctors, 
barristers,  etc., and all  those  who  "sued  out  livery  of their estates" should take  the 
OATH  OF  SUPREMACY, 
which, as Macaulay observed, was  A RELIGIOUS  INQUISITION  where that of 
the STAR CHAMBER  was political. 
Then the  CASTLE  CHAMBER,  called  STAR  CHAMBER366  as in England, which, Lord 
Deputy Chichester said,  was "the  proper court  to punish jurors who will  not  find  a 
verdict  for the  King upon good evidence" 
(oft-quoted passage from Desiderata Curiosa  Hibemiae,  Vol. I, 
p. 262 a). 
It is said therein that  the  penalties there employed consisted  in "imprisonment  and 
loss of ears";  and  "fines, pillory, boring through  the  tongue, marking  on the 
forehead with  an iron  and  other infamous punishments" were likewise applied,  as is 
stated  in the  indictment  of Strafford (Murphy,  p. 279). 
When Strafford went  to Connaught  in 1635,  he took with  him  4,000  HORSE  "as 
good lookers  on,  while  the  plantations were settling" (Strafford, State Letters,  Vol. I, 
Quoted according  to Murphy against  p. 279.—  Ed. 

=====第334页=====
302 Frederick Engels 
p. 454).  In Galway  he imposed fines  not  only  on the  jury that would  not  find a 
verdict  for  the Crown, but also on the sheriff "for returning so insufficient, indeed, 
we conceive,  so packed  a Jury,  in £1,000  to His  Majesty" ([State Letters], August 
1635,  Vol.  I, p. 451). 
By the  28th  of  Henry VIII,  c. 5, 6 and 13, all  recourse  to the  Pope's 
jurisdiction was prohibited and  all Irish came under the Protestant  ECCLESIASTICAL 
COURTS,  whose verdict could  be  appealed against  to the  King alone. They took 
cognizance  of all  marriages, baptisms, burials, wills,  and  ADMINISTRATIONS,  and 
punished  RECUSANTS  FOR  NON-ATTENDANCE  AT  CHURCH  under the 2nd of 
Elizabeth,  c. 2, and  also collected  the  tithes. Bishop Burnet (Life  of Dr. Bedell, 
Bishop  of Kilmore,  p. 89)a said these courts "were often managed  by a  chancellor 
that bought his place, and  so thought  he had a right  to all the  profits  he could make 
out of it. And  their whole business seemed  to be  nothing  but  oppression  and 
extortion....  The  officers  of the  court thought they  had a  sort of right  to oppress 
the natives, and that  all was well  got  that was  wrung from them  ... they made  it 
their business  to draw people into trouble  by vexatious suits,  and to  hold them  so 
long in that,  for 3d  worth  of the tithe  of turf,  they would  be put to a  £5 charge". 
In the  "GRACES", which never materialised, 
Protestant clergymen were  to have been forbidden "to keep private prisons  of their 
own"  for  spiritual offences,  so that offenders should  be committed  to the  King's 
public gaols (Murphy,  p. 281). 
About  the  Protestant clergy  see  Spenser, excerpt  5a.367 
Borlase  and  Parsons encouraged  the  rebellion everywhere. According  to Lord 
Castlehaven's Memoirs,h they said:  "The  more rebels,  the  more confiscations." 
Leland (Vol.  Ill, p.  161), too, observes that,  as before, "extensive forfeitures were 
the favourite object  of the  chief governors  and  their friends". 
By that time,  the  Irish Royalist army was  to have been 50,000 strong through 
reinforcement from England  and  Scotland. 
See Carte, Ormonde, Vol.  Ill, p.  61, for the  instructions  lo the  army.368 
The motto  of the  Kilkenny Confederates36 " was: Pro deo,  pro  rege, et patria 
Hibernia unanimes 1' (Borlase, Irish Rebellion,  p. 128) (1 
— so that is where  the  Prussians lifted  it from. 
17th Saeculum. Cromwell 
Drogheda  MASSACRE.370  After  a successful assault "quarter had been promised  to 
all who should lay down their arms—a promise observed until  all resistance was  at 
an end. But at the  moment that  the  city was  completely reduced, Cromwell  ... 
issued  his  fatal orders that  the  garrison should  be put to the  sword.  His  soldiers, 
a G. Burnet,  The  Life of William Bedell, Bishop  of Kilmore  in Ireland..,  London, 
1685.  Quoted according  to Murphy's book,  p. 280.— Ed. 
h The  Memoirs  of James Touchet  ... Earl  of Castlehaven... Quoted according  to 
Murphy,  p. 288.—  Ed. 
c For  God, King  and  Ireland unanimous.— Ed. 
d Ed. Borlase, The History of the Execrable Irish Rebellion..., London, 1680. Quoted 
from Murphy,  p. 289.— Ed. 

=====第335页=====
Varia  on the History  of the  Irish Confiscations 303 
many  of them with reluctance, butchered  the  prisoners.  The  governor  and all his 
gallant officers, betrayed  to slaughter  by the  cowardice  of some  of their troops, 
were massacred without mercy.  For  five days this hideous execution  was  continued 
with every circumstance  of horror" (Leland,  Vol. Ill, p. 350). A  number  of 
ECCLESIASTICS  found within  the  walls were bayoneted. "Thirty persons only remained 
unslaughtered  ... and  these were instantly transported  as slaves  to Barbadoes" 
([Leland,  Vol. Ill,] p. 350). 
Petty (Political Anatomy, Dublin edition  of Petty's tracts,  pp.  312-15)a estimates 
that 112,000 British  and  504,000 Irish inhabitants  of Ireland died  in the war of 
1641-52.  In 1653,  SOLDIERS' DEBENTURES371  were sold  at 4/- to 5/- in the  pound,  so 
that with  20/-  being  the  price [nominal]  of 2  acres  of land,  and  there being  8 
million acres  of good land  in Ireland,  all Ireland  was  purchasable  for £1  million, 
though  in 1641 it was  worth  £8 million. Petty estimates  the  value  of the  livestock  in 
Ireland  in 1641  at £4  million,  and in  1652  at less than £500,000 so that Dublin  had to 
get meat from Wales. Corn  was  12/- per  BARREL  in 1641  and  50/-  in 1652.  The  houses 
of Ireland, worth  £2 million  in 1641,  were worth less than £500,000  in 1653. h 
Leland,  too,  admits  in Vol. Ill, p. 166,  that "the  favourite idea  of both  the  Irish 
Government  and the  English Parliament" (from  1642  onwards)  "was the  utter 
extermination  of all the  Catholics  of Ireland". 
See Lingard (Vol.  VII, 4th ed., p. 102, note) on the transportation of Irish  as slaves  to 
the West Indies (figures vary from 6,000  to 100,000).  Of the  1,000 boys  and 1,000  girls 
to be sent  to Jamaica,  the  commissioners wrote  in 1655: "Although  we must use force 
in taking them  up, yet it is so  much  for their  own  good  and  likely  to be of  such great 
advantage  to the  public, that  you  may have such number  of them  as you shall think  fit" 
(Thurloe,  Vol. IV, p. 23). d 
By the  first  ACT OF  SETTLEMENT,  the  forfeiture  of 2/3 of  their estates  had  been 
pronounced against those  who had  borne arms against  the  Parliament  and 1/3 of 
their estates against those  who had  resided  in Ireland  any  time from October  1, 
1649 to March 1, 1650 and had not manifested their  CONSTANT GOOD AFFECTION  to 
Parliament.  The  Parliament  had  power  to give them,  in lieu thereof,  other lands  to 
the proportion  of value  thereof.  The  second  Act  concerned resettlement 
(see Prendergast,e Excerpts,  VII,  1 a372). 
Distribution  of land  to soldiers  was  limited  to those  who had  served under 
Cromwell from  1649  (Murphy,  p. 302). 
See Carte, Ormonde,  Vol. II, p. 301,  about some cases  of land surveying, 
especially by  ADVENTURERS.373 
According  to Leland  (Vol. Ill, p. 397), the  Commissioners  in Dublin  and 
Athlone kept considerable domains  for  themselves. 
A PLANTATION ACRE=1 ACRE  2 ROODS  19 PERCHES  5 YARDS  and 2 x/4  FEET IMPERIAL 
STATUTE  measure, or 121  PLANTATION  acres=196  STATUTE ACRES  (Murphy, p. 302). 
a W.  Petty,  The  Political Anatomy  of Ireland  In:  Tracts; Chiefly Relating to  Ireland, 
Dublin, 1769.— Ed. 
b The  last two  paragraphs  are  excerpts from Murphy's book,  pp.  292-94.— Ed 
c J. Lingard,  A History  of England, from  the  First Invasion  by the  Romans, 
Vols.  I-VIII, London, 1819-30.—  Ed. 
d A Collection  of the  State Papers  of John Thurloe, Esq.;... Containing Authentic 
Memorials..., Vols.I-VII, London,  1742.  Quoted from Murphy's book,  p. 298.—  Ed. 
e J. P.  Prendergast,  The  Cromwellian Settlement  of Ireland,  London, 1865.—  Ed. 
12-733 

=====第336页=====
304 Frederick Engels 
17th Saeculum. Charles  II 
A result  of confiscations under Cromwell  and  Charles  II. 
The 7,708,238  STATUTE ACRES  confiscated  by Cromwell were distributed finally,  by 
1675,  as follows: 
STATUTE ACRES 
1) To Englishmen 
ADVENTURERS  787,326 
SOLDIERS  2,385,915 
"FORTY-NINE" OFFICERS 450,380 
DUKE  OF  YORK 169,431 
PROVISORS  477,873 
DUKE  OF  ORMOND AND COLONEL BUTLER  257,516 
BISHOPS'AUGMENTATIONS 31,596 
4,560,037 
2) To Irishmen 
DECREES  OF INNOCENCE 1,176,520 
PROVISORS  491,001 
KING'S LETTERS  OF  RESTITUTION 46,398 
NOMINEES  IN POSSESSION 68,360 
TRANSPLANTATION 541,530 
2,323,809 
Remaining still unappropriated  in 1675,  being 
part of towns  or land possessed  by 
English  or Irish without title  or DOUBTFUL  824,392 
[Total in] Statute  acres  7,708,238 
On "Forty-Nine" officers  see  O'Conor  and  Notes.374 
THE DUKE  OF  YORK3  received  a GRANT  of all the  lands handed over  to the 
ATTAINTED REGICIDES.*3  "Provisors were persons  in whose favour provisoes  had  been 
made  by the  Acts  of Settlement [1662]  and of  Explanation. Nominees were  the 
Catholics named  by the  King restored  to  their mansions  and  2,000 acres 
contiguous." 
At that time  the profitable lands  of Ireland  = 2/3 of  all land,  or 12,500,000  STATUTE 
ACRES.  Of the  rest, considerable tracts were occupied without title  by soldiers  and 
ADVENTURERS.  In 1675, the  12  l/2 million  ACRES  of arable land were distributed  as 
follows: 
"Granted  to English Protestants  of profitable land forfeited 
under the Commonwealth 4,560,037 
Previously possessed  by English Protestant Colonists  and by 
the Church 3,900,000 
Granted  to the Irish 2,323,809 
a James Stuart, future James II.—  Ed. 
b The  reference  is to  those  who  were associated with  the  execution  of 
Charles I.—  Ed. 

=====第337页=====
Varia  on the History  of the  Irish Confiscations 305 
Previously possessed by 'good affectioned' Irish 600,000 
Unappropriated as above 824,391 
STATUTE ACRES  12,208,237" 
[This table] was compiled  by  Murphy3; 
the figure  of  3,900,000 acres  was  taken from  the  ACCOUNT PUBLISHED BY THE 
CROMWELLIAN PROPRIETORS  and  the  rest on  the basis  of the Grace Manuscript quoted 
by Lingard and the  REPORT  OF THE  COMMISSIONERS  TO THE  ENGLISH HOUSE  OF 
COMMONS,  December 15, 1699.  It accords with Petty (Political Anatomy), who wrote: 
"Of the whole 7,500,000 plantation acres  of good land (in Ireland) the English and 
Protestants  and the  Church have this Christmas (1672) 5,140,000 (=8,352,500 
statute acres) and the Irish have near half as much" (Murphy, pp. 314 and 315). 
(On the  confiscations  of William  see p. 18.b) 
17th Saeculum. William  III375 
By the  ACTS  OF  SETTLEMENT  AND  EXPLANATION, 
2,323,809  STATUTE ACRES  were granted  to the 
Irish, they having 600,000 previously  in their 
possession, totalling 2,923,809 
STATUTE 
ACRES 
Of these lands, 1,060,792  PLANTATION ACRES  were 
escheated under William worth £211,623  6s 3d. 
per annum  (REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE 
HOUSE OF COMMONS  1699)  1,723,787 
STATUTE 
ACRES 
[There remain] 1,200,022 
STATUTE 
ACRES 
or as Murphy calculated0 (he probably erred when 1,240,022 
subtracting?)  STATUTE 
ACRES 
a J. N.  Murphy, op. cit., pp. 313-15.— Ed. 
b P. 17 in the manuscript;  it contains only the heading "17. Saeculum, Charles  II, 
James II".— Ed. 
c J. N.  Murphy, op. cit.,  pp. 317-18.— Ed. 
12* 

=====第338页=====
306 Frederick Engels 
In addition, 
RESTITUTED  BY  SPECIAL FAVOUR  OF THE  KING 
ON PARDONING  (65 persons) 125,000 
STATUTE 
ACRES 
the COURT OF CLAIMS RESTORED  (792 persons) 388,500 
STATUTE 
ACRES 
[Total] 513,500 
STATUTE 
ACRES 
Making the total still in Irish hands  1,753,522  a 
STATUTE 
ACRES 
Compiled  by  Murphy  on the  basis  of the  REPORT  OF THE 
COMMISSIONERS OF THE HOUSE  OF  COMMONS (ENGLISH)  in  DECEMBER  1699. 
Written  in March  1870  Printed according  to the  manu­
script First published  in Marx-Engels Archives, 
Russian edition, Vol.  X, Moscow,  1948 
a Engels points out that Murphy may have erred in his calculation by 40,000 acres, 
in which case  the  total would have been 1,713,522.— Ed. 

=====第339页=====
307 
Frederick Engels 
PLAN FOR THE HISTORY OF IRELAND 
1. Natural conditions. 
2. Old Ireland 
3. English conquests. 
1) First invasion. 
2) PALE AND IRISHRY. 
3) Subjugation and expropriation. 152...a-1691. 
4. English rule. 
1) PENAL LAWS.  1691-1780. 
2) Rebellion and Union. 1780-1801. 
3) Ireland in the United Kingdom. 
a) The period of the small peasants. 1801-1846. 
b) The period of extermination. 1846-1870. 
First published in Marx-Engels Archives, Printed according to the manu-
Russian edition, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 script 
a The last figure is missing in the manuscript.— Ed. 

=====第340页=====
308 
Frederick Engels 
[PLAN OF CHAPTER TWO AND FRAGMENTS 
FOR THE HISTORY OF IRELAND] 377 
Old Ireland I. Sources. 1) The ancients. 2) Irish 
literature, buildings and inscriptions. 
3) Foreign sources: the Scandina­
vians,  St. Bernard, Giraldus.— 
4) Later sources, especially late 16th 
century.a 
II a. Race and language. Legends about 
the invaders. Information from the 
ancients. What can be deduced 
about Irish literature from the laws, 
Gifaldus and later sources, 
b. The clan system, landownership, 
laws. 
Ill a. Introduction of Christianity. Ir[ish] 
missionaries and scholars. J. Scotus 
Erig[ena]. 
b. Danish period, etc., up to invasion. 
System of government at this time. 
Ad I 
[Ad II] a. Senchus Mor, XI.b Giraldus.— 
Spenser, Davies, Camden, Campion, 
etc., Ledwich. 378 
b. N[ennius], Brit.c  S[enchus] M[or], XI 
and orig[ina]l. Cf. also Ledwich. 
a This paragraph is crossed out in the manuscript.— Ed. 
b Engels refers to his notebook containing excerpts from Senchus  Mor.—Ed. 
c Nennius, Historia Britonum, London, 1819.— Ed. 

=====第341页=====
Plan of Chapter Two and Fragments for The History of Ireland 309 
Ad III T. Moore, II, pp. 9 ff and 
orig[ina]l. Chron[ology]. Gordon.3 
Hegel, Geschichte der Philosophie. — 
Danica. 
Tigernach (Tierna) the ANNALIST died in 1088 according to the 
Annals of the Four Masters. 
The Annals of the Four Masters compiled in the 17th century by 
M. O'Clary and 3 others from ancient Irish annals.b 
The Annals of Ulster exist in a manuscript dated 1215. 
Poet-chroniclers, mainly 9th-llth centuries. 
An eclipse of the sun correctly recorded by Irish chroniclers on 
May 3, 664 (in Tigernach). 
Irish chiefs of all ranks constantly waged war not only among 
themselves but also with their superior princes as well as the 
nominal king. 
The TANIST is believed to have been both chief commander and 
chief judge, that is very powerful against the king. His title 
(supreme king) Righ-damnha=  rex in fieri,c but minor chiefs also had 
their  TANISTS. 
1 J. Gordon, A History of  the Rebellion in Ireland in 1789, Dublin, 1801; A History  of 
Ireland...,  Dublin, 1805.— Ed. 
b See This volume, p.  173.—  Ed. 
c Future king.— Ed. 

=====第342页=====
310 Frederick Engels 
The hierarchical relations; between princes in Ireland are 
believed only to have involved tributes, COSHERY,379 BONAGHTY but by no 
means military service. 
The supremacy of the kings of Meath and the chroniclers' 
triennial national assembly in Tnamor (Tara) seems to have only 
existed on paper, it might have been enforced from time to time 
but always lapsed again. 
The land allocated to the chief of the clan was not divided (ditto 
that belonging to soldiers, priests, singers, chroniclers). The 
remaining land owned by the clan and could be divided up. 
With communal property the right of inheritance of illegitimate 
sons—in the whole clan—was unquestioned. Gavelkind: Davies 
(p. 136) describes the division of land "TO EACH ACCORDING TO HIS 
ANTIQUITY*' (i.e. his traditional rank in the clan),a which in Moore (Vol. 
I, p. 177)b has already been turned into SENIORITY! 
According to an obscure tradition the Milesians or Scots did not 
apparently practise any crafts until Tuathal died in A. D. 164; 
from then on, however, they did as a result of his [restoration] 
expulsion in 126 by the Plebeians (attacots-attach-tuatha translated 
by O'Reilly as Plebeians). In any case [from] at the time of the 
invasion all traces of the ruling race had disappeared although the 
families of the chiefs may have been Scottish. The first Plebeian 
war A. D.  90.—  In both cases the legitimate Scottish family finally 
regained power. 
There are some Irish poems, believed to date back to the earliest 
days of the Milesians, which in the manuscript c have notes in 
between the lines. Without them they are incomprehensible, but 
;l J. Davies, Historical Tracts, London, 1786.— Ed. 
h Th. Moore, The History of  Ireland,  Vol. I, Paris, 1835.— Ed. 
' Engels refers to the judicial collection Senchus  Mor.—Ed. 

=====第343页=====
Plan of Chapter Two and Fragments for The History of Ireland 311 
even the notes are in a very obsolete language and very difficult to 
understand. 
Hereditable positions in families (i.e. not all of them, only 
certain ones). Thus in Camden's time, and later too, the 
O'Cullinan family in Cork constantly had one or more doctors, 
and people used to say that if someone had resigned himself to 
death not even an O'Cullinan could cure him. Similarly with 
herolds, bards, musicians (and Seanachiesa). This natural consider­
ing the land allocated to them. 
Slaves and slave trade. 
Johannes Scotus Erigena. 
The oldest Irish manuscripts late 9th century, and the oldest 
songs occur as SINGLE FRAGMENTS in the annals; these appear more 
frequently from the 6th century. 
In the BREHON LAWS all fines were expressed in livestock, that 
means there was still no money as yet. 
There are still numerous manuscripts in existence bearing on 
the BREHON LAWS. 
St. Bernard was never in Ireland. 
11 Chroniclers.— Ed. 

=====第344页=====
312 Frederick Engels 
In Ireland in ancient times boats were made of wickerwork 
covered in skins; after 1810 these were still the only kind of boats 
on the west coast, cf. Wakefield, 3 XII, p. 6,b where the passages 
from Pliny and Solinus are also to be found. 
Irish literature?—17th century, poetry, historical] and juridical 
literature],  then completely suppressed due to the eradication of 
the Irish literary language—exists only in manuscript—publication is 
only just beginning—this is [possible] only with a downtrodden 
people. See Serbs, etc. 
The English have been able to reconcile people of the most 
diverse races to their rule. The Welsh, who cling so strongly to 
their nationality and their language, have been completely 
integrated into the British Empire. The Scottish Celts, although 
rebellious until 1745,380 and since then almost exterminated, first 
by the government and later by their own aristocracy, have no 
thought of rebellion. The French of the Channel Islands fought 
bitterly against France even during the Great Revolution. And 
even the Frisians of Heligoland,381 sold to England by Denmark, 
are content with their lot, and it will surely be a long time before 
the laurels of Sadowa and the achievements of the North-German 
Confederation382 arouse in them the agonised cry for unification 
with the great Fatherland. Only the Irish have proved too much 
for the English to cope with. The tremendous resilience of the 
Irish race is to blame for this. Despite the most savage 
suppression, shortly after each attempt to wipe them out the Irish 
stood stronger than ever before. Indeed, they drew their main 
strength from the foreign garrison imposed on them to subdue 
them. Within the lifetime of two generations, often of one, the 
foreigners had become more Irish than the Irish themselves, 
Hiberniores ipsis Hibernis; and the more they adopted the English 
language and forgot Irish, the more Irish they became. 
a Ed. Wakefield, An Account of  Ireland.  Statistical and Political, Vols. I-II, 
London, 1812.— Ed. 
b Engels refers to his notebook containing excerpts from Wakefield.— Ed. 

=====第345页=====
Plan of Chapter Two and Fragments for The History of Ireland 313 
The bourgeoisie turns everything into a commodity, hence also 
the writing of history. It is in its nature, a condition of its 
existence, to falsify all commodities: it falsified history. And the 
version of history which is most highly paid is that which is best 
falsified for the purposes of the bourgeoisie. Teste Macaulay,3 who 
is therefore the unattainable model of the less skilled G. Smith. 
QUEENS  EVIDENCE.— REWARDS FOR EVIDENCE. 
England is the only country where the state openly dares to 
bribe witnesses, be it by an offer of exemption from punishment, 
or by ready cash. That prices are fixed for the betrayal of the 
whereabouts of a victim of persecution is comprehensible, but that 
they say: who gives me evidence on the strength of which someone 
can be sentenced as the perpetrator of some crime or another— 
this infamy is something not only the Code,b but also Pr[ussian] 
common law have left to Eng[lish] law. That COLLATERAL EVIDENCE is 
required alongside that given by the informer changes 
nothing; as a rule there is evidence for somebody to be suspected, 
or else it is fabricated, and the informer only has to adjust his lies 
accordingly. 
Whether this pretty usage has its roots already in Eng[lish] legal 
proceedings is hard to say, but it is certain that it has received its 
development on Irish soil at the time of the Tories383 and the penal 
laws. 
On March 15, 1870, when the government sought to justify the 
removal of an Irish sheriff (Coote of Monaghan) by arguing that 
he had packed the jury panel, G. H. Moore, M. P. for Mayo, said 
in Parliamentc: 
* "If Capt. Coote had done all the things of which he had been accused, he had 
only followed the practice which, in political cases, had been habitually sanctioned 
by the Institute Executive." 
As one instance out of many that might be cited, he would 
mention that though County Cork had a proportion of 500,000 
a Macaulay, The History of England from the Accession of James the  Second,  London, 
1862.—  Ed. 
b Code Napoléon, Paris, Leipzig, 1808.— Ed. 
c Moore spoke in the House of Commons on March 14, 1870. See The Times, 
No. 26699, March 15, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第346页=====
314 Frederick Engels 
Catholics against 50,000 Protestants, at the time of the Fenian trials in 
1865,3S4 a jury panel was  called,  composed of 360 Protestants and 40 
Catholics! * 
The German Legion of 1806-13 was also sent to Ireland. Thus, 
the good Hanoverians who refused to put up with French 
[bondage] rule, were used by the English to preserve English rule in 
Ireland! 
The agrarian murders in Ireland cannot be suppressed because 
and as long as they are the sole effective weapon against the 
extermination of the people by the landlords. They help, which is 
why they persist, and will persist, despite all coercive laws. 
Quantitatively they fluctuate, as do all social phenomena; at times 
they may even become epidemic, occurring on quite insignificant 
occasions. The epidemic can be suppressed, but not the disease 
itself. 
Dublin botanical gardens—total absence of protection for the 
flowers and yet no abuse on the part of the public as in 
England—Churchyard in Glasnevin like no other in England. 
THE ENGLISH LADY. There is no creature more superfluous and 
useless on earth. Custom, education and inclination exclude her 
from all the truly intellectual aspects of life, whereas THE  FRIVOLITIES 
OF LIFE, or at the most dabbling with serious matters, make up the 
entire content of her life and are alone taken seriously by her. 
Written in 1869-70 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in Marx-Engels Archives, 
Russian edition, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 

=====第347页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第348页=====

=====第349页=====
317 
RECORD OF A SPEECH ON THE IRISH QUESTION 
DELIVERED BY KARL MARX 
TO THE GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY 
IN LONDON ON DECEMBER 16, 1867385 
On December 16, Karl Marx delivered a lecture to the London 
German Workers' Educational Society on the conditions in 
Ireland, in which he showed that all attempts of the English 
government to Anglicise the Irish population in past centuries had 
ended in failure. The English, including aristocrats, who immig­
rated before the Reformation386 were transformed into Irishmen 
by their Irish wives, and their descendants fought against England. 
The brutalities of the war against the Irish under Queen 
Elizabeth, the destruction of crops and the displacement of the 
population from one area to another to make room for English 
colonists did not change anything in this respect. At that time, 
GENTLEMEN and MERCHANT ADVENTURERS received large plots of land on 
condition that they would be colonised by English people. In 
Cromwell's time, the descendants of these colonists fought with the 
Irish against the English. Cromwell sold many of them as slaves in 
the West Indies.3 Under the Restoration,387 Ireland received many 
favours. Under William III, a class came to power which only 
wanted to make money, and Irish industry was suppressed in 
order to force the Irish to sell their raw materials to England at 
any price. With the help of the Protestant Penal Laws,388 the new 
aristocrats received freedom of action under Queen Anne. The 
Irish Parliament389 was an instrument of oppression. Catholics 
were not allowed to hold public office, could not be landowners, 
were not allowed to make wills, could not claim an inheritance; to 
be a Catholic bishop was high treason. All these were means for 
robbing the Irish of their land; yet more than half of the English 
See this volume, pp. 288-89.— Ed. 

=====第350页=====
318 Appendices 
descendants in Ulster have remained Catholic. The people were 
driven into the arms of the Catholic clergy, who thus became 
powerful. All that the English government succeeded in doing was to 
plant an aristocracy in Ireland. The towns built by the English have 
become Irish. That is why there are so many English names among 
the Fenians. 
During the American War of Independence the reins were 
loosened a little. Further concessions had to be granted during the 
French Revolution. Ireland rose so quickly that her people 
threatened to outstrip the English. The English government drove 
them to rebellion and achieved the Union390 by bribery. The 
Union delivered the death blow to reviving Irish industry. On one 
occasion Meagher said: all Irish branches of industry have been 
destroyed, all we have been left is the making of coffins. It became 
a vital necessity to have land; the big landowners leased their lands 
to speculators; land passed through four or five lease stages before 
it reached the peasant, and this made prices disproportionately 
high. The agrarian population lived on potatoes and water; wheat 
and meat were sent to England; the rent was eaten up in London, 
Paris and Florence. In 1836, £7,000,000 was sent abroad to absent 
landowners. Fertilisers were exported with the produce and rent, 
and the soil was exhausted. Famine often set in here and there, 
and owing to the potato blight there was a general famine in 1846. 
A million people starved to death. The potato blight resulted from 
the exhaustion of the soil, it was a product of English rule. 
Through the repeal of the Corn Laws Ireland lost her 
monopoly position on the English market, the old rent could no 
longer be paid. High prices of meat and the bankruptcy of the 
remaining small landowners further contributed to the eviction of 
the small peasants and the transformation of their land into sheep 
pastures. Over half a million acres of arable land have not been 
tilled since 1860. The yield per acre has dropped: oats by 16 per 
cent, flax by 36 per cent, potatoes by 50 per cent. At present only 
oats are cultivated for the English market, and wheat is imported. 
With the exhaustion of the soil, the population has deteriorated 
physically. There has been an absolute increase in the number of 
lame, blind, deaf and dumb, and insane in the decreasing 
population. 
Over  1,100,000  people have been replaced by 9,600,000 
sheep. This is a thing unheard of in Europe. The Russians replace 
evicted Poles with Russians, not with sheep. Only under the 
Mongols in China was there once a discussion whether towns 
should be destroyed to make room for sheep. 

=====第351页=====
Appendices 319 
The Irish question is therefore not simply a question of 
nationality, but a question of land and existence. Ruin or revolution 
is the watchword; all the Irish are convinced that if anything is to 
happen at all it must happen quickly. The English should demand 
separation and leave it to the Irish themselves to decide the question 
of landownership. Everything else would be useless. If that does not 
happen soon the Irish emigration will lead to a war with America. 
The domination over Ireland at present amounts to collecting rent 
for the English aristocracy. 
First published in Marx and Engels, Printed according to Eccarius' 
Collected Works, Second Russian Edition, manuscript 
Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960 

=====第352页=====
320 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON CHANGING 
THE PLACE OF THE CONGRESS 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL IN 1868 
FROM NEWSPAPER REPORTS 
OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETINGS 
OF MAY 26 AND JUNE 16, 1868391 
[May 26, 1868] 
Notice of motion was given that a resolution should be moved 
on Tuesday next3 to cancel the resolution of the last congress15 
appointing Brussels as the place of meeting for the next congress, 
and that London be appointed instead.0 
The Council considers it incompatible with the honour and 
dignity of the Association to assemble a congress, surrounded, as it 
would be, by French spies, and in a country whose Government is 
capable of committing such wanton outrages as have been 
perpetrated against the half-starved miners of Charleroi.392 
[June 16, 1868] 
The mover of the resolutionsd then stated, that besides the 
foregoing assurances things had transpired since he had given 
notice which compelled the Council to abstain from revoking the 
vote of the Laussane Congress.393 The Belgian section had already 
taken action. M. Bara, the Minister of Justice, was reported to 
have said in the Chamber of Deputies, that he would not permit 
the Congress to assemblee; in a remonstrance signed by all the 
members of the Brussels committee and the executive of the Free 
a June  2.—Ed. 
b In Lausanne.— Ed. 
c For the text of the resolution, tabled by Marx, see this volume, p. 6.— Ed. 
d Karl Marx.— Ed. 
e J. Bara, Speech in the Chamber of Deputies on May 16, 1868, La Liberté, 
No. 47, May 17, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第353页=====
Appendices 321 
Workmen— an affiliated political society of Verviers, the resident 
members of the Association had declared that "in spite of all the 
vain rhodomontade of the Minister of Justice, the International 
Congress should be held at Brussels". 3 The question, therefore, 
was strictly one of resistance of the Belgian working men against 
the police regulations of their government, with which the Council 
had no right to interfere. He should, therefore, withdraw his 
resolutions.b 
First published in The Bee-Hive News- Reproduced from the newspaper 
paper, Nos. 346 and 349, May 30 and 
June 20, 1868 
a La Tribune du peuple, No. 5, May 24, 1868.— Ed. 
b The newspaper report further has: "which met with general approval, several 
members declaring that only the altered state of the case had changed their 
opinion".— Ed. 
i 

=====第354页=====
322 
Wilhelm Eichhoff 
THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
ITS ESTABLISHMENT, ORGANISATION, POLITICAL 
AND SOCIAL ACTIVITY, AND GROWTH 394 
1. FOUNDATION OF THE ASSOCIATION 
The immediate motive for the foundation of the International 
Working Men's Association was the latest Polish insurrection. The 
London workers sent a deputation to Lord Palmerston with an 
appeal in which they called on him to intervene on behalf of 
Poland. At the same time, they issued an address to the workmen 
of Paris, calling on them to take joint action.3 The Parisians 
responded by sending delegates to London. To welcome them, a 
public meeting gathered at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, on 
September 28, 1864, at which Britons, Germans, Frenchmen, Poles 
and Italians were represented in large numbers. 
This meeting gave birth to the International Working Men's 
Association. Apart from the political purpose for which the 
meeting was called, it also raised the subject of general 
social conditions. It revealed that workmen of all nations had the 
same grievances, that they were subjected to the same basic evils in 
all countries. It showed that the interests of all of them coincided. 
It elected a provisional Central Council, later renamed the General 
Council,0 which made its seat in London and was composed of 
various nationalities. The Council was provisionally entrusted with 
the central administration of the future Association, the publication 
of the Inaugural Address (a kind of programme), and the drafting of 
the Provisional Rules.c 
a "Address of English to French Workmen", The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 112, 
December 5,  1863.—  Ed. 
b In the German original the name of the General Council is given in brackets 
in English and French after the German equivalent.— Ed. 
c K. Marx, "Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association", 
"Provisional Rules of the Association".— Ed. 

=====第355页=====
Appendices 323 
Unanimity and enthusiasm reigned at the meeting. Each nation 
was represented by men who did it honour. As a result, the. 
English workers, who had fought the ruling classes independently 
of, and uninfluenced by, the political and social movements of the 
rest of Europe since 1824, when the legislature was compelled to 
grant them the right of association,395 now came out of their 
national isolation for the first time and agreed with the workmen 
of all nations on the necessity for joint action. Hence the enthusiasm: 
the gathering was aware that it was ringing in a new era in the 
workers' movement. 
2. DIFFICULTIES IN THE INITIAL PERIOD 
OF THE ASSOCIATION 
New movements are not created overnight even if they are 
called upon to fill a pressing need of the times. To begin with, it is 
essential to steer clear of reefs on which new organisations have 
foundered so often before or which have, at the very least, 
diverted them from their original and true goal, for representa­
tives of declining forms of the movement join the new one to 
make it a vehicle of the old. This was the case here, too. The 
Italian members of the provisional Central Council were followers 
of Mazzini. They laid before the Central Council a draft of the 
Inaugural Address and the Provisional Rules396 drawn up by 
Mazzini  himself.  In his address, Mazzini repeated his old political 
programme garnished with a bit of socialist phraseology. He 
thundered against the class struggle. His Rules were formulated 
in a strictly centralised manner fit for secret political societies. 
From the start they would have destroyed the very basis of an 
international working men's association which was not conceived 
to create a movement but only to unite and weld together the 
already existing and dispersed class movement of various coun­
tries. 
Mazzini's name was in high repute at the time among the 
English workers, notably since Garibaldi's triumphant visit to 
London.397 Mazzini was therefore fairly confident that he would 
be able to take charge of the International Working Men's 
Association. But he had reckoned without his host. Karl Marx, 
who had been elected to the provisional Central Council at the 
meeting in St. Martin's Hall, submitted his drafts of the Inaugural 
Address and Provisional Rules in opposition to Mazzini's. Both 

=====第356页=====
324 Appendices 
of his drafts were unanimously adopted and published, and the 
Provisional Rules later won final acceptance at the Geneva 
Congress in 1866.a 
It was therefore a German who gave the International Working 
Men's Association its definite tendency and organisational princi­
ples.  And we might also note that the Central Council in London 
has repeatedly been confirmed in its functions. 
3. THE INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF KARL MARX™8 
In the closest possible translation of the English original, the 
Address reads as follows: 
Working Men, 
It is a great fact that the misery of the working classes has not 
diminished from 1848 to 1864, and yet this period is unrivalled in 
the annals of history for the development of its industry and the 
growth of its commerce. In 1850, a moderate organ of the British 
bourgeoisie, seemingly of more than average information, pre­
dicted that if the exports and imports of England were to rise 50 
per cent, English pauperism would sink to zero.399 Alas! On April 
7th, 1864, Mr. Gladstone}3 the British Chancellor of the Exche­
quer, delighted his audiencec by the statement that the total 
import and export trade of England had grown in 1863 to 
£443,955,000, which amounted to about three times the trade of 
the comparatively recent epoch of 1843. With all that, he was 
compelled to refer to the social misery. He had to speak of those 
who were on the border of starvation, of wages that had not 
increased by a single penny, of human life that was in nine cases 
out of ten but a daily struggle for existence.d He did not speak of 
the people of Ireland, gradually replaced by machinery in the 
north, and by sheep-walks in the south, though even the sheep in 
that unhappy country are decreasing, it is true, not at so rapid a 
rate as the men. He did not repeat what then had been just 
betrayed by the highest representatives of the upper ten thousand 
a Status de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs votés à la séance du 
5 septembre  au Congrès de Genève. In: Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Statuts et 
Règlements, London, 1866.— Ed. 
b "Mr. Gladstone" does not occur in the original English text.— Ed. 
c The original English text has "Parliamentary audience".— Ed. 
d In the original English text this passage from Gladstone's address is given in 
direct speech.— Ed. 

=====第357页=====
Appendices 325 
in a sudden fit of terror. When the garotte panic400 had reached a 
certain height, the House of Lords caused an inquiry to be made 
into,  and a report to be published upon, transportation and penal 
servitude. Out came the murder in the bulky Blue Book of 
1863, a401 and proved it was, by official facts and figures, that the 
worst of the convicted criminals, the penal serfs of England and 
Scotland, toiled much less and fared far better than the 
agricultural labourers of England and Scotland. But this was not 
all. When, consequent upon the Civil War in America, the 
operatives of Lancashire and Cheshire were thrown upon the 
streets, the same House of Lords sent to the manufacturing 
districts a physician commissioned to investigate into the smallest 
possible amount of carbon and nitrogen, to be administered in the 
cheapest and plainest form, which might just suffice to avert 
starvation diseases. Dr. Smith, the medical commissioner of 
Parliament, ascertained that 28,000 grains of carbon, and 1,330 
grains of nitrogen were the weekly allowance that would just about 
be enough to keep an average adult over the level of starvation 
diseases, and he found furthermore that this quantity pretty 
nearly agreed with the scanty nourishment to which the pressure 
of extreme distress had actually reduced the poor cotton 
operatives.* But that is not all. The same learned Doctor was later 
on again deputed by the governmentb to inquire into the 
nourishment of the poorer part of the working class. The results 
of his researches are contained in the "Sixth Report on Public 
Health", published by order of Parliament in the course of the 
present year (1864).c What did the Doctor discover? That the silk 
weavers, the needle women, the kid glovers, the stocking weavers, 
and other workers, received, on an average, not even the distress 
pittance of the cotton operatives, not even the amount of carbon 
and nitrogen "just sufficient to avert starvation diseases". 
* We need hardly remind the reader that, apart from the elements of water 
and certain inorganic substances, carbon and nitrogen form the raw materials of 
human food. However, to nourish the human system, those simple chemical 
constituents must be supplied in the form of vegetable or animal substances. 
Potatoes, for instance, contain only carbon, while bread contains carbonaceous and 
nitrogenous substances in a due proportion. [Note by Karl Marx.] 
a Report of  the Commissioners appointed to inquire into the operation of  the acts (16 & 17 
Vict. c. 99 and 20  8c 21 Vict c. 3) relating to transportation and penal servitude, Vols. I-II, 
London,  1863.—  Ed. 
b The English original has "by the medical officer of the Privy Council".— Ed. 
c Public Health. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council (1863), 
London, 1864. Pp. 13-15 of this report are cited below.— Ed. 

=====第358页=====
326 Appendices 
"Moreover," we quote from the report, "as regards the examined families of 
the agricultural population, it appeared that more than a fifth were with less than 
the estimated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more than one-third were with 
less than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogenous food, and that in three counties 
(Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somersetshire) insufficiency of nitrogenous food was 
the average local diet." "It must be remembered," adds the official report, "that 
privation of food is very reluctantly borne, and that, as a rule, great poorness of 
diet will only come when other privations have preceded it." ... "Even cleanliness 
will have been found costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful 
endeavours to maintain it, every such endeavour will represent additional pangs of 
hunger. These are painful reflections, especially when it is remembered that the 
poverty to which they advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness; in all cases it 
is the poverty of working populations. Indeed, the work which obtains the scanty 
pittance of food is for the most part excessively prolonged." 
Further, the report brings out the strange, and rather unex­
pected fact that of the four divisions of the United Kingdom, 
those of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, the agricultural 
population of England, the richest division, is considerably the 
worst fed, but that even the agricultural labourers of Berkshire, 
Oxfordshire, and Somersetshire, fare better than great numbers of 
skilled indoor operatives of the East End of London.* 
Such are the official statements published by order of Parlia­
ment in 1864,a during the millennium of free trade, at a time 
when the Chancellor of the Exchequer told the House of 
Commons that 
"the average condition of the British labourer has improved in a degree we 
know to be extraordinary and unexampled in the history of any country or any 
age".b 
* Translator's note. In the Preface to his recently published book, Das Kapital. 
Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Von Karl Marx. Hamburg 1867, Marx observes most 
correctly: 
"The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental Western Europe 
are, in comparison with those of England, wretchedly compiled. But they raise the 
veil just enough to let us catch a glimpse of the Medusa head behind it. We should 
be appalled at the state of things at home, if, as in England, our governments and 
parliaments appointed periodically commissions of inquiry into economic condi­
tions;  if these commissions were armed with the same plenary powers to get at the 
truth; if it was possible to find for this purpose men as competent, as free from 
partisanship and respect of persons as are the English factory inspectors, her 
medical reporters on public health, her commissioners of inquiry into the 
exploitation of women and children, into housing and food. Perseus wore a magic 
cap that the monsters he hunted down might not see him. We draw the magic cap 
over eyes and ears as a make-believe that these are no monsters." [Note by Eichhoff.] 
a In Eichhoff's pamphlet mistakenly:  "1863".—  Ed. 
b Here and further the quotations are from Gladstone's speech in the House of 
Commons of April 16, 1863 (see The Times, No. 2^535, April 17, 1863).— Ed. 

=====第359页=====
Appendices 327 
Upon these official congratulations jars the dry remark of the 
official Public Health Report: 
"The public health of a country means the health of its masses, and the masses 
will scarcely be healthy unless, to their very base, they be at least moderately 
prosperous." 
Dazzled by the "Progress of the Nation" statistics dancing before 
his eyes, the Chancellor of the Exchequer exclaims in wild ecstasy: 
"From 1842 to 1852 the taxable income of the country increased by 6 per cent; 
in the eight years from 1853 to 1861, it has increased from the basis taken in 1853, 
20 per cent! The fact is so astonishing to be almost incredible!... This intoxicating 
augmentation of wealth and power," adds Mr. Gladstone, "is entirely confined to 
classes of property!"402 
If you want to know with how many victims of broken health, 
tainted morals, and mental ruin, that "intoxicating augmentation 
of wealth and power entirely confined to classes of property" was, 
and is being, produced by the classes of labour, look to the picture 
hung up in the last "Public Health Report"3 of the workshops of 
tailors, printers, and dressmakers! Compare the "Report of the 
Children's Employment Commission" of 1863, where it is stated, 
for instance, that 
the potters as a class, both men and women, represent a much degenerated 
population, both physically and mentally, that the unhealthy child is an unhealthy 
parent in his turn, that the future was fraught with the gradual extinction of the 
race,  and that the dégénérescence of the population of Staffordshire would be even 
greater were it not for the constant recruiting from the adjacent country, and the 
intermarriages with more healthy races. b 
Glance at Mr. Tremenheere's Blue Book on the "Grievances 
Complained of by the Journeymen Bakers"  !c And who has not 
shuddered at the seemingly paradoxical statement made by the 
inspectors of factories, and illustrated by the Registrar General, 
that the Lancashire operatives, while put upon the distress pittance 
of food, were actually improving in health during this time, 
because of their temporary exclusion by the cotton famine from 
the cotton factory, and that the mortality of the children was 
decreasing, because their mothers were now at last allowed to give 
them, instead of Godfrey's cordial, their own breasts. 
Again reverse the medal! The Income and Property Tax 
Returns laid before the House of Commons on July 20, 1864, 
a The reference is to the Sixth Report..., pp. 25-27, cited above.— Ed. 
b Cf. Children's Employment Commission (1862). First Report of the Commissioners, 
London, 1863, p. 24.— Ed. 
c Report Addressed to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home 
Department..., London, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第360页=====
328 Appendices 
teach us that the persons with yearly incomes, valued3 at £50,000 
and upwards, had, from April 5th, 1862, to April 5th, 1863, been 
joined by a dozen and one, their number having increased in that 
single year from 67 to 80. The same returns disclose the fact that 
about 3,000 persons divide amongst themselves a yearly income of 
about £25,000,000 sterling, rather more than the total revenue 
doled out annually to the whole mass of the agricultural labourers 
of England and Wales. Open the census of 1861, and you will find 
that the number of the landed proprietors of England and Wales 
had decreased from 16,934 in 1851, to 15,066 in 1861, so that the 
concentration of land had grown in 10 years 11 per cent. If the 
concentration of the soil of the country in a few hands proceeds at 
the same rate, the land question will become singularly simplified, 
as it had become in the Roman Empire, when Nero grinned at the 
discovery that half the Province of Africa was owned by six 
gentlemen. 
We have dwelt so long upon these facts, "so astonishing to be 
almost incredible", because England heads the Europe of com­
merce and industry. It will be remembered that not long ago one 
of the refugee sons of Louis Philippe publicly congratulated the 
English agricultural labourer on the superiority of his lot over that 
of his less florid comrade on the other side of the Channel. 
Indeed, with local colours changed, and on a scale somewhat 
contracted, the English facts reproduce themselves in all the 
industrious and progressive countries of the ContinentT In all of 
them there has taken place, since 1848, an unheard-of develop­
ment of industry, and an undreamed-of expansion of imports and 
exports. In all of them the augmentation of wealth and power 
entirely confined to classes of property was truly intoxicating. In 
all of them, as in England, a minority of the working classes got 
their real wages somewhat advanced; while in most cases, given 
the universally rising prices, the monetary rise of wages denoted 
no more a real access of comforts than the inmate of the 
metropolitan poor-house or orphan asylum, for instance, was in 
the least benefited by his first necessaries rising in price according 
to official estimates from £7 7s. 4d. in 1852 to £9 15s. 8d. in 
1861.  Everywhere the great mass of the working classes were 
sinking down to a lower depth, at the same rate, at least, that 
those above them were rising in the social scale. In all countries of 
Europe it has now become a truth demonstrable to every 
unprejudiced mind, and only denied by those, whose interest it is 
a The English original has "valued by the tax-gatherer".— Ed. 

=====第361页=====
Appendices 329 
to hedge other people in a fool's paradise, that no improvement of 
machinery, no appliance of science to industrial and agricultural 
production, no aids and contrivances of communication, no new 
colonies, no emigration, no opening of markets, no free trade, nor 
all these things put together will do away with the miseries of the 
industrious masses; but that, on the present false base, every fresh 
development of the productive powers of labour must tend to 
deepen social contrasts and point social antagonisms. Death of 
starvation rose almost to the rank of a social institution, during 
this intoxicating epoch of economical progress, in the metropolis 
of the British Empire. That epoch is marked in the annals of the 
world by the quickened return, the widening compass, and the 
deadlier effects of the social pest called a commercial and 
industrial crisis. 
After the failure of the Revolutions of 1848, all party 
organisations and party journals of the working classes were, on 
the Continent, crushed by the iron hand of force, the most 
advanced sons of labour fled in despair to the Transatlantic 
Republic, and the short-lived dreams of emancipation vanished 
before an epoch of industrial fever, moral marasme, and political 
reaction. The defeat of the Continental working classes 3 soon 
spread its contagious effects on this side of the Channel. While the 
rout of their Continental brethren unmanned the English working 
classes, and broke their faith in their own cause, it restored to the 
landlord and the money-lord their somewhat shaken confidence. 
They insolently withdrew concessions already advertised. The 
discoveries of new goldlands led to an immense exodus, leaving an 
irreparable void in the ranks of the British proletariat. Others of 
its formerly active members were caught by the temporary bribe 
of greater work and wages, and turned into loyal subjects.13 All the 
efforts made at keeping up, or remodelling, the Chartist 
movement, failed signally; the press organs of the working class 
died one by one of the apathy of the masses, and, in point of fact, 
never before seemed the English working class so thoroughly 
reconciled to a state of political nullity. If, then, there had been no 
solidarity of action between the British and the Continental 
working classes, there was, at all events, a solidarity of defeat. 
And yet this period has not been without its compensating 
features. We shall here only point to two great facts. 
a In the English original this is followed by the phrase: "partly owed to the 
diplomacy of the English Government, acting then as now in fraternal solidarity 
with the Cabinet of St. Petersburg", which was omitted by  Eichhoff. — Ed. 
b The English original says: "turned into 'political blacks'".— Ed. 

=====第362页=====
330 Appendices 
After a thirty years' struggle, fought with most admirable 
perseverance, the English working classes, improving a momen-
taneous split between the landlords and money-lords, succeeded in 
carrying the Ten Hours' Bill.403 The immense physical, moral, and 
intellectual benefits hence accruing to the factory operatives, 
half-yearly chronicled in the reports of the inspectors of factories, 
are now acknowledged on all sides. Most of the Continental 
governments had to accept the English Factory Act in more or less 
modified forms, and the English Parliament itself is every year 
compelled to enlarge its sphere of action. But besides its practical 
import, there was something else to exalt the marvellous success of 
this working men's measure. Through their most notorious men 
of science, such as Dr. Ure, Professor Senior, and other sages of 
that stamp, the British bourgeoisie had predicted, and to their 
heart's content proved, that any legal restriction of the hours of 
labour must sound the death knell of British industry, which, 
vampire like, could but live by sucking blood, and children's blood, 
too. In olden times, child murder was a mysterious rite of the 
religion of Moloch, but it was practised on some very solemn 
occasions only, once a year perhaps, and then Moloch had no 
exclusive bias for the children of the poor. This struggle about the 
legal restriction of the hours of labour raged the more fiercely 
since, apart from frightened avarice, it told indeed upon the great 
contest between the blind rule of the laws of supply and demand 
which form the political economy of the bourgeoisie, and social 
production controlled by social foresight, which forms the political 
economy of the working class. Hence the Ten Hours' Bill was not 
only a great practical success; it was the victory of a principle; it 
was the first time that in broad daylight the political economy of 
the bourgeoisie succumbed to the political economy of the working 
class. 
But there was in store a still greater victory of the political 
economy of labour over the political economy of property. We 
speak of the cooperative movement, especially the cooperative 
factories raised by the unassisted efforts of a few bold "hands".* 
The value of these great social experiments cannot be over-rated. 
By deed, instead of by argument, they have shown that production 
on a large scale, and in accord with the behests of modern science, 
* Translator's note: It is common usage in England to describe workers as hands, 
while sheep and oxen are counted by heads.3  [Note by Eichhoff.] 
a In Eichhoff's German text the words "hands" and "heads" are given in 
brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed. 

=====第363页=====
Appendices 331 
may be carried on without the existence of a class of masters 
employing a class of hands; that to bear fruit, the means of labour 
need not be monopolised as a means of dominion over, and of 
extortion against, the labouring man  himself;  and that, like slave 
labour, like serf labour, hired labour is but a transitory and 
inferior form, destined to disappear before associated labour 
plying its toil with a willing hand, a ready mind, and a joyous 
heart. In England, the seeds of the cooperative system were sown 
by Robert Owen; the same working men's experiments, tried on the 
Continent, were, in fact, the practical upshot of the theories, not 
invented, but loudly proclaimed, in 1848. 
The experience of the period from 1848 to 1864 has proved 
beyond doubt that, however excellent in principle, and however 
useful in practice, cooperative labour, if kept within the narrow 
circle of the casual efforts of private workmen, will never be able 
to arrest the growth in geometrical progression of monopoly, to 
free the masses, nor even to perceptibly lighten 'the burden of 
their miseries. It is perhaps for this very reason that plausible 
noblemen, philanthropic bourgeois spouters, and even keen 
political economists, have all at once turned nauseously com­
plimentary to the very cooperative labour system they had vainly 
tried to nip in the bud by deriding it as the Utopia of the 
dreamer, or stigmatising it as the sacrilege of the Socialist. To save 
the industrious masses, cooperative labour ought to be developed 
to national dimensions, and, consequently, to be fostered by 
national means. Yet, the lords of land and the lords of capital will 
always use their political privileges for the defence and perpetua­
tion of their economical monopolies. So far from promoting, they 
will continue to lay every possible impediment in the way of the 
emancipation of labour. Remember the sneer with which, last 
session, Lord Palmerston put down the advocates of the Irish 
Tenants' Right Bill. The House of Commons, cried he, is a house 
of landed proprietors.404 To conquer political power has therefore 
become the great duty of the working classes. They seem to have 
comprehended this, for in England, Germany, Italy, and France 
there have taken place simultaneous revivals, and simultaneous 
efforts are being made at the political reorganisation of the 
working men's party. 
One element of success they possess—numbers; but numbers 
weigh only in the balance, if united in an alliance and led towards 
a known goal. Past experience has shown how disregard of that 
bond of brotherhood which ought to exist between the workmen 
of different countries, and incite them to stand firmly by each 

=====第364页=====
332 Appendices 
other in all their struggles for emancipation, will be chastised by 
the common discomfiture of their incoherent efforts. This thought 
prompted the working men of different countries assembled on 
September 28, 1864, in public meeting at St. Martin's Hall, to 
found the International Working Men's Association. 
Another conviction swayed that meeting. 
If the emancipation of the working classes requires their 
fraternal concurrence, how are they to fulfil that great mission if 
the foreign policy of governments pursues criminal designs, 
playing upon national prejudices, and squandering in piratical 
wars the people's blood and treasure? It was not the wisdom of the 
ruling classes, but the heroic resistance by the working classes of 
England that saved the West of Europe from plunging headlong 
into an infamous crusade for the perpetuation and propagation of 
slavery on the other side of the Atlantic.405 The shameless 
approval, mock sympathy, or idiotic indifference, with which the 
upper classes of Europe have witnessed the mountain fortress of 
the Caucasus falling a prey to, and heroic Poland being 
assassinated by, Russia; the unresisted encroachments of that 
barbarous power, whose head is at St. Petersburg, and whose 
hands are in every Cabinet of Europe, have taught the working 
classes the duty to master themselves the mysteries of international 
politics; to watch the diplomatic acts of their respective Govern­
ments; to counteract them, if necessary, by all means in their 
power; when unable to prevent, to combine in simultaneous 
denunciations, and to vindicate the simple laws of morals and 
justice, which ought to govern the relations of private individuals, 
as the rules paramount of the intercourse of nations. 
The fight for such a foreign policy forms part of the general 
struggle for the emancipation of the working classes. 
Proletarians of all countries, Unite! 
4. THE RULES OF THE ASSOCIATION406 
These follow in the final, essentially unchanged, wording as 
sanctioned by the Geneva Congress (1866): 
Considering, 
That the emancipation of the working classes must be con­
quered by the working classes themselves; that the struggle for the 
emancipation of the working classes means not a struggle for class 
privileges and monopolies, but for equal rights and duties, and the 
abolition of all class rule; 

=====第365页=====
Appendices 333 
That the economical subjection of the man of labour to the 
monopoliser of the means of labour, that is the sources of life, lies 
at the bottom of servitude in all its forms, of all social misery, 
mental degradation, and political dependence; 
That the economical emancipation of the working classes is 
therefore the great end to which every political movement ought 
to be subordinate as a means; 
That all efforts aiming at that great end have hitherto failed 
from the want of solidarity between the manifold divisions of 
labour in each country, and from the absence of a fraternal bond 
of union between the working classes of different countries; 
That the emancipation of labour is neither a local, nor a 
national, but a social problem, embracing all countries in which 
modern society exists, and depending for its solution on the 
concurrence, practical and theoretical, of the most advanced 
countries; 
That the present revival of the working classes in the most 
industrious countries of Europe, while it raises a new hope, gives 
solemn warning against a relapse into the old errors, and calls for 
the immediate combination of the still disconnected movements; 
For these  reasons:  — 
The first International Working Men's Congress declares that 
this International Association and all societies and individuals 
adhering to it will acknowledge truth, justice, and morality, as the 
basis of their conduct towards each other, and towards all men, 
without regard to colour, creed or nationality; 
This Congress considers it the duty of a man to claim the rights 
of a man and citizen, not only for  himself,  but for every man who 
does his duty. No rights without duties, no duties without 
rights 407; 
And in this spirit they have drawn up the following Rules of the 
I nternational Association  : — 
1. This Association is established to afford a central medium of 
communication and cooperation between Working Men's Societies 
existing in different countries, and aiming at the same end, viz., 
the protection, advancement, and complete emancipation of the 
working classes. 
2. The name of the Society shall be: "The International 
Working Men's Association". 
3. The General Council shall consist of working men belonging 
to the different countries represented in the International 
Association. It shall from its own members elect the officers 
necessary for the transaction of business, such as a president, a 

=====第366页=====
334 Appendices 
treasurer, a general secretary, corresponding secretaries for the 
different countries, &c. The Congress appoints annually the seat 
of the General Council, elects a number of members, with power 
to add to their numbers, and appoints time and place for the 
meeting of the next Congress. The delegates assemble at the 
appointed time and place without any special invitation. The 
General Council may, in case of need, change the place, but has 
no power to postpone the time of meeting. 
4. On its annual meetings, the General Congress shall receive a 
public account of the transactions of the General Council. In cases 
of urgency, it may convoke the General Congress before the 
regular yearly term. 
5. The General Council shall form an international agency 
between the different cooperating associations, so that the working 
men in one country be constantly informed of the movements of 
their class in every other country; that the inquiry into the social 
state of the different countries of Europe be made simultaneously, 
and under a common direction; that the questions of general 
interest mooted in one society be ventilated by all; and that, when 
immediate practical steps should be needed, as, for instance, in 
case of international quarrels, the action of the associated societies 
be simultaneous and uniform. Whenever it seems opportune, the 
General Council shall take the initiative of proposals to be laid 
before the different national or local societies. To facilitate the 
communications, the General Council shall publish periodical 
reports. 
6. Since the success of the Working men's movement in each 
country cannot be secured but by the power of union and 
combination, while, on the other hand, the usefulness of the 
International General Council must greatly depend on the 
circumstances whether it has to deal with a few national centres of 
working men's associations, or with a great number of small and 
disconnected local societies; the members of the International 
Association shall use their utmost efforts to combine the discon­
nected working men's societies of their respective countries into 
national bodies, represented by central national organs. It is 
self-understood, however, that the appliance of this rule will 
depend upon the peculiar laws of each country, and that, apart 
from legal obstacles, no independent local society shall be 
precluded from directly corresponding with the General Council. 
7. The various branches and sections shall, at their places of 
abode, and as far as their influence may extend, take the initiative 
not only in all matters tending to the general progressive 

=====第367页=====
Appendices 335 
improvement of public life but also in the foundation of 
productive associations and other institutions useful to the working 
class.  The General Council shall encourage them in every possible 
manner. 
8. Each member of the International Association, on removing 
his domicile from one country to another, will receive the fraternal 
support of the Associated Working Men. 
9. Everybody who acknowledges and defends the principles of 
the International Working Men's Association is eligible to become 
a member. Every branch is responsible for the integrity of the 
members it admits. 
10. Every section or branch has the right to appoint its own 
corresponding secretary. 
11. While united in a perpetual bond of fraternal cooperation, 
the working men's societies, joining the International Association, 
will preserve their existent organisations intact. 
12. Everything not provided for in the present Rules will be 
supplied by special Regulations subject to the revision of every 
Congress. 
5. THE PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE IN LONDON, 
SEPTEMBER 1865408 
The Central Council (later named the General Council) elected 
at the meeting in St. Martin's Hall had decided to hold the first 
Congress of the International Working Men's Association in 
Brussels at the beginning of September 1865. Later, it found this 
decision to be ill-advised, because, on the one hand, there had not 
been time enough for the Association to sink deeper roots, while 
on the other, the Belgian Government, which bows to orders from 
Paris in matters of internal policy, renewed the law that permits it 
to expel foreigners at will.409 Instead of a general Congress in 
Brussels, the Central Council therefore convened a preliminary 
conference in London. Only delegates of the few leading 
committees from the Continent could take part in it. 
The London Conference determined what questions would be 
discussed at the next general Congress in September 1866. Geneva 
was chosen as the place of the Congress. 
13-733 

=====第368页=====
336 Appendices 
6. THE GENEVA CONGRESS, 3rd TO 8th SEPTEMBER 186641() 
Sixty delegates were present, of whom 45 were members of 25 
sections of the International Working Men's Association and 15 
were members of 11 affiliated societies. 
At the beginning of the debates, there ensued a heated 
discussion about the right of participating in the Congress. Many 
individual members of the Association had come from France 
who,  though they could not present credentials from any section, 
wished to be admitted as delegates of the Paris sections and to 
participate in the proceedings of the Congress. They referred to 
the French legislation which forbade them to have a regular 
organisation. Some members supported their demand. In their 
opinion, the organisation of the Congress had been neither 
complete nor final, and they should not therefore be too strict or 
scrupulous and should rather admit to the proceedings any 
individual member who subscribed to the principles of the 
Association. The British delegates maintained, however, that they 
had come as representatives of branches and societies each of 
which had many thousands of members and that on these grounds 
they demanded the representative system to be applied at the 
Congress; admission of individuals who represented no organised 
body would impair the rule of equality in voting and prejudice the 
rights of the British delegates. The Congress decided that the 
right of participating in the debates and in the voting should be 
granted exclusively to delegates who were able to present regular 
credentials. 
After the credentials had been checked, the Congress proceeded 
to elect the Presidium and the Bureau, and a member of the 
London General Council, watchmaker Jung, was elected to the 
chair. He conducted the ensuing debates most skilfully. The 
hot-blooded Frenchmen, who would rather hear themselves speak, 
than others, made it rather difficult to run the proceedings, but 
the president's tact, calm and dignity, supported by the firm and 
sensible attitude of the English and German workers, prevailed 
over every threatening disturbance. 
It would take us too far to present even a brief summary of the 
debates here.* The discussion chiefly concerned the "Instructions 
* Detailed reports on the proceedings of all congresses of the Association are 
contained in the journal Der Vorbote. Politische und sociale Zeitschrift, which has been 
published since 1866 as the central organ of the German-speaking section of the 
International Working Men s Association under the editorship of Joh. Phil. Becker 
by the publishing house of the Association at Pré-1'Evêque 33 in Geneva. [Note by 
Eichhoff.] 

=====第369页=====
Appendices 337 
for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council",3 whose 
provisions were in substance endorsed by the Congress. The most 
important points were the following: 
§ 1 of these Instructions concerns the organisation of the 
International Association. The Rules, set forth above, which had 
stood the test of two years' practice, were recommended for 
final adoption, London was proposed as the seat of the General 
Council for the next year, and the proposal to elect the General 
Council and a General Secretary with a weekly salary of £2 as 
the only paid officer of the Association was laid before the 
Congress. 
The Congress sanctioned the Provisional Rules, decided that 
London should remain the seat of the General Council, confirmed 
the provisional General Council in London in its functions for the 
administrative year of 1866 to 1867, and fixed the opening of the 
next congress in Lausanne on the first Monday of September 
1867. 
§ 2 of the Instructions concerns the international aid which the 
Association could give the workmen of all countries in their 
struggle against capital. This question, it points out, embraces the 
whole activity of the Association, which aims at combining and 
generalising the till now disconnected efforts for emancipation by 
the working classes in different countries. In one case the 
Association could already claim credit for having successfully 
counteracted the intrigues of capitalists always ready to misuse the 
foreign workman as a tool against the native workman in the event 
of strikes. It is one of the great purposes of the Association to 
make the workmen of different countries not only feel but act as 
brethren and comrades in the army of emancipation. As one more 
international combination of efforts it was proposed to carry out a 
"statistical inquiry into the situation of the working  classes  of all countries 
to be instituted by the working classes themselves". To make it 
successful, the most relevant questions were listed in the scheme 
that is given below. By initiating so great a work, the workmen will 
prove their ability to take their own fate into their own hands. It 
was therefore proposed that all branches of the Association should 
immediately commence the work, and that the Congress should 
invite all workmen of Europe and the United States of America to 
collaborate in gathering the elements of the statistics of the 
working class; that all reports and evidence should be forwarded 
a K. Marx, "Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council. 
The Different Questions".— Ed. 
13* 

=====第370页=====
338 Appendices 
to the General Council which should elaborate them into a general 
report, adding the evidence as an appendix, and that this report 
together with its appendix should be published after having 
received the sanction of the Congress. 
The proposed general scheme of inquiry contains the following 
items,  which may of course be modified to suit local conditions: 
1. Industry, name of. 
2. Age and sex of the employed. 
3. Number of the employed. 
4. Salaries and wages: (a) apprentices; (b) wages by the day or 
piece work; (c) scale paid by middlemen. Weekly, yearly average. 
5. (a) Hours of work in factories, (b) The hours of work with 
small employers and in homework, if the business be carried on in 
those different modes, (c) Nightwork and daywork. 
6. Mealtimes and treatment. 
7. Sort of workshop and work: overcrowding, defective ventila­
tion, want of sunlight, use of gaslight, cleanliness, etc. 
8. Nature of occupation. 
9. Effect of employment upon the physical condition. 
10. Moral condition. Education. 
11. State of trade: whether season trade, or more or less 
uniformly distributed over the year, whether commodities are 
subject to great price fluctuations, whether exposed to foreign 
competition, whether destined for home consumption or for 
export, etc.411 
These proposals of the General Council were adopted by the 
Congress unanimously, and the workers' statistical inquiry into and 
assessment of their own condition have been proceeding steadily 
since. 
§ 3 of the Instructions concerns the limitation of the working day. 
This,  it says, is a preliminary condition, without which all further 
attempts at improvement and emancipation are bound to founder. 
It is needed to restore the health and physical energies of the 
working class, that is, the great body of every nation, as well as to 
secure them the possibility of intellectual development, sociable 
intercourse, social and political action. For this reason the Congress 
should declare itself in favour of a legal limitation of the working day 
to eight hours. This limitation being generally claimed by the 
workmen of the United States,412 the vote of the Congress would 
raise it to the common platform of the working classes all over the 
world. Nightwork is to be permitted in but exceptional cases, in 
trades and branches specified by law, with the tendency being to 
gradually suppress all nightwork. This proposal, however, referred 

=====第371页=====
Appendices 339 
only to adult persons 18 years of age and older, male or female, 
though the latter should be rigorously excluded from all 
nightwork whatever, and all sort of work hurtful to the delicacy of 
the sex, or exposing their bodies to poisonous and otherwise 
deleterious effects. 
The Congress acceded to these proposals with a majority of 50 
to 10 votes. The minority consisted of those French delegates who 
were content to have a legal limitation of the working day to 
10 hours. 
§ 4 of the Instructions attacks the social evil of "juvenile and 
children's labour (both sexes)" at its very root. 
The tendency of modern industry to make children and juvenile 
persons of both sexes cooperate in the great work of social 
production is admitted to be a progressive, sound and legitimate 
tendency, although under capital it has been distorted into an 
abomination. In a rational state of society every child of the age of 
9 years should begin to become a productive labourer so that no 
able-bodied adult person should have to be exempted from the 
general law of nature, which says: work in order to be able to eat, 
and work not only with the brain but with the hands too. 
For the present, however, the Congress is concerned only with 
the working population. Here it distinguishes three classes of 
children and juvenile persons of both sexes, each of which is to be 
treated differently; the first class to range from 9 to 12, the 
second from 13 to 15, and the third from 16 to 17 years of age. It 
was proposed that the employment of the first class in any 
workshop or housework should be legally restricted to two, that of 
the second class to four, and that of the third to six working hours, 
and that for the third class there should be legally provided a 
break of at least one hour for meals or relaxation. 
It was said to be desirable to begin elementary school instruction 
before the age of 9 years, but the Congress dealt here only with 
the indispensable antidotes against the tendencies of a social 
system which degrades the working man into a mere instrument 
for the accumulation of capital, and compels parents by the 
necessity of obtaining a livelihood to sell their own children. The 
right of children and juvenile persons must be vindicated. They 
are unable to act for themselves. It is therefore the duty of society 
to care for their well-being. 
If the bourgeoisie and aristocracy neglected their duties toward 
their offspring, it was their own fault. Sharing the privileges of 
these classes, the child was also condemned to suffer from their 
prejudices. 

=====第372页=====
340 Appendices 
The case of the working class stood quite different. The 
working man was no free agent. In regrettably too many cases, he 
was even too ignorant to understand the true interests of his child, 
or the normal conditions of human development. The more 
enlightened part of the working class, however, fully understood 
that the future of its class, and therefore of mankind, altogether 
depend upon the formation of the rising working generation. The 
workers knew perfectly well that above all else the children and 
the juvenile workers were to be saved from the crushing effects of 
the present system of labour. This could be done only by 
converting social reason into social force, and, under given 
circumstances, there existed no other method of doing so, than 
through general laws enforced by the power of the state. If the 
working,class supported the government in enforcing such laws, it 
would not thereby in the least fortify governmental power. On the 
contrary, it would transform that power, now used against it, into 
its own agency. By a general act it would achieve what it would 
vainly have attempted by a multitude of isolated individual efforts. 
Proceeding from this standpoint, the Congress declared that no 
parent and no employer should be allowed to use juvenile labour, 
except when combined with education. 
Three things were to be understood by education: 
First, mental education. 
Second, bodily education, such as is given in schools of gymnastics, 
and by military exercise. 
Third, technological training, which imparts the general principles 
of all processes of production, and simultaneously initiates the 
child and young person in the practical use and handling of the 
elementary instruments of all trades. 
A gradual and progressive course of mental, gymnastic, and 
technological training should correspond to the classification of 
the juvenile labourers. The costs of the technological schools 
should be partly met by the sale of their products. 
The combination of paid productive labour, mental education, 
bodily exercise and polytechnic training, would raise the working 
class far above the level of the higher and middle class. 
It was self-understood that the employment of all persons up to 
17 years inclusively3 in nightwork and all health injuring trades 
should be strictly prohibited by law. 
The Congress agreed unanimously with these explanations, and 
added a resolution to the effect that the technical training of 
a The English original says: "all persons from [9] and to 17 years (inclu­
sively)".—  Ed. 

=====第373页=====
Appendices 341 
juvenile persons should be of a practical as well as of a theoretical 
nature so that not factory overseers and foremen but working men 
should be trained at the projected technological schools. 
7. THE LAUSANNE CONGRESS, 
2nd TO 8th SEPTEMBER, 1867413 
Sixty-four delegates came to this Congress, among whom the 
German element was represented by 25 members. 
All opening ceremonies were dispensed with, and the Congress 
proceeded at once to elect the Presidium and the Bureau. Eugene 
Dupont, member of the General Council and delegate of the 
French section in London, was elected to the chair, and coped 
smartly with his none too simple duties. He was fortified in his' 
task by the magnificent behaviour of the assembly. No unfriendly 
words had to be smoothed over, no improper pronouncements 
had to be rebutted, no tactless motions had to be registered. This 
time,  too, the difficulty of conducting the discussion in three 
languages (English, German, and French) was happily overcome, 
as it had been at the first congress. 
The most important at this Congress were the reports of the 
individual sections and affiliated societies on the actual successes 
and the growth of the Association. It would take us too far afield 
if we were to reproduce the content of these most interesting 
reports if only in outline, and we may dispense with it here all the 
more because the present expansion of the Association will be 
taken up in a later section. The official proceedings of the 
Congress of 1867 have been published in French by Chaux-de-
Fonds, Imprimerie de la Voix de l'Avenir? 
Indicative of the spirit of the Congress was the following: 
Gaspare Stampa from Milan, delegate of the Central Council of 
Italian working men's associations, which embraces 600 workers' 
societies and has its seat in Naples, announced at the sitting of the 
4th of September that Garibaldi would be passing through 
Lausanne on his way to the Peace Congress in Geneva; he moved 
that the Congress should appoint a deputation to go to Villeneuve 
to greet Garibaldi on behalf of the Congress, and to invite him to 
visit the Congress in his capacity as honorary president of the 
above-mentioned Italian working men's associations. Other dele-
a Rapports lus au Congrès ouvrier réuni du 2 au 8 septembre 1867 à Lausanne, 
Chaux-de-Fonds, 1867.— Ed. 

=====第374页=====
342 Appendices 
gates opposed this motion. However popular Garibaldi may be, a 
Congress representing the working class could not pay homage to 
any single individual. If, however, Garibaldi wished to assume his 
seat at the Congress as honorary president of the Italian working 
men's associations, he would be as heartily received as any other 
delegate. Having done with Stampa's motion, the Congress passed 
on to the agenda. 
The nearly simultaneous holding of the international Peace 
Congress414 in Geneva (9 to 12 September), in which many 
members of the Working Men's Congress intended to take part in 
a private capacity, compelled the latter to define its position in 
relation to the Peace League in Geneva. This was done in the 
following heartily applauded resolution3: 
"Considering that the pressure of war weighs more heavily on the working class 
than on any other class of society, because it is not only robbed by it of its means of 
subsistence but is also the class that is made to shed most blood in it; 
"Considering that the pressure of so-called armed peace weighs as heavily on 
the working man as that of war by consuming the best energies of the people in 
unproductive and destructive labour; 
"Finally, considering that any radical remedy of this evil necessitates altering the 
prevailing social conditions which repose on the exploitation of one part of society 
by another, 
"The Congress of the International Working Men's Association declares its 
complete and emphatic allegiance to the Peace League constituted in Geneva on 
the 7th of September, and to its efforts in the interest and for the maintenance of 
peace, and demands not only that "war be abolished but also that standing armies be 
disbanded, and that a universal and free alliance of the peoples be constituted in 
their place on the basis of reciprocity and justice, but with the proviso that the 
working classes be emancipated from their unfree and oppressed condition and 
social discrimination, and that an end be put to the mutual struggle of classes 
through the rectification of the obtaining contradictions." 
The Geneva Working Men's Congress of 1866 had been an 
object of lively debate in the French press, especially that of Paris 
and Lyons. The big London papers, however, had passed it over 
in dead silence. Not so the Congress in Lausanne a year later. The 
Times had its own correspondent there. Furthermore, it published 
editorial articles about the International Working Men's Associa­
tion,0 and its example was followed by the dailies and weeklies of 
all England. After The Times had set the tone, the other papers, 
too, no longer considered it beneath their dignity to devote not 
a Adresse collective au Congrès de la paix à Genève, de la part des Travailleurs réunis 
en Congrès à Lausanne. —Ed. 
b "The International Working Men's Congress (From a Correspondent). 
Lausanne", The Times, Nos. 25909,  25911,  25912, 25913, September 6, 9, 10, 11, 
1867.—  Ed. 

=====第375页=====
Appendices 343 
only notices but even long editorials to the labour question. All of 
them discussed the Working Men's Congress. It was only natural 
that many papers treated the subject in a superior and ironic vein. 
For every undertaking has its funny side apart from the sublime, 
and how could the Working Men's Congress with its loquacious 
Frenchmen be completely free of it? But for all that, the English 
press has on the whole treated the Congress very decently. Even 
The Manchester Examiner, which is in fact the organ of John Bright 
and the Manchester School, 415 portrayed it in a pertinent editorial 
as an important and epoch-making event. Where it was compared 
with its step-brother, the Peace Congress, the comparison was 
always in favour of the elder brother. In the Working Men's 
Congress they discerned a threatening and fateful tragedy, 
whereas nothing but farce and burlesque was seen in the other. 
8. THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION, 
THE TRADES' UNIONS, AND THE STRIKES3 
With the foundation of the International Working Men's 
Association a new era began for the English Trades Unions. 
Previously, they were exclusively engrossed in the struggle over 
wages and the working time, and were bound down by the 
narrow-mindedness of the medieval guilds system. 
The trades unions are not only a wholly lawful but also a 
governmentally recognised body sanctioned by Act of Parliament 
in 1825'' and necessitated by the daily conflicts between labour and 
capital. Their purpose is to stand up for the interests of workmen 
against masters and capitalists. Their ultima ratio is the strike,0 
whose legality is enshrined in the aforementioned Act of 
Parliament on the condition that any direct breach of the peace is 
avoided and no forcible restraint of traded is attempted. Under 
the protection of this Act, the trades unions have spread in all 
factory districts of England and have, by virtue of their numbers, 
organisation and funds, grown into a powerful body which 
a In the German original the English terms "Trades' Unions" and "Strikes" are 
given in brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed. 
b An Act to repeal the Laws relating to the combinations of Workmen, and to 
make other Provisions in lieu  thereof.—  Ed. 
c The German original has the English and French terms "Strikes" and 
"Grèves" in brackets after their German equivalent.— Ed. 
d The German original has the English terms "breach of the peace" and "restraint 
of trade" in brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed. 

=====第376页=====
344 Appendices 
confronts, and commands the respect of, the employers, and 
makes its influence felt in many different ways. They have 
survived all the periods of political reaction, all the counter-
schemes of the masters and capitalists, all the shortages and 
commercial crises of the past decades, and have the same 
importance for the organisation of the working class as the 
establishment of communes in the Middle Ages had for the 
middle classes of bourgeois society, as Karl Marx has, indeed, 
demonstrated as early as 1847 in his work against Proudhon, 
entitled Misère de la Philosophie. Réponse à la Philosophie de la Misère 
par Mons. Proudhon (Paris 1847). 1' 
It has now been brought home to these trades unions that, on 
the one hand, without knowing it, they are a means of organising 
the working class, and that alongside their immediate and current 
aims they must not forget the general aim of winning the complete 
political and social emancipation of the working class. On the 
other hand, it has equally been brought home to them that no 
ultimate success was possible without international combination 
and that by its very nature the workers' movement cut across state 
and national borders. 
That is why the following resolution was framed and adopted at 
the big conference of delegates from the trades unions of the 
United Kingdom at Sheffield in 1866416: 
"That this conference, fully appreciating the efforts made by the International 
Association to unite in one common bond of brotherhood the working men of all 
countries, most earnestly recommend to the various societies here represented, the 
advisability of becoming affiliated to that body, believing that it is essential to the 
progress and prosperity of the entice working community."b 
The London Trades' Council/417 which is the central body of 
England's trades unions, had by then concluded an agreement 
with the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association in London. The Secretary of the Trades' Council, Mr. 
Odger, was and still is also a member of the General Council of the 
International Association. Only from then on did the activities of 
the trades unions in England gain a universal character, which 
became evident very soon when they took a direct part for the 
first time in the political movement. How successful they were is 
a K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Ansiuer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by 
M. Proudhon.—Ed. 
b Report of the Conference of Trades' Delegates of the United Kingdom..., Sheffield, 
1866.—  Ed. 
c The German original has the English term "Trades' Council" in brackets after its 
German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第377页=====
Appendices 345 
common knowledge. After the fall of the Russell-Gladstone cabinet 
in June 1866 it had seemed that the parliamentary reform would 
be indefinitely postponed. The Tory leaders declared to the loud 
acclaim of the majority that no reform was necessary. At this 
point, the workers took charge of the movement. Mass meetings 
on a large scale were called in London, Birmingham, Manchester, 
Glasgow, Bristol, and other cities, in which the trades unions took 
part in their own capacity. The Trades' Council gave its support to 
the Reform League,418 the governing body of the movement. 
Within a few months, victory was achieved, and the Tory 
government was forced to initiate the parliamentary reform.419 
In England as well as on the Continent the years 1866 to 1868 
were especially plentiful in strikes on the part of the workers and 
in factory lock-outs on the part of the capitalists.* The common 
reason for this was the crisis of 1866420 and its aftermaths. The crisis 
paralysed speculation. Large enterprises came to a standstill, and 
those entrepreneurs who, owing to the changed situ-
ition on the money market, were unable to meet the financial 
commitments they had made at the time when speculation was at 
its highest, were forced into bankruptcy. The stagnation of all 
trading enterprises had reached a point where it was surpassed only 
by the extraordinary glut of gold in the banks of England and 
France. And the gold had piled up in the banks because it could 
no longer find any use for business purposes. This led to a 
general stoppage of commerce and a general decline of prices. 
Victuals alone, notably bread, the workers' most vital necessity, 
had gone up in price owing to the crop failures of 1866 and 1867. 
And precisely during this general shortage came the calamity of 
universal crisis, which made itself felt to the workmen through the 
reduction of the working time and the lowering of wages by the 
employers. Hence the many strikes and lock-outs. It so happened, 
furthermore, that the laws against working men's coalitions had 
only just been lifted in France and other countries of the 
Continent.421 Unquestionably, too, the resolutions of the working 
men's congresses in Geneva and Lausanne had had a moral effect, 
made still stronger by the workmen's awareness everywhere that 
* Lock-out—termporary closure of whole factories and all workshops of any 
industrial branch, the capitalists' instrument of forcing workers to accept low wages. 
[Note by Eichhoff.] 

=====第378页=====
346 Appendices 
they could rely on the powerful backing of the International 
Association. 
But that part of the European bourgeois press which denounced 
the International Working Men's Association for inciting these 
conflicts was mistaken. Nowhere did the Association initiate any 
strikes, and confined itself merely to intervening where the 
character of the local conflicts justified its doing so and required it 
to take action. 
Specifically, it intervened in three important cases, where it also 
used the opportunity to make successful propaganda for its 
principles. 
First, a few general remarks about the tactics of the Association 
during the English workers' strikes, in which its cooperation had 
been required. An account of this is given in the "Third Annual 
Report"3 which the London General Council placed before the 
Congress in Lausanne, and which says: 
"It used to be a standard threat with British capitalists, not only in London, but 
also in the provinces, when their workmen would not tamely submit to their 
arbitrary dictation, that they would supplant them by an importation of foreigners. 
The possibility of such importations taking place was in most cases sufficient to 
deter the British workmen from insisting on their demands. The action taken by 
the General Council has had the effect of putting a stop to these threats being 
made publicly. Where anything of the kind is contemplated it has to be done in 
secret, and the slightest information obtained by the workmen suffices to frustrate 
the plans of the capitalists. As a rule, when a strike or a lock-out occurs concerning 
any of the affiliated trades, the Continental correspondents of the Association are 
at once instructed to warn the workmen in their respective localities not to enter 
into any engagements with the agents of the capitalists of the place where the 
dispute is. However, this action is not confined to affiliated trades. The same action 
is taken on behalf of other trades upon application being received." 
Indeed, this was how the manoeuvres of the English capitalists 
were frustrated during the strikes relative to workshop and factory 
lock-outs of railway excavators, conductors and engine drivers, 
zinc workers, wire-workers, wood-cutters, and so on. In a few 
cases,  such as the strike of the London basket-makers, the 
capitalists had secretly smuggled in labourers from Belgium and 
Holland. Following an appeal of the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association, however, the latter 
made common cause with the English workers. 
Still greater services were rendered to a certain group of 
workers by the Association's administrative committee in Paris. In 
a "Third Annual Report of the International Working Men's Association". In 
the original, the English title is followed by its German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 

=====第379页=====
Appendices 347 
Roubaix, the ribbon manufacturers introduced arbitrary penal 
regulations in their factories which naturally mainly amounted to 
deductions from wages. The inescapable result of this system of 
fines was the dismissal of the workers who protested against it, the 
lock-out leading to a revolt and to an armed intervention by the 
authorities. 422 Here, however, the Central Council of the Interna­
tional Association in Paris stepped in and proved that the 
manufacturers had made themselves guilty of breaking the law 
with their regulations by playing legislator, judge and gendarme 
off their own bat. As a result, the French government was 
compelled to declare that any private factory regulations, insofar 
as they were not purely administrative, but imposed fines, were 
unlawful and constituted an unmitigated usurpation. 
The decisive and most important cases of intervention by the 
International Working Men's Association, however, were the 
following three: 
1. Closure of the Paris Bronze Workshops 
in February 1867 
The great, fundamental importance of this conflict was the 
following: 
Trade unions had only just been legally allowed in France. The 
bronze-workers, a body of approximately  5,000  persons, were the 
first to take advantage of this and to form a union on the English 
model at the beginning of 1866. Naturally, from the start, this 
association was a thorn in the side of the masters, and they 
decided to destroy it at the first opportunity. This opportunity 
came in February 1867, when the union found itself compelled to 
intervene on behalf of its members and to require five of the 
masters to comply with its directions. Instantly, the capitalists 
formed a coalition, which demanded of their workers that they 
either resign from the union or leave the workshops. This 
culminated in a lock-out of some 1,500 bronze-workers by 87 
employers. 
In this case, therefore, the existence of this important factor of the 
movement in France hung in the balance. 
At the beginning of the lock-out, the union of bronze-workers 
had a fund of 35,000 francs. It decided to pay each of the 
dismissed workers 20 francs weekly, and to obtain a loan from the 
English trades unions for this purpose through the good offices of 

=====第380页=====
348 Appendices 
the International Association against a monthly repayment of 
5,000  francs. 
The workers won thanks to the moral and pecuniary support of 
the London General Council, which obtained the desired contribu­
tions from the English trades unions, and also thanks to the 
intervention of the Paris Central Council of the International 
Association which persuaded the other trade unions in France to 
render the bronze-workers vigorous support. 
Besides the social significance of the French workers' coming out 
victorious with the help of their English brethren, the case has its 
international importance, of which the Courrier français of March 
24, 1867 says the following 3: 
"M. Thiers said that no new policy is conceivable in international relations. Yet a 
noteworthy and in no way isolated fact has just taken place which, coming from the 
people, serves notice of something that is really new. 
"We cannot tell if the bitter, hundreds of years old and almost inhuman hatred 
between the English and the French is still rooted in the bosom of a part of the two 
nations. But the fact that the English proletariat offers alliance and pecuniary 
assistance to the Paris bronze-workers to support them in a question of 
employment and wages is a symptom of a new policy which the old parties do not 
and cannot comprehend." 
2. The Geneva Strike in the Spring of 1868* 
While the case of the Paris bronze-workers concerned the 
existence of trade unions in France, the case here concerned the 
* A thorough description of this strike is given in the following little brochure: 
Die internationale Arbeiterassociation und die Arbeitseinstellung in Genf im Frühjahr 
1868. Von Joh. Phil. Becker. Deutsche Verlagshalle, Pré-1'Évêque 33, Geneva, 1868. 
The workers who read this book are most strongly recommended to acquire 
both the brochure of the stout-hearted Joh. Phil. Becker, the proceeds from which 
are exclusively intended for covering the costs incurred in supporting the strike, 
and the monthly journal  Vorbote.  Joh. Phil. Becker is himself a worker in origin and 
has fought for the working class with sword, word and pen all his life long with the 
utmost self-sacrifice and devotion. A veteran of the labour movement, he is as 
energetic as he is original in his thinking, and deserves the recognition of the entire 
working class in contrast to the present-day petits grands hommes b of "satiated virtue 
and solvent morality"c  who are pushing themselves forward everywhere in labour 
circles. He is the life and soul of the international labour movement in Switzerland 
and has, indeed, also enlisted all the German elements who so far adhered to the 
Association in Germany  itself.  [Note by  Eichhoff. ] 
a V. Huriot, "M. Thiers a dit qu'en matière de relations internationales, il n'y 
avait point de politique nouvelle...", Le Courrier français, No. 12, March 24, 
1867.—  Ed. 
b Little great men.— Ed. 
c Heinrich Heine, Neue Gedichte: Romanzen 7, Anno 1829.— Ed. 

=====第381页=====
Appendices 349 
existence of the International Working Men's Association on the 
Continent. 42* 
The conflict between the International Working Men's Associa­
tion and a part of the employers in Geneva broke out and ran its 
course in the following way. 
Ever since August 1867 there were signs of deep dissatisfaction 
over their condition among the Geneva building workers. A 
general meeting of the building workers, held on January 19, 
1868,  moved to elect a joint committee, which would enter into 
negotiations with the employers and by amicable agreement secure 
a reduction of the working time from 12 to 10 hours and a wage 
increase of 20 per cent. A memorandum was drawn up and 
forwarded to all the masters. Instead of deferring to the workers, 
the employers formed a counter-coalition and called a general 
meeting of building masters for the 18th of March, their 
provisional committee turning down the repeated proposals of the 
workers' committee to have amicable talks between delegates of 
the two sides before the general meeting was to take place. 
This attitude of the masters' provisional committee snowed the 
workers what they should expect from the coming general 
meeting of masters. Their committee declared that it had failed in 
its task of negotiating an understanding with the masters' 
committee, and in the evening of the 14th of March it requested 
the Geneva Central Committee of the International Working 
Men's Association to take the matter in hand and to mediate an 
agreement. 
It was the duty of the Association to comply with this request. It 
appointed a commission of three Geneva citizens, whose private 
attempts at mediation, however, also failed to yield results. On the 
20th of March, therefore, after the general meeting of the 18th 
had finally constituted an employers' association, the commission 
issued a public invitation to the "Messieurs les building contractors" 
to come to a meeting on the 23rd of March. On the very next day 
a public reply appeared in the newspapers which let the 
commission of the International Association know in the name of 
the general meeting of the 18th of March that the masters' general 
meeting had decided, with only three votes against, to have no 
negotiations with it whatsoever. 
In the morning of the 23rd of March, the commission formed 
by the International Association made this state of affairs known 
in wall posters, serving notice that if no favourable result was 
achieved by the evening of that day and all prospects of an 
amicable understanding with the employers vanished, it would 

=====第382页=====
350 Appendices 
beat the drums and call a general meeting of all the sections of the 
International Association. At six in the evening the signal was 
given, and members of the Association thronged from all sides to 
the Rue du Rhône, where the union had its premises. The 
bourgeoisie was panic-stricken. Shops and houses were locked up, 
the cash-boxes were placed in safety, and the employees of some 
of the comptoirs 3 were issued arms and ammunition. In the 
meantime, the Association,  5,000  men strong, marched in model 
order to the shooting-range, where the announced general 
meeting discussed the gravity of the situation and unanimously 
assured the building workers of the support of the International 
Association. After this had taken place, it was not the International 
Association but the governing bodies of the trade unions which, to 
their members' thunderous cheers and enthusiastic assurances of 
support, declared a strike of block-cutters, bricklayers, plasterers 
and house-painters in Geneva. Thereupon, the gathering dis­
persed quietly. By nine in the evening Geneva had already 
resumed its usual appearance. 
Word of the strike, which had been unavoidable, was sent to the 
General Council of the International Association in London and 
the administrative councils in Brussels, Paris, and Lyons on the 
25th of March; they were approached for urgent support because 
the Geneva section of the Association had been unprepared for 
the strike, whose magnitude exceeded its capacities. 
In the meantime, the masters lost no time either to invite 
workers for themselves, mainly from Ticino and Piedmont. But 
these were brought to the premises of the International Associa­
tion the moment they arrived, and were there informed of the 
state of affairs and won over to the side of the strikers. 
It goes without saying that during this time the International 
Association was subjected to the most savage attacks and the most 
venomous accusations. The Journal de Genève set the tone and was 
most vigorously backed by the Neue Zürcher Zeitung, the Neue freie 
Presse b of Vienna, and other organs of the /radical, liberal and 
conservative bourgeoisie. As a result of the energetic behaviour of 
the Geneva Central Council, the cause of the strike faded 
completely into the background, while the International Associa­
tion was pushed to the forefront of the movement. 
On the 28th of March, the masters' association put up wall 
notices dated the 26th of March, in which the masters promised to 
a Offices.— Ed. 
b See Neue freie  Presse,  Nos. 1286 (supplement), 1288, 1291, March 29 and 31, and 
April 3, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第383页=====
Appendices 351 
consider the workers' grievances in all fairness, warned them 
against the despotism and menace of the International Working 
Men's Association, which they said was maintained on foreign 
money and had instigated the strike, reminded them of the 
previous friendly mutual understanding, and called on them to 
return to work in good faith as individuals; the masters would be 
glad to improve the workers' lot and would for the time being 
grant them an 11-hour working day. Should they, however, 
contrary to expectations, fail to comply with this, the masters 
would be compelled, for their part, also to close down workshops 
in those branches of the building trade which had not yet joined 
in the strike. 
All attempts to come to an understanding foundered because 
the masters did not wish to deal with delegates of the Internation­
al Association, and since no individual workers reported to work, 
the threatened factory lock-out was carried into effect on the 30th 
of March, and the workshops of joiners, carpenters and tinners 
were closed down. The moral effect which this closure had on the 
Geneva workers is best illustrated by the fact that a number of 
unions which had previously stood aloof from the International 
Association, formed sections and asked it for admission. Thus the 
coach-makers, farriers, saddlers, upholsterers, file-cutters, curriers, 
and others. During these few days the Association won many more 
than a thousand new members. 
Workmen employed in the jewellery trade, such as goldsmiths, 
watchmakers, bowl-makers, and engravers, who with only few 
exceptions are all citizens of Geneva, held a meeting attended by 
more than 2,000 persons on the 30th of March, and resolved as 
one man to apply all moral and material means to help bring the 
cause of the building workers to victory. In reference to the 
International Association, the assembly declared itself quite firmly 
against the false and malicious statement that the Geneva workers 
were being subjected to tyrannical pressure by a foreign society. 
If until then the International Association had applied itself 
diligently to settling the conflict, it was now, since all attempts at 
reaching an understanding had failed, a matter of obtaining 
means for a longer duration of the strike. The Geneva Central 
Committee of the International Association had to support some 
3,000 workers and their families, which was a burden the Geneva 
workers could not conceivably cope with on their own. 
But contributions were already pouring in from all sides. First 
of all, most appreciative acknowledgements are due to the Geneva 
working men and their unions for their spirit of self-sacrifice. It 

=====第384页=====
352 Appendices 
may be said without exaggeration that the employed workers of 
Geneva shared their bread with those who were out of work. And 
not just each and everyone gave willingly part of his wage; the 
unions' savings banks and relief funds contributed sums ranging 
from 500 to  5,000  francs. The unions of other Swiss cities and the 
German workers' societies in Switzerland were not found wanting 
either. Contributions arrived from Germany—Hanover (Workers' 
Union), Hamburg (Workers' Educational Society), Schwerin 
(building workers), Rostock, Kaukehmen, Solingen, Mannheim 
(Tailors' Union), Esslingen (Workers' Educational Society), Munich 
(Workers' Educational Society), and other towns. Especially acti­
ve, however, were the General Council of the International Associa­
tion in London and its administrative committees in Brussels and 
Paris.  At the beginning of April the General Council was already 
able,  despite the formal difficulties that it had had to overcome in 
order to obtain larger sums, to promise the Geneva Central 
Committee at least 40,000 francs monthly from England alone 
until the victorious culmination of the strike, partly as a loan and 
partly as a grant. And by the good offices of the Brussels and 
Paris administrative committees considerable contributions came 
from unions in those two cities, e.g. 2,000 francs from the 
printers, 1,500 francs from the tinners of Paris, and so on. 
The masters saw then that their plan of starving out the workers 
had failed. But since they had vowed that they would not deal with 
the Central Council of the International Association, this was done 
on their behalf by M. Camperio, President of the State Council and 
Chief of the Justice and Police Department of Geneva. He notified 
the Central Committee of the Association on the 8th of April to 
send delegates of all building trades to his office with a view to 
reaching an understanding. An agreement came about already on 
the third day of the negotiations. The masters conceded the 
workers a reduction of the working time by 1 and in some cases 2 
hours,  and a wage increase of 10 per cent. 
In the evening of the same day (11th of April) M. Camperio let 
it be known in wall notices that the conflict between the workmen 
and the employers had been settled through his mediation, that 
the strike was to be considered over, and that work would be 
resumed on Monday (13th of April). 
The International Working Men's Association, too, lost no time 
in announcing the happy end of the strike in wall posters and, while 
thanking the workmen for their brave conduct during the weeks 
of the struggle, it called on them to forget all that had happened 
and go to work on Monday in good cheer. 

=====第385页=====
Appendices 353 
For the International Working Men's Association the conflict 
resulted 0in a mass adherence of workmen in Switzerland. 
3. The Bloody Conflict Between the Belgian Government 
and the Miners of Charleroi (March 1868) 
Belgium is a paradise for the bourgeoisie. Its Constitution is the 
ideal of a model bourgeois state. Its government is the agent of 
the bourgeoisie, representative of the domination of capital. 
Nothing is more natural there than that the least collision between 
the interests of capital and labour should precipitate a conflict 
which culminates in a bloody solution by powder and lead.424 
The more resolutely the International Working Men's Associa­
tion concerns itself there with the cause of the oppressed and 
persecuted, the more necessary it appears to present an exhaustive 
account of the causes of the labour disturbances in the coal basin 
of Charleroi. 
Among the national industries of various countries, coal and 
iron stand at the head of the list. The two industries- form an 
organic whole. No ironworks and no furnace can operate without 
coal, and for the collieries, too, the furnaces and ironworks are the 
most important consumer. Any upheaval in one of the industries, 
therefore, makes itself instantly felt in the other, and a metallurgi­
cal crisis, which recurs periodically like all crises, has an immediate 
and direct bearing on the price of coal. 
The country that nature has favoured the most in respect of 
coal and iron is England. There, both coal and iron lie fairly close 
to the surface and can be extracted with little effort. France, on 
the other hand, is the most disinherited, for it produces practically 
no coal of its own and its ironworks are dependent on English or 
Prussian coal. But though for France importation of foreign coal is 
an economic necessity, it subjects coal-producing Belgium to 
highly disagreeable competition because England and Prussia (with 
a waterway along the Rhine and its tributaries) are in a more 
favourable position as regards transport, and because transporta­
tion costs have a bearing on the local price of coal. 
The general price of coal in each country, on the other hand, 
depends on the wages that are paid for working it. Indeed, the 
international relevance of this factor strikes the eye owing to the 
difference in the amount of labour time consumed in different 
countries to produce the same quantity of coal. Wages, too, are as 

=====第386页=====
354 Appendices 
different as the working time, and in England they are at least 26 2/3 
per cent higher than on the Continent.* 
The implications for colliery workers of different countries are 
the following: 
Whenever an iron and steel crisis or some other unfavourable 
commercial factor depresses the price of coal, the mine-owners try 
to lower wages. Knowing, however, that wages are already so low 
that any further reduction is a hardship that may in certain 
circumstances, such as a time of shortages, drive the worker to 
desperation, they are compelled to look for a plausible excuse. 
As a rule, there are only two such excuses, one applicable only 
to England, and the other only to the Continent. 
The plausible excuse of the English mine-owner is the low wages 
on the Continent. 
The plausible excuse of the continental mine-owner is the low 
price and competition of English coal. 
To what social straits the Belgian coalminers have been reduced 
in these circumstances is vividly described in the following article3 
in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt**: 
"A sadder plight than that of the Belgian coalminer is hardly conceivable. 
Reduced to the condition of an industrial machine, he has been stripped of all 
social rights and duties. He is nothing more than a chattel which figures in the 
mine-owner's inventory alongside horses, donkeys, implements, and other working 
material. That is a fact. A mining company considers itself richer when it has a greater 
number of workers in its hands. When it establishes a workers' town for 'humanitarian 
reasons' the direct gain is at most 2 to 3 per cent. But the indirect gain is immeasurably 
greater, for the company acquires an additional number of workers utterly dependent 
on the mine for their subsistence, thus ensuring the operation of the mine under any 
circumstances. It would be more appropriate to call the coalminer a serf or slave 
* According to estimates by Richard Whiting. To determine how much worse off 
the workers were in France than their colleagues in England, he assumed that, 
considering the difference in the price of the most important necessities in the two 
countries, the worker got just as far with 5 francs in France as he did with 5 
shillings (that is, 6 francs) in England. This made a difference of 162/3  per cent by 
reason of just the price discrepancies. Having in this simple way identified francs 
and shillings as equal values for both countries, Whiting found in addition that 
wages in France were at least 10 per cent lower than those in England, while wages 
in France, Belgium, and Rhenish Prussia were approximately the same. [Note by 
Eichhoff.] 
** Demokratisches Wochenblatt, organ of the German People's Party, Leipzig, 
printed and published by C. W. Vollrath. Its editor-in-chief is Wilhelm Liebknecht. 
[Note by Eichhoff.] 
a "Die Lage der belgischen Kohlenarbeiter", Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nos. 20 
and 21, May 16 and 23, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第387页=====
Appendices 355 
rather than a free man, which is a title that bourgeois economists so generously 
apply to him. 
"Among all the labouring classes the Belgian coalminers wear the badge of 
slavery more distinctly than the others. Ignorance, brutishness, physical and moral 
degradation — those are the sad effects of the unrestricted domination of capital in 
an industry that is in itself probably more demeaning to man than any other. To be 
sure,  the bourgeoisie indulges itself in ascribing the coalminer's misery to his own 
ingrained faults and vices, his lack of foresight, frivolity and dissipation. Wisely, it 
avoids tracing the case to its sources, lest it reveal the causes and circumstances that 
inevitably produce a condition which cannot find succour in vain pity but which it 
is in the general interest to remedy, and as quickly as possible. 
"Among the specific reasons that make the coalminer a machine of flesh and 
bone, the main one is the nature and condition of the work  itself,  and then also the 
extraordinary length of working time. And it is an economic law of the present 
social system that working hours tend to increase in much the same proportion as 
the labour continuously tends to grow harder. 
"The coalminer's labour is purely physical; it calls for no mental effort at all. 
His brain is almost completely idle. Deprived of any stimulus, his mental aptitudes 
remain in an elementary, inert, dormant state. Consequently, his mentality is 
narrow-minded to the extreme. Just as his activity is purely physical, so his needs 
and tastes are also of a purely physical and brutish nature. The coalminer's 
intellectual and moral degradation is not at all surprising if you look at the nature 
of his trade. Considering the ruinous effects of the physical exertion that disfigures 
his body, it is indeed quite impossible for his habits and morals not to conflict with 
reason. 
"The coalminer's worth is measured exclusively by his muscles; intelligence 
counts for nothing, for it is not needed. It takes neither skill nor talent nor 
education to work in a mine; physical strength alone is enough. A brief description 
of the various operations in a coalmine will show the reader that under the present 
economic system it is impossible for the miner to improve himself either physically or 
mentally or morally. 
"Work in a mine is generally divided as follows: the ouvriers à veine cut the coal 
from the seam, the bouteurs take it to the gallery, and the chargeurs à la taille load it 
into carts or tubs. The selôneurs pull the tubs to the shafts where the coal is raised 
to the surface. The coupers de voies, the r éleveurs and the meneurs de terres dig shafts 
and galleries, and take out the earth and stones. All these jobs are done in the dim 
light of a little lamp, in an unhealthy, dust-laden atmosphere. To do his job, the 
coalminer must assume unnatural poses, either lying on his side or kneeling, 
crouching or bending laboriously, and often he can only crawl in order to move 
forward or backward. All this makes his condition worse, more painful, than that 
of an excavator or field labourer, whose jobs are also admittedly of an entirely 
manual nature, but at least performed in open air and daylight. 
"Is it any wonder, therefore, that the coalminer should be mentally and morally at 
so low a level? How can a man who labours daily for 15  to 18 hours  in a murky, unaired 
hole,  retain even a trace of the qualities that distinguish a human being from a beast? 
The best organised creature with the happiest spiritual aptitudes is bound to 
degenerate swiftly in such a regime, which seeks to destroy the individual's abilities. 
Nowadays, one can no longer deny the influence of the body on the spirit, of the 
physical on the moral. The physical state of the individual is usually an indication of 
the mental. The report of the Mons Chamber of Commerce for 1844, an official 
paper, portrays the coalminer in the following terms: 'These workers are pale of face 
in their young years, their frame is bent, they are bow-legged, and their walk is slow. 

=====第388页=====
356 Appendices 
Almost without exceptions, they bear the stamp of premature senility at the age of 40 
to 50.' 
"Bidaut, a mining engineer, wrote in an official report in 1843: 'It is quite 
indisputable that this occupation (that of the coalminer), which deprives one of 
sunlight, subjects one to inhaling gases other than plain air, makes the body assume 
unnatural postures, exposes one to constant dangers, and so on, is of a kind that 
removes man the farthest from the normal conditions of life and should therefore 
be an object of special regulations. For me this is beyond any doubt.' 
"What was true in 1843 is still true in 1868. The physical and moral condition 
of the coalminer, even though it may not have deteriorated, has certainly not 
improved. Far from having been reduced, the working time has since been 
lengthened, and wages, even if we disregard the current decline of business, are 
still the same while the price of victuals has gone up. Though considerable 
improvements have been introduced in mining, the workers have derived no 
benefit therefrom. If, for example, the miner no longer goes down into the mine 
and up again by ladder, the time and energy saved thereby benefit the master 
because more work is done. The effect of all this is that the miner lacks mental 
flexibility, that he scorns schooling and education as being the pursuit of 'idlers', 
that he does not send his children to school, and indulges in the coarsest of 
pleasures and amusements. While the mine-owner has an interest in keeping the 
miner in this brutish state, he is helped by a profusion of lesser businesses which 
profit exclusively off the workers and would, therefore, cease to be profitable if the 
worker were sober, prudent, and provident. They set traps for the miner at every 
step to part him from his last penny. And how easy is it to seduce people who lack 
the least schooling and whose mental capacity is in hibernation! 
"This state of affairs cannot and must not continue. It is futile to appeal to the 
obligations of humanity; they are impotent against the laws of bourgeois economics. 
But the bourgeoisie is badly mistaken if it thinks it can reduce the workers to serfs 
and beasts without being itself affected by the moral consequences  thereof.  Suffice 
it to look at the bourgeoisie of the coal regions and factory towns. Whence the 
contempt for culture, for learning, and the lack of independent thinking outside 
the limits of its enterprises, and whence the crude lust for pleasure that 
distinguishes the bourgeois? It is quite the same as it was with the planters and 
slave-owners of the United States. There it was slavery and slave labour that caused 
the demoralisation. Here, too, similar effects would seem to justify the conclusion 
that the causes are the same. The lower the worker is pushed the lower his master 
sinks in his wake; he becomes morally corrupted as surely as the one whom he has 
ceased to regard as a human being. 
"The workers have themselves found a remedy against the evils they suffer 
from private industry and which retroactively cover the body of society with 
festering sores. This remedy is education and cooperation. Nothing but a reduction 
of working time can put the benefits of enlightenment and education within reach 
of the worker. Nothing but participation in the benefits of capital can deliver him 
from the misery to which he is now helplessly exposed. 
"The moral and material improvement of the worker is a question of social 
justice and of the public weal. There is no way to solve this question other than 
public education and the establishment of cooperative  societies.  It is up to the state to 
set these remedies in motion, to encourage and to support them. It will destroy 
itself if it looks on idly while the effects of the bourgeois economic system corrupt 
and erode society." 

=====第389页=====
Appendices 357 
In February 1867 there had already been disturbances among 
thé miners of Marchienne, which could only be quelled by armed 
force. The cause was the prevailing shortages, notably the high 
price of bread due to the crop failure of 1866. Calling on the 
English workers for contributions to support the families of the 
unfortunate victims of the massacre, the General Council of the 
International Association issued the following appeal at the 
beginning of March 1867 425: 
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
WORKING MENS ASSOCIATION 
18, Bouverie Street, E.C., London 
To the Miners and Iron-Workers of Great Britain 
Fellow working men, it is but a few days since The Times* presaged the ruin 
and destruction of the British iron trade if the Unionists persisted in not working 
under a certain price. The Belgians, it was said, with cheap coals and low wages, 
would engross the trade, both in the home and the foreign market. Two men, 
Creed and Williams, expatiated in The Times on the felicity of the Belgian coal and 
iron-masters not being bothered with vexatious factory laws and Trades Unions; 
the Belgian miners and iron-workers worked contentedly, with their wives and 
children, from 12 to 14 hours a day, for less than their British equals received for 
ten hours' work a day.b  However, hardly was the ink of the print dry, when tidings 
arrived that these contented beings had revolted. The iron trade, says the 
Economiste belge, 0 has been queer for some time on account of the high price of coal 
and an indifferent yield of the mines. The same journal says: "The ignorance of 
the mining population is so profound, their brutality so great, their way of 
spending their money so disorderly and so improvident that the highest wages 
would be insufficient." This is no wonder. The responsibility rests with those who 
keep them in a worse than brutish drudgery from the cradle to the grave. 
At the beginning of February, three furnaces stopped in the neighbourhood of 
Marchienne; the other iron-masters forthwith announced a reduction of wages of 
ten per cent; the coal-masters of Charleroi followed suit, yet the Economiste belge 
says that coals were never more in demand, nor at a higher price than at present. d 
The outrage0 was aggravated by a simultaneous rise in the price of flour, the coal 
and iron-masters being also the proprietors of the flour mills of the district. A 
great many of the work-people became exasperated, and not being organised and 
in the habit of deliberating upon their common affairs, they had no plan of action 
for their guidance. 
They gathered upon the high roads and went from place to place to prevent 
such as might be disposed to work under reduction. The colliers of Charleroi 
arrived by a flour mill guarded by a hundred soldiers whose guns were loaded with 
a The English original has "the thunderer of Printing House Square".— Ed. 
b See The Times, Nos. 25678, 25689, 25692, 25695, December 11, 24, 29 and 
31, 1866; No. 25708, January 15, 1867.— Ed. 
' "La grève de Marchienne-au-Pont", LEconomiste belge, No. 3, February 9, 
1867.—Erf. 
d Ibid.— Erf. 
° The English original has "the affair".— Erf. 

=====第390页=====
358 Appendices 
ball cartridges. This provoked an attack, the result is: killed, wounded, and 
prisoners. These poor provoked and ill-used victims have left families outside the 
graves and the prison walls who are in dire want. Nobody ventures in Belgium to 
say a word in their  behalf.  Mistaken and misguided as these men were as to their 
course of action, they yet fell in labour's cause, and those they have left behind 
deserve sympathy and support. Some pecuniary help to the widows and orphans, 
and the moral influence it would produce, if coming from abroad, would raise the 
drooping spirits of the whole class, and might lead to communications and 
interchanges of opinion which would give our Continental brethren a better idea of 
how labour's battles must be fought, and what organisation and education the 
fighting army requires. 
The Central Council of the International Working Men's Association appeals to 
you to take the case into your consideration, for the cause of the labourers of one 
country is that of the labourers of all countries. 
George Odger, President 
/. George Eccarius, Vice-President 
R. Shaw, Secretary 
Despite their own sad plight, Britain's miners and iron-workers 
responded willingly and warmly to the appeal that was addressed to 
them. That was the reason why the influence of the International 
Association on the labouring population of Belgium kept rising 
steadily, until events occurred in the district of Charleroi in March 
1868 which laid the way open for it all over Belgium and decided 
its social superiority.3 
The reason for this year's labour disturbances was the following. 
There had been a considerable over-production of coal. In 
Belgium coal consumption had declined, partly due to the general 
monetary and financial crisis of 1866 which occasioned an iron 
and steel crisis, affecting mainly the iron-works and blast-furnace 
industry of France and Belgium, and partly because of the 
competition of Prussian against Belgian coal. The Belgian mine-
owners had, in fact, formed a coalition to push up the price of 
their coal. But then the owners of the iron-works and furnaces 
found it more profitable to bring their coal from abroad. And to 
protect themselves against price increases they concluded contracts 
for several years in advance. For the mine-owners it was now a 
question of making good the damage they had brought down on 
themselves by their greed, and, above all, a question of reducing 
production. It might be mentioned in passing that a large 
proportion of the Belgian coalmines are run by public companies 
which have great assets and distributed enormous dividends 
among their shareholders in the previous few years. The owners 
and directors of the mines now decided to reduce the working 
a See this volume, pp. 14-15.— Ed. 

=====第391页=====
Appendices 359 
week to four days, which meant a loss of 33 Vs per cent of their 
regular wage for the workers. When this, too, failed to restore the 
balance between supply and demand, the coal-masters decided to 
reduce the price of coal. But to avoid having to lower the 
dividends of their shareholders, they reduced by another 10 per 
cent the wages that were already down to  662/3  per cent of 
normal. Yet at this very time the price of the most indispensable 
victuals was higher than ever owing to the two crop failures of 
1866 and 1867. The half-starved coalminers, already painfully 
affected by their days of involuntary idleness, remonstrated 
against the wage cut, which doomed them to hunger. The strike 
became universal and spread throughout the district of Charleroi. 
Hunger and misery drove the wretches to rebellion and pillage, 
for otherwise the women would surely not have in a manner of 
speaking put themselves at the head of the crowds of workers, 
marching in front and holding poles to which they had nailed 
some miserable rags. 
Now the capitalists let the government and military forces 
intervene and most deliberately provoked bloody conflicts in which 
many workers were killed, wounded or thrown behind bars. The 
first clash occurred on the 25th of March in the vicinity of 
Charleroi. The workers were about to comply with the well-
meaning entreaties of an officer who pleaded with them to 
disperse, when a stone was flung and hit the major in command, 
giving the latter an excuse to open fire. Seven killed and 13 
wounded was the outcome of that first collision, followed by others 
with the gendarmerie and cavalry. In Arsimont, gendarmes and 
the public prosecutor came to the scene even before any acts of 
violence had occurred, making arrests among workers, who had 
only just announced a strike. Directly in the wake of the police 
came the soldiers, who pounced without ado on the lot of workers 
returning home from the mine. 
In modern history only the scenes of carnage and bloodshed 
during the Negro uprising in Jamaica426  can compare with these 
atrocities. Here, as in Jamaica, the capitalists celebrated bloody 
orgies. Here, as in Jamaica, they hoped to break what was left of 
the workers' spirit of resistance and self-esteem by acts of extreme 
brutality. The cheerful, insolent and humorous tone affected by 
them as they revelled in their terreur blanche 3 may be seen, among 
others, from the following passage in their organ, Indépendance 
belge, of the 1st of April 1868: 
a White terror.— Ed. 

=====第392页=====
360 Appendices 
"The land is inundated with troops, and as these withdraw all individuals 
named as the leaders, as well as all those generally known to be dangerous, will be 
under lock and key. That is a prudent measure necessitated by the circumstances.... 
The arrests are accompanied with a military show of pomp and force, partly to 
create a crushing impression on the spirits of the populace and partly to be ready 
for any surprise attack that may be tried to snatch the prisoners from under the 
armed custody of the authorities.... Considering such organised pressure on the 
masses, it is easy to see that the rising cannot conceivably break out again. The 
bloody drama has also had a profoundly intimidating effect.... The restless but not 
in the least dangerous mass of rioters will be reduced to a state of complete 
impotence before nightfall. All leaders whom they had listened to in the past few 
days are being thrown behind bars, and even those whose voice they might perhaps 
be minded to heed are likewise being imprisoned.... It is in fact no longer the 
military but the police who are dealing with an iron hand.... One seeks advice from 
burgomasters, police officials and gendarmerie brigadiers in the rural communities, 
and has all those in one's own area indicated in reports as trouble-makers 
arrested." 
In the midst of the stupefaction to which these brutalities 
reduced the afflicted part of the workers, the Brussels Central 
Committee of the International Association for Belgium raised its 
voice in the press, called public meetings, stigmatised the 
industrialists and their accomplice, the government, galvanised the 
Belgian working class to joint resistance, supplied the persecuted 
with legal counsel and defence lawyers, and declared the cause of 
the Charleroi coalminers the common cause of the International 
Working Men's Association. The General Council in London, like 
the two committees in Paris and Geneva, supported the committee at 
Brussels.427 
After having suppressed the coalminers' movement in the 
district of Charleroi by force of arms, the employers did nothing 
at all to conciliate the unemployed and starving workers. They 
were perfectly happy to be able to close down their mines for 
some time. The government, too, did nothing. The workers, who 
received no support from any quarter but the International 
Working Men's Association, which was already badly taxed by the 
simultaneous events in Geneva and whose aid committees were 
only being organised, were on the edge of death from starvation. 
But at this time the townsmen of Charleroi, who saw the daily 
increasing misery, began to have misgivings. The Liberal associa­
tion of Charleroi threatened the government that if no work was 
immediately provided to the jobless workers, it would dissolve its 
election committee and leave the field free for the Catholics. The 
threat had the desired effect. It was fear of losing votes in the 
next elections, not the crying distress of the starving workers, that 
drove the liberal government to initiating considerable public 
works in May 1868. 

=====第393页=====
Appendices 361 
In the meantime, the proceedings against the men arrested in 
March are following their course. Whatever the outcome may be, 
whether the judges convict or acquit them, the government will 
have suffered, a setback. The workers know that they can expect 
nothing but powder and lead or imprisonment from the govern­
ment. They cannot expect the government to redress their 
legitimate grievances or to protect and help them against the 
abuses of their employers. The government has itself opened their 
eyes to where help can come from and to whom they must turn: 
not the government but rather the International Working Men's 
Association. 
9. THE POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
Faithful to the programme1' in which it called on working men 
to lay the ground for their social emancipation by seizing political 
power, the General Council did not in the least allow its social 
activity prevent it from taking political action in propitious 
circumstances. The most important steps in this field were the 
following. 
1. Even before the Association was founded some of the 
members of the General Council had worked among their men for 
the cause of the North American Union. To the extent to which 
the government and the ruling classes had favoured the Confeder­
ates,  making the most of the distress caused in England by the 
blockade of American harbours as a lever and employing all 
possible means to instigate demonstrations of English workers in 
favour of the Secessionists428—to that same extent labour leaders 
had foiled these intrigues, informed the government and people 
of the United States in their addresses of the true feelings of the 
masses in Britain, and organised mass demonstrations of London 
workers in favour of the Union. Lincoln's re-election on Novem­
ber 8, 1864 was an occasion for the General Council to send him 
an address with its best wishes.b At the same time, it called mass 
meetings in support of the Union. That was why Lincoln, in his 
a K. Marx, "Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Associa­
tion".— Ed. 
b K. Marx, "To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of 
America".— Ed. 

=====第394页=====
362 Appendices 
message of reply, expressly acknowledged the services of the 
International Working Men's Association for the good cause.3 
2. The General Council also convened public meetings from 
time to time to keep up the English workers' sympathy for Poland 
and to expose Russia's abuses in Europe. 
3. When following the 1866 events in Germany429 a war 
between France and Prussia appeared imminent and the govern­
ment papers in France did their utmost to fan the flames, to fire 
the national ambitions of the French, and to excite national hatred 
between France and Germany, the Paris Central Committee of the 
International Working Men's Association organised workers' dem­
onstrations all over France against the war party, sent messages 
of sympathy to German working men and workers' unions, and 
prevented the French workers from falling into the trap that had 
been set for them. Time will show how much the anti-chauvinist 
attitude of the French labouring classes moulded by this vigorous 
action helped to prevent a war for which there had then been a 
suitable pretext. 
4. The General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association took a conspicuous part in the establishment and 
consolidation of the English Reform League, whose agitation 
brought about the parliamentary reform of 1867. Members of the 
General Council are still the most active members of the Executive 
of the Reform League. The public demonstrations in London that 
forced the resignation of Mr. Walpole, the Tory Home Secretary, 
and the indignation meetings in all the leading cities of the land 
were, indeed, initiated by them. 
5. The murder trial of the Fenians in Manchester* was branded 
by the General Council as a travesty of justice. When the 
* On September 18, 1867, armed Fenians attacked a police van in Manchester 
and freed two political prisoners (Fenian officers). A police sergeant was killed 
during the attack. Contrary to English law, which provides for periodical assizes to 
be held in all counties, the case was put before a special commission, an 
extraordinary tribunal, at which the Fenians who are accused of having taken part 
in the attack were charged with the murder of the police sergeant. Mr. Blackburn 
was named judge and contrived to prevail on the jury by all sorts of stratagems 
that each of the defendants proved to have taken part in the attempt to free the 
prisoners had thereby incurred guilt for murder. Thereupon, Mr. Blackburn passed 
down five convictions and five death sentences. Of the convicted men two were 
reprieved and three were hanged. On June 2, 1868, the selfsame Mr. Blackburn 
conducted the proceedings against Mr. Eyre, the ex-governor of Jamaica, and 
prevailed on the Grand Jury, with references to an alleged judgement of Lord 
a "Mr. Lincoln and the International Working Men's Association. London, 
Jan. 31", The Times, No.  25101,  February 6, 1865.— Ed. 

=====第395页=====
Appendices 363 
executions drew close in November 1867, the General Council sent 
a petition to the English government,3 warning it against the 
bloodshed. Besides, at the height of the panic created in London 
by the Manchester events, the Council held a public session in 
support of the rights of Ireland and the Irish. This was the first of 
the actions in favour of the unfortunate victims of that miscarriage 
of justice. The Times and the rest of the daily press reported the 
event.b The mood among the London workers was so strongly 
altered thereby and the plan of the English aristocracy to exploit 
English national prejudices and split the working class with its 
strong Irish element into two hostile factions, was so effectively 
baulked that the organs of the English aristocracy, such as the 
Saturday Review, began denouncing the International Working 
Men's Association as being dangerous to the state. 
10. CONFLICTS WITH GOVERNMENTS 
1. Conflict with the French Government 
It is commonly known that in France there exists a law that no 
society of more than 20 persons may be constituted without 
authorisation of the government.431 To judge from the wording of 
the law, most of the industrial and commercial companies in 
France are unlawful and exist on sufferance only. For by decision 
of the Court of Appeal the authorisation is tacitc if the society 
in question is public and is not dissolved by the government for 
some length of time. Whether authorised or not, one may assume 
that the government may at the very most dissolve societies to 
whose establishment it had tacitly acquiesced, but that it has no 
right to punish its members. 
As for the organisation of the International Working Men's 
Association in France, the case is as follows. All branch societies in 
Chief Justice Sir A. Cockburn, that Mr. Eyre had not exceeded the administrative 
powers vested in him, thus saving Mr. Eyre from being convicted. On June 8, 
Blackburn was accused by Lord Chief Justice Sir A. Cockburn in public session at 
Queen's Bench430  of having falsified the facts, and pleaded commission of a legal 
mistake. [Note by Eichhoff.] 
a See this volume, pp. 3-4.— Ed. 
b "London Meetings", The Tunes, No. 25974, November 21, 1867.— Ed. 
' In the German original the French word "tacite" is given in Latin in brackets 
after its German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第396页=====
364 Appendices 
France exist merely as members of the English society, on whose 
General Council they are represented by Eugène Dupont. (In 
addition, there is in London a French group and a German one.) 
Though they act in common in certain cases, the French sections 
are not connected with one another, and have intercourse only 
with the General Council in London. Each of the societies forms a 
separate body with an executive committee at its head which 
corresponds with the General Council in London. The establish­
ment of the society in France was initiated by the Paris 
Administrative Committee of the Paris group. The Committee had 
notified the Interior Minister 3 and the Prefect of the Paris police 
of its inauguration and existence as long ago as 1864. Since that 
date the Paris Committee, like the committees in the other cities of 
France, had functioned publicly. Open meetings of members of the 
Association were held from week to week, and reports about them 
were published in public newspapers. Indeed, in clear contrast to 
the secret societies of past decades, the society is by nature a public 
one, and the meetings of the General Council in London are 
reported each week in London newspapers. 
The first conflict between the International Working Men's 
Association and the French government occurred in September 
1867,  after the Congress at Lausanne. 13 A part of the documents of 
the Congress had been entrusted to the care of Jules Gottraux, one 
of the French delegates, who was to despatch them from France to 
England. 432 The moment he crossed the French border, the papers 
were seized.433 The General Secretary of the London General 
Council0 addressed himself in writing to the French Minister of 
the Interiord and demanded the return of the confiscated papers 
because they were British property. He received no reply. 
Thereupon, the General Council of the Association turned to Lord 
Stanley, the British Foreign Secretary. The latter instructed Lord 
Cowley, the British Ambassador in Paris, to demand that the 
papers be returned, and the French government complied. 
The second conflict occurred at about the same time. No printer 
in Paris had dared to print a memorandume which the Paris 
delegates had read out at the Geneva Congress and in which they set 
forth their standpoint and defended their principles — which were, 
a Paul Boudet.— Ed. 
b Eichhoff is mistaken: the conflict occurred in September 1866, after the congress 
in Geneva (see Note 13).— Ed. 
' John George Eccarius.— Ed. 
d Charles La Vallette.— Ed. 
e Congrès  de- Genève. Mémoire des délégués français, Brussels, 1866.— Ed. 

=====第397页=====
Appendices 365 
by the way, one-sidedly Proudhonistic, specifically French, and 
decidedly not accepted by the Association. For this reason, the Paris 
Committee had the memorandum printed in Brussels. But it was 
seized on the border as it was being brought into France. On 
March 3, 1867, the Paris Central Committee of the Association wrote 
to Rouher, the Minister of State and the Emperor's3 alter ego, 
demanding the reasons for the seizure.b In his reply,c  addressed to 
the offices of the Paris Bureau of the Association at Rue de 
Gravilliers 44, Rouher invited a member of the Committee to an 
interview. The Committee appointed a delegate, d who went to see 
the Minister. Rouher demanded altering and modifying a few 
objectionable places. The delegate refused to do so because any 
modifications would rob the document of its meaning. Thereupon, 
Rouher made the following characteristic pronouncement: "Still if 
you ivould introduce  some words  of gratitude to  the Emperor, who has done  so 
much for  the working  classes,  one might  see what could  be done.  " (Pourtant, 
si vous faisiez entrer quelques remerciments à l'adresse de 
l'empereur qui a tant fait pour les classes ouvrières, l'on pourrait 
voir.) e The delegate replied that the Association did not deal in 
politics and that neither flattery nor defamation, whether of an 
individual or a political party, came within its competence. 
Thereupon Rouher broke off the conversation and left the seizure of 
the memorandum in force/ 
The French government imagined that it could use the Interna­
tional Working Men's Association as a tool. It was in for a 
disappointment. On the other hand, it was aware of the growing 
strength and increasing influence of the Society on tfie occasion of 
the strikes at Amiens, Roubaix and Paris. Finally, a few weeks 
after the above conversation, it became aware with the greatest 
displeasure of the Society's agitation against imperialist chauvin­
ism. It decided to take action. Whence arose 
;l Napoleon III.— Ed. 
b Eichhoff is mistaken: the letter was dated March the 9th (see "A M. le 
ministre de l'intérieur. Vendredi, 9 mars 1867", Le Courrier français, No. 112, May 1, 
1868).—  Ed. 
1 Ibid.— Ed. 
d Antoine Marie Bourdon, keeper of the archives of the Paris section of the First 
International.— Ed. 
v In the German original the French sentence is given in brackets after its German 
equivalent. An account of the interview, which took place on March 10, 1867, was 
published in Le Courrier français, No. 112, May 1, 1868.— Ed. 
f Ibid.— Erf. 

=====第398页=====
366 Appendices 
The third conflict.434 In the beginning of 1868,a one night the 
Paris police raided the homes of the members of the Paris Central 
Committee. All letters and papers that they found there were 
confiscated. The police deduced therefrom that the registered 
members of the Paris group numbered some 2,000. (Since then 
this number has risen considerably.) The charge preferred was 
participation in a secret society, but it was dropped after two 
months' investigation. Instead, charges of breaching police regula­
tions were presented, namely, of forming a society of more than 
20 persons in the absence of the government's authorisation. 
On March 20, 1868, the case came before the penal court of the 
Seine department. Engraver Tolain, a co-defendant, spoke on 
behalf of the 15 defendants. The hearing yielded the following 
picture435: 
President^ Do you admit that the International Working Men's Association, 
whose member you and your co-defendants have become, has never been 
authorised? 
Tolain. I think this is not the proper time to reply to this question. In our 
"common plea we intend to prove that the overt activity of our society presupposes 
a tacit acknowledgement of its existence. 
President. But you do admit that the authorisation was never received? 
Tolain. It was never even required of us. To what government, indeed, should 
an international association turn for authorisation? Should it be the French, the 
Belgian, the British or any of the German governments? It could not have known, and 
no one could have told it. What would a French authorisation count for in England, 
for example, or vice versa? 
President. Did you discuss political matters at your gatherings? 
Tolain. Never, nowhere. 
President. A manifesto printed in Brussels in 1866c has been confiscated from 
you, whose content consists of politics, even of effusive politics (politique 
transcenden  tale). 
Tolain. The manifesto is my personal property, and I believe that in France I 
am the only one to own a copy of it. It was drawn up and published by English 
workers because, may it be known to the court, every group in every country has 
the right to set forth its particular opinion without thereby obligating the groups of 
other nations to solidarity. It is therefore not unusual for an English or German 
branch society to discuss questions of politics that we ourselves would not venture 
to touch. I declare that we have always kept our distance from politics at our 
meetings. 
a On New Year's Eve 1867.— Ed. 
b Delesvaux.— Ed. 
c The reference is to the Manifeste de ^Association Internationale des Travailleurs 
suivi du Règlement provisoire, Brussels, 1866. It was translated into French by 
Charles Longuet at Marx's request. Longuet rectified the mistranslations that 
occurred in the first French translation of the Provisional Rules.— Ed. 
d In the German original the French words are given in brackets after their 
German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第399页=====
Appendices 367 
President. How is your Association organised, where is its seat, what are its 
purposes, and what are the functions of the General Council and the Paris Bureau? 
Tolain. The General Council was constituted in London in 1864. No permanent 
seat was ever fixed for it. The fact that it has had its seat in London for three years 
is due to difficulties that we have been unable to overcome. To inform you of its 
purposes I could hardly do better than to read you its Rules. (He reads the Rules).'* 
President. Tell me something about the organisation of the Paris Bureau. 
Tolain. The Paris Bureau was formed following an appeal to all workers 
published in the newspapers. The object of creating the Bureau was to have a 
centre of activity for the Paris group, to send delegates to international congresses, 
and to transact other business on behalf of the Society. All this was done in broad 
daylight and quite openly. The Statutes of the Paris Bureau were set forth in a 
printed booklet, and the weekly dues of every member were fixed at 10 centimes. 
President. Has this Bureau engaged in direct propaganda to expand the Society? 
Tolain. Now and then we were asked for advice as to how a bureau is formed. 
In most cases we referred to the General Council in London. 
Resident. Has the Paris Bureau interfered in any strikes, such as that of the 
Paris bronze-workers, or at Roubaix, Amiens, and elsewhere? 
Tolain. The Association has indeed taken a most active part in the 
above-mentioned events in the belief that by studying the causes of the strikes it 
was doing a good service to the employers as well as the workers. 
Public prosecutor Lepelletier's speech began as follows: 
"Gentlemen, the defendants who stand before you are hard-working, intelligent 
and upright workers. They have never been convicted of anything, nothing has 
tainted their morality, and in substantiating the charge brought against them I, 
gentlemen, can say nothing that would prejudice their honour." 
Thereupon the public prosecutor endeavoured to prove that the 
law had been breached and that there were grounds for 
conviction. Referring to the defendants' arguments invalidating 
the charge, he observed: 
"What reproaches are being cast upon the prosecution? Gentlemen, if you have 
read the Siècle, the Opinion nationale, and the Courrier français of the past few days, 
you will have found expressions of regret in them by that portion of the press 
which sympathises with the International Association. Their reasoning is as follows. 
For three years, the Association has existed in broad and blessed daylight. It may 
not have been allowed by the authorities, but tolerated. Its aim was the material 
and moral emancipation of the workers, its means to this end being the study of 
economic questions and their solution according to the principles of truth, morality, 
and justice.... And such long sufferance was suddenly followed by ruthless criminal 
prosecution for no reason at all other than the plain arbitrariness of power and a 
whim of violence. If the members of the Association had at least gone back on their 
programme and had applied themselves to problems involving danger to the state, if 
they had at least engaged in politics! But, on the contrary, they had steered clear of 
them at their sittings, had not touched them at their congresses, and had restricted 
a The passages from the Rules read by Tolain are cited in  Procès  de l'Association 
Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris, Paris, 1868, pp. 14-15.— Ed. 
h "Règlement du Bureau de Paris." In: Procès de l'Association Internationale des 
Travailleurs..., pp. 22-24.— Ed. 
14-733 

=====第400页=====
368 Appendices 
their activity to the narrow limits of their statutes, which were well known to the 
authorities and, at least indirectly, tacitly, acknowledged by them. 
"This,  gentlemen, is the reproach that is cast upon us. I have neither 
understated nor exaggerated it. Is it a justified reproach? Is it true that the 
Association did not engage in politics? Is it true that it confined itself to the study 
of economic questions as provided for in its programme?" 
Thereupon the public prosecutor endeavoured to prove the 
Paris Bureau's involvement in political matters, which was not 
hard to do considering the Association's general attitude in the 
Luxembourg affair,436 and demanded that the defendants be 
convicted in the interests of the law. 
Here defendant Tolain rose to his feet and placed before the 
court the following petition15: 
"Considering that the illegality of a society derives from the absence of 
authorisation from the authorities; that no formal procedure has been established 
to obtain such authorisation; that the said authorisation can also be dispensed 
tacitly; that demanding a special form of authorisation means tightening a law 
which even the legislator himself has recognised as exceptional; that public 
confidence is shaken thereby; furthermore, that it follows from the discussions 
concerning the law of 1834 and from utterances of government representatives 
that the said authorisation may be granted tacitly; that such tacit permission or 
sufferance is the form in which all industrial and commercial companies of more than 
20 members exist; that conceding the power to persecute such societies without 
first revoking this practice is an infringement upon the public consciousness, since 
it is self-evident that the government considers them lawfully authorised by virtue 
of their obvious existence; considering that the tacit authorisation of the 
Association follows 1) from the continuous publicity of its existence and actions, 
truly far more pronounced than in the case of commercial companies; 2) from the 
two letters of the International Association to the Minister of the Interior and the 
Prefect of the Police, in which the establishment and existence of the Association 
were recorded as long ago as 1864; considering that definitive and formal 
authorisation of the administration is contained in a letter addressed to the 
Secretary of the Society by the office of the Minister of the Interior0 or, more 
precisely, by the Minister of State who was his temporary deputy; that the 
legitimacy of the Association was in no way questioned during an interview with the 
Minister; that the prosecution cannot demonstrate that the Association has in the 
interval changed either its theories or its aims; considering that actually the 
Secretary of the Association, who had been invited to explain the memorial of the 
French delegates to the Congress of 1866,d set forth the very same theories and 
aims which are now being reproved and prosecuted; that at that time even the 
prosecutor's office regarded the Society as amply legalised because it had known of 
its existence and nevertheless stated at the public proceedings of January 4, 1867 
that no prosecution was being contemplated; for all these reasons we plead with the 
court to dismiss the prosecution's indictment." 
a See Procès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris, pp. 16, 
20.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 32-35.— Ed. 
c Paul Boudet.— Ed. 
(1 Congrès de Genève. Mémoire des délégués français, Brussels, 1866.— Ed. 

=====第401页=====
Appendices 369 
Upon submitting this petition, Tolain took the floor on behalf 
of the other defendants. His speech was a passionate protest 
against the lack of rights of the labouring classes. He described the 
dangers which the workman incurred when he endeavoured to 
clarify his social status by mutual instruction, by learning the 
relations that affect his most vital interests, and when he tried to 
secure improvements. Whatever he may do, whatever caution he 
may exercise, however pure and harmless his intentions may be, 
he was always threatened, persecuted, and subject to prosecution. 
In the past 20 years countless industrial innovations had created 
new requirements and completely reconstructed the social econo­
my. Deliberately or not, the government itself had followed the 
movement and collaborated assiduously in this reconstruction. 
"We workers," Tolain went on to say, "were deeply interested to know what 
was to become of us, and this was the reason for our uniting in the International 
Association. Working men wanted to see for themselves, and not through the eyes 
of the official bourgeois economics. English workers gathered to receive the French 
workers; they and we were moved by one and the same concern, the social 
question. The perfection of machines, the English workers said, changed the social 
situation of working men each passing day, so let us enlighten each other, let us 
find the means to safeguard our subsistence. We had the same interests and were 
inspired by the same ideas. Since then the common slogan says that the workman 
cannot expect any improvement of his social condition unless he achieves it by his 
own efforts. This slogan was proclaimed at a public meeting in London in 1864." 
Thereupon Tolain described the establishment, organisation 
and activity of the General Council in London and the Paris 
Bureau. Having again declared that the government had granted 
them tacit authorisation, he said that they, on the other  hand,  had not 
applied for official authorisation out of principle because they would 
not concede to the government the power to permit or forbid 
rights that were the natural endowment of workers and all citizens. 
And he concluded with the following significant declaration: 
"I must add that the position in which we have been put should be properly 
considered. Whatever your sentence may be, we shall do the same tomorrow as we 
did the day before; this is neither hatred nor pigheadedness on our part; it is the 
consciousness of our right. From now on we lay claim to dealing ourselves with all 
matters of concern to us; we have only one means of putting an end to our present 
situation, and that is to overstep the law in order to show how bad it is. So far, we 
have not wished to breach the law because, let me repeat, the police, the 
government, the municipal authorities and the public at large, have known 
everything, seen everything, and accepted everything on sufferance." 
The sentence of the court read1: 
•' See Procès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris, 
pp. 39-40.— Ed. 
14* 

=====第402页=====
370 Appendices 
"Considering that, as follows from the investigations and proceedings, the 
defendants have for three years been Paris members of a society known by the 
name of the International Working Men's Association, that the aforenamed society 
consisted of more than 20 persons, and that it was not authorised; 
"considering that the associated workers were bound among themselves by the 
purposes of the Association and worked together for the achievement of these 
purposes, that the said purposes were to improve the situation of the workers by 
cooperation, production and credit, and that they gathered at regular intervals and 
constituted themselves into a permanent corporation; 
"considering that Articles 291 and 292 of the Code pénal* and the Law of April 
10, 1834 b are police and general security laws applicable to anyone who breaches 
them on French territory, that it is irrelevant that the seat of the Society is located 
in London, and that it is perfectly sufficient to establish that the Paris Bureau has 
committed a breach of the aforenamed laws; 
"considering that notice of the existence of the aforenamed Society in 
newspapers or its sufferance by the authorities does not relieve it of the need for 
an explicit authorisation of the government; 
"considering that the defendants, by acting in this way, have committed offences 
covered by and punishable under Articles 291 and 292 of the Code pénal and § 2 of 
the Law of April 10, 1834; 
"the Court hereby dissolves the International Working Men's Association 
established in Paris under the name of Paris Bureau, and sentences each of the 
defendants to a fine of 100 francs which, in the event of insolvency, shall be 
replaced by 30 days' imprisonment." 
The convicted filed an appeal against this sentence. In the 
meantime, the Paris group acted precisely as Tolain had told the 
court. In place of the prosecuted 15, a new Bureau, consisting of 
nine members of the Association, was elected. Their election was 
announced in the newspapers.' In a signed appeal they called 
publicly on the Paris workmen to contribute funds in support of the 
strike in Geneva.d 
The case of the 15 was heard in the second instance on April 22, 
1868. 
The main points of the indictment were the Bureau's open 
refusal to abide by the imperial penal law banning societies of 
more than 20 persons; the political nature of the Society, which 
subjected all pillars of the existing order to criticism; the power of 
the Society, which no government could withstand if it were 
allowed to embrace all countries as it has been doing so far; by 
a Code pénal, ou code des délits et des peines, Cologne, 1810.— Ed. 
b Loi sur les associations, 10-11 avril 1834.— Ed. 
c "Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris", Le Courrier 
français, No. 71, March 14, 1868.— Ed. 
d The appeal was printed in Le Courrier français, No. 101, April 20, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第403页=====
Appendices 371 
now, it was alleged, it has become a sort of universal intermediary 
for workers' strikes. 
As in all other cases, the accused defended themselves on their 
own, without legal counsel. Referring to the lack of an official 
authorisation, they declared: 
"If we, the Paris correspondents of the London General Council, had been 
notified, after informing the police and the competent authorities of the 
constitution of our Bureau, that an explicit authorisation was required, we would 
have thought of some other organisation for we are making it quite clear that it 
would never have occurred to us to submit to the humiliation of seeking authorisation. The 
very first principle of our Rules would have forbidden us to do so. For it says that 
emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working classes 
themselves. Those, however, who accept authorisation also accept submission, 
subordination and the right of patronage or, in short, serfdom, from which, 
indeed, in all its forms, the International Association aims to liberate the working 
classes." 
The Court of Appeal confirmed the sentence of the penal court 
and, besides, sentenced the appellants to paying the costs of the 
hearing. The grounds of the sentence were in substance the same 
as those of the sentence of the first instance; only the following 
phrase was new: 
"That the danger was aggravated by the enormous power of the organisation and by 
the broad expansion of its activity." 
In the meantime legal proceedings were also instituted against 
the nine members of the new Bureau elected in March, and the 
latter appeared before the penal court on May 22, 1868. 
The hearings of the case were similar to those of March the 
20th.437 
The defence was presented by co-defendant bookbinder Varlin. 
After this workman, too, had dismissed the legal arguments of the 
prosecution with a logic and insight that would have done credit to 
any jurist, he went on to portray the moral-political and 
social-economic side of the case, and here rose to such power of 
expression and conviction as could only have come from someone 
who knew the rightness of the cause and its profound moral justice. 
He saida: 
"In our eyes a strike is only a crude means to establish the wage; we use it 
much against our will for it subjects the workman and his family to weeks and 
months of most severe privations without the assurance of finally winning a fair 
wage. The International Association has set itself the task of gaining a peaceful 
a Procès..., pp. 123-26.— Ed. 

=====第404页=====
372 Appendices 
settlement to the labour question by studying the economic conditions; but as 
obstacles are being raised to our studies and the solution of the social question is 
thereby delayed, we shall frequently have to resort to strikes so as to protect our 
livelihood. 
"But I must touch on yet another point. 
"Before the law you are the judges and we are the accused; but before the 
principles we are two parties—you the party of order at any price, the party of 
stability, and we the party of reform, the party of socialism. Let us take an 
impartial look: what is the social order whose perfections it has been our crime to 
question? It is eroded to the marrow by inequality, its life is menaced by selfishness, 
it is being strangled by the iron claws of anti-social prejudices. Despite the 
declaration of human rights and the short-lived victories of the people's will, it 
depends on a handful of rulers whether or not streams of the people's blood shall 
be shed in fratricidal battles of nation against nation, of people who languish under 
the same burdens and who long for the same emancipation. 
"Enjoyments exist for but a small minority, which, indeed, indulges in them to 
the fullest measure and in the most refined manner. The great mass of the people, 
on the other hand, suffer in misery and ignorance—here groaning under 
unbearable burdens, there racked by hunger, and languishing everywhere in 
the darkness of prejudices and in the superstitious belief that their slavery can never 
end. 
"If you want particulars, see how the gambling on the stock exchange plays 
havoc and  mischief,  how both abundance and hunger are at the will of powerful 
financiers beside whose mountains of gold there abide ruin and malicious 
bankruptcy. In industry unbridled competition holds down the working man and 
destroys any sensible relationship between production and consumption. A 
shortage of hands for the necessary, but an abundance of the unnecessary; while 
millions of poor children go about without a stitch to cover their bodies, shawls of a 
preposterous price, costing more than 10,000 working days, are displayed at world 
exhibitions. The working man does not earn enough even for the bare necessities, 
while the world teems with over-satiated idlers. 
"The old world went under because the thorn of slavery stuck in its flesh; if the 
modern age cares as little for the suffering of the masses, if it forces them to work 
without respite, to suffer, if it denies them ihe necessities so that a few may live in 
luxury and pleasure, if the modern age refuses to see that such a state of society is 
altogether outrageous, its end, too, will not be far distant. 
"Dr. W. Palley, from Oxford University, says in the newspaper, La Coopération, 
of this May a: 
'"Think of a flock of pigeons in a cornfield. Instead of picking away, 
ninety-nine of them consume nothing but the straw and  chaff,  while gathering the 
corn in a large heap expressly for just one pigeon, often the weakest and the most 
pitiful of all; this one struts clucking, gorging  itself,  stamping and spoiling, while 
the hard-working ones stand in a ring and look on good-naturedly; suddenly one 
of their number, possibly braver or perhaps hungrier than its brethren, ventures to 
snap away a grain; now all the rest throw themselves upon the malefactor out of 
blind submissiveness to pull it about, to recover the plunder, to drive it out of their 
community.' 
"Glance at this picture. You will, of course, find that this cannot occur in 
nature, but is repeated a hundredfold every day among human beings who are 
endowed with reason. The conclusion, however, is twofold. You will conclude 
a "Correspondance. Travail et Coopération, Londres, 27 avril 1868", La 
Coopération, No. 18, May 3, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第405页=====
Appendices 373 
therefrom that man stands above animals by virtue of his reason. J say to you, 
however, that despite his reason man can learn a thing or two from animals! 
"Does he not belong to those 99, the creature who is born in misery, who 
hardly ever sees his mother because she must go to her work, who suffers hunger 
and cold, is exposed to every possible harm, who grows up in filth and from early 
childhood contracts the germ of the disease that follows him to his grave? He is 
barely eight, has barely gained a minimum of strength, and off he goes to 
work—to work in thin, unhealthy air, mistreated, doomed to ignorance, and laid 
open by bad examples to every possible vice. So it proceeds until the child is 
older. Now, at 20, the lad must leave his parents, who need him, so as to be robbed 
of his humanity in some soldiers' barracks or to be shot dead on some battlefield. 
If he escapes with his life, he may marry (provided he is allowed to do so by the 
English philanthropist Malthus or the French minister Duchâtel, who happen to 
think that a workman needs neither wife nor family, that no one forces him to 
stay alive if he cannot provide for himself). So he marries, and soon poverty, 
privation, unemployment, disease, and children move into his house. And when 
now, seeing the misery of his own, he ventures to demand a fair wage, he is tied 
hand and foot by hunger as in Preston, shot down as in Charleroi, put behind bars 
as in Bologna, subjected to a state of siege as in Catalonia, or bundled before a court 
as in Paris.... 
"So the wretch trudges on along the road of suffering and humiliation. At a 
mature age, without a comforting memory of his youth, he is startled to find that 
old age is creeping up; should he have no family or only a poor one, he will finally 
die like an evil-doer in an institution for beggars. 
"Yet the man produced four times as much as he consumed. What has society 
done with the surplus? Ask the hundredth pigeon — the one that does nothing at 
all and lives off the labour of the other 99. 
"History shows us that any nation or social organisation that strays off the path 
of strict justice and follows that of injustice, falls prey to decay and dissolution; and 
precisely this is the solace we can derive with certainty from the lessons of the past 
at this time of luxury and misery, coercion and slavery, ignorance and stultification, 
demoralisation and degeneracy, for so long as a human being can starve to death 
on the threshold of a palace crammed with treasure, the state institutions remain 
unstable. 
"Feel the pulse of our time: you will discover a muted resentment between the 
class that wants to hang on to everything and the class that wants to regain the fruit 
of its industry. The crass superstitions which, we thought, had been erased by the 
18th century, are coming back to the surface; wanton egoism and dissolution 
everywhere. Those are signs of decay. The ground is reeling and slipping from 
under your feet: Beware! 
"The class that has so far only appeared on and off on the world stage to 
perform some great act of justice, suppressed at all times and under all 
governments, the class of labour, now offers you a means of revival. Be wise and 
acknowledge its legitimacy; do not interfere with its cause, which is beneficial for 
all. Only the breath of absolute freedom can clear the air and drive away the clouds 
that threaten  us.... 
"Once a class forfeits the moral superiority that put it in power, it must step off 
the stage if it wants to avoid the atrocities that are the last resort of all perishing 
regimes. Let the bourgeoisie comprehend that its strivings are not great enough to 
meet all the needs of the times and that it can therefore do nothing but dissolve 
itself in the younger class that is ringing in a powerful political rebirth, equality, 
and solidarity through freedom." 

=====第406页=====
374 Appendices 
The sentence of the court for each of the nine accused was 
3 months in prison and a fine of 100 francs; the convicted filed 
an appeal, which was eventually dismissed. 
Apart from its social significance, the French government's 
persecution of the International Working Men's Association has 
political implications, too. For the first time since the coup d'état 
of 1852, 4S8 a society existing in France has dared to offer 
resistance under civil law to criminal prosecution and to claim civil 
rights for itself which the one who was elected by universal 
suffrage could not very well deny it through his organs without 
bringing his many years of flirting with the working class to a 
sudden end. It is safe to assume that the prosecution originated 
with Minister of State Rouher. But so great was his embarrassment 
over the imaginary need for action on political grounds that, while 
prosecuting the Paris Bureau, he has not dared to dissolve groups 
of the Association in Lyons, Rouen, Roubaix, Bordeaux, Marseil­
les, and so on. 
The Paris newspaper Le Réveil, organ of Ledru Rollin's party, 
refers most approvingly to the behaviour of the members of the 
Paris Committee. 3 It contrasts the political insight and moral 
superiority of the working class to the intrigues and narrow-
mindedness of the ruling classes. It makes the following note­
worthy observation: 
"It is to the union of ideas and sentiments that prevails amongst the working men 
of the different countries of Europe that we trust for the maintenance of peace. In a 
few days the Congress of the International Association is going to assemble. All the 
countries of Europe will be represented there, perhaps with the exception of France, 
and will it be too much to say that by the wisdom of its resolutions this assembly of all 
the European delegates of labour may become the Amphitryonite council of Europe? 
Yes;  if to-morrow, by mastering the immortal principles of the French revolution, 
and taking in hand the sacred interests of labour, which comprehend order, security, 
and liberty, this Congress decreed peace, the word would be received with enthusiasm 
by all Europe." 
2. Conflict with the Belgian Government 
Spurred by the newspapers of the Belgian bourgeoisie, with 
Indépendance belge at their head, the Belgian government tried to 
a Ch. Delescluze, "Le droit d'Association. Devant la justice", Le Réveil, No. 2, 
July 9, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第407页=====
Appendices 375 
portray the International Working Men's Association as the 
instigator of the disturbances in the district of Charleroi.3 The 
court investigation of the Belgian workers arrested in March soon 
showed, however, that this charge was groundless and that from 
the outset it had been nothing but a deliberate and malicious lie. 
Nevertheless, in May 1868, Jules Bara, the Belgian Minister of 
Justice and Police, took advantage of the debate concerning the 
renewal of the law on the expulsion of  foreigners*™  in the Belgian 
Chamber of Deputies viciously to attack the International Working 
Men's Association ,b to make of its existence the principal pretext 
for the proposed renewal of the foreigners' law, and to go so far 
as to declare that he would not tolerate the convocation of the next 
general congress of the Association, which had at its congress in 
Lausanne appointed it for Brussels on September 7, 1868/ 
Thereupon, the administrative committees of the Brussels and 
all the other groups of the International Association in Belgium 
wrote a joint letter to M. le Ministre, dated May the 22nd, which 
was printed and made publico The letter made clear to the 
Minister that he had absolutely no say in the matter, and that the 
Congress would be held in Brussels. The opening passages of this 
irreverent letter read: 
"M. le Ministre, the undersigned send you their thanks for the great service you 
have rendered their cause by taking it up at a sitting of the Chamber and thereby 
allowing the parliamentary records to be used for the dissemination of our 
principles. 
"It appears that you scorn us no longer. For a long time your newspapers 
glossed over in silence the successes of the Association in this country; like the 
ostrich, you shut your eyes to escape the danger. Yet today you have to consider us 
a power. You have given us official consecration, and recognise by your attitude 
that we oppose you as a power.... 
"But you are reluctant to admit that you and your like are unpopular in 
Belgium, and when a foreigner comes to assist our Association you hasten to lay 
the blame for everything done here at his door." 
Then, having firmly denied the Minister's insinuations that the 
movement of the Belgian workers was inspired and led from 
abroad, the letter went on to say: 
"You should be aware, M. le Ministre, that we will not be run by a man any 
more than by a cask of gin. We are perfectly capable of acting on our own, and our 
a See this volume, p. 14.— Ed. 
b See Jules Bara's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on May 16, 1868, La Voix de 
l'Avenir, No. 23, June 7, 1868; La Liberté, No. 47, May 17, 1868.— Ed. 
c The Brussels Congress took place from September 6th to 13th, 1868.— Ed. 
(l "A Monsieur Bara, ministre de la justice", La Tribune du peuple, No. 5, 
May 24,  1868.—Erf. 

=====第408页=====
376 Appendices 
activity is guided exclusively by the striving for justice, which exists in every 
honourable consciousness. Having barely come into the world, our league already 
numbers thousands of followers in our country; all of us are of the same opinion, 
and all of us are firmly determined to go forward to the common goal—the 
emancipation of labour. 
"These ideas seem incredible to you, M. le Ministre; listen to a few others." 
Here the Minister was informed in detail of the aspirations of 
the International Working Men's Association, and advised to 
obtain further particulars from the documents of its Congresses. 
Then the transgressions of the government were put before him; 
he was reminded of the workers needlessly killed in the Charleroi 
district, who were dealt death instead of bread. It was recognised 
that strikes were an insufficient means of improving the working 
men's situation; but they were the only legitimate means labour 
still had to protest against the abuses of capital. In conclusion, the 
letter said: 
"Yes,  M. le Ministre of 'justice', we want to achieve the triumph of justice which 
you have betrayed. Yes, we will do so without you, despite you, and against you.... 
"You have said you would not tolerate our Congress. Surely, you must have 
been most aroused, M. le Ministre, when you spoke those absurd words.... For 
example, you have proclaimed the 'right of assembly', and we are eager to see what 
measures you will employ to breach it with impunity.... Despite all your big talk, the 
Congress is going to take place in Brussels in September.... One last word: you 
speak of the flash of lightning that we loosen upon Belgium. But it is you yourself 
who have called it forth by your rigid authoritarian government. The real 
thunderstorm is there beside you, yet you fail to notice it." 
At its meeting on June 16, 1868, the General Council of the 
International Association in London confirmed the decision of the 
Belgian Committee to hold the Congress in Brussels at the 
appointed time despite the announced opposition of the govern­
ment.440 
The administrative committees in France have also sent mes­
sages of agreement, declaring their determination to take part in the 
Congress at Brussels and to defy the consequences. 
The Courrier français of Paris commented as follows on the 
simultaneous attacks on the International Working Men's Associa­
tion in Switzerland, France, and Belgium: 
"These happenings are very interesting because at this moment the Association 
is gaining ground on a remarkable scale on the whole of the European continent. 
Everywhere, reaction is using it as a bit of a scapegoat, and this proves that 
everywhere it is considered the vanguard of social reformation. " 

=====第409页=====
Appendices 377 
11. GROWTH OF THE ASSOCIATION 
In England, some fifty trades unions with their branch societies 
in the United Kingdom have joined the International Working 
Men's Association since the resolution of the Trades Union 
Congress at Sheffield in 1866. Among the new members are 
workmen's groups, such as the 30,000 railway excavators, which 
never before participated either in trades unions or in any other 
movements. 
In Ireland,  a section exists in Dublin. 
In the United States of North America, the National Labour 
Congress which met in Chicago resolved on August 20, 1867a to 
establish relations with the International Association for joint 
action. Since then, the General Council at London has been 
corresponding with the General National Labour Union of the 
United States. It will be represented by a special delegate at this 
year's Congress in Brussels.441 
In France the groups that correspond directly and exclusively 
with London are great in number. Sections exist in Paris, Rouen, 
Lyons, Marseilles, Bordeaux, Lille, Roubaix, Argentan (Orne), 
Caen, Digne (Basses-Alpes), Fleurieux (sur Saône), Fuveau 
(Bouches-du-Rhône), Fiers (Orne), Granville (Manche), Harcourt, 
Thierry (Calvados), Havre, Lisieux, Neuville (sur Saône), Nantes, 
Neufchâteau (Vosges), Orléans, Crets (Bouches-du-Rhône), Ville-
franche (Rhône), Vienne (Isère), and other places. It is noteworthy 
that several French rural communities have also adhered to the 
Association. In the French colonies, a group exists in Algiers and 
another in Guadeloupe. 
In Belgium the main seats of the Association are in Brussels, 
Liège, Verviers, and Louvain. Mass adherence to the Association 
has been witnessed among coalminers and ironworkers this year. 
In Holland two sections exist, in Rotterdam and in Amsterdam. 
In Spain a section in Barcelona. 
In Italy, the general association of labour with its main seat in 
Naples and Milan, consisting of 600 workmen's societies, has the 
same kind of cartel with the International Association as the trades 
unions in England and the National Labour Union in the United 
States. Besides, special groups of the International Association 
exist in Genoa and Bologna. 
In Switzerland working men have been seeking admission en 
masse since the Geneva strike. The main groups are in the towns 
In Eichhoff s pamphlet mistakenly: "1866".— Ed. 

=====第410页=====
378 Appendices 
of the Basle and Berne cantons, where communities in the villages de 
la montagne  des Bois have also adhered; Geneva, where the society in 
the city alone numbers more than 6,000 members, and the cantons 
Neufchâtel, Vaud, and Zurich. The Swiss Griitli Union 442 and the 
various German workers' educational societies in Switzerland are 
affiliated to the Association. 
In Germany there are several groups. But most of these have 
declared that despite their sympathies they are unable to join 
officially owing to the absence of legal authorisation.445  The connec­
tions with Germany are therefore still deficient. The special 
Central Bureau for Germany is the same as that for the 
German-speaking Swiss, and is located at Geneva under Joh. Phil. 
Becker at Pré-1'Evêque 33. In the General Council at London, 
Germany is represented by Karl Marx, Secretary for Germany, 
resident at 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, 
London N. W., and by George Eccarius, General Secretary of the 
Association. 
The periodicals of the Association are: 
The Bee-Hive Newspaper in London. 
The Workmen's Advocate in Chicago. 
Le Courrier Français in Paris. Le Siècle, La Liberté, and L'Opinion 
Publique also publish the resolutions and other material of the 
Association. 
The democratic organs in Lyons, Rouen, Bordeaux, and other 
cities. 
La Voix de l'Avenir in Lausanne. 
Der Vorbote in Geneva. 
The Demokratische Wochenblatt in Leipzig, which, though not an 
organ of the Association, voices its principles. 
La Tribune du peuple, La Liberté, L'Espiègle, Le Devoir, Le 
Mirabeau, La Cigale, l'Ingénu, Le Peuple Belge, all in Belgium 
(Brussels, Verviers, and elsewhere). 
Finally, the labour newspapers in Italy. 
CONCLUSION 
The author has one more pleasant duty to perform before he 
takes leave of the German workers, to whom this book is 
dedicated. 

=====第411页=====
Appendices 379 
Under the heading, "The Eight Hours Movement", the 
Kölnische Zeitung of July 19, 1868, carried the following hearten­
ing report: 
"Agitation that was being conducted in the United States in the past few years 
has suddenly been crowned with complete success, due less to its own intrinsic 
merit than to the coincidence of external circumstances which influenced the 
legislature. Once before, the working time in governmental workshops and 
factories was reduced from twelve to ten hours a day. Not content, the workers 
demanded a further reduction, to eight hours (and, mind you, without any 
reduction in the existing wages, whence the name,  "THE EIGHT HOURS MOVEMENT"). 
Congress repeatedly dismissed this demand, but has not dared to consign a 
renewed motion to the same fate. For both parties need the workers' votes in the 
coming presidential elections, and neither of them, probably against its innermost 
conviction to the contrary, wishes to affront the movement and incur the discontent 
of those numerous voters. In England, too, a part of the workers have written a 
slogan on their banner that smacks of a play on words: 'Eight hours' work, eight 
hours'  rest, eight hours' sleep, and eight shillings' wage.' As long as the said 
movement keeps within the pale of the law and as long as no intimidation and no 
illicit pressure are applied against the workers who think for themselves and want 
their labour power to be used as they themselves deem right, the authorities 
will have to, and will prefer to, allow the agitation to follow its natural course. The 
all-powerful unwritten law that regulates supply and demand will eventually make 
itself felt here as well." 
That the Kölnische Zeitung, an organ of the German bourgeoisie, 
is not particularly delighted over the unexpected success of the 
eight hours movement in America, should surprise no one who, 
like that paper, believes in the "omnipotence" of the "unwritten" 
law of supply and demand. 
The New-Yorker Handelszeitung, too, is right from the standpoint 
of "supply and demand" when it testily declares: 
"We can only deplore this decision, which reeks of demagoguery. Both Houses 
of Congress have fixed the working time in governmental workshops at eight hours 
without changing the wages, and the President has promptly signed the Act. In 
other words, the national authorities have introduced the eight-hour system. They 
are entitled to do so: the master can set the working time in his establishments. But 
by doing so they have sanctioned agitation that is without rhyme or reason. And 
they know it. Generally speaking, legislation has as little to do with regulating the 
relationship between the working man and the employer as it has with how often 
the noble and free citizen of this Republic should put on a fresh shirt or if he 
should go through life in whole or torn stockings; and if the attempt to immobilise 
one-fifth of the productive forces is really timely, is surely also open to question. A 
man who wanted to win the favour of the blind part of the labouring masses 
threw in a firebrand, and within sight of the coming national elections no one 
wanted to run the danger of burning his fingers on it. The price of labour as that 
of any other commodity is regulated by the relationship between supply and 
demand. If the legislature wishes to deal with the matter, it is bound to make a fool 
of itself.  That the gentlemen Representatives and Senators fail to see this cannot be 
possible. To our great surprise, even a man like Senator Sumner has given vent to a 
lot of fine words about the workers' educational needs allegedly being served in 

=====第412页=====
380 Appendices 
this way — words of whose total lack of meaning he himself must have been 
profoundly aware. Only he is a friend of the people who does not shrink from 
telling them the truth even in peril of doing himself damage. Once the elections 
are over, the workers will notice that they have been deceived." 
The immediate future will show if the eight hours movement is 
"without rhyme or reason" and if the American workers will notice 
that they "have been deceived" once the presidential elections are 
over. 
For Europe that question is secondary compared to the great 
event that the legislature of the United States has sanctioned the 
eight hours movement.444 
The consequences will not be long in coming. From the 
workshops and factories of the United States government the 
eight-hour principle will make its way forward and gain recogni­
tion as a moral and legitimate demand of the working class 
everywhere in America, England and the European continent— 
wherever to this day the belief in the "omnipotence" of supply 
and demand has raised the duration of the working day to the 
limits of human endurance and pressed down wages to the lowest 
limits of the worker's needs. 
Now we are beginning to witness what Karl Marx, that 
painstaking explorer of and authority on social conditions, 
prophesied on July 25, 1867: 
"As in the 18th century, the American War of Independence sounded 
the tocsin for the European middle class, so in the 19th century, the 
American Civil War sounded it for the European working class."a 
Written in July 1868 Printed according to the text of 
the pamphlet First published as a separate pamphlet in 
August 1868 under the title, Die Inter- Published in English for the first 
nationale Arbeiterassociation. Ihre Grün- time 
dung, Organisation, politisch-sociale Thätig-
keit und Ausbreitung 
•' K. Marx, Preface to the First Edition of the First Volume of Capital.— Ed. 

=====第413页=====
381 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE SUCCESSES 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL IN GERMANY AND FRANCE 
FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT 
OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF JULY 21, 1868 
A letter from Germany announced that the Working-Men's 
Unions of the Southern States of Germany446  are going to hold a 
Congress at Nürnberg in the first week of September. The first 
question to be decided by that Congress is the adhesion of the 
whole federation to the International Working-Men's Association. 
Attention was called to an article in Le Réveil, a new paper, 
published by the friends of Ledru-Rollin at Paris, in which the 
attitude of the members of the Paris Committee is approvingly 
commented upon, and the political sagacity and the superior 
moral conduct of the working classes of Europe, contrasted with 
the intriguing stupidity of the ruling classes. The article contains 
the following remarkable passage: 
"It is to the union of ideas and sentiments that prevails amongst the working 
men of the different countries of Europe that we trust for the maintenance of 
peace. In a few days the Congress of the International Association is going to 
assemble. All the countries of Europe will be represented there, perhaps with the 
exception of France, and will it be too much to say that by the wisdom of its 
resolutions this assembly of all the European delegates of labour may become the 
Amphitryonite council of Europe? Yes; if to-morrow, by mastering the immortal 
principles of the French revolution, and taking in hand the sacred interests of 
labour, which comprehend order, security, and liberty, this Congress decreed 
peace, the word would be received with enthusiasm by all Europe."3 
First published in The Bee-Hive News- Reproduced from the newspaper 
paper, No. 353, July 25, 1868 
a Ch. Delescluze, "Le droit d'Association. Devant la justice", Le Réveil, No. 2, 
July 9, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第414页=====
382 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE CONSEQUENCES 
OF USING MACHINERY UNDER CAPITALISM 447 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF JULY 28, 1868 
The discussion of the proposition, "The influence of machinery 
in the hands of capitalists", was opened by Citizen Marx. He said 
what strikes us most is that all the consequences which were 
expected as the inevitable result of machinery have been reversed. 
Instead of diminishing the hours of labour, the working day was 
prolonged to sixteen and eighteen hours. Formerly, the normal 
working day was ten hours, during the last century the hours of 
labour were increased by law here as well as on the Continent. 
The whole of the trade legislation of the last century turns upon 
compelling the working people by law to work longer hours. 
It was not until 1833 that the hours of labour for children were 
limited to twelve.1 In consequence of overwork there was no time 
left whatever for mental culture. They also became physically 
deteriorated; contagious fevers broke out amongst them, and this 
induced a portion of the upper class to take the matter up. The 
first Sir Robert Peel was one of the foremost in calling attention to 
the crying evil, and Robert Owen was the first mill-owner who 
limited the hours of labour in his factory. The ten hours' bill was 
the first law which limited the hours of labour to ten and a half 
per day for women and children, but it applied only to certain 
factories.448 
This was a step of progress, in so far as it afforded more leisure 
time to the work-people. With regard to production, the limitation 
has long since been overtaken. By improved machinery and 
increased intensity of the labour of individuals there is now more 
a By "An Act to Regulate the Labour of Children and Young Persons in the 
Mills and Factories of the United Kingdom. August 29,  1833".—  Ed. 

=====第415页=====
Appendices 383 
work done in the short day than formerly in the long day. People 
are again overworked, and it will soon become necessary to limit 
the working day to eight hours. 
Another consequence of the use of machinery was to force 
women and children into the factory. The woman has thus 
become an active agent in our social production. Formerly female 
and children's labour was carried on within the family circle. I do 
not say that it is wrong that women and children should 
participate in our social production. I think every child above the 
age of nine ought to be employed at productive labour a portion 
of its time, but the way in which they are made to work under 
existing circumstances is abominable. 
Another consequence of the use of machinery was that it 
entirely changed the relations of the capital of the country. 
Formerly there were wealthy employers of labour, and poor 
labourers who worked with their own tools. They were to a certain 
extent free agents, who had it in their power effectually to resist 
their employers. For the modern factory operative, for the women 
and children, such freedom does not exist, they are slaves of 
capital. 
There was a constant cry for some invention that might render 
the capitalist independent of the working man; the spinning 
machine and power-loom has rendered him independent, it has 
transferred the motive power of production into his hands. By this 
the power of the capitalist has been immensely increased. The 
factory lord has become a penal legislator within his own 
establishment, inflicting fines at will, frequently for his own 
aggrandisement. The feudal baron in his dealings with his serfs 
was bound by traditions and subject to certain definite rules; the 
factory lord is subject to no controlling agency of any kind. 
One of the great results of machinery is organised labour which 
must bear fruit sooner or later. The influence of machinery upon 
those with whose labour it enters into competition is directly 
hostile. Many hand-loom weavers were positively killed by the 
introduction of the power-loom both here and in India. 
We are frequently told that the hardships resulting from 
machinery are only temporary, but the development of machinery 
is constant, and if it attracts and gives employment to large 
numbers at one time it constantly throws large numbers out of 
employment. There is a continual surplus of displaced population, 
not as the Malthusian asserts a surplus population in relation to 
the produce of the country, but a surplus whose labour has been 
superseded by more productive agencies. 

=====第416页=====
384 Appendices 
Employed on land machinery produces a constantly increasing 
surplus population whose employment is not fluctuating. This 
surplus flocks to the towns and exercises a constant pressure, a 
wage lowering pressure upon the labour market. The state of the 
East of London is one of the phenomena it produces.449 
The real consequences are best seen in those branches of labour 
in which the machine is not employed. 
To conclude for the present, machinery leads on one hand to 
associated organised labour, on the other to the disintegration of 
all formerly existing social and family relations. 
First published in The Bee-Hive, No. 354, Reproduced from the news-
August 1, 1868 paper text pasted into the Minute 
Book of the General Council 

=====第417页=====
385 
APPEAL TO THE GERMAN WORKERS IN LONDON 45 
Workers! 
On September 7 of this year the third international workers' 
congress will meet in Brussels. 
The congress will discuss the best means of expanding and 
strengthening the international workers' association and of raising 
the effectiveness of its joint activities; it will also discuss questions 
that immediately affect the interests of the working class and call for 
urgent solution. Finally, mutual agreement should be reached on 
the methods of propaganda. 
The following questions will be put to the congress by the 
General Council: 
1. Reduction and regulation of the working day; 
2. The influence of,machinery in the hands of the capitalists; 
3. The nature of landed property; 
4. The education of the working class; 
5. Setting up credit institutions to promote the social emancipa­
tion of the working class; 
6. The best ways of establishing cooperative producers' societies. 
We call on you to do everything in your power as associations 
and individuals to help in this undertaking made imperative by 
the times and circumstances. It is necessary through voluntary 
contributions to collect what is needed to allow the German 
workers in London to be represented by one or more delegates. It 
would be a disgrace, if, in the present turbulent times, there were , 
not sufficient understanding of their own class interests among the 
thousands of German workers in London to ensure their 
representation at the Brussels Congress. 

=====第418页=====
386 Appendices 
So, to work! It is high time that the workers of all countries 
unite and understand that a mighty association of all sections of 
the working class is necessary for a successful struggle against the 
arbitrary rule of the capitalists. 
Let us not forget that in the United States of North America the 
eight-hour working day has already been proclaimed law for all 
government workshops. 
Let us also recall those historic meaningful words which Karl 
Marx wrote in 1867 in the preface to his work Capital. A Critique 
of Political Economy: "As in the 18th century, the American War of 
Independence sounded the tocsin for the European middle-class, 
so in the 19th century, the American Civil War sounded it for the 
European working-class." 
Contributions will be received in the German Workers' Educa­
tional Society on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays, in the 
evening from 9 o'clock onwards by the secretary and treasurer. 
Windsor Castle, 27 Long Acre, W. C. 
On behalf of the Cerman Workers' Educational Society, 
German branch of the International Working Men's Association: 
The Executive Committee 
Drawn up on about August 11, 1868 Printed according to the news-
First published in the Hermann, No. 502, paper, checked with Marx's man-
August 15, 1868 uscript 

=====第419页=====
387 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE REDUCTION 
OF THE WORKING DAY 451 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF AUGUST 11, 1868 
Citizen Marx could not coincide with Milner,452 that it [the 
reduction of the hours of labour] would lead to a diminished 
production,3 because where the restrictions had been introduced, 
the instruments of production had been vastly more developed 
than in other trades. It had the effect of introducing more 
machinery, and made production on a small scale more and more 
impossible, which, however, was necessary to arrive at social 
production. The sanitary question was settled.453 But a reduction 
of the hours of labour was also indispensable to give the working 
class more time for mental culture. Legislative restrictions were the 
first step towards the mental and physical elevation and the 
ultimate emancipation of the working classes. Nobody denied, 
nowadays, that the State must interfere on behalf of the women 
and children; and a restriction of their hours led, in most 
instances, to a reduction of the working time of the men. England 
had taken the lead, other countries had been obliged to follow to 
some extent. The agitation had seriously commenced in Germany, 
and the London Council was looked to for taking the lead. The 
principle had been decided at former congresses; the time for 
action had arrived. 
First published in The Bee-Hive, No. 358, 
August 22, 1868 Reproduced from the newspaper 
with corrections introduced into 
the Minute Book 
a The words "diminished production" are inserted in Eccarius' hand in place of 
the crossed-out words "an increased demand for labour".— Ed. 

=====第420页=====
388 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE INFLUENCE 
OF COMPETITION IN COTTON INDUSTRY 
ON THE CONDITION OF THE WORKING MEN 
IN FRANCE454 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF JANUARY 5, 1869 
It appears that the cotton yarns and goods manufacturers of 
France are forming an alliance with a view of underselling the 
English manufacturers in their own markets; the French manufac­
turers admit that although the English manufacturers have better 
machinery and larger capitals than the French, they have been 
enabled to hold their own owing to the low wages paid to the men 
in France and they hope by lowering the wages still more to be 
able to produce their goods cheaper than the English manufactur­
ers can. 
Mr. Bertel, mayor of Sotteville-lès-Rouen and one of the largest 
manufacturers of the place, was the first to inaugurate this new 
crusade against the working classes; he offered a reduction of 3V2 
pence per day; on the men refusing these terms they were locked 
out and they have now appealed to the International Working 
Men's Association for help. 
First published in full in Marx and 
Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, 
Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960 Reproduced from the Minute 
Book of the General Council 

=====第421页=====
389 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE CONDITION 
OF THE COALMINERS IN THE COALFIELDS 
OF SAXONY 
FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT 
OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF FEBRUARY 23, 1869 4M 
The German secretary3 read a report on the condition of the 
coalminers in the kingdom of Saxony. Their wages vary from 6s. 
to 10s. 3d. a week, for twelve hours labour a day; boys' from 4s. to 
5s. a week. Each colliery has a benefit club, to which the men are 
compelled to contribute, but they have no voice in the administra­
tion of the funds; the funds are the lawful property of the coal 
owners, and the benefits are, without exception, dispensed by the 
head-managers of the collieries. Sick, relief and superannuation 
allowances rise in proportion to length of service, but any one 
leaving his employment, no matter for what reason, loses all claims 
upon the fund. Thus a man may have contributed to the fund for 
30 or 40 years without receiving a farthing in his old age. 
An agitation among the miners for better terms has led to the 
publication of a draft of rules for a united club for all the Saxon 
collieries. The draft is the work of a committee of colliers presided 
over by Mr. J. G. Dinter. The chief distinctive features are— 
1. All clubs to be consolidated into one. 
2. Members not to lose their rights so long as they reside 
anywhere in Germany and continue to pay their contributions. 
3. A general meeting of all adult members to be the supreme 
authority to elect a general and an executive committee. 
4. Masters' contributions to be equal to one-half of those of the 
men. 
This draft, which does not represent the views of the most 
intelligent colliers, but rather of a section, which would fain to 
carry out reforms with the consent of the masters, carries on its 
a Marx.— Ed. 

=====第422页=====
390 Appendices 
face the stamp of impracticability. It is really too naive to suppose 
that the masters, who now have complete control of the clubs, will 
consent to hand the whole management over to a democratic 
general meeting of working men, and yet continue paying their 
contributions. To open the eyes of such of the colliers as may still 
believe in the possibility of reforming the clubs upon the basis of 
joint contributions of masters and men, the indignant refusal on 
the part of the masters will be the best means. 
First published in The Bee-Hive News­
paper, No. 385, February 27, 1869 Reproduced from the newspaper 

=====第423页=====
391 
RESOLUTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
ON THE PROGRAMME OF THE BASLE CONGRESS 
Upon the report of the Standing Committee the following was 
agreed to as the programme of the next Congress: 
1. The question of landed property; 
2. The right to inheritance; 
3. To what extent can credit be immediately utilised by the 
working class; 
4. The question of general education; 
5. The influence of trades unions upon the emancipation of the 
working class. 
It was further agreed that the order of proceedings be as 
follows: 
1. Verification of Credentials; 
2. Election of Congress officers; 
3. Report of the General Council and reports of branches and 
sections; 
4. Discussion of the questions on the programme; 
5. Appointment of the seat of the General Council for the 
ensuing year; 
6. Election of the members of the General Council; 
7. Appointment of time and place of meeting of the next 
Congress. 
It was further agreed that a notice be appended to the 
programme stating that the statistical inquiry is still proceeding. 
A resolution that the discussion of the questions of the 
programme commence at the next meeting closed the proceed­
ings. 
Adopted by the General Council on June 
22, 1869 
First published as a leaflet in London Reproduced from the Minute 
Book of the General Council, 
checked against the leaflet text 

=====第424页=====
392 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON LANDED PROPERTY 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCJL MEETING 
OF JULY 6, 1869 
[I] 
Cit. Marx was of opinion that Milner had not quite understood 
the nature of the controversy. There was no opposition to the 
mines and woods being made common property. The injury 
caused by the accumulation of land in the hands of the few was 
granted; it was only with regard to arable land that there was any 
dispute, the opposition came from the partisans of small farming; 
small property was the point in dispute. 
The plea of social necessity was superior to the claim of abstract 
right. Every thing, every possible form of oppression had been 
justified by abstract right; it was high time to abandon this mode 
of agitation. The question was, under what form this right should 
be realised. There was a social necessity to transform feudal 
property into peasant property. In England the proprietor has 
ceased to be a necessity in agriculture. 
As for natural right, the animal had a natural right to the soil 
since it cannot live without it. To push this natural right to its 
logical consequences would land us at the assertion of every 
individual to cultivate his own share. 
Social right and social necessity determined in what manner the 
means of subsistence must be procured. Social necessity enforced 
itself in the course of which factory had arrived, where co­
operation was compulsory. The fact that no one could produce 
anything by himself gave the social necessity for co-operation. 
He was not against giving a more emphatic form to the 
resolutions. 

=====第425页=====
Appendices 393 
HU 
The small peasantry is not at the Congresses, "but their idealistic 
representatives are there. The Proudhonists are very strong upon 
the point and they were at Brussels. The Council is responsible for 
the resolutions; they were shaped by the Brussels Committee,458  by 
men who well knew the opposition they had to deal with. I am not 
against recasting them. Cit. Weston has only spoken of social 
necessity. We see that both forms of private property in land have 
led to bad results. The small man is only a nominal proprietor, but 
he is the more dangerous because he still fancies that he is a 
proprietor. In England the land could be transformed into 
common property by act of Parliament in the course of a 
fortnight. In France it must be accomplished by means of the 
proprietors' indebtedness and liability to taxation. 
First published in full in Marx and 
Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, 
Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960 Reproduced from the Minute 
Book of the General Council 

=====第426页=====
394 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE RIGHT 
TO INHERITANCE 459 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF JULY 20, 1869 
I 
Cit. Marx opened the discussion on the question: The Right to 
Inheritance. He said the question had been put by the Alliance of 
Socialist Democrats of Geneva and the Council had accepted it for 
discussion. 3 The Alliance of Geneva demanded above all the entire 
abolition of the Right to Inheritance. 
There were two forms of inheritance. The testamentary right, 
or inheritance by will, had come from Rome and had been 
peculiar to Rome. The father of the Roman family had exercised 
absolute authority over everything belonging to his household. 
The Roman family-father must not be compared with the father 
of a family of the present day. The Roman household had 
included slaves and clients whose affairs and interestsb the head 
had been obliged to defend and maintain in public. There had 
been a superstition that when this man died his ghost remained as 
a watch in the house to see that things were done right or to 
torment if things were managed wrong. In the early times of 
Rome people had sacrificed to this house-god; even blood-feasts 
had been celebrated in his honour and to appease his wrath.c By 
and by it had become fashionable to compromise with this spirit by 
an heir-at-will. It had been the Roman immortality of the soul.d 
The will of the deceased had been perpetuated by a testament, but 
this testament had not necessarily brought a fortune to the 
a Further the word "because" is crossed out in the Minute Book.— Ed. 
b The words "and interests" were inserted between the lines in the Minute 
Book.— Ed. 
c The words "and to appease his wrath" were inserted later.— Ed. 
d This sentence was inserted later. The following words are crossed out: "This 
contrivance had perpetuated."—Ed. 

=====第427页=====
Appendices 395 
successor who inherited, but the will of the deceased had been 
looked upon as a religious duty. In course of time these 
heirs-at-will had laid claim to the fortune too, but even in imperial 
time had never been allowed more than a fourth by law.3 That 
pagan superstition had been transmitted to Christian countries 
and b was the foundation of the right of will as at present existing 
in England and the United States. 
The German right to inheritance was the intestate right, the 
family right, which treated an estate as a sort of co-proprietorship 
of which the father of the family was the manager. When this 
manager died the property fell to all the children. The Germans 
had known of no other hereditary rights; the Church of Rome 
had introduced the Roman right and the feudal system had 
falsified the German right, because feudal property bearing a 
military charge could not have been divided. The French 
Revolution had returned to the German right of inheritance. In 
England we had all sorts of nonsensical things; the individual had 
the most absolute right to will away his property, even to disinherit 
his own offspring, and by this rule long after he had ceased to 
exist.1 This right of will might be left for the middle class to deal 
with as it was a point which would work against the aristocracy. In 
Prussia only a little of a man's property could be willed away. 
The working class who had nothing to inherit had no interest in 
the question. 
The Democratic Alliance was going to commence the social 
revolution with the abolition of the right to inheritance. He asked 
would it be policy to do so? 
The proposition was not new. St. Simon had proposed it in 
1830.4<i0 
As an economical measure it would avail nothing. It would cause 
so much irritation that it would be sure to raise an almost 
insurmountable opposition which would inevitably lead to reaction. 
If at the time of a revolution it was proclaimed, he did not believe 
that the general state of intelligence would warrant its being 
sustained. Besides, if the working class had sufficient power to 
abolish the right to inheritance, it would be powerful enough to 
a The words "by law" were inserted later. The following words are then crossed 
out: "Upon this superstition was the right of will founded."—Ed. 
h The words "pagan" and "had been transmitted to Christian countries and" 
were inserted later.— Ed. 
c Further the following sentence is crossed out: "It was what kept the 
aristocracy in its present position and could be left to the middle class."—Ed. 

=====第428页=====
396 Appendices 
proceed to expropriation which would be a much simpler and 
more efficient process. 
To abolish the right to the inheritance of land in England would 
involve the hereditary functions connected with the land, the 
House of Lords, etc., and 15,000 lords and 15,000 ladies would 
have to die before it became available. If, on the contrary, a 
working men's parliament decreed that the rent should be paid 
into the treasury instead of to the landlord, the Government 
would obtain a fund at oncea without any social disturbance, while 
by abolishing the right to inheritance everything would be 
disturbed and nothing got. 
Our efforts must be directed to the end that no instruments of 
production should be private property. The private property in 
these things was a fiction, since the proprietors could not use them 
themselves; they only gave them dominion over them, by which 
they compelled other people to work for them. In a semi-
barbarous state this might have been necessary, but it was no 
longer so. All the means of labour must be socialised, so that every 
man had a right and the means to exercise his labour power. If we 
had such a state of things the right to inheritance would be of no 
use. As long as we had not, the family right to inheritance could 
not be abolished. The chief aim of people in saving for their 
children was to ensure them the means of subsistence. If a man's 
children, were provided for after his death he would not care 
about leaving them wherewith to get a living, but as long as this 
was not the case it would only result in hardships, it would irritate 
and frighten people and do no good. Instead of the beginning it 
could only be the end of a social revolution. The beginning must 
be to get the means to socialise the means of labour. 
The testamentary right to inheritance was obnoxious to the 
middle class; with this the state could safely interfere any time. We 
had legacy-duties already, all we had to do was to increase them 
and make them progressive, as well as the income-tax, leaving the 
smaller amounts, £50 for instance, free. Insofar only it was a 
working-class question. 
All that was connected with the present state of things would 
have to be transformed, but if testaments were suppressed they 
would be avoided by gifts during life, therefore it would be better 
to tolerate them on certain conditions than do worse. First the 
a Further the words "by abolishing" are crossed out in the Minute Book.— Ed. 

=====第429页=====
Appendices 397 
means for a transformed state of things must be got, then the 
right would disappear of  itself.3 
ir 
Cit. Marx replied: if the state had the power to appropriate the 
land, inheritance was gone. To declare the abolition of inheritance 
would be foolish. If a revolution occurred, expropriation could be 
carried; if there was no power to do that, the right to inheritance 
would not be abolished. 
First published in Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, 
Moscow, 1960 Reproduced from the Minute 
Book of the General Council 
a Further, in the Minute Book, comes the record of speeches by Milner and 
Lucraft (the Chairman); after them Marx again took the floor.— Ed. 

=====第430页=====
398 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES 
ON GENERAL EDUCATION 461 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETINGS 
OF AUGUST 10 AND 17, 1869 
[I] 
Cit. Marx said there was a peculiar difficulty connected with this 
question. On the one hand a change of social circumstances was 
required to establish a proper system of education, on the other 
hand a proper system of education was required to bring about a 
change of social circumstances; we must therefore commence 
where we were. 
The question treated at the congresses was whether education 
was to be national or private.462 National education had been 
looked upon as governmental, but that was not necessarily the 
case.  In Massachusetts every township was bound to provide 
schools for primary education for all the children. In towns of 
more than  5,000  inhabitants higher schools for technical education 
had to be provided, in larger towns still higher. The state 
contributed something but not much. In Massachusetts one-eighth 
of the local taxes went for education, in New York one-fifth. The 
school committees who administered the schools were local, they 
appointed the schoolmasters and selected the books. The fault of 
the American system was that it was too much localised, the 
education given depended upon the state of culture prevailing in 
each district. There was a cry for a central supervision. The 
taxation for schools was compulsory, but the attendance of 
children was not. Property had to pay the taxes and the people 
who paid the taxes wanted that the money was usefully applied. 
Education might be national without being governmental. 
Government might appoint inspectors whose duty it was to see 
that the laws were obeyed, just as the factory inspectors looked 
after the observance of the factory acts, without any power of 
interfering with the course of education  itself. 

=====第431页=====
Appendices 399 
The Congress might without hesitation adopt that education was 
to be compulsory. As to children being prevented from working, 
one thing was certain: it would not reduce wages and people 
would get used to it. 
The Proudhonists maintained that gratuitous education was 
nonsense, because the state had to pay for it; of course somebody 
had to pay, but not those who could least afford it. Was not in 
favour of gratuitous college education. 
As Prussian education had been talked so much of he would 
conclude by observing that the Prussian system was only calculated 
to make good soldiers. 
[II] 
Cit. Marx said: upon certain points we were unanimous. 
The discussion had started with the proposition to reaffirm the 
Geneva resolution which demanded that mental education should 
be combined with bodily labour, with gymnastics and technological 
training3; nothing had been said against that. 
The technological training advocated by proletarian writers was 
meant to compensate for the deficiencies occasioned by the 
division [of] labour which prevented apprentices from acquiring a 
thorough knowledge of their business. This had been taken hold 
of and misconstructed into what the middle class understood by 
technical education. 
As to Mrs. Law's Church budget4W it would be good policy for 
the Congress to declare against the Church. 
Cit. Milner's proposition 464 was not suitable to be introduced in 
connection with the schools; it was a kind of education that the 
young must get from the adults in the everyday struggle of life. 
He could not accept Warren as a bible, it was a question upon 
which few could agree. We might add that such education cannot 
be given at school, but must be given by adults. 
Nothing could be introduced either in primary or higher schools 
that admitted of party and class interpretation. Only subjects such 
as the physical sciences, grammar, etc., were fit matter for schools. 
The rules of grammar, for instance, could not differ, whether 
explained by a religious Tory or a free thinker. Subjects that 
admitted of different conclusions must be excluded and left for 
a The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 
1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869], pp. 5-7.— Ed. 
15-733 

=====第432页=====
400 Appendices 
the adults to such teachers as Mrs. Law, who gave instruction in 
religion.3 
The abolition of the army465 had been resolved by the Brussels 
Congress.b 
It was not advisable to bring it on again. 
First published in full in Marx and Reproduced from the Minute 
Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Book of the General Council 
Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960 
a In the report of the General Council meeting of August 17, 1869 published in 
The Bee-Hive, No. 410, August 21, 1869 this part of Marx's speech is given as 
follows: "As to political economy, religion and other questions, they could not be 
admitted into the primary, nor even the higher schools; that was a kind of 
education which must rest with the adult, and must be left to the lecture room, to 
such schoolmasters as Mrs.  Law."—Ed. 
b The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 
1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869], p. 14.— Ed. 

=====第433页=====
401 
ADDRESS OF THE LAND AND LABOUR LEAGUE 
TO THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN 
OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND466 
Fellow-Workers, 
The fond hopes held out to the toiling and suffering millions of 
this country thirty years ago have not been realised. They were 
told that the removal of fiscal restrictions would make the lot of 
the labouring poor easy; if it could not render them happy and 
contented it would at least banish starvation for ever from their 
midst. 
They rose a terrible commotion for the big  loaf, 467 the landlords 
became rampant, the money lords confounded, the factory lords 
rejoiced—their will was done—Protection received the coup de 
grâce. A period of the most marvellous prosperity followed. At 
first the Tories threatened to reverse the policy, but on mounting 
the ministerial benches, in 1852, instead of carrying out their 
threat, they joined the chorus in praise of unlimited competition. 
Prepared for a pecuniary loss they discovered to their utter 
astonishment that the rent-roll was swelling at the rate of more 
than £2,000,000 a year. Never in the history of the human race 
was there so much wealth — means to satisfy the wants of 
man — produced by so few hands, and in so short a time, as since 
the abolition of the Corn Laws. During the lapse of twenty years 
the declared value of the annual exports of British and Irish 
produce and manufactures—the fruits of your own labour—rose 
from £60,000,000 to £188,900,000. In twenty years the taxable 
income of the lords and ladies of the British soil increased, upon 
their own confession, from £98,000,000 to £140,000,000 a year; 
that of the chiefs of trades and professions from £60,000,000 to 
15* 

=====第434页=====
402 Appendices 
£110,000,000 a year. Could human efforts accomplish more? 
Alas!  there are stepchildren in Britania's family. No Chancellor 
of the Exchequer has yet divulged the secret how the 
£140,000,000 are distributed amongst the territorial magnates, but 
we know all about the trades-folk. The special favourites increased 
from sixteen, in 1846, to one hundred and thirty-three, in 1866. 
Their average annual income rose from £74,300 to £100,600 
each. They appropriated one-fourth of the twenty years' increase. 
The next of kin increased from three hundred and nineteen to 
nine hundred and fifty-nine individuals: their average annual 
income rose from £17,700 to £19,300 each: they appropriated 
another fourth. The remaining half was distributed amongst three 
hundred and forty-six thousand and forty-eight respectables, 
whose annual income ranged between £100 and £10,000 sterling. 
The toiling millions, the producers of that wealth—Britania's 
cinderellas — got cuffs and kicks instead of halfpence. 
In the year 1864 the taxable income under schedule D4b8 
increased by £9,200,000. Of that increase the metropolis, with less 
than an eighth of the, population, absorbed £4,266,000, nearly a 
half.  £3,123,000 of that, more than a third of the increase of 
Great Britain, was absorbed by the City of London, by the 
favourites of the one hundred and seventy-ninth part of the 
British population: Mile End and the Tower, with a working 
population four times as numerous, got £175,000. The citizens of 
London are smothered with gold; the householders of the Tower 
Hamlets are overwhelmed by poor-rates. The citizens, of course, 
object to centralisation of poor-rates purely on the principle of 
local self-government. 
During the ten years ending 1861 the operatives employed in 
the cotton trade increased 12 per cent; their produce 103 per 
cent. The iron miners increased 6 per cent; the produce of the 
mines 37 per cent. Twenty thousand iron miners worked for ten 
mine owners. During the same ten years the agricultural labourers 
of England and Wales diminished by eighty-eight thousand one 
hundred and forty-seven, and yet, during that period, several 
hundred thousand acres of common land were enclosed and 
transformed into private property to enlarge the estates of the 
nobility, and the same process is still going on. 
In twelve years the rental liable to be rated to the poor in 
England and Wales rose from £86,700,000 to £118,300,000: the 
number of adult able-bodied paupers increased from one hundred 
and forty-four thousand five hundred to one hundred and 
eighty-five thousand six hundred. 

=====第435页=====
Appendices 403 
These are no fancy pictures, originating in the wild speculations 
of hot brained incorrigibles; they are the confessions of landlords 
and money lords, recorded in their own blue books. One of their 
experts told the House of Lords the other day that the propertied 
classes, after faring sumptuously, laid by £150,000,000 a year out 
of the produce of your labour. A few weeks later the president of 
the Royal College of Surgeons related to a jury, assembled to 
inquire into the causes of eight untimely deaths, what he saw in 
the foul ward of St. Paneras. 
Hibernia's favourites too have multiplied, and their income has 
risen, while a sixth of her toiling sons and daughters perished by 
famine, and its consequent diseases, and a third of the remainder 
were evicted, ejected and expatriated by tormenting felonious 
usurpers. 
This period of unparalleled industrial prosperity has landed 
thousands of our fellow-toilers—honest, unsophisticated, hard­
working men and women—in the stone yard and the oakum 
room41'9; the roast beef of their dreams has turned into skilly. 
Hundreds of thousands, men, women and children, are wandering 
about—homeless, degraded outcasts—in the land that gave them 
birth, crowding the cities and towns, and swarming the highroads 
in the. country in search of work to obtain food and shelter, 
without being able to find any. Other thousands, more spirited 
than honest, are walking the treadmill to expiate little thefts, 
preferring prison discipline to workhouse fare, while the wholesale 
swindlers are at large, and felonious landlords preside at quarter 
sessions to administer the laws. Thousands of the young and 
strong cross the seas, flying from their native firesides, like from 
an exterminating plague; the old and feeble perish on the 
roadside of hunger and cold. The hospitals and infirmaries are 
overcrowded with fever and famine-stricken: death from starva­
tion has become an ordinary every-day occurrence. 
All parties are agreed that the sufferings of the labouring poor 
were never more intense, and misery so widespread, nor the 
means of satisfying the wants of man ever so abundant as at 
present. This proves above all that the moral foundation of all civil 
government, "that the welfare of the entire community is the highest 
law, and ought to be the aim and end of all civil legislation", has been 
utterly disregarded. Those who preside over the destinies of the 
nation have either wantonly neglected their primary duty while 
attending to the special interests of the rich to make them richer, 
or their social position, their education, their class prejudices have 
incapacitated them from doing their duty to the community at 

=====第436页=====
404 Appendices 
large or applying the proper remedies; in either case they have 
betrayed their trust. 
Class government is only possible on the condition that those 
who are held in subjection are secured against positive want. The 
ruling classes have failed to secure the industrious wages-labourer 
in the prime of his life against hunger and death from starvation. 
Their remedies have signally failed, their promises have not been 
fulfilled. They promised retrenchment, they have enormously 
increased the public expenditure instead. They promised to lift 
the burden of taxation from your shoulders, the rich pay but a 
fractional part of the increased expenses; the rest is levied upon 
your necessaries—even your pawn tickets are taxed—to keep up a 
standing army, drawn from your own ranks, to shoot you down if 
you show signs of disaffection. They promised to minimise 
pauperism: they have made indigence and destitution your 
average condition—the big loaf has dwindled into no  loaf.  Every 
remedy they have applied has but aggravated the evil, and they 
have no other to suggest,— their rule is doomed. To continue is to 
involve all in a common ruin. There is but one,—and only 
one,—  remedy. Help Yourselves! Determine that you will not 
endure this abominable state of things any longer; act up to your 
determination, and it will vanish. 
A few weeks ago a score of London working men talked the 
matter over. They came to the conclusion that the present 
economical basis of society was the foundation of all the existing 
evils,—  that nothing short of a transformation of the existing social 
and political arrangements could avail, and that such a transfor­
mation could only be effected by the toiling millions themselves. 
They embodied their conclusions in a series of resolutions, and 
called a conference of representative working men, to whom they 
were submitted for consideration. In three consecutive meetings 
those resolutions were discussed and unanimously adopted. To 
carry them out a new working men's organisation, under the title 
of the "Land and Labour League", was established. An executive 
council of upwards of forty well-known representative working 
men was appointed to draw up a platform of principles arising out 
of the preliminary resolutions adopted by the conference, to serve 
as the programme of agitation by means of which a radical change 
can be effected. 
After mature consideration the Council agreed to the following: 
1. Nationalisation of the Land. 
2. Home Colonisation. 
3. National, Secular, Gratuitous and Compulsory Education. 

=====第437页=====
Appendices 405 
4. Suppression of Private Banks of Issue. The State Only to 
Issue Paper Money. 
5. A Direct and Progressive Property Tax, in Lieu of All Other 
Taxes. 
6. Liquidation of the National Debt. 
7. Abolition of the Standing Army. 
8. Reduction of the Number of the Hours of Labour. 
9. Equal Electoral Rights, with Payment of Members. 
The success of our efforts will depend upon the pressure that 
can be brought to bear upon the powers that be, and this requires 
numbers, union, organisation and combination. We therefore call 
upon you to unite, organise and combine, and raise the cry 
throughout Ireland, Scotland, Wales and England, "The Land for 
the People"—the rightful inheritors of nature's gifts. No rational 
state of society can leave the land, which is the source of life, 
under the control of, and subject to the whims and caprices of, a 
few private individuals. A government elected by, and as trustee 
for, the whole people is the only power that can manage it for the 
benefit of the entire community. 
Insist upon the State reclaiming the unoccupied lands as a 
beginning of its nationalisation, and placing the unemployed upon 
it. Let not another acre of common land be enclosed for the 
private purposes of non-producers. Compel the Government to 
employ the army, until its final dissolution, as a pioneer force to 
weed, drain and level the wastes for cultivation, instead of forming 
encampments to prepare for the destruction of life. If green fields 
and kitchen gardens are incompatible with the noble sport of 
hunting let the hunters emigrate. 
Make the Nine points of the League the Labour programme, 
the touchstone by which you test the quality of candidates for 
parliamentary honours, and if you find them spurious reject them 
like a counterfeit coin, for he who is not for them is against you. 
You are swindled out of the fruits of your toil by land laws, 
money laws, and all sorts of laws. Out of the paltry pittance that is 
left you, you have to pay the interest of a debt that was incurred 
to keep your predecessors in subjection; you have to maintain a 
standing army that serves no other purpose in your generation, 
and you are systematically overworked when employed, and 
underfed at all times. Nothing but a series of such radical reforms 
as indicated on our programme will ever lift you out of the slough 
of despond in which you are at present sunk. The difficulty can be 
overcome by unity of purpose and action. We are many; our 
opponents are few. Then, working men and women of all creeds 

=====第438页=====
406 Appendices 
and occupations, claim your rights as with one voice, and rally 
round, and unite your forces under, the banner of the "Land and 
Labour League" to conquer your own emancipation! 
John Weston, Treasurer 
Martin J. Boon 
} Secretaries 
/. George Eccarius 
Drawn up by Eccarius on about Reproduced from the pamphlet 
November 14, 1869 
Published as a pamphlet, Address of the 
Land and Labour League to the Working 
Men and Women of Great Britain and 
Ireland,  London, 1869 

=====第439页=====
407 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE POLICY 
OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT 
WITH RESPECT TO THE IRISH PRISONERS470 
FROM IHK MINUTES OK THE GENERAI. COUNCIL MEETING 
OF NOVEMBER 16, 1869 
Cit. Marx then opened the debate on the attitude of the British 
Government on the Irish question. He said political amnesty 
proceeds from two sources: 1. When a government is strong 
enough by force of arms and public opinion, when the enemy 
accepts the defeat, as was the case in America, 4'1 then amnesty is 
given. 2. When misgovernment is the cause of quarrel and the 
opposition gains its point, as was the case in Austria and 
Hungary.4'2 Such ought to have been the case in Ireland. 
Both DisratT. and Gladstone have said that the government 
ought to do for Ireland what in other countries a revolution would 
do. Bright asserted repeatedly that Ireland would always be rife 
for revolution unless a radical change was made. During the 
election Gladstone justified the Fenian insurrection and said that 
every other nation would have revolted under similar cir­
cumstances.'1 When taunted in the House he equivocated his fiery 
declarations against the "policy of conquest"'4'3 implied that 
"Ireland ought to be ruled according to Irish ideas".1' To put an 
end to the "policy of conquest" he ought to have begun like 
America and Austria by an amnesty as soon as he became 
minister. He did nothing. Then the amnesty movement in Ireland 
by the municipalities. When a deputation was about to start with a 
petition containing 200,000 signatures for the release of the 
prisoners he anticipated it by releasing some to prevent the 
appearance of giving way to Irish pressure. The petition came,' it 
was not got up by Fenians, but he gave no answer. Then it was 
mooted in the House that the prisoners were infamously treated.'1 
a See The Irishman, No. 4,'July 24, 1869.— Ed. 
h The Irishman, Nos. 7, 12 and 13, August 14, September 18 and 25, 1869.— Ed. 
<-' The Irishman, No. 4, July 24, 1869.— Ed. 
(l See J. Gray's inquiry in the House of Commons concerning the treatment of 
the Irish prisoners, The Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.— Ed. 

=====第440页=====
408 Appendices 
In this at least the English Government is impartial; it treats Irish 
and English alike; there is no country in Europe where political 
prisoners are treated like in England and Russia. Bruce was 
obliged to admit the fact/' Moore wanted an inquiry'5; it was 
refused. Then commenced the popular amnesty movement at 
Limerick. A meeting was held at which 30,000 people were 
present and a memorial for the unconditional release was 
adopted/ Meetings were held in all the towns in the North. Then 
the great meeting was announced in Dublin where 200,000 people 
attended. It was announced weeks beforehand for the 10th 
October. The trade societies wanted to go in procession. On the 
8th proclamations were issued prohibiting the procession to go 
through certain streets. Isaac Butt interpreted it as a prohibition, 
of the procession/1 They went to Fortescue to ask but he was not at 
home, his Secretary Burke did not knowr. A letter was left to be 
replied to; he equivocated.e The government wanted a collision. 
The procession was abandoned and it was found afterwards that 
the soldiers had been supplied with 40 rounds of shot for the 
occasion. 
After that Gladstone answered the Limerick memorial of August 
in a roundabout way.474 He says the proceedings varied much. 
There were loyal people and others who used bad language 
demanding as a right what could only be an act of clemency. 
It is an act of presumption on the part of a paid public servant 
to teach a public meeting how to speak. 
The next objection is that the prisoners have not abandoned 
their designs which were cut short by their imprisonment. 
How does Gladstone know what their designs were and that 
they still entertain them Has he tortured them into a confession? 
He wants them to renounce their principles, to degrade them 
morally. Napoleon did [not] ask people- to renounce their 
republican principles before he gave an amnesty and Prussia 
attached no such conditions. 
Then he says the conspiracy still exists in England and America. 
If it did, Scotland Yard would soon be down upon it. It is only 
"disaffection of 700 years' standing".4''' The Irish have declared 
they would receive unconditional freedom as an act of conciliation. 
:l H. A. Bruce. Speech in the House of Commons of June 4, 1869. Ibid.— Ed. 
h "Mr. G. H. Moore's Motion upon the Treatment by England of Irish Political 
Prisoners", The Irishman, No. I, July 3, 1869.— Ed. 
c The Irishman, No. 6, August 7, 1869.— Ed. 
d The Irishman, No. 16, October 16, 1869.— Ed. 
c- The Irishman, No. 17, October 23,  1869.—Erf. 

=====第441页=====
Appendices 409 
Gladstone cannot quell the Fenian conspiracy in America, his 
conduct promotes it, one paper 3 calls him the Head Centre.476 He 
finds fault with the press. He has not the courage to prosecute the 
press;  he wants to make the prisoners responsible. Does he want to 
keep them as hostages for the good behaviour of the people 
outside? He says "it has been our desire to carry leniency to the 
utmost point". This then is the utmost point. 
When Mountjoy was crowded with untried prisoners, Dr. 
M'Donnell wrote letter after letter to Joseph Murray about their 
treatment. Lord Mayo said afterwards that Murray had suppressed 
them. M'Donnell then wrote to the inspector of prisons, to a 
higher official.b He was afterwards dismissed and Murray was 
promoted.0 
He then says: we have advised the minor offenders to be 
released; the principal leaders and organisers we could not set 
free. 
This is a positive lie. There were two Americans amongst them 
who had 15 years each. It was fear for America that made him set 
them free. Carey was sentenced in 1865 to 5 years, he is in the 
lunatic asylum, his family wanted him home,d he could not upset 
the government. 
He further says: to rise in revolt against the public order has 
ever been a crime in this country. Only in this country. Jefferson 
Davis's revolt was right because it was not against the English, the 
government.47' He continues, the administration can have no 
interest except the punishment of crimes. 
The administration are the servants of the oppressors of 
Ireland. He wants the Irish to fall on their knees because an 
enlightened sovereign and Parliament have done a great act of 
justice.c They were the criminals before the Irish people. But the 
Irish was the only question upon which Gladstone and Bright 
could become ministers and catch the dissenters478 and give the 
Irish place-hunters an excuse of selling themselves. The church 
was only the badge of conquest. The badge is removed, but the 
servitude remains. He states that the government is resolved to 
continue to remove any grievance, but that they are determined to 
a Neu'-York Irish People.—Ed. 
h The Irishman, No. 7, August 14, 1869.—Ed. 
c The Irishman, No. 19, November 6, 1869.— Ed. 
d The Irishman, No. 20, November 13, 1869.— Ed. 
c An allusion to Gladstone who said in his reply to the Limerick memorial that 
"amnesty could only be an act of clemency on the part of the sovereign" (The 
Times, No. 26579, October 23, 1869).— Ed. 

=====第442页=====
410 Appendices 
give security to life and property and maintain the integrity of the 
empire. 
Life and property are endangered by the English aristocracy. 
Canada makes her own laws479 without impairing the integrity of 
the empire, but the Irish know nothing of their own affairs, they 
must leave them to Parliament, the same power that has landed 
them where they are. It is the greatest stupidity to think that the 
prisoners out of prison could be more dangerous than insulting a 
whole nation. The old English leaven of the conqueror comes out 
in the statement: we will grant but you must ask. 
In his letter to Isaac Butt he says: 
"You remind me that I once pleaded for foreigners.'1 Can the two cases 
correspond? The Fenians were tried according to lawful custom and found guilty 
by a jury of their countrymen. The prisoners of Naples were arrested and not tried 
and when they were tried they were tried by exceptional tribunals and sentenced 
by judges who depended upon the government for bread."h 
If a poacher is tried by a jury of country squires he is tried by 
his countrymen. It is notorious that the Irish juries are made up 
of purveyors to the castle whose bread depends upon their verdict. 
Oppression is always a lawful custom. In England the judges can 
be independent, in Ireland they cannot. Their promotion depends 
upon how they serve the government. Sullivan the prosecutor has 
been made master of the rolls. 
To the Ancient Order of Foresters in Dublin he answered that 
he was not aware that he had given a pledge that Ireland was to 
be governed according to Irish ideas.480 And after all this he comes 
to Guild-Hail and complains that he is inadequate for the task/ 
The upshot is that all the tenant right meetings are broken up; 
they want the prisoners [released]. They have broken with the 
clerical party. They now demand that Ireland is to govern  herself. 
Moore and Butt have declared for it.d Thev have resolved to 
liberate O'Donovan Rossa by electing him a member of Parlia­
ment.0481 
First published in full in Marx and Reproduced from the Minute 
Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Book of the General Council 
Vol. 16, Moscow, I960 
a A reference to Gladstone's pamphlet Two Letters to the Earl of Aberdeen on the 
State Persecutions of the Neapolitan Government, published in London in  1851.—  Ed. 
b The Times, No. 26583, October 27, 1869.— Ed. 
c The Irishman, No. 20, November 13, 1869.— Ed. 
d This sentence was inserted between the lines of the Minute Book.— Ed. 
e' The next sentence in the Minutes reads: "Cit. Marx ended by proposing the 
following resolution" (see this volume, p. 83).— Ed. 

=====第443页=====
411 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECHES ON THE POLICY 
OF THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT WITH RESPECT 
TO THE IRISH PRISONERS 
FROM IHK MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETINGS 
OF NOVEMBER 2.'i AND 30, 18(">9 
[I] 
Cit. Marx. Cit. Mottershead has given a history of Gladstone. I 
could give another, but that has nothing to do with the question 
before us. The petitions which were adopted at the meetings were 
quite civil, but he found fault with the speeches by which they 
were supported. Castlereagh was as good a man as Gladstone and 
I found today in the Political Register** 2 that he used the same 
words against the Irish as Gladstone, and Cobbett made the same 
reply as I have done. 
When the electoral tour commenced all the Irish candidates 
spouted about amnesty, but Gladstone did nothing till the Irish 
municipalities moved. 
I have not spoken of the people killed abroad, because you 
cannot compare the Hungarian war with the Fenian insurrection. 
We might compare it with 1798'1*"' and then the comparison would 
not be favourable to the English. 
I repeat that political prisoners are not treated anywhere so bad 
as in England. 
Cit. Mottershead is not going to tell us his opinion of the Irish; 
if he wants to know what other people think of the English let him 
read Ledru-Rollin' 1 and other Continental writers. I have always 
defended the English and do so still. 
These resolutions'5 are not to be passed to release the prisoners, 
the Irish themselves have abandoned that. 
It is a resolution of sympathy with the Irish and a review of the 
conduct of the government, it may bring the English and the Irish 
a A. A. Ledru-Rollin, The Decline of England, 2nd ed., London, 1850.— Ed. 
h See this volume, p. 83.— Ed. 

=====第444页=====
412 Appendices 
together. Gladstone has to contend with the opposition of The 
Times, the Saturday Review, etc., if we speak out boldly; on the 
other side, we may support him against an opposition to which he 
might otherwise have to succumb. He was in office during the 
Civil War and was responsible for what the government did and if 
the North was low when he made his declaration, so much the 
worse for his patriotism. 
Cit. Odger is right; if we wanted the prisoners released, this 
would not be the way to do it, but it is more important to make a 
concession to the Irish people than to Gladstone.... 484 
Cit. Marx had no objection to leave out the word "deliberately", 
as a prime minister must necessarily be considered to do 
everything deliberately. 48D 
[II] 
Cit. Marx said if Odger's suggestions were followed the Council 
would put themselves on an English party standpoint. 486 They 
could not do that. The Council must show the Irish that they 
understood the question and the Continent that they showed no 
favour to the British Government. The Council must treat the 
Irish like the English would treat the Polish. 
First  published in full in Marx and 
Engels,  Works, Second Russian Edition, 
Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960 Reproduced  from the Minute 
Book  of the General Council 

=====第445页=====
Appendices 413 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE SIGNIFICANCE 
OF THE IRISH QUESTION 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAI. COUNCIL MEETING 
OF DECEMBER 14, 1869 
Cit. Marx proposed that the Council at its rising should adjourn 
to January 4th. He said it would not be advisable to discuss the 
Irish during the holiday weeks when the attendance of members 
might be small. 487 He considered the solution of the Irish question 
as the solution of the English, and the English as the solution of 
the European. 
The proposition was agreed  to.... 
First published, in Russian, in the book Reproduced from the Minute 
Generalny Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. Book of the General Council 
1868-1870. Protokoly, Moscow, 1964 

=====第446页=====
414 
ARTICLES  BY JENNY MARX 
ON THE  IRISH QUESTION  48i 
I 
London, February  27, 1870 
The Marseillaise  for  February  18  quotes  an article from  The 
Daily News''1  in which  the  English paper gives information  to the 
French press concerning  the  election  of O'Donovan Rossa. Since 
this information  is somewhat confused  and  since partial explana­
tions only serve  to throw  a false light  on the  things which they  are 
claiming  to elucidate,  I should  be grateful  if you  would kindly 
publish  my  comments  on the  article  in question. 
Firstly,  The  Daily News states that O'Donovan  was  sentenced  by 
a jury,  but it  omits  to add  that in Ireland  the  juries  are  composed 
of minions more  or less directly nominated  by the  government. 
Then,  in speaking with righteous horror  of the TREASON-FELONY, 
the false liberals  of The  Daily News omit  to say  that this  new 
category  in the  English Penal Code  was  expressly invented  to 
identify  the  Irish patriots with  the  vilest  of criminals. 
Let us take then  the  case of O'Donovan Rossa.  He  was one  of the 
editors  of The  Irish People. Like most  of the  Fenians  he was 
sentenced  for  having written so-called seditious articles. Conse­
quently  the  Marseillaise  was not  wrong  in drawing  an analogy 
between Rochefort  and Rossa. 489 
Why does  The  Daily News, which aims  at keeping France 
informed about  the  Fenian prisoners, remain silent about  the 
appalling treatment  of them?  I trust that  you  will allow  me to  make 
up for  this prudent silence. 
Some time  ago  O'Donovan  was put in a  dark cell with  his hands 
chained behind  his  back.  His  handcuffs were  not  removed night 
La Marseillaise,  No. 60,  February  18,  1870.—  Ed. 

=====第447页=====
Appendices 415 
or day so that he was forced to crouch on the ground to lick his 
food, gruel made with water. Mr. Pigott, editor of The Irishman, 
learnt about these facts from Rossa who described them to him in 
the presence of the prison governor and another witness, and 
published the information in his newspaper,3 encouraging 
Mr. Moore, one of the Irish members of the HOUSE  OF COMMONS, to 
request a parliamentary enquiry into what goes on in the prisons.b 
The government strongly opposed this request. Thus, Moore's 
motion was rejected by 171 votes to 36—a worthy supplement to 
the voting which crushed the right to suffrage.1 
And this took place during the ministry of the sanctimonious 
Gladstone. As you can see the great Liberal leader knows how to 
mock humanity and justice. There are also Judases who do not 
wear glasses. 
Here is another case which also does England credit. O'Leary, a 
Fenian prisoner aged between sixty and seventy, was put on bread 
and water for three weeks because—the reader of the Marseillaise 
would never guess why—because Leary called himself a "pagan" 
and refused to say he was Protestant, Presbyterian, Catholic or 
Quaker. He was given the choice of one of these religions or bread 
and water. Of these five evils, O'Leary, or "pagan O'Leary" as he is 
called, chose the one that he considered the least—bread and 
water.'1 
A few days ago after examining the body of a Fenian who died 
at Spike Island Prison the CORONER1 expressed his very strong 
disapproval of the manner in which the deceased man had been 
treated.1 
Last Saturday a young Irishman called Gunner Hood left prison 
after four years in it. At the age of 19 he had joined the English 
army and served England in Canada. He was taken before a 
military tribunal in 1866 for having written seditious articles and 
sentenced to two years' hard labour. When the sentence was 
pronounced Hood took his cap and threw it into the air shouting, 
a The Irishman, No. 49, June 12, 1869, "O'Donovan Rossa. To the Editor of The 
Irishman; The Press on the Treatment of the Political Prisoners: The Treatment of 
O'Donovan Rossa".— Ed. 
b "Mr. G. H. Moore's Motion upon the Treatment by England of Irish Political 
Prisoners", The Irishman, No. 1, July 3, 1869.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 442-43.— Ed. 
A Ibid., p. 102.—Ed. 
e Jenny Marx uses the English term and gives the explanation of it in 
brackets.— Ed. 
1 See the article "Inquest at Spike Island. — Condemnation of the Prison 
Treatment", The Irishman, No. 34, February 19, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第448页=====
416 Appendices 
"Long live the Irish republic!" This impassioned cry cost him 
dear. He was sentenced to an extra two years in prison and fifty 
strokes for good measure. This was carried out in the most 
atrocious manner. Hood was attached to a plough and two 
strapping blacksmiths were armed with CAT-O-NINE-TAILS. There is no 
equivalent term in French for the English  KNOUT.  Only the Russians 
and the English know what is meant by this. Like draws to like. 
Mr. Carey, a journalist, is kept at present in the part of the 
prison intended for the insane, the silence and the other forms of 
torture to which he has been subjected having turned him into a 
mass of living flesh deprived of all reason. 
The Fenian, Colonel Burke, a man who has distinguished 
himself not only by his military service in the American army but 
also as a writer and painter, has also been reduced to a pitiful state 
in which he can no longer recognise his closest relatives. I Could 
add many more names to this list of Irish martyrs. Suffice it to say 
that since 1866, when there was a raid on The Irish People's 
offices,490 20 Fenians have died or gone mad in the prisons of 
humanitarian England. 

=====第449页=====
417 
II 
London, March 5 491 
During the meeting of the House of Commons on March 3 Mr. 
Stacpoole questioned Mr. Gladstone on the treatment of Fenian 
prisoners. He said, among other things, that Dr. Lyons of Dublin 
had recently stated that 
"the discipline, diet, personal restrictions and the other punishments were 
bound to cause permanent damage to the prisoners' health".a 
After having expressed complete satisfaction with the way in 
which prisoners were treated, Mr. Gladstone crowned his little 
SPEECH  with this brilliantly witty remark: 
"As to the health of O'Donovan Rossa, I am glad to be able to say that during 
her last visit to her husband Mrs. O'Donovan Rossa congratulated him on looking 
better." 
Whereupon a burst of Homeric laughter broke out from all 
sides of that noble assembly. Her last visit! Note that Mrs. 
O'Donovan Rossa had not only been separated from her husband 
for several years, but that she had travelled all over America 
earning money to feed her children by giving public lectures on 
English literature. 
And bear in mind also that this same Mr. Gladstone, whose quips 
are so pointed, is the almost sacred author of Prayers, the 
Propagation of the Gospel, The Functions of Laymen in the Churchc and 
the recently published homily Ecce homo. 
Is the profound satisfaction of the head jailer shared by his 
prisoners? Read the following extracts from a letter written by 
•' W. Stacpoole, Speech in the House of Commons on March 3, 1870, The 
Times, No. 26689, March 4, 1870.— Ed. 
bW. E. Gladstone, Speech in the House of Commons on March 3, 1870, The 
Times, No. 26689, March 4, 1870.— Ed. 
' The titles of Gladstone's books are given in English in the newspaper, with 
the French translations in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第450页=====
418 Appendices 
O'Donovan Rossa, which by some miracle was. slipped out of the 
prison and arrived at its destination after an incredible delay: 
LEITER  FROM ROSSA 
I have already told you about the hypocrisy of these English masters who, after 
placing me in a position which forced me to get down on my knees and elbows to 
eat, are now depriving me of food and light and giving me chains and a Bible. I 
am not complaining of the penalties which my masters inflict on me — it is my job 
to suffer — but I insist that I have the right to inform the world of the treatment to 
which I am subjected, and that it is illegal to hold back my letters describing this 
treatment. The minute precautions taken by the prison authorities to prevent me 
writing letters are as disgusting as they are absurd. The most insulting method was 
to strip me once a day for several months and then examine my arms, legs and all 
other parts of my body. This took place at Mitlbnnk daily from February to May 
1867.  One day I refused, whereupon five prison officers arrived, beat me 
mercilessly and tore off my clothes. 
Once I succeeded in getting a letter to the outside, for which I was rewarded by 
a visit from Messrs. Knox and Pollock, two  POLICE MAGISI RAIES* 
How ironical to send two government employees to find out the truth about the 
English prisons. These gentlemen refused to take note of anything important 
which I had to tell them. When I touched upon a subject which was not to their 
liking, they stopped me by saying that prison discipline was not their concern. Isn't 
that so, Messrs. Pollock and Knox? When I told you that I had been forced to wash 
in water which had already been used by half a dozen English prisoners, did you 
not refuse to note my complaint? 
At Chatham I was given a certain amount of tow to pull out and told that I 
would go without food if I did not finish the work by a certain time. 
"Perhaps you'll still punish me even if I do the job in time," I shouted: That's 
what happened to me at Millbank." 
"How could it?" asked the jailer. 
Then I told him that on July 4 I had finished my work ten minutes before the 
appointed time and picked up a book. The officer saw me do this, accused me of 
being lazy and I was put on bread and water and locked in a dark cell for 
forty-eight hours. 
One day I caught sight of my friend Edward Duffy. He was extremely pale. A 
little later I heard that Duffy was seriously ill and that he had expressed the wish to 
see me (we had been very close in Ireland). I begged the governor to give me 
permission to visit him. He refused point-blank. This was round about Christmas 
'67 — and a few weeks later a prisoner whispered to me through the bars of my 
cell: "Duffy is dead." 
How movingly this would have been described by the English if it had 
happened in Russia! 
If Mr. Gladstone had been present on such a sad occasion in Naples, what a 
touching picture he would have painted! Ah! ^weet Pharisees, trading in hypocrisy, 
with the Bible on their lips and the devil in their bellies. 
I must say a word in memory of John Lynch. In March 1866 I found myself 
together with him in the exercise yard. We were being watched so closely that he 
only managed to say to me, "The cold is killing me." But then what did the 
English do to us? They took us to London on Christmas Eve. When we arrived at 
a Jenny Marx uses the English term and gives its French equivalent in 
brackets.— Ed. 

=====第451页=====
Appendices 419 
the prison they took away our flannels and left us shivering in our cells for several 
months. Yes, they cannot deny that it was they who killed John Lynch. But 
nevertheless they managed to produce officials at the enquiry who were ready to 
prove that Lynch and Duffy had been given very gentle treatment. 
The lies of our English oppressors exceed one's wildest imagination. 
If I am to die in prison I entreat my family and my friends not to believe a 
word of what these people say. Let me not be suspected of personal rancour 
against those who persecuted me with their lies. I accuse only tyranny which makes 
the use of such methods necessary. 
Many a time the circumstances have reminded me of Machiavelli's words: "that 
tyrants have a special interest in circulating the Bible so that the people understand 
its precepts and offer no resistance to being robbed by brigands". 
So long as an enslaved people follows the sermons on morality and obedience 
preached to them by the priests, the tyrants have nothing to fear. 
If this letter reaches my fellow countrymen I have the right to demand that 
they raise their voices to insist that justice be done for their suffering brothers. Let 
these words whip up the blood that is moving sluggishly in their veins! 
I was harnessed to a cart with a rope tied round my neck. This knot was 
fastened to a long shaft and two English prisoners received orders to prevent the 
cart from bouncing. But they refrained from doing this, the shaft rose up into the 
air and the knot came undone. If it had tightened I would be dead. 
I insist that they do not possess the right to put me in a situation where my life 
depends on the acts of other people. 
A ray of light is penetrating through the bolts and bars of my prison. This is 
reminder of the day in New tow awards where I met Orangemen and Ribbonmen492 
who had forgotten their bigotry! 
O'Donovan Rossa 
Political prisoner sentenced 
to hard labour'1 
a "O'Donovan Rossa. Letter from the Member for Tipperary", The Irishman, 
No. 32, February 5, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第452页=====
420 
III 
London, March 16, 1870 
The main event of the past week has been O'Donovan Rossa's 
letter which I communicated to you in my last report.3 
The Timesb printed the letter without comment, whereas The 
Daily News published a commentary without the letter.' 
"As one might have expected," it says, "Mr. O'Donovan Rossa takes as his 
subject the prison rules to which he has been subjected  FOR  A WHILE."1 
How atrocious this "for a while" is in speaking of a man who has 
already been imprisoned for five years and condemned to hard 
labour for lifel 
Mr. O'Donovan Rossa complains among other things "of being 
harnessed to a cart with a rope tied round his neck" in such a way 
that his life depended on the movements of English convicts, his 
fellow prisoners. 
But, exclaims The Daily News, "Is it really unjust to put a man in a situation 
where his life depends on the acts of others? When a person is in a car or on a 
steamer does not his life also depend on the acts of others?" 
After this brilliant piece of arguing, the pious casuist reproaches 
O'Donovan Rossa for not loving the  BIBLE  and preferring the IRISH 
PEOPLE,  an opposition which is sure to delight its readers. 
"Mr. O'Donovan," it continues, "seems to imagine that prisoners serving 
sentences for seditious writing should be supplied with cigars and daily newspapers, 
•' See this volume, pp. 418-19.— Ed. 
b "The Fenian Convict O'Donovan Rossa", The Times, No. 26694, March 10, 
1870.—  Ed. 
c "The Marseillaise of Tuesday last was...", The Daily News, No. 7445, March 11, 
1870.—  Ed. 
d In La Marseillaise the English expression "for a while" is given in brackets after 
the French equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第453页=====
Appendices 421 
and that they should above all have the right to correspond freely with their 
friends." 
Ho, ho, virtuous Pharisee! At last you have admitted that 
O'Donovan Rossa has been sentenced to hard labour for life for 
seditious writing and not for an attempted assassination of Queen 
Victoria, as you vilely insinuated in your first address to the 
French press. 
"After all," this shameless newspaper concludes, "O'Donovan Rossa is simply 
being treated for what he is, that is, an ordinary convict." 
After Mr. Gladstone's special newspaper, here is a different 
angle from the "liberal" press, The Daily Telegraph, which 
generally adopts a rougher manner/ 
"If we condescend," it says, "to take note of O'Donovan Rossa's letter, it is not 
because of the Fenians who are incorrigible, but exclusively for the well-being of 
France. 
"Let it be known," it says, "that only a few days ago in the House of Commons 
Mr. Gladstone made a formal denunciation of all these outrageous lies, and there 
cannot be any intelligent Frenchmen of whatever party and class who would dare 
doubt the word of an English gentleman." 
But if, contrary to expectation, there were parties or people in 
France perverse enough not to believe the word of an English 
gentleman such as Mr. Gladstone, France could not at least resist 
the well-meant advice of Mr. Levy who is not a gentleman and 
who addresses you in the following terms: 
"We advise our neighbours, the Parisians, to treat all the stories of cruelties 
committed on political prisoners in England as, so many insolent lies." 
With Mr. Levy's permission, I will give you a new example of 
the value of the words of the gentlemen who make up Gladstone's 
Cabinet. 
You will remember that in my first letter I mentioned Colonel 
Richard Burke, a Fenian prisoner who has gone insane thanks to 
the humanitarian methods of the English government.11 The 
Irishman was the first to publish this news,1 after which Mr. 
Underwood sent a letter to Mr. Bruce, the Home Secretary,li 
asking him for an enquiry into the treatment of political prisoners. 
Mr. Bruce replied in a letter which was published in the English 
press and which contained the following sentence: 
a The Daily Telegraph, No. 4598, March 11, 1870.— Ed. 
b See this volume, p. 416.— Ed. 
' "More Prison Horrors. Irish Political Prisoners Being Done to Death in English 
Prisons", The Irishman, No. 27, January 1, 1870.— Ed. 
'' The letter was published in The Irisnman, No. 28, January 8, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第454页=====
422 Appendices 
"With regard to Richard Burke at Woking Prison, Mr. Bruce is bound to refuse 
to make an enquiry on the grounds of such ill-founded and extravagant insinuations as 
those contained in the extracts from The Irishman which you have sent me."a 
This statement by Mr. Bruce is dated January 11, 1870. Now in 
one of its recent issues The Irishman has published the same 
Minister's reply to a letter from Mrs. Barry; Richard Burke's sister, 
who asked for news, about her brother's "alarming" condition.b 
The ministerial reply of February 24 contains an official report 
dated January 11 in which the prison doctor and Burke's special 
guard state that he had become insane.c Thus, the very day when 
Mr. Bruce publicly declared the information published by The 
Irishman to be false and ill-founded, he was concealing the 
irrefutable official proof in his pocket! It should be mentioned 
incidentally that Mr. Moore, an Irish member in the House of 
Commons, is to question the Minister on the treatment of Colonel 
Burke. 
The Echo, a recently founded newspaper, takes an even stronger 
liberal line than its companions. It has its own principle which 
consists of selling for one penny, whereas all the other newspapers 
cost twopence, fourpence or sixpence. This price of one penny 
forces it on the one hand to make pseudo-democratic professions 
of faith so as not to lose its proletarian subscribers, and on the 
other hand, to make constant reservations in order to win over 
respectable subscribers from its competitors. 
In its long tirade on O'Donovan Rossa's letter it finished up by 
saying that "perhaps even those Fenians who have received an 
amnesty will refuse to believe the exaggerations of their compat­
riots",  as if Mr. Kickham, Mr. Costello and others had not already 
published information on their suffering in prison totally in 
accordance with Rossa's letter! But after all its subterfuge and 
senseless evasions The Echo touches on the sore point. 
The "publications by the Marseillaise," it says, "will cause a scandal and this 
scandal will spread all round the world. The continental mind is perhaps too 
limited to be able to discern the difference between the crimes of a Bomba' 1 and 
the severity of a Gladstone! So it would be better to hold an enquiry", and so on. e 
a The Irishman, No. 30, January 22, 1870. The reply to Underwood's enquiry 
was made on behalf of Bruce by A.F.O. Liddell on January 11, 1870.— Ed. 
b Both Mrs. Barry's letter to Bruce of February 22, 1870 and Liddell's reply to 
it of February 24 were published in The Irishman, No. 37, March 12, 1870.— Ed. 
c J. Meyers, Official report on Richard Burke's state of health, dated January 
11, 1870, The Irishman, No. 37, March 12, 1870.—Ed. 
d King Bomba, i. e. Ferdinand II.— Ed. 
e "O'Donovan Rossa's Woes", The Echo, No. 391, March 11, 1870.—Ed. 

=====第455页=====
Appendices 423 
The Spectator, a "liberal" weekly which supports Gladstone, is 
governed by the principle that all genres are bad except the 
boring one/' This is why it is called in London the journal of the 
seven wise men. After giving a brief account of O'Donovan Rossa 
and scolding him for his aversion to the Bible, the journal of the 
seven wise men pronounces the following judgment: 
"The  Fenian O'Donovan Rossa does not appear to have suffered anything more 
than the ordinary sufferings of convicts, but we confess that we should like to see 
changes  in this regime. It is very right and often most advisable to shoot rebels. It 
is also right to deprive them of their liberty as the most dangerous type of 
criminals.  But it is neither right nor wise to degrade them." b 
Well said, Solomon the Wise! 
Finally we have The Standard, the main organ of the Tory party, 
the Conservatives. You will be aware that the English oligarchy is 
composed of two factions: the landed aristocracy and the 
plutocracy. If in their family quarrels one takes the side of the 
plutocrats against the aristocrats one is called a liberal or even 
radical. If, on the contrary, one sides with the aristocrats against 
the plutocrats one is called a Tory. 
The Standard calls O'Donovan Rossa's letter an apocryphal story 
probably written by A. Dumas. 
"Why,"  it says, "did the Marseillaise refrain from adding that Mr. Gladstone, 
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Mayor were present each morning 
while  O'Donovan Rossa was being tortured?"0 
In the House of Commons a certain member once referred to 
the Tory party as the  "STUPID  PARTY".d Is it not a fact that The 
Standard well deserves its title as the main organ of the stupid 
party! 
Before closing I must warn the French not to confuse the 
newspaper clamour with the voice of the English proletariat 
which, unfortunately for the two countries, Ireland and England, 
has no echo in the English press. 
Let it suffice to say that more than 200,000 men, women and 
children of the English working class raised their voices in Hyde 
Park to demand freedom for their Irish brothers, and that the 
General Council of the International Working Men's Association, 
-' Jenny Marx paraphrases words from Voltaire's novel L'Enfant prodigue: Tous 
les genres sont bons, hors le genre ennuyeux" (The Prodigal Son: "Ail genres are 
good  except the boring ones").— Ed. 
h The Spectator, No. 2176, March 12,  1870.—  Ed. 
' The Evening Standard, March 10,  1870.—  Ed. 
d Jenny Marx uses the English words "stupid party" and gives the French 
translation  in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第456页=====
424 Appendices 
which has its headquarters in London and includes well-known 
English working-class leaders among its members, has severely 
condemned the treatment of Fenian prisoners and come out in 
defence of the rights of the Irish people against the English 
government.493 
P. S. As a result of the publicity given by the Marseillaise to 
O'Donovan Rossa's letter,3 Gladstone is afraid that he may be 
forced by public opinion to hold a parliamentary public enquiry 
into the treatment of political prisoners. In order to avoid this 
again (we know how many times his corrupt conscience has 
opposed it already) this diplomat has just produced an official, but 
anonymous denial of the facts quoted by Rossa.494 
Let it be known in France that this denial is nothing more than 
a copy of the statements made by the prison jailer, police 
magistrates Knox and Pollock, etc., etc.b These gentlemen know 
full well that Rossa cannot reply to them. He will be kept under 
stricter supervision than ever, but ... I shall reply to them in my 
next letter with facts, the verification of which does not depend on 
the goodwill of jailers. 
a O'Donovan's letter of March 5, 1870, La Marseillaise, No. 79, March 9, 
187D.—  Ed, 
'' Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the 
English Convict Prisons, London, 1867.— Ed. 

=====第457页=====
425 
IV 
London, March 18, 1870 
As I announced in my last letter Mr. Moore, an Irish member of 
the House of Commons, yesterday questioned the government on 
the treatment of Fenian prisoners.3 He referred to the request 
about Richard Burke and four other prisoners held in Mountjoy 
Prison (in Dublin) and asked the government whether it consid­
ered it honourable to hold the bodies of these men after having 
deprived them of their senses. Finally, he insisted on a "full, free 
and public enquiry".15 
So here was Mr. Gladstone with his back to the wall. In 1868 he 
gave an insolent, categorical refusal to a request to hold an 
enquiry made by the same Mr. Moore. Since then he has always 
replied in the same fashion to repeated demands for an enquiry. 
Why give way now? Should he admit to being 
alarmed by the clamour on the other side of the Channel? Never. 
As to the charges levelled against our governors of prisons, we 
have asked them to give a full explanation in this connection. 
The latter have unanimously replied that all this is sheer 
nonsense. Thus, our ministerial conscience is naturally satisfied. 
But after the explanations given by Mr. Moore—these are his 
exact words—it appears "that the point in question is not exactly 
satisfaction. That THE SATISFACTION OF THE MINDS OF THE GOVERNMENT0 
derives from its confidence in its subordinates and, 'THEREFORE'^ it 
a See this volume, p. 422.— Ed. 
b Moore's speech in the House of Commons on March 17, 1870, The Times, 
No. 26702, March 18, 1870.— Ed. 
c The words in small caps are given in La Marseillaise in English in brackets after 
their French equivalent.— Ed. 
d This word is given in the newspaper in brackets after its French equiva­
lent.— Ed. 

=====第458页=====
426 Appendices 
would be both politic and just to conduct an enquiry into the truth 
of the jailers' statements".495 
One day he says this, and the next day says that, 
His yesterday's views today he will shelve, 
He now wears a helmet, and now a top hat, 
A nuisance to others, a bore to  himself/' 
But if he does give way in the end, he does so with a further mental 
reservation. 
Mr. Moore demands a "full, free and public enquiry". 
Mr. Gladstone replies that he is responsible for the "form" of the 
enquiry, and we already know that this will not be a "parliamen­
tary enquiry", but one conducted by means of a Royal Commis­
sion. In other words, the judges in this great trial, in which 
Mr. Gladstone appears as the main defendant, are to be selected 
and appointed by Mr. Gladstone  himself. 
As for Richard Burke, Mr. Gladstone states that the government 
had learnt of his insanity as early as January 9. Consequently, his 
honourable colleague Mr. Bruce, the Home Secretary, lied out­
rageously by declaring in his open letter of January 11 that this 
information was untrue.1' But, Mr. Gladstone continues, 
Mr. Burke's mental disturbance had not reached a sufficiently 
advanced stage to justify his release from prison. It must not be 
forgotten that this man was an accessory to the blowing up of 
Clerkenwell Prison.496 Really? But Richard Burke was already 
detained in Clerkenwell Prison when a number of other people 
took it into their heads to blow up the prison in order to free him. 
Thus he was an accessory to this ridiculous attempt which, it is 
thought, was instigated by the English police and which, if it had 
succeeded, would have buried him under the ruins! Moreover, 
concludes Mr. Gladstone, we have already released two Fenians 
who went mad in our English prisons. But, interrupts Mr. Moore, 
I was talking about the four insane men detained in Mountjoy 
Prison in Dublin. Be that as it may, replies Mr. Gladstone. There 
are still two madmen less in our prisons. 
Why is Mr. Gladstone so anxious to avoid all mention of 
Mountjoy Prison? We shall see in a moment. This time the facts 
are verified not by letters from the prisoners, but in a Blue Book 
published in 1868 by order of Parliament.497 
After the Fenian skirmish498 the English government declared a 
state of general emergency in Ireland. All guarantees of the 
freedom of the individual were suspended. Any person "suspected 
•' Les satires de Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux, Jena, 1834 (Satire VIII, 5).— Ed. 
b Bruce's letter to Th. N. Underwood was published in The Irishman, No. 37, 
March 12, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第459页=====
Appendices 427 
of being suspected of Fenianism" could thus be thrown into prison 
and kept there without being brought to court as long as it pleased 
the authorities. One of the prisons full of suspects was Mountjoy 
Convict Prison in Dublin, of which John Murray was the inspector 
and Mr. M'Donnell the doctor. Now what do we read in the Blue 
Book published in 1868 by order of Parliament? 
For several months Mr. M'Donnell wrote first to Inspector 
Murray protesting against the cruel treatment of suspects. Since 
the inspector did not reply, Mr. M'Donnell sent three or four 
reports to the prison governor. In one of these letters he refers to 
"certain persons",— I am citing word for word  — "who show unmistakable signs 
of insanity". He goes on to add: "I have not the slightest doubt that this insanity is 
the consequence of the prison regime. Quite apart from all humane considerations, 
it would be a serious matter if one of these prisoners, who have not been sentenced 
by a court of law but are merely suspects, should commit suicide." 
All these letters addressed by Mr. M'Donnell to the governor 
were intercepted by John Murray. Finally, Mr. M'Donnell wrote 
direct to Lord Mayo, the First Secretary for Ireland. He told him 
for example: 
"There is no one, my Lord, as well informed as you yourself are on the harsh 
discipline to which the 'suspect' prisoners have been subjected for a considerable 
time,  a more severe form of solitary confinement than that imposed on the 
convicts." 
What was the result of these revelations published by order of 
Parliament? The doctor, Mr. M'Donnell, was dismissed!!! Murray 
kept his post. 
All this took place during the Tory ministry. When Mr. Glad­
stone finally succeeded in unseating Lord Derby and Mr. Disraeli 
by fiery speeches in which he denounced the English government 
as the true cause of Fenianism, he not only confirmed the savage 
Murray in his functions but also, as a sign of his special 
satisfaction, conferred a large sinecure, that of REGISTRAR  OF HABITUAL 
CRIMINALS , on his post of inspector. 
In my last letter I stated that the anonymous reply to Rossa's 
letter, circulated by the London newspapers, emanated directly 
from the Home Office. 
It is now known to be the work of the Home Secretary, 
Mr. Bruce. Here is a sample of his "ministerial conscience!" 
As to Rossa's complaint that he is obliged "to wash in water which has already 
been used for the convicts' ablutions, the police magistrates Knox and Pollock have 
declared that after their careful enquiry it would be superfluous to consider such 
nonsense", says Mr. Bruce. 

=====第460页=====
428 Appendices 
Luckily the report by police magistrates Knox and Pollock has 
been published by order of Parliament.3 What do they say on page 
23 of their report? That in accordance with the prison regime a 
certain number of convicts use the same bath one after the other 
and, that "the guard cannot give priority to O'Donovan Rossa 
without offending the others". It would, therefore, be "superflu­
ous to consider such nonsense". 
Thus,  according to the report by Knox and Pollock, it is not 
O'Donovan Rossa's allegation that he was forced to bathe in water 
which had been used by convicts that is nonsense, as Mr. Bruce 
would have them say. On the contrary, these gentlemen find it 
absurd that O'Donovan Rossa should have complained about such 
a disgrace. 
During the same meeting in the House of Commons at which 
Mr. Gladstone declared himself ready to hold an enquiry into the 
treatment of Fenian prisoners, he introduced a new Coercion Bill 
for Ireland, that is to say, the suppression of constitutional 
freedoms and the proclamation of a state of emergency. 
Theoretical fiction has it that constitutional liberty is the rule 
and its suspension an exception, but the whole history of English 
rule in Ireland shows that a state of emergency is the rule and that 
the application of the constitution is the exception. Gladstone is 
making agrarian crimes the pretext for putting Ireland once more 
in a state of siege. His true motive is the desire to suppress the 
independent newspapers in Dublin. From henceforth the life or 
death of any Irish newspaper will depend on the goodwill of 
Mr. Gladstone. Moreover, this Coercion Bill is a necessary 
complement to the Land Bill recently introduced by Mr. Glad­
stone which consolidates landlordism in Ireland whilst appearing 
to come to the aid of the tenant farmers.499 It should suffice to say 
of this law that it bears the mark of Lord Dufferin, a member of 
the Cabinet and a large Irish landowner. It was only last year that 
this Dr. Sangrado published a large tomeb to prove that the Irish 
population has not yet been sufficiently bled, and that it should be 
reduced by a third if Ireland is to accomplish its glorious mission 
to produce the highest possible rents for its landlords and the 
largest possible quantities of meat and wool for the English 
market. 
a Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the 
English Convict Prisons, London, 1867.— Ed. 
b F. T. H. Blackwood, Mr. Mill's Plan for the Pacification of Ireland Examined, 
London, 1868.— Ed. 

=====第461页=====
429 
V 
London, March 22 
There is a London weekly with a wide circulation among the 
people which is called Reynolds's Newspaper. This is what it has to 
say about the Irish question: 
"Now we are regarded by the other nations as the most hypocritical people on 
earth. We blew our own trumpets so loudly and so joyfully and exaggerated the 
excellence of our institutions so much, that now when our lies are being exposed 
one by one it is not at all surprising that other peoples should ridicule us and ask 
themselves whether it can be possible. It is not the people of England who have 
brought about such a state of affairs, because the people also have been tricked and 
deceived — the blame lies with the ruling classes and a venal, parasitic press...."a 
The Coercion Bill for Ireland which was introduced on 
Thursday eveningb is a detestable, abominable, execrable measure. 
This Bill extinguishes the last spark of national liberty in Ireland 
and silences the press of this unhappy country in order to prevent 
its newspapers from protesting against a policy which is the crying 
disgrace of our time. The government wants its revenge on all 
those newspapers which did not greet its wretched Land Bill with 
transports of delight, and will get it. In effect the Habeas Corpus 
Act will be suspended, because from now onwards it will be 
possible to imprison for six months or even for life any person 
who cannot explain his behaviour to the satisfaction of the 
authorities. 
Ireland has been put at the mercy of a band of well-trained 
spies who are euphemistically referred to as "detectives". 
Not even Nicholas of Russia ever published a crueller ukase 
a Reynolds's Newspaper, March 20, 1870.— Ed. 
b March 17.— Ed. 

=====第462页=====
430 Appendices 
against the unfortunate Poles than this Bill of Mr. Gladstone's 
against the Irish. It is a measure which would have won 
Mr. Gladstone the good favour of the famous King of 
Dahomey.500 Nevertheless, Mr. Gladstone had the colossal effron­
tery to boast in front of Parliament and the nation of the generous 
policy which his government is proposing to adopt with regard to 
Ireland. At the end of his speech on Thursday Gladstone even 
went as far as producing expressions of regret pronounced with a 
sanctimonious, lachrymose solemnity worthy of the reverend 
Mr. Stiggins. But snivel as he may, the Irish people will not be 
deceived. 
We repeat that the Bill is a shameful measure, a measure worthy 
of Castlereagh, a measure which will invoke the condemnation of 
all free nations on the heads of those who invented it and those 
who sanction and approve it. Finally, it is a measure which will 
bring well-deserved opprobrium to Mr. Gladstone and, we sincere­
ly hope, lead to his swift defeat. And how has the demago­
gic minister Mr. Bright been able to keep silent for forty-eight 
hours? 
We state without hesitation that Mr. Gladstone has proved to be 
the most savage enemy and the most implacable master to have 
crushed Ireland since the days of the notorious Castlereagh. 
As if the cup of ministerial shame were not already full to 
overflowing, it was announced in the House of Commons on 
Thursday evening, the same evening as the Coercion Bill was 
introduced, that Burke and other Fenian prisoners had been 
tortured to the point of. insanity in the English prisons, and in the 
very face of this appalling evidence Gladstone and his jackal Bruce 
were protesting loudly that the political prisoners were treated 
with all possible care. When Mr. Moore made this sad announce­
ment to the House he was constantly interrupted by hoots of 
bestial laughter. Had such a disgusting and revolting scene taken 
place in the American Congress, what a howl of indignation would 
have gone up from us! 
Up till now the Reynolds's Newspaper, The Times, The Daily News, 
Pall Mall, The Telegraph, etc., etc., have greeted the Coercion Bill 
with shouts of wild joy, particularly the measure for the 
destruction of the Irish press. And all this is taking place in 
England, the acknowledged sanctuary of the press. But one should 
not, after all, be too angry with these new writers. You will 
agree that it was too hard to watch The Irishman each Saturday 
demolish the tissue of lies and calumny which these Penelopes 
worked on for six days of the week with sweat on their brows, and 

=====第463页=====
Appendices 431 
that it is quite natural that they should give a frantic welcome 
to the police who come to tie the hands of their formidable 
enemy. At least these fine fellows realise their own collective 
worth. 
A characteristic exchange of letters has taken place between 
Bruce and Mr. M'Carthy Downing concerning Colonel Richard 
Burke.a Before reproducing it I should like to remark in passing 
that Mr. Downing is an Irish member of the House of Commons. 
This ambitious advocate joined the ministerial phalanx with the 
noble aim of making a career. Thus, we are not dealing here with 
a suspect witness. 
February 22, 1870 
Sir, 
If my information is correct, Richard Burke, one of the Fenian prisoners 
formerly held in Chatham Prison, has been transferred to Woking in a state of 
insanity. In March 1869 I took the liberty of bringing his state of apparent 
ill-health to your notice, and in the following July Mr. Blake, former member for 
Waterford, and I informed you of our opinion that if the system of his treatment 
were not changed, the worst consequences were to be feared. I received no reply to 
this letter. My object in writing to you is the cause of humanity and the hope of 
obtaining his release so that his family may have the consolation of seeing to his 
needs and mitigating his suffering. I have in my hand a letter from the prisoner to 
his brother dated December 3 in which he says that he has been systematically 
poisoned, this being, I imagine, one of the phases of his disease. I sincerely trust 
that the kind sentiments for which you are known will urge you to grant this 
request. 
Yours, etc., 
M'(Jarthy Downing 
Home Office, 
February 25, 1870 
Sir, 
Richard Burke was transferred from Chatham as a result of his illusion that he 
was poisoned or cruelly treated by the prison medical officers. At the same time, 
without him being positively ill, his health deteriorated. Consequently, I gave 
orders for him to be moved to Woking and had him examined by Dr. Meyer from 
Broadmoor Asylum, who was of the opinion that his illusion would disappear when 
his health improved. His health did, in fact, improve rapidly and an ordinary 
observer would not have noted any signs of his mental weakness. I should very 
much like to be in a position to give you an assurance of his early release, but am 
not able to do so. His crime and the consequences of the attempt to free him are 
loo serious for me to be able to give you such an assurance. Meanwhile all that 
a "The Fenian Prisoner Burke", The Irishman, No. 38, March 19, 1870.—./•;</. 
16-733 

=====第464页=====
432 Appendices 
medical science and good treatment can do to restore his mental and physical 
health will be done. 
H. A. Bruce 
February 28, 1870 
Sir, 
After receiving your letter of the 25th in reply to my request that Burke should 
be handed over to the care of his brother, I hoped to find an occasion to talk to 
you on this matter in the House of Commons, but you were so busy on Thursday 
and Friday that an interview was out of the question. I have received letters from a 
number of Burke's friends. They are waiting anxiously to hear whether my request 
has been successful. I have not yet informed them that it has not. Before 
disappointing them I felt "justified" in writing to you again on the matter. I 
thought that as a person who has invariably and at some risk denounced 
Fenianism, I could permit myself to give a word of impartial, friendly advice to the 
government. 
I have no hesitation in saying that the release of a political prisoner who has 
become mentally unbalanced would not be criticised and certainly not condemned 
by the general public. In Ireland people would say: "Well, the government is not as 
cruel as we thought." Whereas if, on the other hand, Burke is kept in prison this 
will provide new material for the national press to attack it as being even crueller 
than the Neapolitan governors in their worst days. And I confess that I cannot see 
how men of moderate views could defend the act of refusal in such a case... 
M'Carthy Downing 
Sir, 
I regret that I am unable to recommend Burke's release. 
It is true that he has shown signs of insanity and that in ordinary cases I would 
be "justified" in recommending him to the mercy of the Crown. But his case is not 
an ordinary one, because he was not only a hardened conspirator, but his 
participation in the attempt to blow up Clerkenwell which, if it had succeeded, 
would have been even more disastrous than it was, makes him an  IMPROPER 
RECIPIENT  OF  PARDON.' 1 
H. A. Bruce 
Could anything be more infamous! Bruce knows perfectly well 
that if there had been the slightest suspicion against Colonel 
Burke during the trial concerning the attempt to blow up 
Clerkenwell, Burke would have been hung next to Barrett who 
was sentenced to death on the testimony of a man who had 
previously given false testimony against three other men, and in 
spite of the evidence of eight citizens who made the journey from 
Glasgow to prove that Barrett had been there when the explosion 
had taken place. The English have no scruples (Mr. Bruce can 
confirm this) when it is a question of hanging a man — especially a 
Fenian. 
a The words in small caps are given in La Marseillaise in brackets after their 
French equivalents.— Ed. 

=====第465页=====
433 
But all this spate of cruelty cannot break the iron spirit of the 
Irish. They have just celebrated their national holiday, St. Patrick's 
Day, more demonstratively than ever in Dublin. The houses were 
decorated with flags saying: "Ireland for the Irish!", "Liberty!" 
and "Long live the political prisoners!" and the air rang with the 
sound of their national songs and—the Marseillaise. 
16* 

=====第466页=====
434 
VI 
AGRARIAN OUTRAGES IN IRELAND 
London, April 2, 1870 
In Ireland the plundering and even extermination of the tenant 
farmer and his family by the landlord is called the property right, 
whereas the desperate farmer's revolt against his ruthless ex­
ecutioner is called an agrarian outrage. These AGRARIAN OUTRAGES,  a 
which are actually very few in number but are multiplied and 
exaggerated out of all proportion by the kaleidoscope of the 
English press in accordance with orders received, have, as you will 
know, provided the excuse for reviving the regime of white terror 
in Ireland. On the other hand, this regime of terror makes it 
possible for the landowners to redouble their oppression with 
impunity. 
I have already mentioned that the Land Bill consolidates 
landlordism under the pretext of giving aid to the tenant farmers. 
Nevertheless, in order to pull the wool over people's eyes and 
clear his conscience, Gladstone was compelled to grant this new 
lease of life to landlord despotism subject to certain legal 
formalities. It should suffice to say that in the future, as in the past, 
the landlord's word will become law if he succeeds in imposing on 
his TENANTS  AT win b the most fantastic rents which are impossible to 
pay or, in the case of land tenure agreements, makes his farmers 
sign contracts which will bind them to voluntary slavery. 
And how the landlords are rejoicing! A Dublin newspaper, the 
Freeman, publishes a letter from Father P. Lavelle/ the author of 
The Irish Landlord since the Revolution, in which he says: 
a These two words are given in the newspaper in brackets after their French 
equivalents.— Ed. 
b This term is given in the newspaper in brackets after its French equivalent.— 
Ed. 
c P. Lavelle, "To the Tenants and Tenant-Farmers of Ireland", The Freeman's 
journal. March 29, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第467页=====
Appendices 435 
"I have seen piles of letters addressed to tenants by their landlord, the brave 
captain, and 'absentee' living in England, warning them that from now on their 
rents are to be raised by 25%. This is equivalent to an eviction notice! And this 
from a man who does nothing for the land except live off its produce!" 
The Irishman on the other hand publishes the new tenure 
agreements dictated by Lord Dufferin,a the member of Gladstone's 
Cabinet who inspired the Land Bill and introduced the Coercion 
Bill in the House of Lords. Add the rapacious shrewdness of an 
expert moneylender and the despicable chicanery of the advocate 
to feudal insolence and you will have a rough idea of the new land 
tenure agreements invented by the noble Dufferin. 
It is now easy to see that the rule of terror has arrived just in 
time to introduce the rule of the Land Bill! Let us suppose, for 
example, that in a certain Irish county the farmers refuse either to 
allow a 25% rent increase or to sign Dufferin's land tenure 
agreements! The county's landlords will then get their valets or 
the police to send them anonymous threatening letters, as they 
have in the past. This also counts as an "agrarian outrage". The 
landlords inform the Viceroy, Lord Spencer, accordingly. Lord 
Spencer then declares that the district is subject to the provisions 
of the Coercion Act which is then applied by the same landlords, 
in their capacity as magistrates, against their own tenants! 
Journalists who are imprudent enough to protest will not only 
be prosecuted for sedition, but their printing presses will be 
confiscated without the semblance of legal proceedings! 
It should, perhaps, now be obvious why the head of your 
executive b congratulated Gladstone on the improvements which he 
had introduced in Ireland, and why Gladstone returned the 
compliment by congratulating your executive on its constitutional 
concessions. "A Roland for an Olivier"0  those of your readers 
who know Shakespeare will say. But others who are more versed 
in the Moniteur than in Shakespeare will remember the letter sent 
by the head of your executive to the late Lord Palmerston 
containing the words "Let us not act like knaves!" 
Now I shall return to the question of political prisoners, not 
without good cause. 
;1 "Lord Dufferin's Lease.— Landlord Confiscation", The Irishman, No. 37, March 
12, 1870.— Ed. 
b Napoleon III.— Ed. 
c Jenny Marx paraphrases Shakespeare's words; see King Henry the Sixth, Part 1, 
Act I, Scene 2.— Ed. 

=====第468页=====
436 Appendices 
The publication of Rossa's first letter in the Marseillaise" 
produced a great effect in England—the result is to be an 
enquiry. 
The following dispatch was printed by all the newspapers in the 
United States: 
"The Marseillaise says that O'Donovan Rossa was stripped naked once a day and 
examined, that he was starved, that he was locked in a dark cell, that he was 
harnessed to a cart, and that the death of his fellow prisoners was caused by the 
cold to which they were exposed." 
The Irishman's New York correspondent says: 
"The Rochefort Marseillaise has placed the suffering of the Fenian prisoners 
before the eyes of the American people. We owe a debt of gratitude to the 
Marseillaise which, I trust, will be promptly paid." b 
Rossa's letter has also been published by the German press.c 
From now onwards the English government will no longer be 
able to commit its outrages in silence. Mr. Gladstone will gain 
nothing from his attempt to silence the Irish press. Each journalist 
imprisoned in Ireland will be replaced by a hundred journalists in 
France, Germany and America. 
What can Mr. Gladstone's narrow-minded, out-of-date policies 
do against the international spirit of the nineteenth century? 
a See this volume, pp. 418-19.— Ed. 
b "The Irishman in New York", The Irishman, No. 40, April 2, 1870.— Ed. 
c Der Volksstaat, No. 22, March 16, 1870.— Ed. 

=====第469页=====
437 
VII 
THE DEATH  OF  JOHN LYNCH 
Citizen Editor, 
I am  sending  you  extracts from  a letter written  to The  Irishman 
by an Irish political prisoner during  his  detention  (he is now at 
liberty)  in a  penal colony  in Australia. 
I shall limit myself  to translating  the  episode concerning John 
Lynch. 
LEITER FROM JOHN CASEY 
The following  is a brief,  impartial report  of the  treatment  to which  my  brother 
exiles (twenty-four  in number)  and I  were subjected during  our  incarceration  in 
that pit of  horrors, that living tomb which  is called Portland Prison. 
Above  all it is my  duty  to pay a  tribute  of respect  and  justice  to the  memory  of 
my friend John Lynch  who was  sentenced  by an  extraordinary tribunal  in 
December  1865 and  died  at Woking Prison  in April  1866. 
Whatever  may be the  cause  to which  the  jury  has  attributed  his  death,  I 
confirm,  and am  able  to furnish  proof,  that  his death  was  accelerated  by the  cruelty 
of the  prison warders. 
To be imprisoned  in the  heart  of winter  in a  cold cell  for twenty-three hours 
out of twenty-four, insufficiently clad, sleeping  on a  hard board with  a log of  wood 
as a pillow  and two  worn blankets weighing barely  ten lbs. as  one's only protection 
against  the  excessive cold, deprived through  an inexpressibly fine stroke  of cruelty 
of even covering  our  frozen limbs with  our  clothes which  we were forced  to put 
outside  our  cell door, given unhealthy, meagre nourishment, having  no exercise 
apart from  a daily walk lasting three-quarters  of an  hour  in a  cage about  20 ft. 
long by 6 ft.  wide designed  for the  worst type  of criminals: such privation  and 
suffering would break even  an iron constitution.  So it is not  surprising that  a 
person  as delicate  as Lynch should succumb  to it  almost immediately. 
On arrival  at the  prison Lynch asked  for permission  to keep  his flannels  on. His 
request  was  rudely refused.  "If you  refuse  1 shall  be dead  in three months,"  he 
replied  on that occasion.  Ah,  little  did I  suspect that  his words would come true.  I 
could  not  imagine that Ireland  was to  lose  one of her  most devoted, ardent  and 
noble sons  so soon,  and  that  I myself  was to  lose  a tried  and  tested friend. 

=====第470页=====
438 Appendices 
At the beginning of March I noticed that my friend was looking very ill and one-
day 1 took advantage of the jailer's brief absence to ask him about his health. He 
replied that he was dying, that he had consulted the doctor several times, but that 
the latter had not paid the slightest attention to his complaints. His cough was so 
violent that although my cell was a long distance from his, I could hear it day and 
night resounding along the empty corridors. One jailer even told me, "Number 7's 
time will soon be up  — he should have been in hospital a month ago. I've often seen 
ordinary prisoners there looking a hundred times healthier than him." 
One day in April I looked out of my cell and saw a skeleton-like figure 
dragging itself along with difficulty and leaning on the bars for support, with a 
deathly pale face, glazed eyes and hollow cheeks. It was Lynch. I could not believe 
it was him until he looked at me, smiled and pointed to the ground as if to say: 
"I'm finished." 
This was the last time I saw Lynch. 
This statement of Casey's corroborates Rossa's testimony about 
Lynch. And it should not be forgotten that Rossa wrote his letter 
in an English prison whilst Casey was writing in an Australian 
penal colony, making any communication between the two of them 
quite impossible. However, the government has just stated that 
Rossa's assertions are lies. Bruce, Pollock and Knox even declare 
"that Lynch was given flannels before he asked for them".' 
On the other hand Mr. Casey insists as firmly as Mr. Bruce 
denies it that Lynch complained that "even when he was incapable 
of walking and was forced to remain in the terrible solitude of his 
cell his request was refused". 
But as Mr. Laurier said in his beautiful speech: 
"Let us leave aside human testimony and turn to the testimony that does not lie, 
the testimony that does not deceive, the silent testimony."50* 
The fact remains that Lynch entered Pen ton ville blooming with 
life, full of hope and, three months later, this young man was a 
corpse. 
Until Messrs. Gladstone, Bruce and his cohort of police can 
prove that Lynch is not dead, they are wasting their time in vain 
oaths. 
a Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment oj the Treason-Felony Convicts in the 
English Convict Prisons, London, 1867.— Ed. 

=====第471页=====
439 
VIII 
LETTER FROM ENGLAND 
London, April 19, 1870 
"No priests in politics" is the watchword which can be heard all 
over Ireland at the moment. 
The large party which has been opposing with all its might the 
despotism of the Catholic Church, ever since the  -DISESTAUUSHMENT" 
of the Protestant Church, is growing daily with remarkable 
rapidity and has just dealt the clergy a crushing blow. 
At the Longford election the clerical candidate, Mr. Greville-
Nugent, beat the people's candidate, John Martin, but the 
nationalists challenged the validity of his election because of the 
illegal means by which it had been won, and got the better of their 
opponents. The election of Nugent was annulled by Judge 
Fitzgerald who declared Nugent's agents, that is to say the priests, 
guilty of having bribed the voters by flooding the country not with 
the Holy Spirit, but with spirits of a different kind. It appeared 
that in the single month from December 1 to January 1 alone the 
reverend lathers had spent £3,500 on whisky! 
The Standard allows itself to make some most peculiar comments 
on the Longford election: 
"With regard to their scorning of the intimidation by the clergy," writes the 
mouthpiece of the  "STUPID  party", "the nationalists deserve our praise.... The great 
victory which they have won will encourage them to put up new candidates against 
Mr. Gladstone and his ultramontane allies." 
The Times writes: 
"From the Papal Bull issued in the eternal city to the intrigues of the country 
priests, all ecclesiastical power was lined up against Fenianism and the nationalists. 

=====第472页=====
440 Appendices 
Unfortunately this ardour was not accompanied by prudence, and will result in a 
second battle at Longford."a 
The Times is right. The battle of Longford will break out again 
and be followed by those of Waterford, Mallow and Tipperary, 
the nationalists in these three counties also having presented 
petitions requesting the annulment of the election of the official 
members. In Tipperary it was O'Donovan Rossa who first won the 
election, but since Parliament stated that he was incapable of 
representing Tipperary the nationalists proposed Kickham in his 
place, one of the Fenian patriots who has just finished a spell in 
English prisons. Kickham's supporters are now declaring that their 
candidate has been duly elected in spite of the fact that Heron, the 
government and clerical candidate, gained a majority of four 
votes. 
Bear in mind, however, that one of these four voters for Heron 
is a wretched maniac who was taken to the poll by a reverend 
father—you know the weakness which priests have for the poor in 
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.b And that the second 
voter is a corpsel Yes, the honest and moderate party actually 
dared to profane the name of a man who died a fortnight before 
the election by making him vote for a Gladstonian. Apart from 
this, patriotic voters say that eleven of their votes were discounted 
on the grounds that the first letter of Kickham's name was 
illegible, that their telegrams were not delivered, that the 
authorities were bribing electors right and left and that a base 
system of intimidation was practised. 
The pressure which was brought to bear in Tipperary was 
unprecedented even in the history of Ireland. The bailiff and the 
policeman, who stand for eviction warrants, besieged the tenants' 
hovels in order to terrify wives and children first. The booths in 
which the voting took place were surrounded by police, soldiers, 
magistrates, landlords and priests. 
The latter hurled stones at people who were putting up posters 
for Kickham. On top of all this, the moneylender was present in 
the booths, his eyes resting hungrily on his wretched debtor 
during the voting. But the government got nothing for all its 
pains.  One thousand six hundred and sixty-eight small tenants 
braved it out and, unprotected by secret ballot, gave their votes 
openly for Kickham. 
This brave act reminds us of the heroic struggle of the Poles. 
a "House of Commons. London, Friday, April 8", The Times, No. 26723, April 8, 
1870.—  Ed. 
h Cf. Matthew 5:3.— Ed. 

=====第473页=====
Appendices 441 
Faced with the battles waged in Longford, Mallow, Waterford 
and Tipperary, will anyone still dare to say that the Irish are the 
abject slaves of the clergy. 
Published in La Marseillaise, Nos. 71, 79, 
89, 91, 99, 113, 118, 125 for March 1, 9, 
19, 21 and 29, and April 12, 17 and 24, 
1870 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Translated from the French 
Signed: /. Williams (except for Article II 
which is not signed) 

=====第474页=====
442 
LETTER OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
TO ROBERT WILLIAM HUME IN NEW YORK 
London, April 23, 1870 
Dear Sir, in answer to yours of the 26th ult. I am directed by 
the Council to state that the International Association recognises 
no special national interests among the working men who may 
happen to have been born in different countries. 
One of our aims is to eliminate whatever may yet remain of 
national antipathies and, perhaps, animosities, from the minds of 
working men. The Council cannot, therefore, endorse the kind of 
representation implied in your memorial. General Cluseret had his 
feelings outraged by the French police, which was probably the 
reason why the trade societies gave him credentials which induced 
him to institute a comparison between himself and the French 
ambassador at Washington.503 The French ambassador at Washing­
ton has to vindicate the personal interests of a dynasty, and the 
property interests of the French traders. The Paris workmen have 
no such interests to be taken care of on the other side of the 
Atlantic, against the probable encroachments of the American 
working men. We consider the interests of the French workmen 
resident in the United States strictly identical with the interests of 
all the other working men of the United States. 
To facilitate the inter-communication of such as may be 
separated by difference of language, and perhaps manners, we 
have correspondents, who are conversant with these things, and to 
them we trust for managing the rest. 
The communication with the United States is distributed among 
the secretaries of the different nationalities of the General 
Council. General Cluseret and Mr. Pelletier are our French 
correspondents in America. They correspond with our Secretary 

=====第475页=====
Appendices 443 
for France.11  Siegfried Meyer and Vogt are our German correspond­
ents.  They correspond with the German Secretary 13 here, and the 
General Secretary1 manages the English correspondence; and 
beside such trade union officers as Mr. Jessup, we look to you as 
our correspondent in case any misunderstanding should arise 
between different nationalities, to endeavour to set matters right, 
but we cannot admit that either French or Germans have an 
opposite or special interest from any other workmen, and we 
always urge them on to take an active part in, and identify 
themselves with, the movement of the working men of the 
country, in which they reside, particularly in America. 
Respecting the secret society movement, I am instructed to ask 
you to favour us at your convenience with your opinion as to the 
cause which has tended to bring about the necessity for secret 
action. We have been advised to persuade you and friend Jessup 
to publicly stand up against it, but we suppose there is a necessity 
for it, or else it would not have come into vogue and moreover it 
would be presumptuous on our part to offer advice in such a 
matter, but we wish to know the reasons, to bring them to the 
knowledge of the working men of the Old World, who have just 
emerged from conducting their agitation in secret. 
Yours faithfully, 
/. George Eccarius, General Secretary 
Read at the General Council meeting of 
May 24, 1870 Reproduced from the newspaper 
clipping pasted into the Minute 
Book of the General Council 
a Eugene Dupont. — Ed. 
b Karl Marx.— Ed. 
c Johann Georg Eccarius.— Ed. 

=====第476页=====
444 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE BEE-HIVE" 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF APRIL 26, 1870 
Cit. Marx proposed that the Council should cut off all 
connections with The Bee-Hive. He said it had suppressed our 
resolutions and mutilated our reports and delayed them so that 
the dates had been falsified, even the mention that certain 
questions respecting the Irish prisoners were being discussed had 
been suppressed. 505 
Next to that, the tone of The Bee-Hive was contrary to the Rules 
and platform of the Association. It preached harmony with the 
capitalists, and the Association had declared war against the 
capitalists' rule. 
Besides this, our branches abroad complained that by sending 
our reports to The Bee-Hive we gave it a moral support and led 
people to believe that we endorsed its policy. We would be better 
without its publicity than with it. 
On the Irish Coercion Bill506 it had not said a word against the 
government. 
First published in Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the Minute 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Book of the General Council 
Moscow, 1960 

=====第477页=====
445 
ACCOUNT OF A LETTER BY KARL MARX 
TO THE COMMITTEE 
OF THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC WORKERS' PARTY 507 
[London, June 27, 1870] 
The second3 letter concerns business matters of the International 
Working Men's Association, the postponement of the congress in 
particular. Marx emphatically rejects Liebknecht's proposal to 
postpone the congress until October,508 even though such a 
postponement would be very welcome to the General Council itself 
as the congress documents are not yet ready. But the French, 
Marx wrote, were already displeased about the congress being 
held in Mainz and not at least in Verviers, whereas the Parisians 
particularly wanted to have it in Paris. We must not provide any 
cause for unrest. Marx fears that if Liebknecht's plan for 
postponement is sanctioned there will be minority congress of the 
French and the French-speaking Swiss under Bakunin and he 
says:  "National petty jealousies have penetrated too deeply into 
people's blood to be reasoned away in a day." 
First published in Leipziger Hochver- Printed according to the 1872 
rathsprozeß, Leipzig, 1872 edition of the book, checked with 
the 1874 and 1894 editions 
Published in English for the first 
time 
The first letter see on pp. 133-35 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第478页=====
446 
RECORD OF MARX'S SPEECH ON THE SPLIT 
IN THE ROMANCE FEDERATION 509 
FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING 
OF JUNE 28, 1870 
Cit. Marx thought the only thing the Council could do was to 
leave the Geneva Committee 3 that had helped from the founda­
tion of the Association as it was. It had fulfilled its duty in every 
respect and had had a larger constituency though fewer delegates 
than [the] other party at the Swiss Congress.nI° The vote admitting 
the Alliance should also be communicated.1' The new committee 
could choose some local name. 
First published in Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the Minute 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Book of the General Council 
Moscow, I960 
a The Federal Council of Romance Switzerland.— Ed. 
b A reference to the admission of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy to the 
International (see this volume, pp. 34-36, 45-46).— Ed. 

=====第479页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第480页=====

=====第481页=====
449 
NOTES 
In the autumn of 1867 the General Council of the International Working 
Men's Association launched a widespread campaign among the English workers 
in support of the Irish national liberation movement led by the Fenians. The 
memorial written by Marx was an integral part of this campaign. 
The Fenians were Irish revolutionaries who named themselves after the 
"Féne"— a name of the ancient population of Ireland. Their first organisations 
appeared in the 1850s in the USA among the Irish immigrants and later in 
Ireland  itself.  The secret Irish Revolutionary Brotherhood, as the organisation 
was known in the early 1860s, aimed at establishing an independent Irish republic 
by means of an armed uprising. The Fenians, who expressed the interests of the 
Irish peasantry, came chiefly from the urban petty bourgeoisie and intelligentsia 
and believed in conspiracy tactics. The British Government attempted to suppress 
the Fenian movement by severe police reprisals. 
On September 18, 1867, the Fenians made an armed attack on a prison van 
in an attempt to liberate Kelly and Deasy, two of their leaders. The latter 
managed to escape but a policeman was killed during the clash. Five Irishmen 
(Maguire, Condon, Larkin, Allen and O'Brien) were charged with murder and 
brought to trial. Although there was no direct evidence, they were sentenced to 
death. Maguire was subsequently pardoned, and Condon, as an American 
citizen, had his sentence commuted to life imprisonment. The others were 
executed. 
The Fenian trial in Manchester aroused a storm of protest in Ireland and 
England. On the insistence of Marx, the General Council of the International 
began, on November 19, a discussion on the Irish question during which the 
leaders of the international proletarian organisation expressed their solidarity 
with the struggle of the Irish people for independence and condemned the 
position of the reformist trade union leaders who, in the wake of the English 
bourgeois radicals, denied the right of the Fenians to resort to revolutionary 
methods in the struggle. The discussion was scheduled to continue on 
November 26 (see this volume, pp. 189-93), but when the news of the 
conviction was received, the General Council convened a special meeting on 
November 20 and addressed a memorial to the Home Secretary asking for the 
commutation of the death sentence. The British Government ignored the 
memorial. 

=====第482页=====
450 Notes 
Because of opposition from the trade union leaders, the English labour 
press did not publish the memorial in its original wording. A report on the 
special meeting of the General Council, published in The Bee-Hive, No. 319, 
November 23, 1867, only summarised it, and named the General Council 
members who had signed it. The French translation was published by Le Courrier 
français, No. 163, November 24. 
In English the memorial was first published in full in The General Council of 
the First International. 1866-1868, Moscow, 1964. 
This document is also preserved in the form of the manuscript copy made 
by Mrs. Marx which fully coincides with the text entered into the Minute Book. 
Written as an article, this copy was apparently to be sent to the press. In this 
volume the memorial is reproduced from this copy. p. 3 
2 Marx means an extensive amnesty granted by President Lincoln in  A 863 and 
President Johnson in 1865 to persons who had fought in the US Civil War on 
the side of the South. p. 3 
3 Marx wrote this item on the basis of a letter from Johann Baptist Schweitzer 
dated April 29, 1868. The item was included in the report of the General 
Council meeting of May 12, 1868 published in The Bee-Hive Newspaper, 
No. 344, May 16, 1868, but is not to be found in the Minute Book. Informing 
Engels of Schweitzer's letter, Marx wrote to him on May 4, 1868 that he 
intended "to use this question in the interests of the Party", and insisted on an 
inquiry into the condition of the workers employed in the iron trade of the 
Rhine Province (see this letter and Marx's letter to Engels of May 7 and the 
latter's reply of May 6-7, 1868, present edition, Vol. 43). p. 5 
4 The Lausanne Congress of the International in 1867 designated Brussels as the 
venue of the next general congress. On February 24, 1868, the General Council 
called on all sections to begin preparing the Congress agenda. However, the 
Belgian Minister of Justice, Jules Bara, declared in the Chamber of Deputies on 
May 16 that he would not permit the convocation of the Congress in Brussels 
and urged the deputies to renew the Aliens Law of 1835, under which any 
foreigner could be expelled from the country as politically unreliable. In view 
of this, at the General Council meeting of May 26, 1868, Marx raised the 
question of not meeting in Brussels (see The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 346, May 
30, 1868). The resolution drawn up by Marx to this effect was read by Jung at 
the General Council meeting of June 2, since Marx had left for Manchester. 
Bara's statement and the prolongation of the Aliens Law caused great 
discontent in Belgium. The Brussels Section of the International sent the 
Minister a protest letter which was published in La Tribune du Peuple, No. 5, 
May 24, 1868. 
In their letters to the General Council, De Paepe and Vandenhouten, the 
leaders of the Brussels Section, urged the Council not to yield to the 
government because this threatened the further existence of the International 
in Belgium. Consequently, on Marx's proposal, the General Council meeting of 
June 16 cancelled the resolution of June 2 and Brussels remained the venue 
for the next annual congress (see this volume, pp. 320-21 and also Marx's letter 
to Engels of June 20, 1868, present edition, Vol. 43). 
The text of the June 2 resolution was included in the Minutes of the 
General Council meeting of June 2, 1868, and was also published in The 
Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 347, June 6, 1868. p. 6 
5 This refers to the Aliens Law adopted in Belgium on September 22, 1835 and 
prolonged every three years. Despite the widespread protest campaign in the 

=====第483页=====
Notes 451 
press and at meetings, it was renewed at the end of June 1865. In May 1868, 
the Belgian Government, for fear of fresh mass action, prolonged it without 
discussion in the Chamber of Deputies. p. 6 
" The public meeting to celebrate the anniversary of the June 1848 insurrection 
of the Paris workers was held on June 29, 1868 in the Cleveland Hall, London. 
Such meetings were annually held by the German Workers' Educational Society 
in London jointly with other émigré organisations. 
The French petty-bourgeois democrat Félix Pyat, who attended the meeting, 
delivered a speech and moved a provocative resolution urging terroristic acts 
against Napoleon III (the resolution was published in The Bee-Hive, No. 351, 
July 4, 1868). The Brussels Espiègle, No. 25, July 5, 1868, published a report of 
the meeting which described it as a meeting of the International with Pyat as 
one of its leaders. This statement was repeated in other newspapers. The 
General Council held that this could discredit the International in the eyes of 
the workers and give the Bonapartist government a pretext for the persecution 
of its members in France and Belgium. Consequently, at its meeting on July 7 
the Council resolved, on Marx's proposal, to disavow Pyat's behaviour in a 
resolution to this effect (see also Marx's letter to Engels of July 7, 1868, present 
edition, Vol. 43). 
When the General Council's resolution against Pyat appeared in the press, a 
split took place in the French Section in London, of which he was a member. 
Eugène Dupont, Hermann Jung, Paul Lafargue and other proletarian members 
of the section expressed their disapproval of Pyat's adventurous and 
provocative tactics and withdrew from it. Pyat's group lost ties with the 
International but continued to act in its name and repeatedly supported 
anti-proletarian elements opposing Marx's line in the General Council. On 
May 10, 1870, the General Council officially dissociated itself from this group 
(see this volume, pp. 127-28). 
The text of this resolution has been preserved in the Minutes of the General 
Council meeting of July 7, 1868. It was first published in La Liberté, No. 55, 
July 12, 1868 and reproduced in La Cigale, No. 29, July 19, La Tribune du 
Peuple, No. 7, July 26, 1868 (with the end of the resolution denying Pyat's 
connections with the International omitted), and in other newspapers. 
This resolution was first published in English in The General Council of the 
First International. 1866-1868, Moscow, 1964. p. 7 
17 In 1866-68, after the suppression of the Polish insurrection of 1863-64, the 
Russian Government promulgated "Regulations on the Gubernia and Uyezd 
Administration in the Kingdom of Poland" and a number of ukases aimed at 
the abolition of Polish institutions and the consolidation of the administrative 
apparatus — the chief means of national oppression. The number of gubernias 
was increased, the prerogatives of the governors appointed by the Russian 
Government were extended, supreme bodies (the State Council and others) 
were abolished, and different administrative departments (post, communications) 
were subordinated to the respective ministries in St. Petersburg. p. 8 
s The question of machinery and its effects under capitalism was raised by the 
General Council on January 28, 1868 and was to go on the agenda of the 
Brussels Congress. It was initially discussed by the General Council at its 
meetings of July 28 and August 4, 1868. The discussion was opened by Marx 
who put forward the basic ideas developed by him in Volume One of Capital, 
chapter "Machinery and Modern Industry" (for the record of Marx's speech 
see this volume, pp. 382-84). 

=====第484页=====
452 Notes 
Summing up the discussion on August 4, Marx proposed that the General 
Council should record its conclusion in the form of a resolution. The resolution 
was drawn up by Marx and adopted at the next Council meeting, on 
August 11. 
At the Brussels Congress this resolution was moved by Georg Eccarius at the 
session of September 9, 1868, and became part of the preamble of the 
Congress resolution. At the same session, Friedrich Lessner read some extracts 
from Capital to substantiate Marx's stand on this question. 
The resolution was published in English in The Times, No. 26229, 
September 14, 1868, in Eccarius' report of this Congress session; in The 
Bee-Hive, No. 362, September 19, 1868, and in a special pamphlet published in 
London in 1869: The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the 
Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868; in French it was 
printed in: a special supplement to Le Peuple Belge, No. 392, September 11, La 
Liberté, No. 64, September 13, La Cigale, No. 38, September 20, La Tribune du 
Peuple, No. 10, November 8, 1868 and L'Égalité, No. 14, April 24, 1869; in 
German the resolution appeared in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 38, 
September 19, 1868 and in the Arbeiter-Zeitung (New York), No. 28, August 
16, 1873. It was included in various other editions in English, German, French, 
Spanish and Italian. p. 9 
This is Marx's reply to an official invitation from the General Association of 
German Workers, of July 6 (see Der Social-Demokrat, No. 95, August 14, 1868), 
to attend its annual congress (assembly) in Hamburg as guest of honour. The 
invitation was signed by Schweitzer, the President, and by more than twenty 
members of the Association's Executive, workers from various parts of 
Germany. (The text of the invitation is given in the Minutes of the General 
Council meeting of August 18, 1868, in the form of a pasted-in clipping from 
The Bee-Hive, No. 358, August 22, 1868.) 
Marx's invitation to the congress of the General Association of German 
Workers and the programme of the congress both showed that its most 
progressive members, influenced by the labour movement, and particularly by the 
International and the ideas contained in Marx's Capital, had begun to dissociate 
themselves from the Lassallean dogmas, and that the leaders of the Association 
did not have a free hand. 
In his reply to the invitation Marx gave his opinion of the programme of 
the Hamburg congress, and, as he remarked in a letter to Engels of August 26, 
1868,  congratulated the members of the Association on "their rejection of 
Lassalle's programme" (see present edition, Vol. 43). 
The Hamburg Congress (August 22-26, 1868) adopted important decisions: it 
approved in principle of the strike movement, unanimously acknowledged that 
"Marx had rendered outstanding services to the working class with his work 
Capital", and pointed to the necessity for joint action by the workers of 
different countries. 
In fact, however, the Association's leaders opposed the organisation of 
strikes and continued to obstruct the Association's affiliation to the Interna­
tional. 
Marx's letter to the President and the Association's Executive was read at a 
closed sitting of the congress on August 24 and was applauded. It was 
published in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 100, August 28 and the Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt, No. 35, August 29, 1868. In 1886, on the third anniversary of 
Marx's death, his letter was reprinted in the Sozialdemokrat, No. 11, March 11. 
p. 10 

=====第485页=====
Notes 453 
10 A reference to the Standing Committee or Sub-Committee, the executive body of 
the General Council of the International. It generally assembled once a week 
and drafted many of the decisions which were later adopted by the Council. 
The Standing Committee evolved from a commission, elected when the IWMA 
was being set up, to draft its programme documents — the Rules and the 
Inaugural Address. The Committee included the President of the General 
Council (until this office was abolished in September 1867), the General 
Secretary and the corresponding secretaries for the different countries. Marx 
took an active part in the work of the Standing Committee as Corresponding 
Secretary for Germany. p. 10 
11 The text of this resolution, adopted by the General Council meeitng of August 
25, 1868 in connection with the preparations for the Brussels Congress, has 
been preserved in the minutes of this meeting; it was also published in The 
Bee-Hive, No. 359, August 29, 1868 (for the record of Marx's speech in 
substantiating this resolution see this volume, p. 387). 
At the Brussels Congress this resolution was moved by Eccarius and read in 
the report of the commission on reducing the working day on September 12, 
1868. 
It was published in English in the reports of the Congress sittings in The 
Times, No. 26232, September 17, 1868 and in the pamphlet The International 
Working Men's. Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and the 
Congress of Brussels, 1868 published in London in 1869; in French it was 
published in a special supplement to Le Peuple Belge, No. 399, September 18, 
La Cigale, No. 38, September 20 and La Tribune du Peuple, No. 10, 
November 8, 1868. p. 11 
12 The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council (the first report was submitted 
to the London Conference of the International in September 1865) was written 
by Marx (approved by the General Council on September 1, 1868) for the 
Third Congress of the International held in Brussels on September 6-13, 1868. 
The Brussels Congress was attended by nearly 100 delegates representing 
workers from Great Britain, France, Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy and 
Spain. Marx, who took an active part in the preparations for the Congress, was 
absent. However, he helped the General Council representatives there, since he 
was kept informed almost daily by Friedrich Lessner. The French text of the 
report drawn up by Marx was read at the Congress by Dupont on September 7. 
The Congress adopted an important resolution on the necessity for 
transferring railways, mineral resources, collieries and mines, woods and arable 
land into public property. This resolution showed that most of the French and 
Belgian Proudhonists had become supporters of collectivism, and it marked the 
victory of proletarian socialism over petty-bourgeois reformism within the 
International. The Congress also adopted the resolutions (drawn up by Marx) 
on the eight-hour working day, on the use of machinery under capitalism and 
on the attitude towards the congress of the bourgeois-pacifist League of Peace 
and Freedom (see present edition, Vol. 20, p. 204), and a resolution, moved by 
Lessner for the German delegates, recommending the workers of all countries 
to study Marx's Capital and secure its translation from German into other 
languages. 
The fourth annual report was included in the official French edition of the 
minutes of the Brussels Congress— Troisième congrès de l'Association Inter­
nationale des Travailleurs. Compte rendu officiel. Supplement to Le Peuple Belge, 
September 8, 1868 and reprinted in La Liberté, No. 64, September 13, 1868. 
The English text, written by Marx, was published in Eccarius' correspondence 

=====第486页=====
454 Notes 
"International Working Men's Congress" in The Times, No. 26225, September 
9, 1868 and reprinted in The Bee-Hive, No. 361, September 12, 1868. The 
German text of the report, also written by Marx, was printed in Der 
Social-Demokrat, No. 106, September 11, the Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 38 
(supplement), September 12 and Hermann, No. 506, September 12, 1868. The 
report was also published in a number of newspapers and books in Germany, 
Britain, Belgium, Switzerland and France. Abridged translations appeared in 
Russian and Flemish. 
In this volume the annual report is reproduced from The Times and 
checked with the handwritten copy in German made by Mrs. Marx and slightly 
differing from the English text. The main discrepancies are indicated in foot­
notes,  p. 12 
3 Jules Gottraux, a Swiss-born subject of Great Britain and a member of the 
International, was detained by the French police on the French-Swiss frontier 
on September 30, 1866 when he was returning to London from his trip to 
Switzerland. The police confiscated letters, printed matter, and other material 
entrusted to him by the International's leaders in Geneva to be handed over to 
the General Council. The documents seized included the preliminary report on 
the work of the Geneva Congress which had been drawn up by Council 
member Frederick Card and published in Geneva as a pamphlet in French. 
(Later, this gave rise to a rumour that the French authorities had confiscated 
the Congress minutes, which in reality had by that time been brought to 
London by Hermann Jung.) The General Council lodged a complaint with the 
French Minister of Home Affairs about this irregularity and demanded the 
return of the seized documents. When he refused to reply to the complaint, 
written by Fox on the Council's instructions, the General Council decided to use 
the fact publicly to expose the regime of the Second Empire (see also the 
record of Marx's speech at the General Council meeting of November 27, 1866, 
present edition, Vol. 20, p. 414). At the beginning of December the Council 
approached the British Foreign Secretary, asking him to make a corresponding 
demarche to the French Government, which forced the French authorities to 
return, on December 21, the materials taken from Gottraux. Fox wrote a 
special article on the actions of the Bonapartist authorities. It was published in 
The Commonwealth on January 12, 1867 and in The Working Man on 
February 1, 1867. 
p. 12 
14 The strike of weavers and spinners in Roubaix in March 1867 was caused by 
the dismissal of a great number of workers following the introduction of 
machinery. 
A strike of dyers in Amiens in July 1867 was supported by the workers in 
other trades. 
In February 1867 the bronze-workers of Paris refused to dissolve their 
credit society on their employers' demand and went on strike. Thanks to the 
General Council (it discussed the matter at its meetings of March 5, 12, 19 and 
26, and April 2 and 9, 1867), the Paris workers received financial aid from the 
British trade unions. The strike ended in the victory for the bronze-workers — 
they managed to save their organisation. 
In March and April 1868, 3,000 building workers went on strike in Geneva. 
They demanded the reduction of the working day to 10 hours, higher wages 
and pay by the hour for pay by the day. They were joined by workers in other 
trades. The aid from the workers of Switzerland, Britain, France and Germany 
helped the Geneva builders to win the strike. p. 12 

=====第487页=====
Notes 455 
Marx refers to the Memoire of the Paris Section for the Geneva Congress, 
containing a detailed exposition of Proudhonist views on the main issues of the 
workers' struggle. It was supported by the Lyons and Rouen sections and read 
as the report of the French delegates at the congress on September 4. The full 
text of the Memoire was published in Brussels in September 1866 under the 
title Congrès de Genève. Mémoire des délégués français. p. 12 
In December 1867 the homes of the Executive Committee members of the 
Paris Section of the International were searched. This was followed by an 
investigation and then the first trial against the International in France. The case 
was heard on March 6 and 20, 1868. Among the documents seized by the police 
during the searches was a letter of November 23, 1867 from Dupont, the 
Corresponding Secretary for France, to a member of the Paris Section, André 
Mural, in which the French members of the International were informed of the 
campaign organised in defence of the imprisoned Fenians (see Note 1). The 
French authorities tried to use this letter to incriminate the International in the 
organisation of the Fenian conspiracy. 
The court declared the Paris Section dissolved and fined the Committee 
members. p. 13 
In France, according to Article 291 of the Criminal Code and the Law of April 
10, 1834, any society with a membership exceeding 20 had to be sanctioned by 
the respective authorities. p. 14 
In the spring of 1868, the workers of the Charleroi coalfield declared a strike, 
in reply to the mine-owners' reduction of production to four days a week and 
lowering of wages by ten per cent. In the bloody clashes between the miners 
and police troops, twenty-two people were arrested and put on trial. 
The Brussels Central Section launched a broad campaign in support of the 
strikers both in Belgium and abroad. It organised meetings of protest and gave 
wide coverage of the events in the columns of La Tribune du Peuple, La Liberté 
and other newspapers. On April 12, 1868 it issued a manifesto to the workers 
of Belgium and other countries (see La Tribune du Peuple, No. 4, April 19, 
1868).  The section maintained regular ties with the General Council of the 
International. The Council discussed the Charleroi events at its meetings of 
April 21, May 12 and June 2, 1868 and organised aid to the strikers. The 
Brussels Section set up a special committee to brief lawyers for the defence of 
the detainees. The lawyers managed to swing public opinion in favour of the 
accused, and on August 15 they were acquitted by the jury. This led to a rise in 
membership of the International in Belgium. p. 14 
See Note 5. p. 14 
At Mentana, on November 3, 1867, the French army, jointly with the Pope's 
hired guards, defeated Garibaldi, who had undertaken a new campaign against 
Rome to liberate the city from the French and annex it to the Italian state. 
p. 15 
Marx refers to the reactionary Prussian law on associations adopted on 
March 11, 1850. p. 15 
From November 1805 until the formation of the Eisenach Party in 1869, the 
Central Committee of German sections in Switzerland headed by Johann 
Philipp Becker was an organising centre for sections uniting German workers 
not only in Switzerland but also in Germany, Austria, the L'nited States and 
countries where German émigré workers lived. Becker's activities, in particular 

=====第488页=====
456 Notes 
his Vorbote (on the significance of this monthly see Mrs. Marx's letter to Becker 
of January 29, 1866, present edition, Vol. 42), did much to spread the ideas of 
the International among the German workers at a time when conditions for 
establishing an organisation in Germany itself were still lacking. p. 15 
23 The reference is to the general congress of the General Association of German 
Workers held in Hamburg on August 22-26, 1868 (see Note 9). The resolution 
adopted was published in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 102, September 2, 1868. 
p. 15 
24 Marx refers to the Nuremberg Congress of the Union of German Workers' 
Associations, led by Bebel, which was held from September 5 to 7, 1868. The 
General Council's official representative, Georg Eccarius, was present (see Marx's 
letter to Engels of July 29, 1868, present edition, Vol. 43). By 69 votes against 46 
the Congress resolved to join the International Working Men's Association and 
elected a committee of 16 to carry out this resolution (see Protokoll über den 5. 
Vereinstag der deutschen Arbeitervereine am 5. und 7. September 1868 zu Nürnberg, 
Leipzig, 1868, S. 19). On September 22 the General Council approved this 
committee as the Executive Committee of the International Working Men's 
Association for Germany. 
The Nuremberg Congress also resolved to organise trade unions and heard 
Liebknecht's report on armament, in which he demanded the abolition of 
standing armies. 
The Union of German Workers' Associations was founded at a congress of 
German workers' educational societies in Frankfurt am Main on June 7, 1863, 
in opposition to the Lassallean General Association of German Workers. 
Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel took an active part in its activity. 
p. 15 
25 The decision to affiliate to the International adopted by the delegate meeting 
of 50 German workers' educational societies in Switzerland, held in Neuenburg 
(Neuchâtel) on August 9-10, 1868, was announced in Der Vorbote, No. 8, 
August 1868. p. 16 
26 The National Labour Union was founded in the USA at a congress in Baltimore 
in August 1866, with the active participation of William Sylvis, a prominent 
leader in the American labour movement. In a letter to Ludwig Kugelmann on 
October 9, 1866, Marx wrote with satisfaction about the Baltimore congress: 
"...Most of the demands I had put up for Geneva were put up there too, by the 
correct instinct of the workers" (see present edition, Vol. 42). The 
Labour Union established contacts with the International Working Men's 
Association in October 1866, but its delegate to the next congress of the 
International, Richard Trevellick, elected by the Union's congress in Chicago in 
August 1867, was unable to come to Lausanne. At the last sessions of the Basle 
Congress of the International (September 1869) Andrew Cameron was the 
National Labour Union delegate. At the Union's congress in Cincinnati in 
August 1870, Cameron reported on his participation in the International's 
Congress, and the Union adopted a resolution on its adherence to the 
principles of the International Association and its intention to join it. The 
resolution was not implemented, however. Its leaders soon became involved in 
Utopian projects of money reform. In 1870 and 1871, many trade unions 
withdrew, and in 1872 the Union virtually ceased to exist. p. 16 
27 On June 25, 1868 the American Congress passed a law introducing an 
eight-hour working day for all government enterprises and federal institutions. 
p. 17 

=====第489页=====
Notes 457 
28 The Schiller Institute, founded in Manchester in November 1859 in connection 
with the centenary of Schiller's birth, was conceived as a cultural and social 
centre of the city's German colony. At first Engels was critical of the society, 
notorious for its tendency to formalism and pedantry, and kept aloof from it. 
But after certain amendments were made in the Rules, he became a member 
of its Directorate in 1864, and later President of the Institute, devoting much 
time to it and exercising a considerable influence on its activities. 
In September 1868, while Engels was away from Manchester, the 
Directorate invited Karl Vogt, who was connected with Bonapartist circles 
and cast aspersions on proletarian revolutionaries, to give a lecture in the 
society. In view of this Engels held that his political reputation would be 
compromised if he remained President and wrote this letter to the Directorate. 
On October 2 the secretary, Davisson, on behalf of the Directorate approached 
Engels asking him to revise his decision but Engels refused. In April 1870 
Engels was again elected member of the Directorate, but he did not take an 
active part in its work. p. 18 
29 Engels refers to the difficulties experienced by the Schiller Institute in building 
new premises. p. 18 
30 Engels wrote this article on learning about the police ban, on September 16, 
1868,  on the General Association of German Workers centred in Leipzig, and 
on its local branch in Berlin. On October 10, however, a group of Lassalleans 
headed by Schweitzer restored the Association under the same name and 
transferred its seat to Berlin. The new Rules of the Association published in 
Der Social-Demokrat, No. 119, October 11, 1868, said that the Association would 
abide by Prussian laws and act in a peaceful, legal way. Adapting itself to 
Prussian law, the leaders of the Association dissolved its local branches. Marx and 
Engels sharply criticised Schweitzer's manoeuvres in the letters they exchanged in 
September and October. The same criticism is contained in Marx's letter to 
Schweitzer of October 13, 1868 (see present edition, Vol. 43) and in this article by 
Engels. In it Engels develops the views he set out in 1865 in "The Prussian Military 
Question and the German Workers' Party" (see present edition, Vol. 20), which he 
quotes extensively. In his letter to Engels dated September 29, 1868, Marx wrote 
that this article helped to undermine the Lassallean positions (present edition, Vol. 
43). p. 20 
31 The reference is to the "liberal" course announced by Prince William of Prussia 
(King of Prussia from 1861) when he became regent in October 1858. He made 
the Manteuffel Ministry resign and called the moderate liberals to power. The 
bourgeois press dubbed this the policy of the "New Era". It was, in fact, solely 
intended to strengthen the position of the Prussian monarchy and Junkers. 
This soon became clear to the representatives of the liberal opposition whose 
hopes had been deceived and who refused to approve the government project 
of a military reform. The constitutional conflict that ensued and Bismarck's 
advance to power in September 1862 put an end to the "New Era". 
p. 20 
32 Engels means the general congress of the General Association of German 
Workers held in Hamburg (see Note 9). p. 23 
33 Engels wrote this postscript on the advice of Marx who, in his letter to Engels 
of September 25, 1868 (see present edition, Vol. 43) drew his attention to 
Becker's pamphlet Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's, 
Schleiz, 1868. p. 24 

=====第490页=====
458 Notes 
34 In his will Lassalle recommended Bernhard Becker as his heir to the post of 
President of the General Association of German Workers. On the title page of 
his Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's (Schleiz, 1868), 
Becker calls himself "heir by Lassalle's will". 
At a meeting of the Association's Hamburg branch on March 22, 1865, 
Becker slandered the International Working Men's Association and also Marx, 
Engels and Liebknecht (see Der Social-Demokrat, No. 39, supplement, March 26, 
1865).  Marx exposed this slander in his article "The President of Mankind" 
(see present edition, Vol. 20). The Berlin branch, expressing the growing 
discontent of the rank-and-file members of the General Association with 
Becker, resolved to expel him and recommended other organisations to follow 
suit. Similar meetings were held in many other branches. In June 1865 Becker 
was compelled provisionally to delegate his presidential powers to his deputy 
Fritzsche and he completely renounced them the following November. 
p. 24 
3;' Under the influence of Sophie von Hatzfeldt a small group of Lassalleans split 
away from the General Association of German Workers and in 1867 formed the 
Lassallean General Association of German Workers. This Association, whose 
president was first Försterling and later Mende, had little impact on the workers 
and in 1872 virtually ceased to exist. p. 24 
36 At its meeting of September 29, 1868 the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association discussed, among other things, Hirsch's statement 
that all the principal trade unions of England had withdrawn from the 
Association. To refute this slander Marx wrote this item for the Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt (see his letter to Engels of October 4, 1868, present edition, 
Vol. 43). The editors presumably made changes in the first paragraph. 
This item was first published in English in The General (Council of the First 
International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 25 
37 The General Council of the International Working Men's Association jointly 
with the English trade unions organised financial support for the workers on 
strike. 
During the strike of the Paris bronze-workers in February-March 1867 (see 
Note 14), the General Council published in The International Courier, March 13, 
1867,  an address to the English workers calling on them to give material help 
to the strikers. The trade unions of shoemakers, tailors, cabinet-makers and 
others sent several hundred pounds sterling to France through the General 
Council. 
In connection with the shooting of the Belgian miners and iron-workers of 
Marchienne (February 1867), the General Council published an appeal "To the 
Miners and Iron-Workers of Great Britain" (The International Courier, March 
13, 1867) urging them to support the victims of this brutal action. The 
bereaved families received financial assistance. 
During the strike and lock-out of the Geneva building workers in 
March-April 1868 (see Note 14) the General Council guaranteed monthly aid 
from England amounting to 40,000 francs. The money was sent to Geneva by 
trade unions of carpenters and joiners, weavers, book-binders and others. 
p. 25 
38 This refers to the London Trades Council elected at a conference of trade union 
delegates held in London in May 1860. The Council headed the London trade 
unions numbering many thousand members, and was fairly influential among 
the British workers. 

=====第491页=====
Notes 459 
In the first half of the 1860s it headed the British workers' campaign 
against intervention in the USA, in defence of Poland and Italy, and later for 
the legalisation of the trade unions. The leaders of the following large trade 
unions played a major role in the Council: the Amalgamated Society of 
Carpenters and Joiners (Robert Applegarth), the Shoemakers' Society (George 
Odger), the Operative Bricklayers' Society (Edwin Coulson and George Howell) 
and the Amalgamated Engineers (William Allan). All of them, except Allan, 
were members of the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association. 
The General Council did its best to draw into the International the broad 
mass of British workers and endeavoured, on the one hand, to get the local 
trade union organisations affiliated to it and, on the other, to induce the 
London Trades Council to join the International as a British section. "The 
London Council of the English Trade Unions (its secretary is our president, 
Odger) is deliberating at the present moment as to whether it should declare 
itself to be the British Section of the International Association. If it does so, 
government of the working-class here will in a certain sense pass into our 
hands,  and we shall be able to give the movement a good 'push on'," wrote 
Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann on October 13, 1866 (see present edition, Vol. 42). 
On the initiative of the English members of the General Council, the London 
Trades Council discussed the question of joining the International at its meetings 
in the autumn of 1866. 
After the repeated deferment of the question, which was due to the 
struggle between the reformist leaders of the London Council who opposed 
affiliation and local trade unionists, it was finally decided at the Council 
meetings of January 9 and 14, 1867, to co-operate with the International 
Association "for the furtherance of all questions affecting the interests of 
labour; at the same time continuing the London Trades Council as a distinct 
and independent body as before" (The Times, No. 25708, January 15, 1867). 
This decision was discussed by the General Council of the International on 
January 15, 1867, after which the London Trades Council continued to 
maintain its contact with the International through those of its members who 
were also members of the General Council. p. 26 
39 In the spring of 1865 the Central (General) Council of the International 
initiated, and participated in, the setting up of a Reform League in London as 
a political centre of the mass movement for the second election reform. The 
League's leading bodies — the Council and Executive Committee — included the 
General Council members, mainly trade union leaders. The League's pro­
gramme was drafted under Marx's influence. Unlike the bourgeois parties, 
which confined their demands to household suffrage, the League advanced the 
demand for manhood suffrage. This revived Chartist slogan won it the support of 
the trade unions, hitherto indifferent to politics. The League had branches in all 
big industrial cities. The vacillations of the radicals in its leadership, however, and 
the conciliation of the trade union leaders prevented the League from following 
the line charted by the General Council of the International. The British 
bourgeoisie succeeded in splitting the movement, and a moderate reform was 
carried out in 1867 which granted franchise only to the petty bourgeoisie and the 
upper layers of the working class. p. 26 
40 The National Reform League was founded in London in 1849 by Bronterre 
O'Brien and other Chartist leaders. Its objective was to campaign for universal 
suffrage and social reforms. In 1866 the League became affiliated to the 

=====第492页=====
460 Notes 
International. Its leaders Alfred Walton and George Milner became members 
of the General Council and took part in several congresses of the International. 
p. 26 
In 1863 Edgar Bauer, a German journalist and former Young Hegelian, began 
working for the Prussian Press Department. p. 27 
Marx wrote this item at the request of Collet Dobson Collet, the publisher of 
The Diplomatic Review (see Marx's letters to Engels of November 14 and 23, 
1868,  present edition, Vol. 43). The editor was David Urquhart, a journalist 
and former diplomat. In the early 1820s Urquhart published The Portfolio, a 
collection of diplomatic documents and papers relating to the diplomacy of 
European powers, including documents exposing the diplomatic activity of 
Palmerston, who virtually directed Britain's foreign policy for many years. 
In 1853, in a series of articles entitled Lord Palmerston Marx used, along 
with other documents, some of those published by Urquhart. Later, some of 
Marx's articles were reprinted in Urquhart's journal The Free  Press.  At the same 
time,  Marx sharply criticised Urquhart for his anti-democratic views and 
emphasised the principal difference between his own stand as a proletarian 
revolutionary and the Urquhartites' reactionary position. 
When publishing this item by Marx, the editors of The Diplomatic Review 
prefaced it with a note recommending Marx as the author of Revelations of the 
Diplomatic History of the 18th Century (see present edition, Vol. 15) and of 
Capital. p. 28 
The Bank Charter Act (An Act to Regulate the Issue of Banknotes, and for 
Giving to the Governor and Company of the Bank of England Certain 
Privileges for a Limited Period) was introduced by Robert Peel on July 19, 
1844.  It provided for the division of the Bank of England into two separate 
departments, each with its own cash account—the Banking Department, 
dealing exclusively with credit operations, and the Issue Department, issuing 
banknotes. The Act limited the number of banknotes in circulation and 
guaranteed them with definite gold and silver reserves which could not be used 
for the credit operations of the Banking Department. Further issues of 
banknotes were allowed only in the event of a corresponding increase in the 
precious metal reserves. The issue of banknotes by provincial banks was 
stopped. The Act was suspended several times by the government  itself,  in 
particular during the monetary crises of 1847 and 1857. 
The crisis of 1866 in England was particularly manifest in the sphere of 
credit. In May 1866, when the financial panic reached its climax and the Bank 
of England was in danger of bankruptcy, its Board received a letter, signed by 
the Prime Minister Rüssel and the Chancellor of the Exchequer Gladstone, 
sanctioning the suspension of the 1844 Act (see The Times, No. 25497, May 14, 
1866);  this allowed the Bank to extend credit operations and somewhat mitigate 
the financial panic in the country. 
Marx analysed the Act of 1844 and its significance in a number of articles 
for the New-York Daily Tribune: "The Vienna Note.— The United States and 
Europe.— Letters from Shumla.— Peel's Bank Act" (see present edition, 
Vol. 12), "The Bank Act of 1844 and the Monetary Crisis in England", "The 
British Revulsion" (Vol. 15), "The English Bank Act of 1844" (Vol. 16), etc. A 
detailed description of the Act was given by Marx in Capital, Vol. Ill 
(Chapter XXXIV). p. 28 
Marx means the first two occasions when the Bank Act of 1844 was 
suspended — the letters from Prime Minister Russell and Chancellor of the 

=====第493页=====
Notes 461 
Exchequer Wood, dated October 25, 1847, to the Governor and Deputy-
Governor of the Bank of England (in: Report from the Secret Committee of the 
House of Lords appointed to inquire into the  causes  of the distress...,  London 1848), and 
from Prime Minister Palmerston and Chancellor of the Exchequer Lewis of 
November 12, 1857, to the Governor and Deputy-Governor of the Bank of 
England (in: The Times, No. 22837, November 13, 1857). p. 28 
45 Marx refers to the congress of representatives of France, Britain, Austria, 
Russia, Sardinia, Prussia and Turkey in Paris, where a peace treaty was signed 
on March 30, 1856, putting an end to the Crimean War, 1853-56. Marx here 
alludes to the fact that Clarendon, the head of the British delegation, failed to 
carry out the plans of British diplomacy to the full because of Anglo-French 
contradictions and a noticeable rapprochement between France and Russia. 
p. 29 
4(> The articles headed "Money Market and City Intelligence" (The Times, 
Nos.  25539 and 25579, July 2 and August 17, 1866) voiced alarm about the 
flow of English capital abroad, mainly to France, and about the consequent fall 
in the discount rate of the Bank of England. p. 29 
47 The agreement on another  5-per  cent Anglo-Dutch loan to Russia was 
concluded on November 4, 1866, to cover her foreign payments, particularly 
her debts. p. 29 
48 At its meeting of October 6, 1868, the General Council of the International 
Association decided to publish the resolutions of the Geneva Congress (1866), 
adopted after the Council's report (K. Marx, "Instructions for the Delegates of 
the Provisional General Council. The Different Questions", present edition, 
Vol. 20), as well as those of the Brussels Congress (1868). Eccarius did the 
preliminary work, while Marx prepared the text for the press and checked the 
translation. Marx wrote the preamble to this publication between the end of 
October and November 3, 1868 (see his letter to Engels of February 24, 1869, 
present edition, Vol. 43) and it was first published in The Bee-Hive Newspaper, 
No. 371, November 21, 1868. Section I of this publication, including Marx's 
preamble, was approved at the General Council meeting of November 3, 1868. 
Subsequently, the publication was incorporated into a pamphlet, The Interna­
tional Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 1866, and 
the Congress of Brussels, 1868, London [1869]. p. 31 
49 The Geneva Congress resolutions, which Marx selected for inclusion in the 
publication of those of the Brussels Congress (1868), dealt with the role of the 
International in the proletariat's economic struggle, the eight-hour working 
day, protection of child and female labour, the organisation of co-operative 
production and the tasks of the trade unions (points 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the 
"Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council. The 
Different Questions"—see present edition, Vol. 20). p. 31 
50 The reason for Marx's statement to the German Workers' Educational Society in 
London was the Society's attitude towards the Lassallean Berlin Congress of 
1868 and towards the workers' organisation founded by Bebel and Liebknecht 
at the Nuremberg Congress (see Note 24). On November 23, 1868 Marx wrote 
to Engels: "Imported from Paris and Germany, the Lassalleans, who are in 
secret contact with Schweitzer, took advantage of the absence of Lessner 
because of his wife's illness to obtain a vote of confidence in Schweitzer against 
the Nuremberg people" (see present edition, Vol. 43). Subsequently, Marx 
supported Lessner in his struggle against the Lassallean elements in the Society. 

=====第494页=====
462 Notes 
The German Workers' Educational Society in London was founded in 1840 by 
German worker refugees, members of the League of the Just. After the 
founding of the Communist League in 1847, representatives of its local 
communities played the leading role in the Society, which had branches in 
various working-class districts in London. In 1847 Marx and in 1849-50 Engels 
took an active part in the Society's work, but in September 1850 they 
temporarily withdrew because the Willich-Schapper sectarian-adventurist group 
had increased its influence in the Society. In the late 1850s, when Marx's 
followers (Georg Eccarius, Friedrich Lessner, Karl Schapper, who had renounced 
his sectarian views, and others) prevailed again, Marx and Engels resumed their 
activities in the Educational Society. When the International Working Men's 
Association was established, the Society became its German section in London. 
Many of its members — Eccarius, Kaub, Lessner, Lochner, Bolleter and 
others—were on the General (Central) Council of the International and played 
a prominent role in its activity. The Society existed until 1918, when it was 
closed by the British Government. p. 32 
On September 26, 1868, a General Congress of German Workers took place in 
Berlin, convened by Schweitzer and Fritzsche, as Reichstag deputies, by consent 
of the Hamburg general congress of the General Association of German 
Workers (see Note 9). The congress was attended by 206 delegates representing 
over 142,000 workers, mainly from the towns of North Germany. The workers' 
associations affiliated to the Nuremberg organisation headed by Bebel and 
Liebknecht, were denied representation at this congress. The Berlin congress 
set up several trade unions on the pattern of the sectarian Lassallean 
organisation. These unions formed a general union headed by Schweitzer 
which was completely subordinate to the General Association of German 
Workers. 
Marx severely criticised Schweitzer for the organisation of the congress, 
which led to a split among workers' trade unions in Germany, and for the 
Rules it adopted (see Der Social-Demokrat, No. 112, supplement, September 25, 
1868) which ran counter to the aims and character of the trade union 
movement (see Engels' letter to Marx of October 22, 1868, present edition, 
Vol. 43). p. 32 
Marx refers to the Nuremberg Congress of the Union of German Workers' 
Associations headed by Bebel (see Note 24). p. 32 
Marx means his letter of October 13, 1868 (see present edition, Vol. 43) in 
reply to Schweitzer's letters of September 15 and October 8, 1868. p. 33 
The Democratic Workers' Association  (Demokratischer  Arbeiterverein) was founded in 
October 1868 as a result of the split in the Berlin Workers' Association. 
Wilhelm  Eichhoff,  who was in constant contact with Marx and was the General 
Council's Berlin correspondent, played a great part in establishing the 
Democratic Association. On his proposal, the newly formed Association joined 
the Nuremberg organisation of workers' associations headed by Bebel and 
Liebknecht and adopted its programme, which was based on the principles of 
the International. It maintained ties with the Berlin Section of the Internation­
al, and almost all its members were also members of the International. To 
emphasise its proletarian character, two workers—Wilcke and Kämmerer — 
were elected its Presidents. 
The Democratic Workers' Association actively opposed the Lassalleans. 
Wilhelm Liebknecht used to speak at its meetings. In 1869 it joined the 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party set up at the Eisenach Congress. p. 33 

=====第495页=====
Notes 463 
This circular letter was written by Marx on December 22, 1868, in connection 
with the discussion of the admission of the Alliance to the International at the 
General Council on December 15 and 22. 
The International Alliance of Socialist Democracy (L'Alliance internationale de la 
démocratie socialiste) was founded by Mikhail Bakunin in Geneva in October 
1868.  Besides Bakunin, members of its Provisional Committee were Brosset, 
Duval, Guétat, Perron, Zagorsky and Johann Philipp Becker. In 1868 the 
Alliance published in Geneva leaflets in French and German containing its 
Programme and Rules. Becker, who shortly afterwards broke with Bakunin, 
sent the Alliance's Programme and Rules to the General Council on November 
29. Both these documents were read out at its meeting on December 15, 1868, 
and the Council spoke against the admission of the Alliance to the International 
Working Men's Association. Marx thought that it was "against our Rules to 
admit another international association into our society" (this was written in the 
margin of the Minute Book on December 22 when the Minutes of December 15 
were confirmed). On the same day, December 15, Marx forwarded the 
Alliance's Programme with his own remarks (see this volume, pp. 207-11) to 
Engels asking for his comments. Engels wholly shared Marx's opinion and 
noted that the admission of the Alliance to the IWMA would create "a state 
within the state" (see Marx's letters to Engels of December 15 and 19 and the 
latter's answer of December 18, 1868, present edition, Vol. 43). 
The draft reply to the Alliance was written by Marx, who took into account 
Engels' remarks, and adopted by the General Council meeting on December 22 as 
a circular letter. 
This circular letter, sent out to all the sections of the International as a 
confidential communication, was first published in Geneva in 1872 in K. Marx 
and F. Engels, Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale. Circulaire privée du 
Conseil Général de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs (see present edition, 
Vol. 23), and reprinted in Le Courrier de France, June 1872 and Le Radical, 
No. 175, June 23, 1872. The text of the circular letter has been preserved in 
several manuscripts slightly differing in reading (two of them are Marx's 
manuscripts: one for December 22, 1868, and the other appended to his letter 
to Jung of August 6, 1870; two hand-written copies: one made by Jung, and 
the other by Dupont and Engels). 
In English the circular letter was first published in The General Council of the 
First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 34 
The League of Peace and Freedom was a pacifist organisation set up in 1867 with 
the active participation of Victor Hugo, Giuseppe Garibaldi and other 
democrats. Voicing the anti-militarist sentiments of the masses, the League's 
leaders did not disclose the social sources of wars and often confined 
anti-militarist activity to mere declarations. At the General Council meeting of 
August 13, 1867, Marx spoke against the International's official participation in 
the League's Inaugural Congress, since this would mean solidarity with its 
bourgeois programme; but he recommended that some members of the 
International should attend the Congress on their own in order to make it 
adopt revolutionary-democratic decisions (see present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 426-
27, and Marx's letter to Engels of September 4, 1867, Vol. 42). 
Marx's tactics against the League of Peace and Freedom were fully 
approved by the Brussels Congress of the International in 1868, which opposed 
official affiliation to the League but was in favour of the united action of the 
working class with all the progressive anti-war forces. p. 35 
17-733 

=====第496页=====
464 Notes 
57 At the General Council meeting of December 15, 1868 Dupont proposed that a 
short report on the activity of the IWMA since the Brussels Congress should be 
drawn »up and published. Jung was instructed to draw up the resume and Marx 
expressed his willingness to help. The resume contains chiefly the material of 
the General Council meetings of November 3 and 24, December 22, 1868 and 
January 5, 1869 and includes Marx's reports. The resolution moved by Marx 
and Applegarth, probably on Marx's initiative, was not entered in the Minute 
Book. That is probably why Marx decided to include it in this resume. 
p. 37 
58 The reference is to a letter from the Saxon miners of Lugau, Nieder-
Würschnitz and Oelsnitz, dated November 15, 1868, informing the General 
Council of their decision to join the International. The letter was read by Marx 
at the meeting of November 24, 1868. p. 37 
59 Marx refers to the Democratic Workers' Association (see Note 54), the 
formation of which he had announced at the General Council meeting of 
November 3, 1868. The facts cited by Marx were mentioned in a letter from 
Liebknecht that was read out to the General Council on December 22, 1868. 
p. 37 
b0 These data were given by Vandenhouten in his letter to Bernard of December 
19, 1868 and read at the General Council meeting of December 22, 1868. 
p. 37 
(>1 The strike of the Basle ribbon weavers broke out on November 9, 1868. A 
detailed description of the Swiss workers' economic struggle in the winter of 
1868-69 was given by Marx in the Report of the General Council to the Fourth 
Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association (see this 
volume, pp. 68-70). The reports about this strike and the lockout in Rouen's 
cotton industry (Nord department) were made in the General Council on 
January 5, 1869. p. 37 
62 In response to the General Council's resolution, the Paris bronze-workers, on 
Marx's proposal, sent the Rouen weavers the £20 advanced to them by the 
Amalgamated Carpenters and Joiners of Britain. A letter from Rouen read out at 
the General Council meeting on January 26, 1869 thanked the Council for the 
support it had given the locked-out workers. p. 38 
63 Engels made out this report at Marx's request on the basis of material sent in 
by the Saxon miners from Lugau, Nieder-Wiirschnitz and Oelsnitz. The miners 
informed the General Council and Marx personally of their desire to join the 
International (see Note 58). On February 13, 1869 Marx wrote to Engels that 
the Lugau miners were the first in Germany to enter into direct contact with 
the International Working Men's Association and that it was necessary to give 
them public support (see present edition, Vol. 43). 
Marx highly praised Engels' report, which was written in English. "Thanks 
a lot for the report. It is perfectly clear," he wrote to Engels on February 24. 
The report was read by Marx to the General Council on February 23, and it 
resolved to have it published in English and in German translation. An 
abridged version appeared in a report of the General Council meeting in The 
Bee-Hive, No. 385, February 27, 1869 (see this volume, pp. 389-90). Other 
English newspapers to which Marx applied, including The Times, The Daily 
News and The Morning Advertiser, refused to publish the document. Marx 
himself translated Engels' manuscript into German (see his letter to Engels of 
March 2, 1869), and it was published in Der Social-Demokrat, No. 33, March 17, 

=====第497页=====
Notes 465 
Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 12 (supplement), March 20, and Zukunft, 
Nos.  67 and 68, March 20 and 21, 1869. The English original has not been 
preserved. 
The report was published in English in full for the first time in The General 
Council of the First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 39 
This expression was used by the Prussian Minister of the Interior, von Rochow. 
In his letter of January 15, 1838 to the citizens of Elbing who had expressed 
their dissatisfaction at the expulsion of seven opposition professors from 
Göttingen University, Rochow wrote: "It behoves a loyal subject to exhibit due 
obedience to his King and Sovereign...; it does not behove him to apply the 
measure of his limited understanding to the actions of the head of the State." 
p. 43 
Having received the General Council's letter of December 22, 1868 in which it 
refused to admit the Alliance of Socialist Democracy to the International as an 
independent international organisation (see this volume, pp. 34-36), the 
Alliance's Central Bureau again applied to the General Council on February 27, 
1869,  declaring its readiness to dissolve its international organisation provided 
the General Council approved its programme and admitted its individual local 
sections to the International (see Marx's letter to Engels of March 5 and Engels' 
reply of March 7, 1869, present edition, Vol. 43). 
This letter is the General Council's reply to the second application of the 
Alliance. It was written by Marx who obtained Engels' agreement to it by 
quoting it almost verbatim in his letter of March 5, 1869. It was accepted 
unanimously by the General Council on March 9 and confidentially sent out to 
all sections of the International. The document was first published in the 
pamphlet by Marx and Engels, Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale 
(Geneva, 1872) and reprinted in Le Courrier de France, June 24, 1872 and Le 
Radical, No. 176, June 24, 1872. This letter has been preserved in several 
copies with minor differences in reading: two rough copies by Marx in English 
and French, Marx's fair copy in French, and a copy in French in an unknown 
hand with corrections made by Marx. 
This document was first published in English in The General Council of the 
First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. 
In this volume the document is reproduced from Marx's rough copy in 
English checked with his fair copy in French. Major differences in reading are 
given in the footnotes. p. 45 
Article 2 of the Alliance's Programme was already included in the Programme 
which Bakunin presented at the Berne Congress of the League of Peace and 
Freedom in September 1868. In compliance with the General Council's request, 
Article 2 of the Alliance's Programme was changed in April 1869 to read as 
follows: "It is above all working for the complete and final abolition of classes 
and of political, economic and social equalisation of persons of both sexes." At 
the General Council meeting of July 27, 1869 Marx proposed and the Council 
resolved that the Alliance should be admitted to the International. p. 46 
Marx wrote this address to the workers of Europe and the United States 
following the bloody events in Belgium in April 1869. On April 20, the General 
Council heard the report öf Eugen Hins, representative of the Belgian Federal 
Council of the International, who had been sent to the spot to investigate the 
details of the massacre in Seraing and Frameries. Marx was commissioned to 
draw up an address on behalf of the General Council to denounce the atrocities 
committed by the Belgian authorities. He wrote it in English and French and 

=====第498页=====
466 Notes 
read it out at the General Council meeting of May 4. The Council approved the 
address and decided to have it printed and distributed. In English it was 
published as a leaflet, "The Belgian Massacres. To the Workmen of Europe 
and the United States", in London on May 12, 1869. A copy of the leaflet has 
been preserved in the Minute Book of the General Council. Part of the leaflet 
was reproduced in The Bee-Hive, No. 395, May 8, 1869. The French text was 
published in the Belgian newspapers L'Internationale, No. 18, May 15 and La 
Liberté, May 16, 1869. The German translation by Eccarius was printed in Der 
Social-Demokrat, No. 58, May 21, in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 21, May 
22, 1869 and in other newspapers in Germany, Switzerland and France. The 
address found a broad response among the people. Read at a mass protest 
meeting in Brussels on May 16, it was met with tumultuous applause, p. 47 
68 De Paepe wrote to Marx on May 31, 1869 that, for reasons of censorship, when 
the French text of the address was published in the Belgian newspapers, the 
names of Kamp, Pirmez and the Prince of Flanders were replaced with the 
words "persons occupying high posts in Belgium". See "Moralités de l 'affaire de 
Seraing" in L'Internationale, No. 14, April 18, 1869. p. 48 
69 Les sommations préalables (reading the riot act) — in a number of bourgeois 
countries, the triple demand of the authorities, covered by law, that the crowd 
should disperse, after which armed force may be used. p. 48 
70 The reference is to the Franco-Belgian negotiations (between February and July 
1869) on railway concessions in view of the fact that the Belgian Parliament had 
passed a law by which the transfer of concessionary rights could be done only 
by the authorities' permission. The law, which was passed very quickly, was 
directed against the economic expansion of France which tried to seize the 
Belgian railways. p. 48 
71 Eyre, the Governor of the British colony of Jamaica, organised the brutal 
suppression of a Negro uprising in October 1865. This massacre caused a 
public outrage in Britain, and the British Government was compelled to dismiss 
Eyre from his post. p. 49 
72 Belgium was declared neutral by the protocol of the London conference of five 
countries (Britain, France, Russia, Austria and Prussia) in January 1831, soon 
after the Belgian bourgeois revolution of 1830 and Belgium's separation from 
Holland. (See: Onzième protocole de la Conférence tenue à Londres, le 20 
janvier 1831. In: Martens, G. F., Nouveau Recueil de Traités d'Alliance, de Paix, de 
Trêve, de Neutralité, de Commerce... [Groupe II], T. 10, Goettingue, 1836", 
pp. 158-60.) P- 49 
73 See Note 18. p. 50 
/4 Originally the name of a religious sect of cut-throats in India, the word "thug" 
came to be widely used in nineteenth-century European literature to denote 
professional ruffians and assassins. p. 50 
75 These words were said by Delfosse, a deputy to the Belgian Parliament, at a 
sitting of the Chamber of Representatives on March 1, 1848, in reply to a 
remark that the ideas of the French revolution of 1848 would travel round the 
world (see Les Annales Parlementaires 1847-1848. Chambre des Représentants. 
Séance du 1 er Mars 1848, p. 950). p. 51 
7b The General Council's Address to the National Labour Union of the United 
States (see Note 26) was written by Marx, and read by him in the General 

=====第499页=====
Notes 467 
Council on May 11, 1869, in view of a threat of war between England and the 
United States in the spring of 1869. The reply from the Union's President, 
Sylvis, is cited by Marx in the General Council's report to the Basle Congress 
(see this volume, pp. 81-82). The English text of the address was published as a 
leaflet and in The Bee-Hive, No. 396, May 15, 1869. The German translation 
was printed in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 21, May 22; Der Social-
Demokrat, No. 59, May 23; Die Volksstimme, No. 4, Supplement, May 23, and in 
Der Vorbote, No. 8, August 1869. In the USA, the address appeared in workers' 
periodicals: Die Arbeiter Union (New York), No. 10, June 2; The Workingman's 
Advocate (Chicago-Philadelphia), No. 45, June 5, and Weekly American Workman 
(Boston), No. 22, September 18, 1869. p. 53 
77 Shoddy aristocrats—people in America who got rich quick on the Civil War. 
p. 54 
78 The second edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, written by 
Marx between December 1851 and March 1852 (see present edition, Vol. 11), 
appeared in Hamburg in 1869. 
The bourgeois press kept silent about the new edition of The Eighteenth 
Brumaire. Marx's preface to the 1869 edition of his work was first reprinted in 
Der Social-Demokrat, No. 117, Supplement, October 6, 1869. Der Volksstaat did 
not announce the second edition of the book until March 16, 1870 (in a 
supplement to No. 22); at the same time it published the text of the preface. 
This preface was also reproduced in the third edition that came out in 1885 
under Engels' editorship. In 1889 the preface was translated into Polish. A 
French translation was published in January 1891 in Le Socialiste, organ of the 
Workers' Party of France, and in the same year in a separate edition of the 
book which came out in Lille. In Russian, the preface was published in the first 
Russian edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte that came out in 
Geneva in 1894. The first English translation of this work was published in The 
People, the weekly of the Socialist Labour Party of the United States, in 
September-November 1897. It was published in book form in New York in 
1898.  p. 56 
79 On Marx's advice Joseph Weydemeyer published The Eighteenth Brumaire of 
Louis Bonaparte in May 1852 as the first issue of the "non-periodic journal" Die 
Revolution, and provided it with a short preface. In giving it the title The 
Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, Weydemeyer failed to take into account 
that throughout the book Marx referred to the chief initiator of the coup d'état 
as Louis Bonaparte, which he did deliberately (see his letter to Jenny Marx of 
June 11, 1852, present edition, Vol. 39). p. 56 
80 Marx presumably refers to a letter from the Leipzig publisher and bookseller 
Otto Wigand of March 20, 1852, in which he refused to publish Marx's 
Eighteenth Brumaire, since there was a "risk of being persecuted by the state". 
p. 56 
81 The Vendôme Column was erected in Paris between 1806 and 1810 in tribute to 
the military victories of Napoleon I. It was made of bronze from captured 
enemy guns and crowned by a statue of Napoleon; the statue was removed 
during the Restoration but re-erected in 1833. In the spring of 1871, by order 
of the Paris Commune, the Vendôme Column was destroyed as a symbol of 
militarism. p. 57 
82 This short biography of Karl Marx is based on Engels' original version written 
at the end of July 1868 for the German literary newspaper Die Gartenlaube (see 

=====第500页=====
468 Notes 
Engels' letter to Marx of July 20 and Marx's letter to Kugelmann of October 
26, 1868, present edition, Vol. 43), but not printed by the editors. In July 1869 
Engels rewrote it for the newspaper Die Zukunft, No. .185, August 11, 1869. 
This first biography of Marx, written by Engels, was also printed in the 
Demokratisches Wochenblatt, No. 34 (supplement), August 21, 1869, by Wilhelm 
Liebknecht, who omitted a most important passage stating that Lassalle was not 
an original thinker but borrowed the content of his writings from Marx and 
vulgarised his works. p. 59 
A reference to the Communist League, the first German and international 
communist organisation of the proletariat, formed under the leadership of 
Marx and Engels in London early in June 1847, as a result of the 
reorganisation of the League of the Just (a secret association of refugee workers 
and artisans that appeared in the 1830s and had communities in Germany, 
France, Switzerland and England). The programme and organisational 
principles of the Communist League were drawn up with the direct 
participation of Marx and Engels. The League's members took an active part in 
the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany of 1848-49. Though the 
defeat of the revolution dealt a blow to the League, it was reorganised in 
1849-50 and continued its activities. In the summer of 1850, disagreement 
arose in the League between the supporters of Marx and Engels and the 
Willich-Schapper sectarian group which tried to impose on the League its 
adventurist tactics of immediately unleashing a revolution without taking into 
account the actual situation and the practical possibilities. The discord led to a 
split within the League in September 1850. Owing to police persecutions and 
arrests of League members in May 1851, the activities of the Communist 
League as an organisation practically ceased in Germany. On November 17, 
1852,  on a motion by Marx, the League's London District announced the 
dissolution of the League. 
The Communist League played an important historical role as the first 
proletarian party guided by the principles of scientific communism, as a school 
of proletarian revolutionaries, and as the historical forerunner of the 
International Working Men's Association. p. 59 
The Cologne Communist Trial (October 4-November 12, 1852) was organised 
and stage-managed by the Prussian Government. The defendants were 
members of the Communist League arrested in the spring of 1851 on charges 
of "treasonable plotting". The forged documents and false evidence presented 
by the police authorities were not only designed to secure the conviction of the 
defendants but also to compromise their London comrades and the proletarian 
organisation as a whole. The dishonest tactics resorted to by the Prussian police 
state in fighting the international working-class movement were exposed by 
Engels in his article "The Late Trial in Cologne" and, in greater detail, by 
Marx in his pamphlets Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne 
(see present edition, Vol. 11) and Herr Vogt, Chapter 3, Section 4 (see present 
edition, Vol. 17). p. 59 
This sentence was omitted by Liebknecht in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt, 
No. 34 (supplement), August 21, 1869, which Engels noted with displeasure in 
his letter to Marx on September 5, 1869 (see present edition, Vol. 43).p. 60 
Engels refers to the beginning of the reign of Frederick William IV of Prussia 
(1840-57) on whom the liberal bourgeoisie pinned great hopes. But this 
short-lived "New Era" amounted to insignificant concessions to the liberal 
bourgeoisie. p. 60 

=====第501页=====
Notes 469 
87 On January 19, 1843 the Prussian Government passed a decision banning the 
Rheinische Zeitung as from April 1, 1843 and imposing a rigorous censorship 
for the remaining period. The decree was promulgated on January 21 (see 
"Erlass der drei Zensurminister betr. Unterdrückung der Rheinischen Zeitung 
zum 1. April  1843",  Berlin, 1843, 21. Januar). After the publication of the 
rescript of January 21 Marx directed his efforts to secure its repeal. At the end 
of January 1843 he was already thinking of resigning the editorship (see letter 
to Ruge of January 25, 1843, present edition, Vol. 1, p. 397), but he did not 
consider it possible to carry out his intention at the height of the campaign for 
the repeal of the ban. In March, however, he believed that changes in the 
editorial board might make it possible to save the newspaper, and he made up 
his mind to resign officially from his post (the announcement of his resignation 
was published on March 17, 1843). Marx was probably prompted to do so also 
by his unwillingness to take upon himself the responsibility for a possible 
change of line of the newspaper by which the liberal shareholders wished to 
prolong its existence. 
However the royal rescript vas not repealed. The last issue of the 
newspaper appeared on March 31, 1843. p. 60 
88 Later, Marx wrote in the preface to his A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy (1859): "In the year 1842-43, as editor of the Rheinische Zeitung, I first 
found myself in the embarrassing position of having to discuss what is known 
as material interests. Debates of the Rhine Province Assembly on the theft of 
wood and the division of landed property; the official polemic started by Herr 
von Schapper, then Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province, against the Rheinische 
Zeitung about the condition of the Mosel peasantry, and finally the debates on 
free trade and protective tariffs caused me in the first instance to turn my 
attention to economic questions" (see present edition, Vol. 29). p. 60 
89 This refers to the German Democratic Society, formed in Paris after the February 
revolution of 1848 and headed by petty-bourgeois democrats who campaigned 
to raise a volunteer legion of German refugees with the intention of marching 
into Germany. In this way they hoped to carry out a revolution in Germany 
and establish a republic there. Marx and Engels resolutely condemned this 
adventurist plan of "exporting revolution". Late in April 1848 the volunteer 
legion moved to Baden where it was dispersed by government troops, p. 61 
90 Engels refers to reports of the commissioners appointed to inquire into the 
situation in the various branches of English industry, published in the Blue 
Books. 
Blue Books—collected documents of the British Parliament and Foreign 
Office published since the seventeenth century. p. 63 
91 The Health and Morals of Apprentices Act of 1802 limited the working time of 
child-apprentices to twelve hours and prohibited their employment at night. 
This law applied only to the cotton and wool industries; it made no provision 
for control by factory inspectors and was virtually disregarded by the 
mill-owners. p. 63 
92 A reference to the law of August 15, 1867, which brought new industries under 
the factory acts (including that of 1847) on the ten-hour working day, and the 
law of August 21, 1867 on the labour of children, adolescents and women in 
workshops. The first law covered mainly large factories while the second 
embraced small enterprises and workshops. p. 64 

=====第502页=====
470 Notes 
Marx wrote this report after the General Council had discussed the problem of 
abolishing the right of inheritance at its meetings of July 20 and August 3, 
1869 in view of the preparations for the Basle Congress. The question was put 
on the agenda at the insistence of the section founded by Bakunin in Geneva in 
May 1869 under the name of "The Alliance of Socialist Democracy. Central 
Section". This section guided the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy 
(see Note 55) which continued to exist secretly despite the announcement of its 
dissolution. 
On July 20 Marx made a long speech in the General Council. A record of it 
has been preserved in the Council's Minute Book (see this volume, pp. 394-97). 
The text of Marx's report was endorsed by the General Council on August 3. It 
was read at the Basle Congress by Eccarius on September 11, 1869 and 
reproduced in full in the reports about the congress in English, French and 
German: Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's 
Association, held at Basle, in Switzerland. From the 6th to the 11th September, 1869, 
London [1869], pp. 26-27; Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Compte 
rendu du IV-e Congrès International, tenu à Bâle en septembre, 1869, Bruxelles, 
1869,  pp. 122-24; Verhandlungen des IV. Congresses des internationalen Arbeiter­
bundes in Basel, Nos. 1-7, Basel, 7.-14. September 1869, S. 77-80; in Der Vorbote, 
No. 10, October 1869 and in Arbeiter-Zeitung (New York), No. 36, October 11, 
1873.  p. 65 
The demand to abolish the right of inheritance was put forward by 
Saint-Simon's followers (Enfantin, Bazard, Rodrigues, Bûchez, etc.) who in the 
late 1820s set out to popularise and develop Saint-Simon's doctrine. In 1830 a 
book was published in Paris which, based as it was on Bazard's lectures, 
expressed the views of the followers of Saint-Simon on the right of inheritance: 
Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. Première année. 1829. Paris, 1830, 
pp. 143-69. p. 66 
Marx drew up this report, on the General Council's instructions, in late August 
and early September 1869 for the Basle Congress, which was to be held in 
September. (As can ,be seen from Dupont's letter to Marx of September 1, 
1869,  Marx's report was discussed at the General Council meeting on that day. 
The minutes of this meeting were not recorded in the Minute Book.) Marx did 
not attend the congress but took an active part in its preparations. The Minute 
Book contains records of his speeches in the General Council during the 
discussion of the following items on the congress agenda: the agrarian question 
(July 6, 1869), the right of inheritance (July 20) and public education (August 
10 and 17) (see this volume, pp. 398-400). 
Having discussed the land question for the second time, the Basle Congress 
decided by a majority vote in favour of abolishing private property in land and 
turning it into common property, thereby confirming the socialist platform of 
the International. It also resolved to unite trade unions on a national and 
international scale, to strengthen the International organisationally and to 
extend the General Council's powers. At this congress the supporters of Marx's 
scientific socialism clashed openly for the first time with the followers of 
Bakunin's anarchism over the abolition of the right of inheritance (see Note 
93). 
The text of the General Council's report, written by Marx in English, was 
read in German and French at the congress on September 7, and published in 
German in Marx's translation as a separate pamphlet, Bericht des Generalraths der 
Internationalen Arbeiter-Association an den IV, allgemeinen Congress in Basel, Basel, 
1869.  In English and French it was published together with the Minutes of the 

=====第503页=====
Notes 471 
Congress sittings in the following pamphlets: Report of the Fourth Annual 
Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held at Basle, in 
Switzerland, London [1869], pp. 7-13; Association Internationale des Travailleurs. 
Compte rendu du IV-e Congrès International, tenu à Bâle, en septembre 1869, 
Bruxelles, 1869, pp. 9-23. 
The report was also published in a number of newspapers and journals: 
L'Internationale, Nos. 37 and 38, September 26 and October 3, 1869; Le Progrès, 
Nos.  26, 27 and 28, December 11, 18 and 25, 1869 and Nos. 1, 2 and 3, 
January 1, 8 and 15, 1870; Der Vorbote, No. 9, September 1869; Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt, Nos. 41, 42 and 43, September 18, 22 and 25, 1869; and in the 
Neapolitan newspaper L'Eguaglianza, Nos. 8 and 9, December 24 and 31, 1869. 
The first Russian translation appeared in the journal Narodnoye  Dyelo,  Nos. 7-10, 
November 1869. Extracts from the report or summaries of it were printed in 
The Times, No. 26543, September 15, 1869 (in Eccarius' report); La Liberté 
(Brussels), No. 116, September 12, 1869; L'Égalité (Geneva), No. 36, September 
25, 1869, and in other periodicals. p. 68 
"La Jeune Suisse" ("Young Switzerland")—here, the chauvinistic youth organ­
isation known as "La Jeune Genève" ("Young Geneva"). p. 71 
"Les orgies infernales des casse-têtes" ("Infernal orgies of the knuckle-dusters") — 
from a speech by Raspail, a deputy to the Legislative Corps, at a session of July 
8, 1869, in which he lodged a protest against the violence of the Bonapartist 
police during the elections in Paris (see Annales du Sénat et du Corps  législatif. 
Session extraordinaire du 28 juin au 6 septembre 1869, Paris, 1869, p. 205). 
p. 71 
The facts mentioned here were made public in L'Égalité, No. 19, May 29, 1869. 
During the strikes of Geneva builders and printers in spring 1869, the 
Romance Federal Committee and the International's sections in Geneva carried 
out a great deal of work. The Committee issued a number of addresses to the 
workers. They were published in March and April 1869 in L'Égalité and as 
leaflets: the address of the Committee to the sections of the International of 
March 17 ("Le Comité Federal Romand. Aux Sections Internationales"), the 
address of a meeting of Swiss citizens, members of the International, convened 
on April 2 on the Federal Committee's initiative, exposing the employers' 
slanders against the International Working Men's Association ("Adresse au 
Conseil d'État et au Peuple de Genève"), and other addresses. 
The bulletins periodically put out by the builders' and printers' societies 
belonging to the International also played an important role in organising the 
strikes: "Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Grève des Tailleurs de 
Pierre et Maçons", "La Société Typographique de Genève à l'opinion 
publique". p. 71 
The Crédit Mobilier (Société générale du Crédit Mobilier) was a French joint-stock 
bank founded in 1852 by the Péreire brothers. Closely connected with and 
protected by the Government of Napoleon III, it engaged in large-scale 
speculation. The bank was involved, in particular, in the railway-building 
business. It went bankrupt in 1867 and was liquidated in 1871. p. 72 
The strike of Rouen weavers was discussed at the Sub-Committee's meeting of 
January 2, 1869 and at the General Council meetings of January 5, 12 and 19, 
1869.  The resolution adopted on January 5 and published in The Bee-Hive, 
No. 379, January 16, sharply criticised the attempt of the employers of Rouen 
and other departments of France to expand trade "by reducing the wages of 

=====第504页=====
472 Notes 
work-people already underpaid". Various societies were invited to send 
delegates to the next Council meeting "to devise the best means to frustrate the 
unwarrantable attempts of the French manufacturer, and to render the 
workmen concerned such assistance as they may need". 
On the General Council's aid to the Rouen weavers see Note 62. p. 74 
loi A reference to the first trial against the International in France (see Note 16). 
p. 74 
102 The reference is to the North-German Confederation (Norddeutscher Bund) — a 
federative state to the north of the Main that existed from 1867 to 1870. It was 
set up under Prussia's superiority and on the initiative of the Prussian Prime 
Minister, Otto Bismarck, after Prussia's victory over Austria in 1866 and the 
disintegration of the German Confederation. It included 19 states and three 
free cities in North and Central Germany with a population of about 
30,000,000 people. The Confederation adopted its constitution on July 1, 1867. 
Its establishment was a major step in unifying Germany under Prussia's 
hegemony. 
In the course of the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71 South-German states 
joined the Confederation. On December 9, 1870 the Reichstag decreed that the 
united state should be renamed the German Empire. The latter was proclaimed 
in Versailles on January 18, 1871. p. 75 
103 "Les chassepots avaient encore fait merveille" ("Chassepots have worked wonders 
again");  chassepots—rifles improved by Chassepot and adopted by the French 
army in 1866. p. 76 
104 Th^ was the slogan of the Lyons weavers during the rebellion of 1831. 
p. 77 
105 A reference to Austria's defeat in the Austro-Prussian war of 1866. p. 77 
106 The general congress of the German Social-Democrats held in Eisenach on 
August 7-9, 1869, founded the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party. 
Point 6 of the second section of the Party programme adopted by the Congress 
read: "Considering that the task of the emancipation of labour is neither local 
nor national but a social task embracing all countries where modern society 
exists,  the Social-Democratic Workers' Party regards  itself,  as far as laws on 
associations allow, as a section of the International Working Men's Association 
and shares its aspirations." p. 78 
107 yne  political crisis aggravated by Austria's defeat in the war with Prussia in 
1866 and the growing national liberation movement compelled its reactionary 
ruling circles to come to an agreement with Hungary and form a dual 
monarchy, Austria-Hungary on the one hand, and to make a number of 
political concessions to the bourgeoisie on the other. The Constitution adopted 
in December 1867 extended the powers of the representative body — 
Reichsrat, established ministerial responsibility to Parliament, introduced 
universal military service and centralised administration. In addition to 
representatives of the aristocracy, bourgeois liberals became members of the 
new government. p. 78 
108 See Note 56. p. 78 
109 when describing the workers' movement in Moravia, Marx drew on the articles 
published in L'Internationale, No. 29, August 1 ("Massacre d'ouvriers en 
Moravie"), and Die Volksstimme, No. 8, July 25, 1869 ("Die Opfer des 13. Juli 
in Brunn"), about the massacre of Brunn workers by government troops. He 

=====第505页=====
Notes 473 
also used an article from Die Volksstimme, No. 9, August 8, 1869 ("Der Prozess 
gegen die Social-Demokraten Most und Brüsshaver"), describing the trial of 
Austrian Social-Democrats in connection with a mass meeting in Vienna on 
May 29, 1869 and the adoption of a resolution which contained demands 
similar to those in the programme, drawn up at Eisenach, of the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party. p. 78 
110 Cis-Leithanian Austria or Cis-Leithania—part of Austria-Hungary which in­
cluded Austria proper, Bohemia, Moravia, Galicia, Bukovina, Dalmatia and 
other lands. Trans-Leithania consisted of Hungary and Hungarian-ruled 
Slovakia, Transylvania, Croatia, Slavonia and other lands. These regions were 
named after the river Leitha that divided them. p. 78 
111 At its meeting at Elberfeld-Barmen on March  28-31,  1869 the General 
Association of German Workers declared its accord with the programme of the 
International Working Men's Association and advised its members to join the 
International individually (see "Vereins Theil. Für den Allgem.-Deutschen 
Arbeiterverein. Generalversammlung", Der Social-Demokrat, No. 47, April 21, 
1869).  p. 79 
112 The Riot Act—was introduced in Parliament in 1714 and passed in 1715 for 
the maintenance of public peace and order. It empowered the local authorities 
to disperse assemblages of "trouble-makers" by force and charge them with 
felony. The Act obliged the authorities to read part of it to those assembled 
and to open fire if the latter refused to disperse within an hour. p. 81 
11 ' This resolution was adopted at the Second General Congress of English Trade 
Unions at Birmingham, August 23-28, 1869, on the motion of Cremer, a 
member of the General Council of the International who attended it, and was 
published in The Bee-Hive, No. 412, September 4, 1869. The Congress resolved 
to demand the eight-hour working day for the United Kingdom and to 
consider the agrarian question in detail at the next congress. p. 81 
114 See Note 26. p. 81 
115 This draft resolution was proposed by Marx at a General Council meeting on 
November 16, 1869 during the debate on the Irish question. 
In the summer and autumn of 1869, Ireland was the scene of a widespread 
campaign for an amnesty of the imprisoned Fenians (see Note 1). The 
numerous meetings (in Limerick and other cities) sent petitions to the British 
Government demanding the release of the Irish revolutionaries. Gladstone, 
then head of the British Government, expressed his refusal to comply with 
these demands in his letters of October 18 and 23, 1869, to the prominent 
participants in the amnesty movement Henry O'Shea and Isaac Butt (see The 
Times, Nos. 26579 and 26583, October 23 and 27, 1869; for Marx's analysis of 
Gladstone's refusal, see this volume, pp. 407-10). In England the second 
campaign in defence of the imprisoned Fenians was initiated and organised by 
General Council members. The General Council repeatedly discussed this 
question in October and November 1869. The British Government's refusal to 
amnesty the Fenian prisoners resulted in a protest demonstration of nearly 
200,000 workers in London on October 24. Marx also attended the 
demonstration (see the description of it in the letter from Marx's daughter 
Jenny to Ludwig Kugelmann on October 30, 1869, present edition, Vol. 43). 
On October 26, the General Council decided to draw up a resolution (an 
address to the English people in defence of the Irish prisoners) and set up a 
commission consisting of Marx, Lucraft, Jung and Eccarius to do so. However, 

=====第506页=====
474 Notes 
on Marx's proposal the question was given a wider context and on November 9 
the General Council decided to discuss the British Government's attitude 
towards the Irish prisoners and the English working class's stand on the Irish 
question. Marx spoke twice during the discussion (see this volume, pp. 407-12), 
and his draft resolution moved on November 16 was adopted unanimously by 
the General Council on November 30, with an amendment proposed by Odger, 
a reformist leader of the English trade unions, that the word "deliberately" in 
the first paragraph of the resolution be omitted. 
The draft resolution has been preserved as a rough copy, in the form of 
Marx's original letter to Engels of November 18, 1869, and as recorded by 
Eccarius in the Minutes of the General Council. The resolution was published 
in Reynolds's Newspaper, No. 1006, November 21, Der Volksstaat, No. 17, 
November 27, L'Egalité, Nos. 47 and 48, December 11 and 18, in L'Inter­
nationale, No. 48, December 12, 1869, and elsewhere. 
In his work The Right of Nations to Self-Determination Lenin reproduces the 
text of the resolution in full (Collected Works, Vol. 20, Moscow, pp. 438-39). 
p. 83 
b In a speech made on October 7, 1862, in Newcastle, Gladstone (then 
Chancellor of the Exchequer) greeted the Confederacy of the Southern States 
in the person of its President Jefferson Davis, justifying the rebellion of the 
southern slave-owners against Lincoln's lawful government. The speech was 
published in The Times, No. 24372, October 9, 1862. It was mentioned by 
speakers during the discussion in the General Council. p. 83 
17 Gladstone's Liberal Government succeeded the Tory Government, led by 
Disraeli, in December 1868. One of the demagogic slogans of the Liberals that 
brought them victory at the elections was Gladstone's promise to solve the Irish 
question. At the height of the election struggle, the opposition in the House of 
Commons criticised Tory policy in Ireland, comparing it with the policy of 
conquest of Britain herself pursued by William, Duke of Normandy, in the 
eleventh century (see The Times, No. 26067, April 4, 1868). p. 83 
18 Marx wrote this circular letter in connection with the campaign launched by 
Bakunin and his followers against the General Council in November 1869. At 
the Basle Congress of the IWMA, Bakunin had tried to take over the 
leadership of the International by transferring the General Council from 
London to Geneva. Having failed in this, he changed his tactics and launched 
an open campaign against the General Council. A group of Bakunin's followers 
gained the majority in L'Egalité. The article "Le Bulletin du Conseil Général" 
(L'Égalité, No. 42, November 6, 1869) accused the General Council of violating 
clauses 2 and 3 of the Rules envisaging the publication by the Council of an 
information bulletin on the condition of workers in different countries. The 
article "L'Organisation de l'Internationale" (L'Égalité, No. 43, November 13, 
1869) proposed that a special Federal Council for England should be set up, 
allegedly to help the General Council in fulfilling its functions as regards the 
general affairs of the International. The leading article "Les Parties Politiques à 
Genève et l'Internationale" (L'Égalité, 45, November 27, 1869) preached 
abstention from politics and referred to the distorted French translahon of the 
General Rules. Finally, the leading article "Réflexions" (L'Égalité, No. 47, 
December 11, 1869) contained comments on the General Council's resolution 
against Gladstone (see this volume, p. 83), with sharp attacks on the Council for 
its position in the Irish question. Similar attacks on the General Council were 
made by another pro-Bakunin newspaper, Le Progrès. 

=====第507页=====
Notes 475 
The Egalité and Progrès attacks were first discussed at the General Council 
meeting of December 14, 1869. The text of the circular letter to the Federal 
Council of Romance Switzerland, drawn up by Marx, was approved by the 
Council at an extraordinary meeting on January 1, 1870 and sent out to all 
sections of the International. 
Meanwhile, early in January 1870, before it received the circular, the 
Romance Federal Council launched a decisive campaign against the Bakuninists 
and managed to have Perron, Robin, and other Alliance supporters withdrawn 
from the Egalité editorial board (for details see this volume, p. 123). 
The circular letter was originally not intended for publication, but part of it 
was published in 1872 in the confidential circular Fictitious Splits in the 
International drawn up by Marx and Engels. The full text of the letter was first 
printed in Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 2, No. 15, July 12, 1902. There are several copies of 
the text: three in manuscript (one made by Mrs. Marx and corrected by Marx, 
another by Jung, and the third by Dupont, which is now in the Lyons municipal 
archives). There is also Marx's own manuscript, attached to his letter of March 28, 
1870,  to Ludwig Kugelmann and known as "Confidential Communication" (see 
this volume, pp. 112-24). The latter version was published in Die Neue Zeit. 
In this volume the circular letter is printed from Mrs. Marx's copy corrected 
by Marx (Marx's insertions were made on separate sheets) and has been 
collated with his manuscript as sent to Kugelmann and with Jung's copy. 
The circular letter was first published in English in Letters to Dr. Kugelmann by 
Karl Marx, Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign Workers in the USSR, 
Moscow-Leningrad, 1934, pp. 105-09. p. 84 
Fhe reference is presumably to the League of Public Welfare—an association of 
pacifist organisations, heterogeneous in composition and views, founded in 
France in 1863 by the petty-bourgeois journalist Edmond Potonié. Later it 
merged with the League of Peace and Freedom (see Note 56). p. 85 
In November 1866, John Hales proposed the reorganisation of the English 
branch of the International so that it would rely not on the trade unions 
affiliated with it, but on the new sections, formed according to the territorial 
principle and headed by a special Federal Council. Similar proposals were 
made at the end of 1869. Marx and other leaders of the Council considered the 
moment inopportune since this would isolate the International from the 
workers' mass organisations. Only after the events of 1871 (the Paris 
Commune), when the situation in England and in the world had changed 
radically and reformist trends had gained supremacy in the trade unions, did 
Marx and his supporters consider it advisable to form the British Federation of 
the International with a special Council at its head. p. 86 
Fhe Land and Labour League was founded in London in October 1869 with the 
participation of the General Council. Its Executive Committee included more 
than 10 General Council members. The League's programme was drawn up by 
Eccarius on Marx's instruction (see this volume, pp. 401-06). Along with general 
democratic demands, like the reform of the finance and tax system and of 
public education, it contained demands for the nationalisation of the land and 
the reduction of working hours, as well as the Chartist demands for universal 
suffrage and home colonisation. 
Marx held that the League could play a definite role in revolutionising the 
English working class and saw it as a means of establishing an independent 
proletarian party in England. However, by the autumn of 1870 the influence of 

=====第508页=====
476 Notes 
bourgeois elements had grown in the League and it gradually began to lose 
contact with the International. p. 87 
122 This refers to the London Trades Council (see Note 38). p. 87 
123 The Anglo-Irish Union was imposed on Ireland by the British Government 
after the suppression of the Irish rebellion of 1798. The Union, which came 
into force on January 1, 1801, abrogated the autonomy of the Irish Parliament 
and made Ireland more dependent on Britain. One of the consequences of its 
introduction was, in particular, the abolition of tariffs established by the Irish 
Parliament at the end of the eighteenth century to protect the rising Irish 
industry, and this led to its total decline. p. 88 
124 Yhe position of the International on the Irish question, as expounded in this 
document, essentially anticipated the resolution on item 2 of. the programme 
for the debate on this question in the General Council as proposed by Marx 
early in November 1869, namely, on the item defining the attitude of the 
English working class to the liberation struggle of the Irish people. Even 
though other official documents of the International were soon to remove the 
need for a special resolution on this issue, Marx stuck to his idea of continuing 
the debate on the Irish question in the General Council. Circumstances 
hindered this, notably Marx's protracted illness which prevented him from 
attending Council meetings regularly in the winter and spring of 1870. Later, 
more urgent matters arose, and in July 1870 the Franco-Prussian war broke 
out, which absorbed the attention of the Council. The Council therefore 
confined itself to the decisions already adopted on the Irish question, p. 89 
125 Here and below, Marx compares the texts of the English and French editions: 
Address and Provisional Rules of the International Working Men's Association 
(London, 1864) and Congrès Ouvrier. Association Internationale des Travailleurs. 
Règlement Provisoire (Paris, 1864) which contains Proudhonist distortions of the 
preamble to the International's Provisional Rules. 
For details concerning the various publications of the Rules, see present 
edition, Vol. 20 (notes 1 and 351). p. 89 
126 Marx refers to the French translation of the Provisional Rules made by Charles 
Longuet and published in the pamphlet Manifeste de VAssociation Internationale 
des Travailleurs suivi du Règlement provisoire issued in Brussels in summer 1866 
by the newspaper La Rive Gauche. p. 90 
127 Robert Shaw, a member of the General Council, a house-painter, died 
on December 31, 1869. At a General Council meeting on January 4, 1870 Marx 
was included in a deputation to attend the funeral on January 5. The General 
Council resolved that the news of Shaw's death should be communicated to the 
sections of the International. Marx, who corresponded on behalf of the General 
Council with De Paepe, leader of the Belgian sections, included this obituary in 
a letter to him dated January 8, 1870. The obituary was published by 
L'Internationale, No. 53, January 16, with an editorial note: "News from 
London". 
In English the obituary was published for the first time in The General 
Council of the First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 92 
128 Engels prepared the second edition of his The Peasant War in Germany (see 
present edition, Vol. 10) in 1870 together with Wilhelm Liebknecht, originally 
as a reprint in 29 numbers of Der Volksstaat, Leipzig (April 2-October 15, 
Nos.  27-83,  at irregular intervals). Numbers 27 and 28 of the newspaper 
carried Engels' preface to the 1870 edition. 

=====第509页=====
Notes 477 
In October 1870 this work was published in book form— Der deutsche 
Bauernkrieg von Friedrich Engels. Zweiter, mit einer Einleitung versehener 
Abdruck, Leipzig, Verlag der Expedition des Volksstaat. 
A new, third, authorised edition came out in 1875. For this edition Engels 
wrote a special addendum to the 1870 Preface, dated July 1, 1874. 
In this volume the Preface is printed according to the 1870 Preface verified 
with the 1875 edition. 
In English the Preface was first published in F. Engels, The Peasant War in 
Germany, International Publishers, New York, 1926. p. 93 
The extreme Left was one of the two factions of the Left wing of the Frankfurt 
National Assembly during the revolution of 1848-49 in Germany. The extreme 
Left, known as the radical-democratic party, mainly represented the petty 
bourgeoisie, but was nevertheless supported by a section of the German 
workers. The extreme Left vacillated and took a half-way position on the basic 
problems of the German revolution — abolition of the remnants of feudalism 
and unification of the country. Engels described the position of the petty 
bourgeoisie in the revolution of 1848-49 in his works, The Campaign for the 
German Imperial Constitution and The Peasant War in Germany (see present 
edition. Vol. 10). p. 93 
This refers to Marx's works: The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850, 
consisting of a series of articles written between January and October 1850 
specially for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue and 
published in il under the general title "1848-1849" (see present edition, 
Vol. 10), and The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, written between De­
cember 1851 and March 1852 (see notes 78 and 79). p. 94 
On May 15, 1860, the Prussian Ghamber of Deputies voted, at the 
Government's demand, for the allocation of 9,000,000 talers to the War 
Ministry till June 30, 1861 "for the temporary maintenance of the arm) in 
fighting trim and for the increase of its military might". The results of the 
voting (315 for, 2 against and 5 abstaining) showed that the Prussian 
bourgeoisie had in fact given in to the government over the reorganisation of 
the army. p. 95 
The National-Liberals—members of the party formed by the German, 
principally Prussian, bourgeoisie in the autumn of 1866 after a split in the 
Party of Progress. Their policy showed that a considerable part of the liberal 
bourgeoisie had abandoned its claims to extend its political prerogatives and had 
capitulated to Bismarck's Junker government as a result of Prussia's victory in 
the Austro-Prussian war and the establishment of her supremacy in Germany. 
p. 95 
Engels refers to the Austro-Prussian war of 1866 which wound up the long 
rivalry between Austria and Prussia and predetermined the unification of 
Germany under the supremacy of Prussia. Several German states — including 
Hanover, Saxony, Bavaria, Württemberg and Baden — fought on Austria's side. 
Prussia formed an alliance with Italy. After a serious defeat at Sadowa on 
July 3 Austria began peace negotiations and signed a treaty in Prague on 
August 23. Austria conceded Schleswig and Flolstein to Prussia, paid small 
indemnities to her and gave the province of Venetia to Italy. The German 
Confederation, which was founded in 1815 by decision of the Vienna Congress 
and embraced over 30 German states, ceased to exist, and North German 
Confederation was founded in its place under Prussia's supremacy (see Note 

=====第510页=====
478 Notes 
135 102).  Austria, Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg, Hesse-Darmstadt remained 
outside the Confederation. As a result of the war, Prussia annexed the 
Kingdom of Hanover, the Electorate of Hesse-Cassel, the Grand Duchy of 
Nassau and the free city of Frankfurt am Main. (On the events of the 
Austro-Prussian war see Engels' "Notes on the War in Germany", present 
edition, Vol. 20). p. 95 
134 In the German original the term Haupt- und Staatsaktionen (principal and 
spectacular actions) is used; this has several meanings. In the seventeenth and 
the first half of the eighteenth century, it denoted plays performed by German 
touring companies. The plays, which were rather formless, presented tragic 
historical events in a bombastic and at the same time coarse and farcical 
manner. 
Secondly, this term can denote major political events. It was used in this 
sense by a trend in German historical science known as "objective historiog­
raphy". Leopold Ranke was one of its chief representatives. He regarded 
Haupt- und Staatsaktionen as the main subject-matter to be set forth. Objective 
historiography, which was primarily interested in the political and diplomatic 
history of nations, proclaimed the pre-eminence of foreign politics over domestic 
politics and disregarded the social relations of men and their active role in 
history. p. 95 
Engels refers to the Kingdom of Hanover, the Electorate of Hesse-Cassel and 
the Grand Duchy of Nassau annexed by Prussia following the Austro-Prussian 
war of 1866. p. 95 
136 Engels refers to what is known as Trans-Leithania (see Note 110). p. 96 
137 The German People's Party (Deutsche Volkspartei) was set up in 1865 and 
consisted of democratic elements of the petty bourgeoisie and partly of 
representatives of the bourgeoisie, chiefly from South-German states. As distinct 
from the National-Liberals (see Note 132), the People's Party was against 
Prussia's supremacy in Germany and advocated the plan of the so-called Great 
Germany uniting both Prussia and Austria. While pursuing an anti-Prussian 
policy and advancing general democratic slogans, the People's Party at the same 
time voiced the particularist aspirations of some German states. It was against 
Germany's unification as a single centralised democratic republic, advocating 
the idea of a federative German state. 
In 1866 the Saxon People's Party, whose nucleus consisted of workers, 
joined the German People's Party. This Left wing of the German People's Party 
had, in effect, nothing in common with it except anti-Prussian sentiments and 
the desire jointly to solve the problems of Germany's national unification in a 
democratic way; it subsequently developed along socialist lines. The main 
section of the Party split away from the petty-bourgeois democrats and took 
part in founding the Social-Democratic Workers' Party in August 1869. 
p. 96 
138 In the 1860s a number of finance reforms in the interests of the bourgeoisie 
were carried out in the North German Confederation. In 1867 passports were 
abolished and freedom of movement and domicile established; in 1868 the 
system of uniform measures and weights was introduced and the trading code 
of the Customs Union extended to cover the entire territory of the 
Confederation. All these reforms undoubtedly facilitated the development of 
industry and the formation of the German nation. 
However, medieval guild regulations in Prussia during the mid-1860s was a 
great hindrance to the development of capitalism in Germany. In conformity 

=====第511页=====
Notes 479 
with the bureaucratic system of regulating industry, there were branches in 
which no one could engage in business without a special license (concession). 
Only the Regulations of June 21, 1869 abolished the last remnants of guild 
privileges, and the law of June 11, 1870 provided for the establishment of 
joint-stock companies without preliminary permission. p. 96 
139 "Jhe Basle Congress of the International adopted, on September 10, 1869, the 
following resolution on landed property proposed by Marx's followers: 
" 1. That Society has the right to abolish private property in land, and 
convert it into common property. 
"2. That it is necessary to abolish private property in land, and convert 
it into common property." p. 100 
140 Marx sent this article as a private letter to César De Paepe, the editor of 
L'Internationale, the newspaper of the Belgian sections of the International 
Working Men's Association. Marx expected the letter to be edited by De Paepe 
before it was printed (see Marx's letter to Engels, March 9, 1870; present 
edition, Vol. 43). The editors, however, published it almost without changes, 
only adding some explanations in brackets and dividing it into two parts. A 
small editorial comment was appended, which is not published in this edition. 
An excerpt from the article was published in La Liberté, No. 10, March 10, 
1872. 
Marx used a great amount of factual material from The Irish People and The 
Irishman for 1869 and 1870. 
Contextually close to this article are those written by Jenny, Marx's 
daughter, for La Marseillaise (see this volume, pp. 414-41). p. 101 
141 O'Donovan Rvôsa, a prominent Fenian who in 1865 had been sentenced to 
penal servitude for life, was nominated candidate at the by-elections to 
Parliament in County Tipperary (South-Western Ireland). On November 25, 
1869,  Rossa was elected M.P. Even though the elections were quashed, the fact 
of his election testified to the growing protest against English policy among the 
Irish masses. Engels wrote about O'Donovan Rossa's election to Parliament in 
his letter to Marx of November 29, 1869 (see present edition, Vol. 43). 
p. 104 
142 A writ of Habeas Corpus—the name given in English judicial procedure to a 
document enjoining the appropriate authorities to present an arrested person 
before a court on the demand of the persons interested to check the legitimacy^ 
of the arrest. Having considered the reasons for the arrest, the court either 
frees the arrested person or sends him back to prison or releases him on bail or 
guarantee. The procedure, laid down by an Act of Parliament of 1679, does 
not apply to persons accused of high treason and can be suspended by decision 
of Parliament. The British authorities frequently made use of this exception in 
Ireland. p. 104 
143 A reference to the pamphlet Two Letters to the Earl of Aberdeen on the State 
Persecutions of the Neapolitan Government, published in London in 1851, in which 
Gladstone exposed the cruel treatment inflicted by the Government of the 
Neapolitan King Ferdinand II (nicknamed "Bomba" for the bombardment of 
Messina in 1848) on political prisoners arrested for participation in the 1848-49 
revolutionary movement. p. 105 
144 xhe  Land Bill  for  Ireland  was  discussed  in the  English Parliament  in the  first 
half of 1870.  Submitted  by Gladstone  on behalf  of the  English Government, 
ostensibly  to assist Irish tenants,  it contained  so many provisos  and  restrictions 

=====第512页=====
480 Notes 
that it actually left intact the basis of big landownership by the English 
landlords in Ireland. It also preserved their right to raise rents and to drive 
tenants off the land, stipulating only that the landlords pay a compensation to 
the tenants for land improvement, and instituting a definite judicial procedure 
for this. The Land Act was passed in August 1870. The landlords sabotaged 
the implementation of the Act in every way and found various ways round it. 
The Act greatly promoted the concentration of farms in Ireland into big estates 
and the ruination of small Irish tenants. p. 105 
This is a report of the Standing Committee which it discussed at the sittings of 
February 19 and March 5, 1870. (Marx also attended them.) 
The report was submitted to the General Council of the International on 
March 8, 1870. The Council, which had the right to arbitrate in conflicts 
arising between sections of the International, adopted the report and passed a 
decision on the conflict between Adrien Scheitel and other members of the old 
Lyons section who supported the French Left Republicans, and the group of 
Albert Richard, a Bakuninist. 
The General Council found all the accusations made against Richard 
untenable and confirmed him in the post of Corresponding Secretary of the 
IWMA. The decision signed by the Corresponding Secretary foi France, 
Eugène Dupont, was published in L'Internationale, No. 63, March 27, 1870. 
p. 108 
The Russian Section of the International was founded in Geneva in the spring 
of 1870 by a group of Russian political emigrants, young people influenced by 
the ideas of the Russian revolutionary democrats Chernyshevsky and Dob-
rolyubov. A great part in setting up this section was played by A. A. Serno-
Solovyovich, a member of the International who died in 1869. 
On March 11 the Committee of the Russian Section sent a letter to 
Hermann Jung enclosing its Programme and Rules (they were published in the 
section's newspaper, Narodnoye Dyelo, No. 1, April 15, 1870). In a letter of 
March 12 to Marx, the'Committee asked him to be the Russian Section's 
representative on the General Council of the International. Johann Philipp 
Becker on his own behalf wrote letters of recommendation to Marx and Jung. 
At its meeting on March 22, the General Council admitted the Russian 
Section to the International and Marx agreed to represent it in the Council. An 
official reply to the section was written by Marx, in the name of the General 
Council, on March 24 and published in Narodnoye Dyelo, No. 1, April 15, 1870. 
The Russian Section was of great help to Marx and Engels in their struggle 
against the divisive activities of the Bakuninists. Its members — Nikolai Utin, 
Anton Trusov, Yekaterina Barteneva, Victor Bartenev, Yelena Dmitriyeva, 
Anna Korvin-Krukovskaya—took an active part in the Swiss and international 
working-class movement. Some of them participated in the Paris Commune. 
The section sought to establish contacts with the revolutionary movement 
in Russia. It virtually ceased its activity in 1872. 
This document was first published in English in K. Marx and F. Engels, 
Selected Correspondence, 1848-95. Translated by Dana Fori, New York, 
International Publishers, 1942. p. 110 
For Flerovsky's book The Condition of the Working Class in Russia, see Marx's 
letters to Engels of February 10 and 12, 1870 (present edition, Vol. 43). 
p. 110 
This Confidential Communication was intended for the Committee of the 
German Social-Democratic Workers' Party. It included the full French text of 

=====第513页=====
Notes 481 
the General Council's circular letter of January 1, 1870 to the Federal Council 
of Romance Switzerland (see this volume, pp. 84-91). As Corresponding 
Secretary for Germany Marx sent it to Ludwig Kugelmann in a letter of March 
28, 1870, asking him to communicate the document to Bracke and other 
members of the Committee. 
In English, the Confidential Communication was first published in Letters to 
Dr. Kugelmann by Karl Marx, Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign 
Workers in the USSR, Moscow-Leningrad, 1934. 
In this volume the document is published according to Marx's manuscript 
enclosed in the above-mentioned letter to Kugelmann. As compared with the 
circular letter of the General Council to the Federal Council of Romance 
Switzerland, Marx's manuscript contains certain mainly stylistic alterations and 
cuts.  p. 112 
149 See Note 56. p. 112 
150 At the Second Congress of the League of Peace and Freedom (Berne, September 
21-25,  1868), the second item on the agenda was "the relation of the economic 
and social question to the question of peace and freedom". By a majority vote 
the congress rejected the resolution proposed by Bakunin which declared the 
necessity for "economic and social equalisation of classes and individuals", the 
"abolition of the state" and the "liquidation of the right of inheritance". 
Having found no support- at the congress, Bakunin and his followers withdrew 
from the League and in the same year established the International Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy (see Note 55) whose programme was based on the 
above-mentioned proposals by Bakunin'. p. 112 
151 See Note 55. 
152 See Note 119. 
163 See Note 120. 
154 See Note 121. 
155 The reference is to the London Trades Council (see Note 38). 
156 The  reference  is to the  Anglo-Irish Union  of 1801 (see  Note  123). 
157 See Note 124. 
158 Marx refers to a letter dated January 4, 1870, from the Romance Federal 
Council in Geneva to Jung, in which the Council expressed its disagreement 
with the Egalite's attacks on the General Council. It also wrote that the Alliance 
of Socialist Democracy had not been admitted to the Romance Federation and 
that the Alliance's aims had nothing in common with the tasks of the 
International Working Men's Association. In a private letter of January 4 to 
Hermann Jung, secretary Henri Perret wrote about the withdrawal of Charles 
Perron, Paul Robin and other Bakuninists from the Egalite's editorial board. 
The announcement of their withdrawal was published in the newspaper on 
January 8, 1870 (No. 2). 
The letters of the Romance Federal Council were sent from Geneva in reply 
to Jung's letter of November 1869, before it received the circular letter "The 
General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland". p. 123 
159 The  reference  is to the  official letter  of the  Romance Federal Council  to the 
General Council of the International of February 3, 1870 read at the General 
Council meeting on February 8. The Council unanimously agreed that the 
explanation was satisfactory. p. 123 p-113 
p-117 
p-118 
p-119 
p-119 
p-119 
p-121 

=====第514页=====
482 Notes 
160 In 1858 the Russian landowner Pavel Bakhmetev sent Herzen money for 
propaganda purposes (the so-called Bakhmetev fund). Marx learned about this 
from Johann Philipp Becker's letter of March 13, 1870. 
In 1869, under pressure from Bakunin and Ogaryov, Herzen agreed to 
divide the fund into two parts, one of which Ogaryov sent to Nechayev. After 
Herzen's death in 1870, Nechayev received the other part from Ogaryov. 
p. 123 
161 See Note 146. p. 124 
162 In its letter of March 12, 1870 signed by Utin, Neto\ (Baitenev) and Trusov, 
the Committee of the Russian Section asked Marx to represent them in the 
General Council of the International. It also stated that the section's members 
had decidedly broken off their ties with Bakunin and intended "in the 
immediate future to expose this man publicly", as he was deluding the "world 
of the working people". p. 124 
163 Marx wrote this letter in reply to a request of January 12, 1870, from the 
International Metalworkers' Society in Hanover for help in establishing contacts 
with the English trade unions. The General Council appointed a delegation 
headed by Jung to conduct the talks. On April 12 Jung reported on a meeting 
on April 7 with the Council of the London Amalgamated Engineers. The latter 
was ready to establish contact with the engineers of Germany and France and 
handed over a list of questions which interested English workers. The 
questionnaire in Marx's letter slightly differs in wording from the English text 
preserved in Jung's letter to Marx of April 13, 1870 (see The  General Council of 
the Tirst  International.  1868-1870, Moscow, 1966, pp. 470-71). 
Marx's letter, with a short editorial and conclusion was published in German 
in Die Tagwacht, No. 16, May 5, 1870, and in French in L'Internationale, 
No. 76, June 26, 1870. The author's name was mentioned in the editorial. 
p. 125 
164 By the General Council's decision of November 22, 1864 The Bee-Hive was 
declared an official newspaper of the Association. This was announced in a 
supplement to the first edition of the Address and Provisional Rules of the 
Working Men's International Association, London, 1864. However, closely 
connected with trade union leaders and representatives of the radical 
bourgeoisie, the newspaper virtually remained, as Marx wrote to Sigfrid Meyer 
on July 4, 1868, a narrow trade union organ far from voicing the views of the 
IWMA (see present edition, Vol. 43). The Bee-Hive frequently suppressed the 
General Council's documents, mutilated them at will and sometimes did not 
publish the reports of the General Council meetings at all (see Marx's letters to 
Engels of July 29, November 18, 1869, present edition, Vol. 43). It adopted a 
negative attitude to the Irish national liberation movement, justifying Gladstone's 
policy  ( The  Bee-Hive,  No. 420, October 30, 1869; see also Engels' letter to Marx of 
November  1 ). Its policy was censured by members of the International in different 
countries. 
The question of severing all connections with The Bee-Hive was raised by 
Marx at a meeting of the General Council on April 26, 1870 (see this volume, 
p. 444). Marx was supported by other members of the Council, who instructed 
him to draw up a declaration for publication. In a letter to Engels of April 28, 
1870 (see present edition, Vol. 43), Marx wrote that he was to prepare a 
resolution for the next Tuesday, i. e. for the General Council meeting of May 
3. Marx drew it up at the beginning of May and sent it to several newspapers 
(it was published in German in Der Volksstaat,  No. 38, May 11, 1870 and in Der 

=====第515页=====
Notes 483 
Vorbote, No. 5, May 1870, datelined "London, May 3"). On May 3 the General 
Council did not discuss the question. On May 10 Marx was not present at the 
General Council meeting. He moved the resolution on May 17 (its text in 
Marx's handwriting is pasted into the Minute Book of the General Council). 
The General Council unanimously resolved to break with The Bee-Hive and to 
announce this resolution publicly to its different sections. 
The resolution was published in French in L'Egalité, No. 22, May 28; 
L'Internationale, No. 72, May 29 and in Le Mirabeau, No. 46, June 5, 1870. 
p. 126 
1,5 Samuel Morley and other bourgeois liberals headed by Daniel Pratt built up a 
fund in 1869 for publishing The Bee-Hive and became its managers. At the 
beginning of 1870, H. Solley, a clergyman who championed an alliance 
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, virtually became its editor-in-chief. 
p. 126 
166 In an attempt to strengthen its weakened position the government of Napoleon 
III scheduled a plebiscite for May 8, 1870. The questions were formulated in 
such a way that it was impossible to express disapproval of the Second Empire's 
policy without simultaneously opposing all democratic reforms. The Paris 
Federation of the International and the Federal Chamber of Workers' Societies 
of Paris issued a manifesto on April 24, 1870 (Manifeste antiplébiscitaire des 
Sections parisiennes fédérées de l'Internationale et de la Chambre fédérale des Sociétés 
ouvrières),  which exposed this demagogic manoeuvre and called on the workers 
to abstain from voting. 
On the eve of the plebiscite, members of the Paris Federation were arrested 
and charged with conspiring to assassinate Napoleon III. At the same time, 
persecution of members of the International began in Lyons, Rouen, Marseilles 
and other cities. The third trial of the members of the Paris Federation was 
held from June 22 to July 5, 1870. The attempted charge of complicity in the 
sham plot failed and the detainees were sentenced for being members of the 
International. 
The declaration against the persecution of the members of the French 
sections written by Marx was approved by the General Council on May 3, 1870, 
and it was published in English as a leaflet and in the newspapers The Daily 
Telegraph, May 4, The Eastern Post, May 7 and The Penny Bee-Hive, No. 447, 
May 7, 1870 over the signature of General Council members. The French 
translation, made by Marx (see Marx's letter to Engels of May 10, 1870), was 
published in La Marseillaise, No. 138, May 7; La Liberté, No. 150, May 8; 
L'Egalité, No. 20, May 14; L'Internationale, No. 70, May 15, and Le Mirabeau, 
No. 45, May 29, 1870. In German the declaration was printed in Der Volksstaat, 
No. 38, May 11; Der Vorbote, No. 5, May; Die Tagwacht, No. 14, May 21, 1870, 
and in other periodicals. p. 127 
l<)7 xhe first trial of the International's Paris Executive Committee took place in 
March 1868 (see Note 16); the second, from May 22 to June 19, 1868. 
p. 128 
168 This resolution was introduced at the General Council meeting of May 10, 
1870 by Hermann Jung on behalf of Marx who was absent because of illness. A 
group of French petty-bourgeois emigrants in London, followers of Félix Pyat, 
who had lost contact with the International after the General Council's 
resolution of July 7, 1868 (see this volume, p. 7), continued to call themselves 
the French Section in London and to issue documents in the name of the 
International Working Men's Association. Throughout 1869 the question of 

=====第516页=====
484 Notes 
officially severing relations with this group was repeatedly raised in the General 
Council. In the spring of 1870, when a third trial against members of the 
International was in preparation in France, the break became all the more 
necessary, since the incriminatory material included documents of the so-called 
French Section in London, in particular an address adopted at a meeting on 
October 20, 1868, in which the International was identified with a secret 
republican society, the Revolutionary Commune, headed by Félix Pyat. 
The text of the resolution in English has been preserved' in the form of 
Marx's own manuscript pasted into the minutes of May 10, 1870 (with minor 
corrections in Eccarius' hand), and was published in The Penny Bee-Hive, 
No. 418, May 14; The Times, No. 26748, May 12; The Echo, No. 443, May 12, 
and in Reynolds's Newspaper, May 15, 1870. 
The French text of the resolution, copied by Auguste Serraillier, is also 
extant; it was published in La Marseillaise, No. 145, May 14; L'Internationale, 
No. 70, May 15; L'Égalité, No. 21, May 21, and Le Mirabeau, No. 45, May 29, 
1870.  In German it was printed in Der Volksstaat, No. 41, May 21 and 
Volkswille, No. 18, May 28, 1870. p. 131 
Marx refers, in particular, to a report about a banquet given by the so-called 
French branch in London on May 3, 1870 in honour of Gustave Flourens, a 
French revolutionary, follower of Blanqui, an organiser of the Paris rising of 
1870.  The report was forwarded to France, Germany and other countries by 
the Havas and Reuters agencies and was published in the Journal des Débats on 
May 5. It stated that the banquet was chaired by "M. Le Lubez, President of 
the International Association", whereas Le Lubez had been expelled from the 
International for slander as far back as 1866. p. 131 
•' * By decision of the Basle Congress, the next congress of the Association was to 
be held in Paris. At the General Council meeting of May 17, 1870 Marx 
proposed that the meeting-place should be changed in view of the increasing 
harassment by Napoleon Ill's government of the working-class and democratic 
movement and, in particular, of the International. It was decided to convoke 
the congress in Mainz. 
However, the congress did not meet in Mainz because of the outbreak of 
the Franco-Prussian war in July 1870. At the General Council meeting on 
August 2, Marx proposed that local sections and federations must be 
approached in writing and asked whether they would consent to a postpone­
ment of the congress. On receiving their consent, the General Council passed a 
formal resolution on August 23, 1870 for the postponement of the congress 
"until the earliest opportunity". 
The resolution on the convocation of the congress in Mainz proposed by 
Marx was passed by the General Council on May 17, 1870. The German text, 
which Marx sent to Wilhelm Liebknecht, was printed in Der Volksstaat, No. 42, 
May 25; Der Vorbote, No. 6, June 1870, and in Volkswille, No. 20, June 11, 
1870.  In French the resolution wa« published in L'Égalité, No. 22, May 28 and 
Le Mirabeau, No. 45, May 29, 1870. 
In English the text of the resolution has been preserved in the Minute Book 
of the General Council and as a handwritten copy made by Eleanor Marx. It 
was first published in English in The General Council of the First International. 
1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 132 
On May 9, 1870, the Brunswick Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' 
Party sent a letter to the General Council officially proposing that the next 
congress of the International be held in Germany. p. 132 

=====第517页=====
Notes 485 
This letter was written by Marx and Engels in connection with a congress of the 
International to be held in September 1870. Following the General Council's 
decision of May 17, 1870 on the convocation of the congress in Mainz,  Stumpf, 
authorised by Liebknecht, wrote a letter to Marx on June 11 asking him to 
postpone the congress till October in view of the forthcoming September 
elections to the Imperial Diet in Germany. The next day the same request was 
made by the Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party to the 
General Council, and by Geib to Marx. Marx was definitely against the 
postponement and expressed his opinion on the matter in a letter to the 
Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party on June 27 (see 
this volume, p. 445). 
This letter of Marx and Engels was published in Der Volksstaat, No. 51, 
June 26, 1872 and in the book Leipziger  Hochverrathsprozess.  Ausführlicher Bericht 
über die Verhandlungen des Schwurgerichts zu Leipzig in dem Prozess gegen 
Liebknecht, Bebel und Hepner wegen Vorbereitung zum Hochwerrath vom 11.-26. 
März 1872, Leipzig, 1872. It was reprinted in the 1874 and 1894 editions of 
the book, the latter edition being prepared by Liebknecht on the instruction of 
the Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party. p. 133 
The Stuttgart Congress of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party took 
place from June 4 to 7, 1870. It summed up the results of the party's activity 
for the past year, paying great attention to the work among the masses. The 
Congress discussed the peasant question. On Bebel's proposal it adopted the 
resolution on the socialisation of the land, formulating it in the spirit of the 
Basle Congress resolutions. In its political programme the Congress sharply 
criticised the Bakuninist views on the political struggle and the state. 
The Congress also discussed the next congress of the International in 
Mainz. " p. 133 
This refers to a special fund at the personal disposal of Bismarck which was 
used for bribing the press. p. 135 
After the Egalité editorial board was reorganised (see Note 158), the 
Bakuninists, attempting to retain their lost positions, had secured a formal 
majority of votes at a regular congress of the Romance Federation held in La 
Chaux-de-Fonds on April 4-6, 1870. The congress discussed the attitude of the 
working class to the political struggle. In contrast to the Geneva sections, the 
Bakuninists advocated abstention from the political struggle, referring to the 
French text of the Rules (see this volume, pp. 89-90). On Bakunin's insistence, 
the congress began its proceedings with the admission of the newly formed 
sections to the federation. A sharp struggle arose over the admission of the 
section named "Alliance of Socialist Democracy—Central Section" (see Note 
55) and the Chaux-de-Fonds pro-Bakunin section. Utin, one of the leaders of 
the Russian Section in Geneva, exposed Bakunin's schismatic activities. A split 
occurred; the Geneva delegates and other General Council supporters 
continued their work independently. An announcement about the Chaux-de-
Fonds split was published in L'Égalité on April 9, 1870. 
The Bakuninists elected a new Federal Committee and transferred its seat 
to La Chaux-de-Fonds. Thus two Federal committees appeared in Romance 
Switzerland — in Geneva and in La Chaux-de-Fonds. The Bakuninists started 
publication of a newspaper, La Solidarité, that appeared under the editorship of 
James Guillaume, first in Neuchâtel (April 11, 1870-May 12, 1871), and then in 
Geneva. It was, in fact, a continuation of Le Progrès. 
On April 12, 1870 the General Council, having received the news about the 

=====第518页=====
486 Notes 
events at the congress instructed Hermann Jung to gather more particulars. 
Jung brought them to the attention of the Council in April and May. At the 
request of the Geneva Committee members, the Council discussed the split at 
the Chaux-de-Fonds congress on June 28 and passed a resolution (for the 
record of Marx's speech on the question see this volume, p. 446). It was sent to 
the two Federal Committees by Jung, the Corresponding Secretary for 
Switzerland, and published in La Solidarité, No. 16, July 23 and Le Mirabeau, 
No. 53, July 24, 1870, over his signature. 
In English the resolution was first published in The General Council of the 
First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 136 
76 The lock-out of the Geneva building workers was discussed by the General 
Council at its meetings on June 14 and 21, 1870. On June 21 Marx was 
instructed to draw up an address to the trade unions and sections of the 
International in Europe and the United States. The address was approved by 
the General Council on July 5 and published in leaflet form in English, 
German and French: "The Lock-out of the Building Trades at Geneva. The 
General Council of the International Working Men's Association to the 
Working Men and Women of Europe and the United States"; "Die 
Aussperrung der Bauarbeiter in  Genf.  Der Generalrath der internationalen 
Arbeiterassoziation an die Arbeiter und Arbeiterinnen in Europa und den 
Vereinigten Staaten"; "La Grève des corps de métiers en bâtiment à Genève. 
Appel du Conseil général de l'Association internationale des Travailleurs aux 
travailleurs et travailleuses de l'Europe et des États-Unis". The German text 
was also published in the newspapers Der Volksstaat, No. 56, July 13 and 
Volkswille, No. 25, July 16, 1870 and in the journal Der Vorbote, No. 7, July 
1870.  In this volume the address is printed according to the English leaflet, 
checked with the German and French texts. p. 137 
77 The masters' appeal was adopted on June 2, 1870, at a meeting of the 
Association of Building Trade Masters in the Canton of Geneva, and published 
as a poster. It placed the whole responsibility for the strike in Geneva on the 
International Association. The masters demanded that the authorities should 
put into effect an article in the federal constitution entitling the government to 
expel "foreigners violating the home and foreign security of Switzerland". 
p. 138 
178 The decision of the Geneva master builders to declare a lock-out of building 
workers evoked protests from workers of other trades. On June 19, 1870, 
L'Internationale wrote about a 10,000-strong meeting of Geneva workers 
protesting against this decision of the employers. L'Egalité, No. 23, June 11, 
1870 published a protest of a 5,000-strong meeting of watch-makers 
("Protestation votée en Assemblée populaire nationale tenue au Bâtiment 
Electoral 7 juin 1870"). On June 14 the Egalité editors published a special 
supplement to No. 23 on the Geneva building workers' strike. The next issue 
of June 18 published an address by the Geneva factory workers to the strikers, 
expressing solidarity with them and informing them of the aid that had been 
organised. p. 138 
179 Engels wrote notes at the request of Marx's eldest daughter, Jenny. They were 
intended as a preface to Erins-Harfe, Irländische Volksmelodien nach Thomas 
Moore, which was being prepared for publication in Hanover. Jenny Marx sent 
them to Ludwig Kugelmann, asking him to hand them to Joseph Risse, the 
compiler of the collection (see Jenny Marx's letter to Kugelmann, July 17, 1870, 
present edition, Vol. 43). However, they did not appear in the collection 

=====第519页=====
Notes 487 
printed in 1870. They were first published in 1955, in Movimento Operaio, 
No. 2, Milano, in Italian, and in La Pensée, No. 75, 1957, in French. 
In English this article was published in Marx and Engels, Ireland and the 
Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1978. p. 140 
The supposed works of Ossian, a mythical Celtic bard, were forged and published 
in 1760-65 by the Scottish poet James Macpherson. p. 140 
This confidential communication was drawn up by Marx in connection with 
preparations for the next congress of the International scheduled for 
September 5, 1870 in Mainz. At the General Council meeting on June 28, 1870 
Marx proposed that the sections of the Association should discuss the change of 
the seat of the General Council so as to avoid creating privileged conditions for 
workers of one or another country. Although adopted, Marx's proposition was 
objected to by Hales, a General Council member. The Council resumed the 
debate on July 5 and 12 and turned down Hales' objections. On July 14 Marx 
sent Hermann Jung the French text of the confidential communication and a 
letter in English (see present edition, Vol. 43) to be forwarded to Switzerland, 
with one reservation: "The following must not be published but only 
communicated by letter to the different sections." Also extant is the text sent to 
De Paepe by Auguste Serraillier, Corresponding Secretary for Belgium. The 
sections opposed any change of the Council's seat, considering London the 
most suitable place for the leading body of the International Working Men's 
Association. 
The document was first published in Russian in Marx and Engels, Works, 
Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960 and in English in The General 
Council of the First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 142 
The agenda of the Mainz Congress of the International to be opened on 
September 5, 1870 was drawn up by Marx and approved by the General 
Council on July 12, 1870. When it was discussed Marx took the floor several 
times to explain different points. The text of the programme adopted by the 
Council was published as a leaflet entitled The Fifth Annual Congress of the 
International Working Men's Association. The programme was prefaced by the 
following text: "The International Working Men's Congress of 1870 will be 
held in the city of Mayence-on-the-Rhine. The delegates are requested to 
assemble on Monday, September 5, at nine  o'clock  in the forenoon, in the Marble Hall, 
which the Burgomaster of the City has kindly placed at the disposal of the 
Association during the Session of the Congress." In a letter to Jung of July 14, 
1870,  Marx quoted the full text of the agenda, asking him to preserve the 
order of the items. He wrote: "Dear Jung. Enclosed the Programme. The 
questions are arranged in such an order as will facilitate the business of next 
Congress. You'll understand my meaning. Your truly, K. M." (see present 
edition, Vol. 43). 
In this volume the programme of the Mainz Congress is printed according 
to Marx's manuscript, sent to Jung, which is fuller than the text of the leaflet. 
Besides the Mainz Congress agenda was published in The Bee-Hive, 
No. 461, August 13, 1870; it appeared in French in La Solidarité, No. 17, July 
30, La Liberté, No. 162, July 31, L'Internationale, No. 81, July 31, L'Égalité, 
No. 28, August 6 and Le Mirabeau, No. 55, August 7, 1870; and in German in 
Der Vorbote, No. 7, July 1870 (with some inaccuracies), Die Tagwacht, No. 24, 
July 30, Der Volksstaat, No. 65, August 13, 1870 (the text corrected and signed 
by Marx). p. 143 

=====第520页=====
488 Notes 
It was Wilhelm Liebknecht who proposed that this point should be included in 
the agenda of the Mainz Congress (in his letter to Marx of April 27, 1870). It 
was also discussed at the Stuttgart Congress of the Social-Democratic Workers' 
Party (see Note 173), Liebknecht delivering a report on the subject, p. 143 
The History of Ireland is a fragment of a voluminous work which Engels 
intended to write and on which he worked at the end of 1869 and during the 
first half of 1870. Engels studied a vast selection of literary and historical 
sources: the works of antique and medieval writers, annals, collections of 
ancient law codes, legislative acts and legal treatises, folklore, travellers' notes, 
numerous works on archaeology, history, economics, geography, geology, etc. 
Engels' bibliography, embracing over 150 titles, is selective and includes only a 
few of the sources he studied. 
Engels presumably did not complete his preparatory work. However, the 
collected material comprising 15 paginated notebooks, the excerpts from books, 
the list of literature, notes on separate sheets and newspaper cuttings show the 
scale of his research into Irish history as well as his understanding of certain of 
its aspects. 
Engels studied Gaelic in order to do research into Irish sources. Marx 
attached great importance to Engels' work and constantly helped him with it 
(see their letters during this period in Vol. 43 of the present edition). The 
views of Marx and Engels on major problems of Irish history took shape in the 
course of joint discussion. 
The draft plan (see p. 307) shows that Engels' work was to consist of four 
long chapters, the last two being subdivided into sections. Engels actually 
succeeded in finishing only the first chapter—"Natural Conditions". The 
second chapter—"Old Ireland" — is unfinished. The manuscript breaks off 
where Engels intended to throw light on the social structure of Irish society 
before the English conquest in the second half of the twelfth century. Engels 
did not begin writing the last two chapters, which were to describe the 
development of the country up to the events of his own day, although he had 
compiled most of the required material. In a letter to Sigismund Borkheim 
written in early March 1872 (see present edition, Vol. 44), Engels mentioned 
that the Franco-Prussian War, the Paris Commune, the clash with the 
Bakuninists in the International, etc., interrupted his work. Engels used the 
results of his research in his theoretical works, such as The Origin of the Family, 
Private Property and the State (see present edition, Vol. 27) and in his letters to 
various correspondents. 
The fragment The History of Ireland (see this volume, pp. 308-14) and some 
preparatory material Engels collected for this work were first published in 1948 
in Russian in the Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. X. In English, excerpts from the 
draft plan and the fragment The History of Ireland were published in Marx and 
Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971, while 
The History of Ireland was published for the Irish Communist Group by Angela 
Clifford, 258 Liverpool Road, No. 1, August 1965. 
In the present edition The History of Ireland is printed according to Engels' 
manuscript in German. Omissions in passages from different authors are 
marked by dots in square brackets. Italics in the quotations are mostly by 
Engels unless otherwise indicated in the footnotes. p. 145 
Engels refers to the formation of a centralised feudal state in England after the 
conquest in 1066 by William, Duke of Normandy. The reforms carried out in 
the twelfth century by Henry II Plantagenet were particularly instrumental in 
strengthening the King's power. One of the objects of the English monarchy's 

=====第521页=====
Notes 489 
aggressive designs was Ireland, a country at an earlier stage of social and 
political development and still in a state of feudal decentralisation. Between 
1169 and 1171 part of the island was conquered by the Anglo-Norman barons, 
who founded a colony in South-East Ireland known as the English Pale. The 
term came into use in the second half of the fourteenth century. The 
boundaries of the English Pale changed during the continual wars of the 
conquerors against the hitherto unsubdued population. Castles and fortifica­
tions were built in the border areas. At the end of the fifteenth century the 
Pale included only part of the present counties of Louth, Meath, Dublin and 
Kildare, but it served as a bridgehead for the complete subjection of Ireland by 
the English in the sixteenth century. Dublin was the centre of the Pale and the 
seat of the English Lord Deputy. p. 147 
186 A reference to County Laoighis (Leix) in Central Ireland, which, in 1557, 
following the confiscation by the Tudors of the lands of local tribal 
communities (the clans), was renamed Queen's County in honour of Mary 
Tudor, Queen of England. The neighbouring Offaley (Offaly) County, the 
population of which had also fallen victim to the expropriation policy of the 
English colonial authorities, was renamed King's County in honour of Mary's 
husband, Philip II of Spain (see also this volume, pp. 297 and 298). p. 148 
187 In modern terms — deposits of the Mesozoic and Cainozoic periods. p. 152 
188 Engels presumably quoted Young according to Murphy's  Ireland.  Industrial, 
Political, and Social, London, 1870. p. 156 
189 The synopsis of Wakefield's book, which contains rich factual material on the 
Ireland of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, is to be found in 
notebooks VII, XI and XII of Engels' preparatory material on the history of 
Ireland (see his letters to Marx of February 22 and April 13, 1870, present 
edition, Vol. 43). p. 156 
190 A reference to the period of cruel reprisals against the Irish population and 
their wholesale expropriation, which began soon after the suppression of the 
Irish national liberation uprising of 1641-52 by the troops of the English 
bourgeois republic (see Note 229). According to the Acts of the English 
Parliament of 1652 and 1653, some of the Irish landowners, who were declared 
guilty of revolt, were to be forcibly moved to the barren province of Connaught 
and the swampy southern County Clare. Resettlement was carried out under 
pain of execution. 
On the eve of the 1798 Irish uprising, Connaught, and to an even greater 
extent the bordering counties of the province of Ulster in the north, became 
the scene of widespread terrorism by English mercenaries and Protestant gangs 
hired by the landlords from among their menials (Ancient Britons, etc.), against 
the local Catholic population and its self-defence units. Under the pretext of 
confiscating arms from the population and billeting, soldiers committed all 
kinds of outrages, torturing and murdering Irish people who fell into their 
hands and burning down their homes. Many Catholic peasants were evicted 
from Ulster after receiving threatening notes reading: "Go to the devil or 
Connaught". p. 159 
191 A reference to the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 (see Note 219), leading to 
the influx of cheap corn to England and creating conditions which, from the 
point of view of the landlords and the bourgeoisie, favoured the development 
of stock-breeding in Ireland. p. 161 

=====第522页=====
490 Notes 
92 G. Boate, Natural History of  Ireland,  London, 1652. Engels, like Wakefield, gives 
an earlier date of publication. p. 162 
93 The reference is to England's war against Napoleonic France and the European 
countries dependent on her (in 1812 England fought Napoleon in alliance with 
Russia, Spain and Portugal), and to the Anglo-American War which broke out 
that year. It was won by the United States in 1814. p. 165 
94 The third volume of this publication, concluding the collection Senchus Mor 
(The Great Book of Old), appeared in 1873, after Engels had written the 
passage in this book. Senchus Mor is one of the most detailed records of the 
laws of the Brehons, guardians of and commentators on laws and customs in 
Celtic Ireland (for Engels' description of Senchus Mor, see his letters to Marx of 
April 29, May 8 and 10, 1870, present edition, Vol. 43). p. 165 
95 Engels refers to the collection Rerum Hibernicarum Scriptores (Ancient Annalists 
of Ireland), published in four volumes in 1814, 1825 and 1826 by Charles 
O'Conor in Buckingham. 
The collection contains the first publications of part of the Annales IV 
Magistrorum, the Annales Tigernachi, which were written between the eleventh 
and fifteenth centuries and described events from the close of the third 
century, the Annales Ultonienses (compiled by various chroniclers between the 
fifteenth and seventeenth centuries and describing events beginning with the 
mid-fifth century), and the Annales Inisfalensis (generally assumed to have been 
compiled from 1215 onwards, and treating events up to 1318), all of them 
mentioned by Engels, and others. p. 168 
96 Arthur O'Connor was one of the few leaders of the United Irishmen Society, 
which prepared the 1798 uprising (see Note 229), who managed to escape 
execution. After his release from gaol in 1803, O'Connor was banished to 
France, where he stayed to the end of his days. p. 169 
97 Saerrath and Daerrath—two forms of tenancy in old Ireland, whereby the 
tenant, generally an ordinary member of the community, was given the use of 
stock and later also of land by the chief of the clan or tribe and by other 
representatives of the tribal élite. They entailed partial loss of personal freedom 
(especially under Daerrath) and various onerous duties. These forms of 
dependence were typical of ilie period of the disintegration of tribal relations 
in ancient Irish society and of the early stages of feudalisation. At this time 
land tenure was still mainly communal, while stock and farming implements 
were already private property, and private landownership already existed in 
embryonic form. 
Engels' "see below" refers to the unfinished part of this chapter, p. 172 
98 The works of Giraldus Cambrensis on Ireland, Topographia Hibernica and 
Expugnatio Hibernica (in Engels' manuscript Hibernia Expugnata), were included 
in the fifth volume of the Giraldi Cambrensis Opera, mentioned by Engels, the 
publication of which was begun by J. S. Brewer. The fifth volume, published 
by J. F. Dimock, appeared in 1867. p. 173 
99 A reference to the following works: M. Hanmer, The Chronicle of  Ireland; 
E. Campion, History of  Ireland;  E. Spenser, A View of the State of  Ireland, 
published in Ancient Irish Histories. The Works of Spencer, Campion, Hanmer and 
Marleburrough, vols. I-II, Dublin, 1809, and also to: John Davies, Historical 
Tracts, London, 1786; W. Camden, Britannia, London, 1722 (the first edition 
of this book was published in 1586 in Latin; later English translations 

=====第523页=====
Notes 491 
appeared); F. Moryson, An Itinerary Containing Ten Years Travels through the 
Twelve Dominions of Germany, Bohmerland, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Denmark,-
Poland,  Italy, Turkey, France, England, Scotland and  Ireland,  London, 1617. 
p. 173 
200 Huxley spoke of this in a public lecture in Manchester on January 9, 1870. A 
detailed account of the lecture was published in the Manchester Examiner and 
The Times on January 12, 1870 under the heading "Professor Huxley on 
Political Ethnology" (see also Engels' letter of March 9, 1870 to Marx, present 
edition. Vol. 43). p. 174 
201 See Note 180. p. 176 
202 The reference is to the following medieval works: Claudianus, De IV consulatu 
Honorii Augusti panegiricus; Isidorus Hispalensis, Etymologiarum libri XX; Beda 
Venerabilis, Historiae Ecclesiasticae libri quinque; Anonymus Ravenatis, De 
Geographiae libri V; Eginhard, Vita et gesta Karoli Magni; Alfred the Great, 
Anglo-Saxon Version of the Historian Orosius. In all probability Engels used 
extracts from the above-mentioned works contained in K. Zeuss, Die Deutschen 
und die Nachbarstaemme. p. 177 
2()3 Triads—medieval Welsh works written in the form characteristic of the poetry 
of the ancient Celts of Wales, with persons, things, events, etc., arranged in sets 
of three. As regards their content, the Triads are subdivided into historical, 
theological, judicial, poetical and ethical. The early Triads were composed not 
later than the tenth century, but the extant manuscripts of these works date 
back to the period from the twelfth to the fifteenth century. p. 177 
204 Alexandrian Neoplatonic school—a trend in ancient philosophy originating in the 
third century A.D. in Alexandria during the decline of the Roman Empire. 
The source of Neoplatonism was Plato's idealism and the idealistic aspect of 
Aristotle's teaching, interpreted in a mystical spirit by the Neoplatonic 
philosophers. In the fifth century A.D. an unknown adherent of this school, 
who attempted to combine the Christian doctrine with Neoplatonism, signed his 
works with the name of Dionysius the Areopagite, the first Christian Bishop of 
Athens. p. 178 
205 Haraldsaga was written early in the thirteenth century by the Icelandic poet 
and chronicler Snorri Sturluson and describes the life and exploits of the 
Norwegian King Harald (the ninth-tenth centuries), founder of the Harfagr 
(Fair hair) dynasty. It is part of Snorri Sturluson's book Heimskringla covering 
the history of the Norwegian kings from ancient times to the twelfth century. 
p. 179 
20(> Krâkurnâl (Song of Krâka) — a medieval Scandinavian poem, composed as the 
death-song of Ragnar Lodbrôk (ninth century), a Danish Viking taken prisoner 
and put to death by Ella, King of Northumberland. According to the legend, 
Krâka, Ragnar's wife, sang the song to her children to inspire them with the 
desire to avenge their father's death. Engels used the text of the song as given 
in the reader: F. E. Ch. Dietrich, Altnordisches Lesebuch, Leipzig, 1864, S. 73-80. 
p. 180 
207 Njßl' s Saga —an Icelandic saga which, according to the latest research, was 
recorded at the end of the thirteenth century from oral tradition and ancient 
written documents. The central theme is the life story of Gunnar, an Icelandic 
Hawding (a member of the clan nobility), and his friend Bond Njâl (a free 
community member), an expert and commentator on ancient customs and laws. 

=====第524页=====
492 Notes 
The saga tells of the battle of the Norsemen against the Irish King Brian Boru, 
and is an authentic source for the study of a major event in Irish history—the 
Irish victory over the Norse invaders in 1014 at the battle 
of Clontarf.  Engels quoted the excerpt from the Njâl's Saga according to the 
text of the reader: F. E. Ch. Dietrich, Altnordisches Lesebuch, Leipzig, 1864, 
S. 103-08. p. 181 
208 Contemporary scholars transcribe the name of King Brian's residence in 
Munster as Kankaraborg, or Kincora. p. 184 
209 The Cimbri and Teutons, Germanic tribes, invaded Southern Gaul and 
Northern Italy in 113-101 B.C. In 101 B.C. these tribes were routed by the 
Roman General Marius at the battle of Vercelli (Northern Italy). The Battle of 
the Romans against the Cimbri and Teutons was described by Plutarch in his 
biography of Marius, by Tacitus in Germania, and by other ancient historians. 
p. 184 
210 Beowulf—a poem about the legendary hero Beowulf is supposed to have been 
recorded in the eighth century and ranks as the finest known work of 
Anglo-Saxon poetry. It is based on folk sagas about the life of the Germanic 
tribes in the early sixth century. 
Hildebrandslied —an eighth-century German epic poem, of which only a few 
passages have survived. 
Engels refers to the so-called Elder Edda and the Younger Edda. The Elder 
JLdda is a collection of epic poems and songs about the lives and deeds of the 
Scandinavian gods and heroes. It has come down to us in a manuscript dating 
back to the thirteenth century, discovered in 1643 by the Icelandic Bishop 
Sveinsson. The Younger Edda is a treatise on pagan mythology and the poetry 
of the scalds compiled in the early thirteenth century by Snorri Sturlusson. 
p. 185 
211 Leges barbarorum —records of the common law of various Germanic tribes, 
compiled between the fifth and ninth centuries. p. 185 
212 Engels' manuscript breaks off here. The extant plan for the second chapter 
("Old Ireland") shows that Engels also intended to describe the clan system, 
landed property and the laws of old Ireland (see this volume, p. 307). 
p. 185 
213 These notes were written by Marx in English as a conspectus for a speech to be 
made at a meeting of the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association on November 26, 1867, when the discussion on the Irish question, 
begun on November 19, was to be continued. In view of the immense 
disturbance caused by the execution of the three condemned Fenians (Larkin, 
Allen and O'Brien) on November 23, Marx considered this speech as no longer 
suitable. Feeling that at such a moment it would be more appropriate for one 
of the English members of the General Council to express sympathy with the 
Irish revolutionaries, he gave the floor to Peter Fox, who was known for his 
support of the Irish national liberation movement. Marx described the meeting 
in great detail in his letter of November 30, 1867 to Engels (see present edition, 
Vol. 42). Later, preparing for a report on the Irish question in the German 
Workers' Educational Society in London (see this volume, p. 194), Marx used 
this draft and the materials he had compiled for it. 
These notes were first published in English in The General Council of the 
First International. 1866-1868, Moscow, 1964. Inaccuracies in the figures have 
been corrected. p. 189 

=====第525页=====
Notes 493 
A reference to the Act of Settlement adopted by the Long Parliament on August 
12, 1652, during the English bourgeois revolution, following the suppression of 
the 1641-52 national liberation uprising in Ireland. The Act legalised the reign 
of terror and violence established by the English colonialists in Ireland and 
sanctioned the wholesale plunder of Irish lands in favour of the English 
bourgeoisie and the "new" bourgeoisified nobility. This Act declared the 
majority of Ireland's indigenous population "guilty of revolt". Even those 
Irishmen who had not been directly involved in the uprising but had failed to 
show the proper "loyalty" to the English Parliament were considered "guilty". 
Those declared "guilty" were classified into categories, depending on the 
extent of their involvement in the uprising, and subjected to brutal reprisals: 
execution, deportation, confiscation of property. On September 26, 1653, the 
Act of Settlement was supplemented by the Act of Satisfaction which prescribed 
the forcible resettlement of Irish people whose property had been confiscated 
to the barren province of Connaught and to County Clare (see Note 190) and 
defined the procedure for allotting the confiscated land to the creditors of 
Parliament, the officers and men of the English army. Both Acts consolidated 
and extended the economic foundations of English landlordism in Ireland. 
p. 189 
See Note 142. p. 189 
Marx uses an appraisal of the Fenian movement given in Queen Victoria's 
address to Parliament of November 19, 1867 (see The Times, No. 25973, 
November 20, 1867) to describe the brutal policy of the English Government 
towards the Irish Fenians. p. 189 
During an abortive coup in Boulogne in 1840, Prince Louis Bonaparte 
wounded an officer of the government troops. This crime did not prevent the 
English Government from obsequiously recognising the Bonapartist regime 
after the usurpation of power by Louis Bonaparte in 1851. In 1867, however, 
three Irish Fenians were sent to the gallows purely on suspicion of having 
made an attempt on the life of a policeman while attacking a prison van in 
Manchester. p. 189 
The corn-acre (conacre) system—the subletting to the poorest peasants of small 
plots (up to half an acre) by middlemen on extortionate terms, which was 
extensively practised in Ireland. The term came into use in the eighteenth 
century, after the adoption of a law decreeing that corn be sown on these 
small-holdings. p. 191 
The repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 led to a reduction in grain prices due to 
the fall in the demand for Irish grain in England, and the rise in the demand 
for wool and other stock-breeding products from Ireland (see Marx's letter to 
Engels of November 30, 1867, present edition, Vol. 42). This made landlords 
and rich farmers switch to extensive pasture farming which resulted in the 
mass eviction of small Irish tenants from the land ("clearing of estates") in the 
mid-nineteenth century (see also this volume, pp. 201-03). p. 192 
A reference to the forcible eviction from the land of the population of the 
Scottish Highlands (the Gaels) by the Anglo-Scottish nobility in the eighteenth 
and the beginning of the nineteenth centuries, a process similar to the 
"clearing of estates" in Ireland. Marx describes this process in Chapter XXVII 
of Volume I of Capital and in his article "Elections.— Financial Clouds.—The 
Duchess of Sutherland and Slavery" (present edition, Vol. 11). p. 192 

=====第526页=====
494 Notes 
221 Roundheads—the nickname given by the Royalists to the Parliamentarians 
during the seventeenth-century English revolution because of their puritan 
custom of cutting their hair close, while the cavaliers—supporters of the 
King—wore their hair long. p. 192 
222 See Note 123. p. 192 
223 Early in the nineteenth century the Irish national movement developed under 
the slogan of the abolition of political restrictions for the Catholic population 
and the granting to Catholics (who formed the majority of the population) of 
the right to stand for election to Parliament. In 1829 the British Parliament, 
under pressure of a mass movement in Ireland, lifted some of the restrictions 
(Catholic Relief Act). Catholics were granted the rights to be elected to 
Parliament and hold certain government posts. Simultaneously the property 
qualification for electors was increased fivefold. With the aid of this manoeuvre 
the British ruling classes hoped to win over to their side the upper crust of the 
Irish bourgeoisie and Catholic landowners and thus split the Irish national 
movement. p. 192 
224 In the 1820s the demand for the repeal of the Union became the most popular 
slogan of the Irish national liberation movement. In 1840 a Repeal Association 
was founded whose leader, Daniel O'Connell, stood for a compromise with the 
English ruling circles and reduced the programme of the movement to the 
demand for autonomy and other political concessions. In the mid-forties the 
supporters of the liberation of Ireland by revolutionary methods, up to and 
including armed uprising against English rule (Young Ireland—a revolutionary 
patriotic society), gained ground in the Repeal Association. The differences 
between O'Connell and those advocating the use of "physical force" led to a 
split in the Association and the formation of the more radical Irish 
Confederation (the beginning of 1847). Its Left, revolutionary wing headed the 
national liberation movement and became the target of severe reprisals in 1848. 
Eventually, the Repeal Association broke up completely. p. 193 
225 Marx refers to France's colonial wars in Algeria which began in the 1830s and 
lasted (with intervals) for 40 years. p. 193 
226 A reference to the reactionary foreign policy pursued by Castlereagh, the 
British Foreign Secretary (1812-22). He supported the efforts of the Holy 
Alliance to strengthen the reactionary feudal monarchies in Europe, notably 
the measures against the revolutionary movements in Italy and Spain. The 
counter-revolutionary Tory policy of Castlereagh was continued by Palmerston, 
the Whig leader, who relied on the support of the Right wing of the party. He, 
however, masked the real nature of this policy with liberal phrases and 
hypocritical expressions of sympathy with the oppressed peoples. Marx showed 
in his pamphlet Lord Palmerston (see present edition, Vol. 12) that, as Foreign 
Secretary, Palmerston played an ignoble role with regard to the Polish struggle for 
independence during the general uprising of 1830-31 and the uprising in the free 
city of Cracow in 1846. While inciting the Poles to action by his false promises of 
assistance, Palmerston sanctioned the suppression <>f the Polish movement by 
Tsarist Russia, Austria and Prussia. p. 193 
227 Marx refers to an error which the leadership of the Reform League (see 
Note 39) committed by refusing to give any real support to the Irish national 
liberation movement, although many of the League's rank-and-file members 
expressed sympathy with it. The meeting of the League's Council on 
November 1, 1867 adopted a resolution condemning Fenianism, tabled by 

=====第527页=====
Notes 495 
bourgeois radicals. When the Irish question came up for discussion in the 
General Council of the International in November 1867, the speeches were 
spearheaded against this chauvinistic and anti-revolutionary position of the 
Reform League and its supporters among the liberal trade unionists, p. 193 
This outline is a draft conspectus for a report on the Irish question that Marx 
was to make at a meeting of the German Workers' Educational Society in 
London on December 16, 1867. "Yesterday I gave a IV2 hour lecture on 
Ireland at our German Workers' Society (though a further 3 German workers' 
associations were represented, about 100 people in all)," Marx wrote to Engels 
on December 17 (see present edition, Vol. 42). Some members of the General 
Council of the International also attended the meeting. Eccarius, a Council 
member who attached great importance to this report, which explained the 
attitude of the General Council towards the Irish national liberation movement, 
took notes in order to prepare them for publication (for Eccarius' record of 
Marx's report see this volume, pp. 317-19). A copy of these notes was sent to 
Johann Philipp Becker, the editor of Der Vorbote, but they were not published. 
The outline was written by Marx both in German and English. English 
words used by Marx are set in small caps. Longer passages written in English in 
the original are placed in asterisks. German words and sentences occurring in the 
passages written by Marx in English are, with a few exceptions, not indicated, so as 
to avoid numerous footnotes. 
The outline was first published in English in Marx and Engels, Ireland and 
the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. 
On the German Workers' Educational Society in London see Note 50. p. 194 
A reference to the three biggest national liberation uprisings in Ireland. 
The 1641-52 uprising was provoked by the colonialist policy which the 
English absolute monarchy pursued in Ireland and which was continued during 
the seventeenth-century English Revolution by the English bourgeoisie and the 
"new" nobility. The majority of the insurgents were Irish peasants led by.the 
expropriated clan chiefs and the Catholic clergy. The Anglo-Irish nobility, 
descendants of the first English conquerors who had become, related to the 
Irish clan élite and adopted many Irish customs and habits, also participated in 
the uprising. In October 1642, the insurgents formed the Irish Confederation 
in Kilkenny. A struggle went on within it between the indigenous Irish, who 
stood for Ireland's independence and action both against the Long Parliament 
and the English Royalists, and the Anglo-Irish aristocrats, who endeavoured to 
come to terms with Charles I on condition that they were allowed to keep their 
estates and receive a guarantee of freedom of worship for Catholics. The latter 
gained the upper hand and a treaty was signed with a representative of 
Charles I. After the defeat of the Royalists in England, Oliver Cromwell, the head 
of the new bourgeois republic, organised an expedition to Ireland on the pretext 
of suppressing a Royalist revolt there but in fact with the aim of reducing it to 
colonial submission and plundering the land. (He hoped that by confiscating Irish 
lands he would solve the problem of paying the creditors of the republic, the 
officers and men of the army.) In 1649-52, the Irish uprising was brutally 
suppressed; the garrisons and population of entire towns were destroyed, the 
Irish were sold en masse into slavery in the West Indies, and Irish lands were 
confiscated and handed over to new English landlords. These actions by Cromwell 
and his successors did much to prepare the ground for the restoration of the 
monarchy in England in 1660. 
The 1689-91 uprising followed in the wake of the 1688-89 coup d'état in 
England (known as the Glorious Revolution), involving the overthrow of 
18-733 

=====第528页=====
496 Notes 
James II and the establishment of a bourgeois-aristocratic constitutional 
monarchy in England under William III of Orange. The Catholic nobility in 
Ireland, supported by the masses who were dissatisfied with the colonial 
regime, rose against William. Under the banner of defence of the Stuarts the 
insurgents fought for the abolition of Ireland's political and religious inequality 
and the return of the confiscated estates. James II, who had taken refuge in 
Ireland and was endeavouring to use the Irish movement to regain the crown, 
became its official head and recognised the demands of the Irish people. But 
the differences between the reactionary Jacobites and the Irish patriots 
weakened the insurgents. Despite their stubborn resistance, they were finally 
defeated. 
The 1798 uprising was the result of the upsurge of national sentiments in 
Ireland, caused by the growth of the liberation movement and the impact of 
the American and French bourgeois revolutions at the end of the eighteenth 
century. It was prepared by Irish bourgeois revolutionaries (Theobald Wolfe 
Tone, Edward Fitzgerald and others), who in 1791 founded a patriotic society, 
"The United Irishmen", in Belfast (the chief town' of the Northern Irish 
province of Ulster) and proclaimed a fight for an independent Irish republic. 
On the eve of the uprising, however, most of the society's leaders were tracked 
down by government spies and arrested. The uprising broke out on May 23 and 
lasted until June 17, 1798. It flared up in a number of counties in 
South-Eastern and Northern Ireland and was particularly strong in County 
Wexford. The majority of the insurgents were peasants and urban poor. In 
August and September 1798, after the landing of a French force in support of 
the Irish patriots, the uprising spread to a number of places in Connaught. 
The English authorities launched savage reprisals against the rebels (almost all 
the leaders were executed) and passed the Act of Anglo-Irish Union (see 
Note 123). p. 194 
230 About 1155 Pope Adrian IV issued a Bull which conferred on the English King 
Henry II the title of Supreme Ruler of Ireland in exchange for the promise to 
subject the Irish Church to Rome. Henry II used this "gift" to launch an 
aggressive expedition against Ireland in 1171. 
In 1576, in connection with the exacerbation of relations between Protestant 
England and the Catholic powers, Pope Gregory XIII declared that Queen 
Elizabeth I had forfeited the right to the Irish crown. p. 195 
231 See Note 185. p. 195 
232 The name given in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries to merchants and 
bankers, particularly those from the City of London, who took part in colonial 
plunder and financial speculation. During the English revolution of the 
mid-seventeenth century, "adventurers" loaned Parliament considerable sums 
of money to finance the war against the Royalists in exchange for land 
confiscated in Ireland. Among the "adventurers" were many statesmen, 
members of the gentry, and civil servants. p. 195 
233 The Anglo-Irish Parliament, convoked at the end of the thirteenth century, was 
initially made up of representatives of the big barons and dignitaries of the 
Church of the English colony in Ireland (the Pale). With the extension of the 
power of the English Crown to the entire island (sixteenth-early seventeenth 
centuries), the Parliament became a representative body of the English and 
Anglo-Irish aristocracy under the English Lord Deputy. The competency of 
that Parliament was limited; according to an Act passed by Lord Deputy 
Poynings in 1495, it could be convoked only with the sanction of the Royal 

=====第529页=====
Notes 497 
Privy Council. Under the impact of the growing national liberation movement, 
in the 1780s the English Government was compelled to extend the rights of the 
Irish Parliament (Renunciation Act). In 1801, however, the Irish Parliament 
was abolished under the Act ot Union. p. 195 
™ See Note 214. p. 196 
235 Amalekites—members of a nomadic tribe living in the second millennium B.C. 
on the Sinai. The Amalekite warriors made raids on Palestine and drove the 
population into captivity. At the turn of the tenth century B.C. the Amalekites 
were practically annihilated. p. 196 
23b A reference to the capitulation at Limerick, an agreement signed in October 
1691 between the Irish insurgents and representatives of the English command 
and approved by King William III. The surrender terms were honourable: the 
insurgents were given permission to serve either in foreign armies or in the 
army of William III; the people were promised an amnesty, the preservation of 
their property, suffrage and religious freedom. Several months before the 
Limerick Agreement, similar agreements were concluded during the capitula­
tion of the insurgent garrisons in Galway and other towns. The terms of these 
agreements, however, were soon flagrantly violated by the English authorities. 
p. 196 
237 Absentees—landlords who owned estates in Ireland but lived permanently in 
England. Their estates were managed by realty agents who robbed the Irish 
peasants, or were leased to speculator-middlemen who subleased small plots to 
the peasants. p. 197 
238 p enal Code or Penal Laws—a set of laws passed by the English for Ireland at 
the end of the seventeenth and in the first half of the eighteenth centuries on 
the pretext of a struggle against Catholic conspiracies. These laws deprived the 
indigenous Irish, the majority of whom were Catholics, of all civil and political 
rights.  They limited the right of Catholics to inheritance and to the acquisition 
and alienation of property, introducing the practice of confiscating property 
for petty offences. The Penal Code was used as an instrument for the 
expropriation of the Irish who still owned land. It established unfavourable 
lease terms for Catholic peasants, increasing their dependence on the English 
landlords. The ban on Catholic schools, the severe punishment meted out to 
Catholic priests and other measures were intended to stamp out Irish national 
traditions. The penal laws were abrogated, and then only in part, at the end of 
the eighteenth century under the influence of the growing national liberation 
struggle in Ireland. p. 197 
239 Catholics were officially deprived of voting rights by the Act on the Regulation 
of Elections passed in 1727. Irish Catholics had not enjoyed the right to stand 
for election to Parliament from the end of the seventeenth century, after the 
introduction of an oath to be taken by M.P.s involving the abjuration of 
Catholic dogma. The latter restriction was only lifted in 1829. Voting rights 
were restored to the Catholic population somewhat earlier, in 1793, since the 
English landlords themselves often needed the votes of their Catholic tenants. 
p. 197 
240 Marx refers to a number of concessions which the English Government was 
forced to make to Ireland because of the victory of the American troops at 
Saratoga in October 1777, during the American War of Independence, and the 
reaction to this event in England. The penal laws most hated by the Irishmen 
were abrogated (in 1778 the Government abrogated the law prohibiting the 
18* 

=====第530页=====
498 Notes 
Catholics to rent more than two acres of land from Protestants or to enter into 
commercial or credit agreements with them). However, as before the Catholics 
were deprived of the right to elect M.P.s. p. 198 
241 Freehold—a category of small landownership which had come down from 
medieval England. The freeholder paid the lord a comparatively small rent in 
cash and was allowed to dispose of his land as he saw fit. In Ireland, 
freeholders were mainly English colonists and their descendants. p. 198 
242 See Note 123. p. 198 
243 Marx refers to England's war against Napoleonic France which ended in 1815. 
On the movement for the emancipation of Catholics mentioned by Marx 
further in this passage, see Note 223. p. 198 
244 Cottiers—a category of the rural population consisting of land-hungry or 
landless peasants. In Ireland cottiers rented small plots of land and cottages 
from landlords or real estate agents on extremely onerous terms. Their 
position resembled that of farmhands. p. 200 
245 The Corn Laws, the first of which were passed as early as the fifteenth century, 
imposed high import duties on agricultural products in order to maintain high 
prices for these products on the domestic market. The Corn Laws served the 
interests of the big landowners. The struggle between the industrial bourgeoisie 
and the landed aristocracy over the Corn Laws ended in their repeal in June 
1846.  The repeal of the Corn Laws marked the victory of the industrial 
bourgeoisie whose motto was Free Trade (see also Note 219). p. 200 
246 In February 1835, Daniel O'Connell, the leader of the Irish bourgeois 
nationalists, signed an agreement with representatives of the Whigs according 
to which he was to support them in the House of Commons in return for 
certain concessions; in particular, Irish political leaders were promised posts in 
the administrative apparatus after the Whigs came to office. For his part, 
O'Connell undertook to stop the Repeal of the Union campaign. The 
agreement was negotiated in Lord Lichfield's London house and became 
known as the Lichfield-House Contract. It meant that the liberal circles of the 
Irish bourgeoisie and the medium landowners had reached a compromise with 
the English politicians and had renounced consistent struggle for Ireland's 
independence (see also Note 223). p. 201 
247 See Note 218. p. 203 
248 Marx made these remarks on the Programme and Rules of the International 
Alliance of Socialist Democracy (see Note 55) probably on December 15, 1868, 
the day when the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association discussed the admission of the Alliance into the International and 
instructed Marx to prepare an answer. The remarks were written in the right 
and left margins of a French leaflet containing the Programme and Rules. 
Marx underlined certain words and phrases (in this volume they are set in bold 
type) and in some places drew vertical lines in the margins. (The names of 
Jules Johannard and Eugène Dupont, who had read the Programme and taken 
part in its discussion, were written in the margin by Jung.) The same day Marx 
sent this document to Engels asking for his opinion (see Note 55). Taking into 
account Engels' ideas, Marx drew up a circular letter "The International 
Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democra­
cy" (see this volume, pp. 34-36) which was approved by the General Council on 
December 22, 1868. 

=====第531页=====
i\otes 499 
Marx's comments on the Programme and Rules of the Alliance were first 
published in English in The General Council of the First International. 1868-1870, 
Moscow, 1966. p. 207 
Marx apparently refers to the plans to publish L'Égalité. He was invited to 
contribute to this paper by A. A. Serno-Solovyevich in a letter of November 20, 
1868 which did not mention the new newspaper's title. On December 3, 1868 
Charles Perron wrote to Hermann Jung about steps taken to publish L'Egalité 
and asked Marx, Eccarius and Jung to contribute to it. Eccarius' reply of 
December 2 and Jung's reply of December 6 were published in a special issue 
of L'Egalité on December 16. In addition, the editors published the following 
note:  "Citizen Marx brings it to the notice of the commission that, to his great 
regret, his health and the excessive amount of work make it impossible for him 
to guarantee his participation in the journal. Nevertheless, we hope that from time 
to time this brave champion of the working class will write to the organ of the 
Romance sections in Switzerland." p. 210 
Marx wrote this work in October and November 1869 when preparing for the 
forthcoming debate on the Irish question in the General Council of the 
International (see this volume, p. 83). This is also shown by the extracts taken 
by Marx from the newspaper The Irishman about the movement for the 
amnesty of the Irish political prisoners and the draft resolution on the amnesty 
adopted by the General Council on November 30, 1869. At a later date, 
apparently when looking through Marx's manuscripts after his death, Engels 
attached a separate page with an inscription "Hibernica" and the date "1869" 
to this series of manuscripts. On this basis we may assume that Marx intended 
to use "Extracts and Notes" as preparatory material for a report on Item 2 of 
his plan for the forthcoming discussion in the General Council — the attitude of 
the English working class to the Irish question (see Note 124). Marx's letter to 
Engels of December 10, 1869 (see present edition, Vol. 43) shows that he took 
an interest in developments in Ireland at the close of the eighteenth century 
because he wanted to examirte the characteristics of England's policy in Ireland 
and of the Irish national movement at the time, whose progressive exponents 
demanded that Ireland be granted the status of an independent republic, a 
demand which was just as urgent in the nineteenth century. It was particularly 
important for Marx to show that the cruel treatment of the Irish re­
volutionaries and the subjugation of Ireland by the English authorities had a 
detrimental effect on the English people themselves. 
Marx's work consists of two parts: the main investigation and a supplemen­
tary summary of comprehensive chronological data. Each of the parts is in the 
form of a separate manuscript with the author's pagination. Page 9 of the 
second manuscript is missing. The first manuscript is a rough draft of the main 
investigation with evidence of subsequent editing. On several pages the text is 
written in above lines crossed out by the author or insertions are made on 
pieces of paper pasted to the manuscript. Marx used the following sources for 
his "Extracts and Notes": J. Mitchel, The History of  Ireland,  from the Treaty of 
Limerick to the Present Time, vols. I-II, Dublin, 1869; [J. Ph. Curran,] The 
Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran.  Edited,  with Memoir and 
Historical Notices, by Thomas Davis, Dublin, 1855; G. Ensor, Anti-Union. Ireland 
as She Ought to Be, Newry, 1831, and other material such as the journal Political 
Register, published by the English radical William Cobbett, a number of 
documentary publications (Grattan's speeches, etc.) and historical treatises. 
The work is not a synopsis of these books. Marx selected material according 
to his own plan, showing how he understood the course of Irish history at the 

=====第532页=====
500 Notes 
time considered and its division into periods. This is also clear from the 
structure of both manuscripts and by the way Marx himself divided them into 
sections, paragraphs and items. He very often selects facts from various sources 
or from various sections of the same source (for example, from Thomas Davis' 
"Memoir of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran" and from his 
commentary, or "Historical Notices", to Curran's speeches) and arranges them 
in his own way. The exposition proves that Marx took a creative approach to 
the material. 
Direct quotations from various sources and Marx's own renderings of 
certain passages (also given in small type but without quotation marks) are written 
in English. His own remarks are written both in English (mostly) and German and 
are given in normal type. Passages written in German are indicated in the 
footnotes (separate German words are not indicated). In both manuscripts, there 
are passages indicated by Marx with vertical lines in the margin (these are 
reproduced in this volume). Passages enclosed by Marx in square brackets are 
given in this volume in braces to distinguish them from the editor's insertions in 
square brackets. Words doubly underlined by Marx are given in bold type. 
The known sources quoted or rendered by Marx are referred to either in 
footnotes or in the editorial Notes to the relevant passages. Italics in the 
quotations belong to Marx except where otherwise stated in the footnotes. 
This work was first published in English in Marx and Engels, Ireland and the 
Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1978. p. 212 
231 A reference to the peace treaty concluded by Napoleonic France and her allies 
with England at Amiens on March 27, 1802. It was no more than a short-lived 
armistice. In May 1803 the armed struggle for world supremacy was resumed. 
The change in the royal title under the Peace of Amiens amounted to the final 
and formal repudiation by the English kings of their claims to the French 
throne, claims that dated back to the Hundred Years' War (1337-1453). 
p. 212 
252 Poynings' Law was passed in 1495 by the Parliament convened by Poynings, 
representative of the English Crown in the town or Droheda, in the 
south-eastern part of Ireland conquered by the English. It was repealed in May 
1782 under the impact of the Irish national liberation movement (see this 
volume, p. 225). p. 212 
253 'rhe Privy Council of the Lord Lieutenant (Viceroy) of Ireland consisted of 
high officials who headed various departments of colonial administration. 
p. 212 
254 A reference to the books: W. Molyneux, The Case of Ireland's Being Bound by 
Acts of Parliament in England  Stated,  Dublin, 1698; J. Swift, Drapier's Letters, 
Dublin, 1725, and A Short View of the State of  Ireland,  Dublin, 1727; Ch. Lucas, 
Barber's Letters, Dublin, 1747. (These writers are mentioned by Thomas Davis in 
his "Memoir of... Curran" included in The Speeches of the Right Honorable John 
Philpot Curran, Dublin, 1855, p. XIX.) p. 212 
255 The- Statute of George I mentioned here was promulgated in 1719 and is also 
known as the Declaratory Act (6. George I. An Act for the Better Securing the 
Dependency of the Kingdom of Ireland on the Crown of Great Britain). It was 
repealed during 1782 and 1783 owing to the upsurge of the liberation 
movement in Ireland. p. 212 
256 See notes 232 and 237. p. 215 

=====第533页=====
Notes 501 
257 In the latter half of the eighteenth century Britain strove for greater influence 
over her American colonies. From 1763 onwards, the British Government 
issued a series of edicts restricting both the territorial location of the American 
population and the rights of American states in questions of trade. In 1765 laws 
were issued which provided for a standing army in the colonies and made an 
attempt to introduce direct taxation (Stamp Act). All this caused mass 
anti-British actions among the American population. On March 18, 1766 the 
Stamp Act was repealed but the Declaratory Act was proclaimed instead. It 
confirmed the British Crown's supreme rights over its American colonies and 
repeated, almost verbatim, the Statute of George I concerning Ireland. These 
acts by the British Government provoked the war of the North American 
colonies for independence. p. 215 
258 See Note 238. p. 215 
259 Qn February 6, 1778 the French Government concluded treaties with the 
United States of America. France officially recognised the American Republic, 
promised to defend the independence and sovereignty of the USA, and 
undertook not to lay down her arms until Britain recognised American 
independence. These treaties ensured mutual support for the territorial claims 
of the two countries. At the same time France and the USA concluded the 
Treaty of Amity and Commerce. p. 216 
260 phis  passage from Curran's speech to the Irish Parliament on February 18, 
1792 is quoted from The  Speeches  of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran, Dublin, 
1855,  pp.  140-41.  This book contains Curran's parliamentary speeches 
from November 1783 to May 1797, as well as those he made later in the courts 
and elsewhere in defence of participants in the Irish revolutionary movement 
and in the 1798 uprising. The quoted edition is supplied with "Memoir" 
and "Historical Notices" containing biographical notes on Curran and a 
description of the most important developments of the time. The author was 
Thomas Davis, a prominent Irish democrat, historian and poet, one of the 
leaders of "Young Ireland" (see Note 224). Throughout his work, Marx gives 
either direct quotations or his own rendering of passages both from Curran's 
speeches and from the "Memoir" and "Historical Notices" by Davis. Marx 
regarded this book as the most important source for a study of the political 
history of Ireland in the late eighteenth century and considered Curran himself 
a "great lawyer and the noblest personality". Marx brought this book to the 
attention of the English members of the General Council (see Marx's letter to 
Engels of December 10, 1869, present edition, Vol. 43). p. 216 
261 protestant  ascendancy—a principle employed openly  in  governing Ireland 
between  1691 and 1800  according  to which  the  Protestants, mostly English 
colonists  and  their descendants, enjoyed extensive political, social  and  religious 
privileges, whereas  the  Catholic majority  was  deprived  of all  rights  and had to 
pay tithes  to the  state Anglican Church. This principle  was  expressed most 
brazenly  in the  Penal Code  (see  Note  238)  against  the  Catholics.  p. 216 
262 The recognition of the American colonies' independence and the conclusion of 
the treaties of alliance and commerce on February 6, 1778, involved France, in 
alliance with Spain, in war with Britain (see Note 259). p. 217 
263 xhe principles of armed neutrality proclaimed by the government of 
Catherine II in 1780 were soon recognised by several states as the norm for 
international maritime law. They envisaged freedom of trade between neutral 
and belligerent countries, prohibition of privateering, inviolability of neutral 

=====第534页=====
502 Notes 
cargo carried by enemy vessels and of enemy cargo carried by neutral vessels 
(with the exception of arms smuggling), and refusal to recognise a port under 
blockade if access is not blocked by the enemy navy. The declaration on armed 
neutrality undermined Great Britain's monopoly domination of the seas and 
helped the North American states in their struggle for independence. 
p. 218 
264 Marx borrowed the expression "armed Protestantism of Ireland" from Thomas 
Davis'  "Memoir" in the book J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., p. XIX, to describe 
the Irish Volunteer movement in the late eighteenth century. In his outline of 
the four periods in the Volunteer movement, Marx gives long quotations from 
Davis.  p. 218 
265 The Catholic Committee was founded in the late 1750s. Among its members 
were liberal Catholic landowners, Catholic merchants, manufacturers and 
intellectuals whose aim was to fight for the alleviation and repeal of the penal 
laws against the Catholics. Originally the Catholic Committee took a very 
moderate and loyal stand in regard to the English authorities. But the national 
upsurge at the end of the eighteenth century changed its composition and 
tactics, and radical elements of the Irish bourgeoisie now prevailed in the 
Committee. Its left wing took part in the Volunteer movement and 
subsequently joined the revolutionary Society of United Irishmen. The efforts 
of the Catholic Committee to secure for the Catholics equal rights with the 
Protestants continued in the first decade of the nineteenth century. 
The Whig Club was founded in 1789 in Dublin and the Northern Whig 
Club in 1791 in Belfast. The composition and political tendencies of this 
organisation were diverse. Its Protestant leaders voiced the interests of 
Protestant liberal landlords and the big bourgeoisie. They stood for a 
compromise with the British Government and wanted to keep the national 
movement within strictly constitutional bounds. The committee's radical wing, 
on the contrary, proposed more resolute action and later formed the nucleus of 
the United Irishmen Society. p. 219 
266 f he rest of the section (up to the asterisks), consists of Marx's close rendering 
of passages from Davis' "Memoir" in J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches... (pp. XIX-
XX) and excerpts from this book. p. 219 
267 Marx refers to the struggle for political power among British ruling political 
circles under George III. In 1788, after George Ill's first attack of insanity, the 
Prince of Wales (the future George IV) and his followers believed that the 
Prince would become Regent, but the King quickly recovered, and the Prince, 
who had hoped that the Whigs would help him pay his debts, was rejected by 
the head of the Cabinet, Pitt. In 1806 the latter died and the administration 
actually went over to Fox, a representative of the Whigs. In 1811 George Ill's 
health deteriorated and the question of the Regency was finally settled. 
p. 219 
268 -phe Catholic Relief Act was passed by the Irish Parliament, with the consent of 
the British Government, in April 1793. It abrogated part of the Penal Code. 
Catholic freeholders paying income tax of not less than 40s., were officially 
allowed to vote. The Catholics were granted the right to acquire, sell and 
transfer property by will; they were allowed to enter Dublin University but, as 
before, could not stand for election to Parliament. p. 220 
269 At the beginning of February 1793 Britain officially began a war with the 
French Republic. This war was extremely unpopular in Ireland, and the United 

=====第535页=====
Notes 503 
Irishmen Society issued proclamations calling on the government to conclude 
an honourable peace with France. The English ruling circles launched an 
offensive against the Irish national liberation movement. The Convention, 
Gunpowder and other Acts passed by the Irish Parliament in 1793 effectively 
deprived the Volunteer organisations and the United Irishmen of their legal 
ground. p. 220 
270 Dublin Castle was built by the English conquerors in the thirteenth century and 
became the seat of the English authorities—the Lord Lieutenant (Viceroy) of 
Ireland and the Privy Council (see Note 253), and a stronghold against the 
Irish population. It was a symbol of English colonial rule. p. 222 
271 The full text of the resolution moved by Hussey Burgh reads as follows: "We 
beg to represent to His Majesty that it is not by temporary expedients, but by a 
free trade alone, that this nation is now to be saved from impending ruin." It is 
quoted in the book: J. Mitchel, The History of  Ireland,  Vol. I, p. 127. 
Marx made wide use of the factual information in this book and of the 
quoted texts of speeches and documents, but he hardly ever quoted the 
author's text. Marx must have borrowed from Mitchel's book excerpts from 
some of Grattan's speeches, the text of the resolution adopted by the Volunteer 
Convention at Dungannon and data concerning the correspondence between 
Fitzwilliam and Lord Carlyle (Mitchel, op. cit., Vol. I, chapters XX and 
XXVIII). Information on the Irish uprising of 1798, on the use of Hanoverian 
and other German troops for the suppression of the Irish national movement 
also came from the same source (Mitchel, op. cit., Vol. I, chapters XXVI, 
XXXII and XXXIII). When estimating the policy of the English Prime Minister 
Pitt the Younger, Marx also took some of Mitchel's conclusions into account. 
He gave high praise to Mitchel's activities as a leader of the revolutionary-
democratic trend in the Irish national movement in the 1840s and valued his 
opinion as a historian. p. 222 
272 A Mutiny Act (an Act for Punishing Officers or Soldiers who shall Mutiny or 
Desert Their Majesties' Service) was passed annually by Parliament from 1689 
to 1881. This Act invested the Crown with the authority to have a standing 
army and navy of a certain strength, to introduce rules and regulations in the 
army and navy, to court-martial and to establish a system of punishment for 
mutiny, disobedience of orders, breach of discipline, etc. p. 224 
273 The Methuen Treaty was a trade treaty concluded between England and 
Portugal on December 27, 1703. It was signed by the English diplomat John 
Methuen, hence its name. It opened wide access in Portugal for English 
woollens, in return for which Portugal received the right to export its wines to 
England on favourable terms. p. 224 
274 See Note 142. p. 225 
275 The Declaration was published in a book by J. Mitchel, The History of  Ireland, 
from the Treaty of Limerick to the Present Time, Dublin, 1869, Vol. I, pp. 138-39. 
p. 225 
276 In this section Marx must have taken passages from the speeches of Portland, 
Grattan, Hutchinson and others from The Speeches of the Right Honourable Henry 
Grattan, published in London in 1822-30 in four volumes (the quoted passages 
are from Vol. I, pp. 131-134, 139, 122-23, 129, 138-43), and from the book: 
J. Mitchel, The History of  Ireland,  Vol. I, pp. 144-45. p. 226 

=====第536页=====
504 Notes 
277 George Ill's Speech from the Throne of April 8, 1782 (Marx mistakenly wrote 
April 18) was read by Fox in the House of Commons on April 9. Conveying 
the contents of the speech, Marx apparently drew on J. Mitchel's History of 
Ireland,  Vol. I, p. 144. p. 226 
278 The Court of King's (Queen's) Bench—one of the oldest courts in England. In 
the nineteenth century (up to 1873) it was an independent supreme court for 
criminal and civil cases, competent to review the decisions of lower judicial 
bodies. p. 232 
279 xhe rotten boroughs were sparsely populated constituencies which had retained 
the right to a seat in Parliament from the Middle Ages. In practice the election 
of M.P.s from the rotten boroughs depended on the landlords who controlled 
them. p. 233 
280 See Note 265. p. 236 
281 The text to the end of the section (up to the asterisks) consists of Marx's close 
renderings of passages from Curran's speeches and Davis' "Notices" in The 
Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran, and extracts from the book 
(pp.  53-60, 73-76, 91-103 and 131-36). p. 237 
282 Xhis section contains Marx's close renderings of passages from Curran's 
speeches and Davis' "Notices" in The Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot 
Curran, and extracts from the book (pp. 46-56). p. 239 
283 Xhis section contains Marx's close renderings of Davis' "Notices" and Curran's 
speeches from the book J. Ph. Curran, The Speeches..., and extracts from the 
book (pp. 82-91). p. 241 
284 xhis section contains Marx's close renderings of passages from The Speeches of 
the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran, and quotations from the book 
(pp.  61-65, 68-73 and 76-77). p. 242 
285 See Note 237. p. 242 
286 Right Boys (from the name of an imaginary leader known as Captain Right)—a 
secret peasant society that arose in 1785 in the southern counties of Ireland as 
a spontaneous protest by the Irish peasants against cruel oppression. The Right 
Boys employed the same organisational forms (special ritual, oath of loyalty) 
and the same methods of struggle (threatening letters, raids on estates, terrorist 
acts against landlords, middlemen, tax and tithe collectors, destruction of 
enclosures put up on communal lands, seizure of the harvests grown on 
landlords' fields, etc.) as did the secret peasant societies that appeared in 
various localities of Ireland in the 1760s, such as Whiteboys, Steelhearts and the 
like.  The actions of these societies often developed into local peasant revolts. 
The English authorities resorted to the most cruel punitive measures against 
them. p. 243 
287 In this section Marx renders and quotes passages from Davis' "Notices" in The 
Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran, pp. 103, 128-30. p. 244 
288 See Note 241. p. 245 
289 See Note 265. p. 245 
290 A reference to the final stage of the royalist uprising that flared up in March 
1793 in the Vendée, a department in the west of France. The rebels were mostly 
backward peasants, incited by counter-revolutionary noblemen and priests. The 
English ruling circles supported the Vendée rebels with arms and money. A 

=====第537页=====
Notes 505 
decisive blow was inflicted on them in 1795 by republican troops Under Lazar 
Hoche. Many leaders of the uprising were executed in 1796, but attempts to 
renew it were made in 1799 and in later years. 
A Vendée has become a synonym- for a reactionary uprising. p. 246 
291 The text to the end of the section consists of Marx's close rendering of passages 
from Davis' "Memoir" and "Notices" in The Speeches of the Right Honorable John 
Philpot Curran, and quotations from the book (pp. XX-XXI and 138-42). 
p. 247 
292 rphis section consists of Marx's close renderings of passages from Curran's 
speeches and from Davis' "Memoir" and "Notices" in The Speeches..., and 
quotations from that book (pp. XXI, 154-56). p. 247 
293 See Note 265. p. 247 
294 A reference to the so-called corresponding societies — democratic organisations 
that arose in England and Scotland under the impact of revolutionary events in 
France. A particularly important role was played by the London Correspond­
ing Society founded at the beginning of 1792 with Thomas Hardy, a 
shoemaker, as chairman. The corresponding societies disseminated the ideas of 
the French Revolution, demanded peace with the French Republic and fought 
for democratic reforms in England. The societies existed for a number of years 
despite cruel persecution by the government. p. 248 
295 Dissenters—persons who do not profess the state religion. Here the author 
refers to adherents of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland among the 
descendants of the Scottish colonists who had moved to Northern Ireland, and 
to members of various Protestant sects at variance with the official Anglican 
Church. p. 248 
296 A reference to the convocation of the Volunteer Convention at Dungannon on 
February 15, 1793, where the delegates expressed their readiness to fight for 
the equal rights for the Protestants and Catholics. p. 248 
297 Marx quotes the above-mentioned Declaration and the Address of the Irish 
Jacobins of Belfast to the Public apparently from Davis' commentaries to Curran's 
speeches (see The Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran, Dublin, 1855, 
pp. 208-09). Further, till the end of the section, there follow extracts from Davis' 
"Memoir" and commentaries, and from Curran's speeches (op. cit., 
pp. XXI-XXII, 147-53, 173-74). p. 249 
298 See Note 223. p. 250 
299 Marx refers to the sharp criticism to which the 1793 Convention Act was 
subjected by the English radical writer William Cobbett in the columns of his 
journal Cobbett's Weekly Political Register (see Vol. XIX, 1811, pp. 417-18) and 
to its application in Ireland at the beginning of the nineteenth century. 
p. 251 
300 See  Note 223. p. 252 
301 Defenders—the members of an organisation of Irish Catholics, which emerged 
in the 1780s and 1790s in defence against the terrorist gangs of Protestants 
(yeomen). Many of the Defenders, recruited mainly from among the Irish 
peasants, took part in the national liberation uprising of 1798. 
Ribbonmen—Irish peasants who were united in secret societies and wore a 
green ribbon as an emblem. The Ribbonmen movement was a form of popular 

=====第538页=====
506 Notes 
resistance to the arbitrary rule of the English landlords and the forcible eviction 
of tenants from the land. The Ribbonmen attacked estates and organised 
attempts on the lives of hated landlords and managers. The activities of the 
Ribbonmen had a purely local, decentralised character and they had no 
common programme of action. p. 252 
302 The text below consists of Marx's close renderings of passages from Curran's 
speeches and Davis' "Notices" in The Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot 
Curran, Dublin, 1855 (pp. 190, 196, 211-12, 248-58. 261, 264-85, 315-16) and 
quotations from the book. p. 253 
303 yne expedition under General Hoche was organised by the French Govern­
ment (Directory) on the insistence of Wolfe Tone, a leader of the United 
Irishmen Society, who came to France early in 1796 to obtain military assistance 
for the Irish patriots. He thought the arrival of the French landing force would 
be the signal for a general uprising in Ireland. The flotilla with the landing 
force sailed from Brest in mid-December 1796, but only a few ships reached 
Bantry Bay, the rest either being scattered by storms or sunk by English ships, 
as is stated in Marx's excerpts (see this volume, p. 280). The expedition was a 
failure and, towards the end of December, the surviving ships returned to 
Brest. In spite of this the English authorities waited with apprehension for 
General Hoche to resume landing operations early in 1797. However, fresh 
attempts to land French troops in Ireland were undertaken only later (one 
attempt, in the autumn of 1798, is described below, see pp. 281-82) with very 
weak landing forces, since support for Ireland's fight for independence was a 
subordinate issue in the strategy of the French bourgeois rulers, as compared 
with their plans for conquering colonies in the Middle East and other regions 
(Bonaparte's campaign in Egypt, Syria, etc.). p. 254 
304 See Note 251. p. 256 
305 A reference to the provocative role of Prussian ruling circles during the second 
and third partitions of Poland at the close of the eighteenth century. Secretly 
inciting Polish patriots against Tsarist Russia, the Prussian Government helped 
in the second partition of Polish lands (1793) and in suppressing the uprising 
led by Tadeusz Kosciuszko, which was followed by the third partition of Poland 
(between Prussia, Austria and Russia) and the final liquidation of the Polish 
state (1795). 
The policy of the English Government with respect to Ireland at the close 
of the eighteenth century is compared with Prussia's policy on the Polish 
question in G. Ensor, Anti-Union. Ireland as She Ought to Be, Newry, 1831, p. 85. In 
some sections of the present work Marx made wide use of this Irish journalist's 
accusatory pamphlet. Marx refers to Ensor's pamphlet mainly when he examines 
the concrete situation and methods of enforcing the Union. He also borrows 
historical parallels from Ensor (with the Cromwellian period, with the Union of 
1707 between England and Scotland and with the Swedish-Norwegian Union of 
1814),  plus quotations from speeches made by various statesmen, and passages 
from newspapers and books by Petty, Lawrence, Harris and other authors 
whom Ensor himself often quoted without giving reference to the actual editions. 
p. 258 
306 Here and below, up to the section "Lord Cornwallis' Administration", Marx 
gives rendering of passages from Ensor's book Anti-Union. Ireland as She Ought 
to Be, Newry, 1831, pp. 85-89. p. 258 

=====第539页=====
Notes 507 
307 A reference to the Peace Treaty, which Charles Cornwallis concluded in 1792 
with Tippoo Sahib (or Tippoo Sultan) —ruler of the South-Indian state of 
Mysore, who offered stubborn resistance to English expansion. Under the 
treaty, Mysore lost a considerable part of its territory and had to pay the East 
India Company 33 million rupees. Further attempts by Tippoo Sultan to 
prevent England's conquest of India resulted in a fourth Anglo-Mysore war 
(1799),  in which Tippoo was killed and Mysore became a vassal state, p. 259 
308 The bottom of Marx's manuscript page 46 is left blank with a remark in Marx's 
hand "See continuation p. 47". In turn, part of the text on page 47, repeating 
the foregoing description of Cornwallis' actions against the French landing force 
and Irish insurgents, is deleted with a vertical line. The undeleted text begins with 
a repetition of the sentence, a little longer this time, "Pitt now conceived...". 
p. 261 
309 See Note 186. p. 262 
310 A reference to the unification of England and Scotland into a single state — the 
Kingdom of Great Britain—by the Anglo-Scottish Union of 1707, which 
abolished Scotland's parliament, allowing Scottish deputies several scores of 
seats in the English Parliament. However, the autonomy and rights of the 
Presbyterian Church were retained. The people opposed the Union, seeing it as 
an encroachment on their country's independence. It was, however, enforced 
thanks to the efforts of the Scottish aristocrats, who sought thus to secure their 
privileges, and of the Scottish upper bourgeoisie seeking access to enterprise in 
the colonies and to England's world trade. p. 263 
311 The Swedish-Norwegian Union of 1814 reflected the interests of Sweden's 
ruling classes. By their promises to help in incorporating Norway into the 
Swedish Crown, the governments of certain European countries, including 
England, secured Sweden's participation in the anti-Napoleon coalition of 
1813-14. The annexation was sanctioned by the Vienna Congress (1814-15). 
The Union, however, provided for an autonomous Norwegian Parliament and 
administration. In 1905 the Norwegian Parliament abrogated the Union and 
Norway regained her independence. p. 264 
312 A reference to Pitt's resignation in view of the forthcoming Anglo-French 
negotiations which resulted in the conclusion of the Peace Treaty of Amiens 
(see Note 251). p. 265 
313 Threshers were members of a secret peasant organisation active in the Irish 
countries of Mayo, Leitrim, Slygow and Roscommon in 1806 and 1807. They 
opposed excessive requisitions made by church tithe collectors. The authorities 
meted out cruel punishments to the threshers, many of whom were hanged. 
p. 266 
314 J4 ere anc i elsewhere Marx quotes The Morning Chronicle for June 1828 
from G. Ensor, Anti-Union. Ireland as She Ought to Be, Newry, 1831, p. 31. 
p. 268 
315 This section consists of Marx's close rendering of passages and of quotations 
from Ensor's Anti-Union. Ireland as She Ought to Be, Newry, 1831, pp. 6, 18, 
24-27,  44-45. p. 268 
316 On August 16, 1819 government troops shot down unarmed participants in a 
mass meeting in support of electoral reform at St. Peter's Fields, near 
Manchester. After the "Battle of Peterloo", as this massacre was ironically 

=====第540页=====
508 Notes 
called by analogy with the Battle of Waterloo, Parliament hastened to pass six 
reactionary acts against freedom of the press and assembly ("gagging laws"), 
Castlereagh being one of the initiators of their adoption. p. 268 
317 This and the next section of the manuscript consist of Marx's renderings and 
quotations from Elisor's book Anti-Union..., pp. 51, 54, 56-57. p. 269 
318 See Note 232. p. 269 
319 Brehon—an ancient Irish lawyer or judge; Brehon law—the code of law used in 
Ireland before its occupation by the English. p. 269 
320 A reference to two major uprisings against English rule in Ireland. 
The first uprising started in 1315 when a detachment led by Edward Bruce, 
brother of Robert Bruce, King of Scotland, landed in Ireland shortly after 
routing the army of King Edward II of England. Many Irish clan chiefs joined 
him. However, although the army led by Robert Bruce came to the assistance of 
the Irish insurgents, the uprising was quelled in 1318. 
On the uprising of 1641-52 see Note 229. p. 269 
321 Yhe second part of the work is subdivided in almost the same way as the first. 
The only difference being that here two paragraphs are designated by the 
letter c): "Volunteer Organisation" and "Declaration of Irish Independence", 
whereas in the main part of the work the first of these paragraphs is 
designated by the letter b). p. 270 
322 See Note 240. p. 270 
323 See Note 264. p. 270 
324 See Note 271. p. 271 
325 See Note 270. p. 274 
326 Notes on Goldwin Smith's book Irish History and Irish  Character  (Oxford and 
London, 1861) are to be found in Notebook IV, one of those with excerpts that 
Engels wrote while working on The  History  of Ireland.  Smith's book drew Engels' 
attention not as a source for the study of Irish history, but rather as a specimen 
of the Liberal falsification of this history that reflected the colonialist tendencies 
of the English bourgeoisie. Engels considered refutation of such chauvinistic 
conceptions to be one of his most important tasks, as witnessed by his sharp 
criticism of Smith in this and other articles, in particular by his description of 
this author in The  History .of  Ireland,  Varia on the History  of the Irish  Confiscations, 
as well as in his excerpts from M. O'Conor's History of  the Irish  Catholics...  and 
in his letter to Marx of November 29, 1869 (see present edition, Vol. 43). 
Engels set down these excerpts and critical remarks on Smith's book in 
November 1869. The work consists of two parts: Notebook IV begins with the 
first; the second follows Engels' excerpts from another book on Irish history 
and is entitled: "Goldwin Smith. Conclusion (passages quoted word for word 
and addenda)". Apart from new excerpts referring to the book as a whole, 
Engels quotes entire passages that were merely mentioned in the first part. In 
both parts there are insertions in the margin made by Engels at a later date 
and references to other notebooks with excerpts comparing Smith's views to 
those of other authors and to data obtained from other sources. 
In Engels' manuscript there are direct quotations from Smith's book (and 
from other authors) in the original English and also his own renderings of 
certain passages, also in English (these are given in this volume, like the 
quotations, in brevier but without quotation marks). Engels wrote his own 

=====第541页=====
Notes 509 
remarks mostly in German (the English translation is in great primer) and in 
English (these are in small caps in this volume). Words doubly underlined by 
Engels are printed here in bold face. Italics in the quotations are by Engels. 
The notes were first published in English in Marx and Engels, Ireland and 
the Irish Question, Moscow, 1978. p. 283 
A reference to Engels' excerpts from the book: Matthew O'Conor, The History 
of the Irish Catholics from the Settlement in 1691 with a View of the State of Ireland 
from the Invasion by Henry II to the Revolution, Dublin, 1813, supplemented with 
facts from many other works. Engels' excerpts were published for the first time 
in Russian in 1948 in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. X, under the heading 
"Excerpts on the History of Ireland in the 17th and 18th Centuries". 
p. 283 
Engels refers to the book by J. G. Kohl, Reisen in  Irland,  Vols. I and II, 
Dresden and Leipzig, 1843, excerpts from which he later inserted in the 
notebook of notes on Smith's book. Engels said that the Irish people were still 
in the grip of superstition at the time when Kohl travelled in Ireland. 
"Two year olds" and "three year olds"—names applied to groups of fighters in 
Ireland. It is believed that these names derived from debates about the age of 
steers.  p. 284 
Here and below Engels refers to his excerpts from the book by John Davies, 
Historical Tracts, London, 1786, which he wrote down on separate sheets, 
apparently in order to compare evidence concerning Irish customs as 
interpreted by Smith and other English historians with that taken directly from 
source. Excerpts are made from Davies' main treatise: True Causes Why Ireland 
was never entirely subdued and brought under obedience of the Crown of England until 
the Beginning of his Majesty's happy Reign (the reference is to James I, during 
whose reign this treatise was published, 1612). 
In Engels' opinion, this treatise by Davies was a very important source for 
the study of the Irish medieval history (see his letter to Marx of November 29, 
1869,  present edition, Vol. 43). Consequently, in addition to the excerpts, 
Engels wrote a detailed conspectus of this book (Notebook V) to which he 
refers in his insertions to the Notes on Goldwin Smith's work and in other 
material on the history of Ireland. 
In his excerpts, Engels gave an explanation of such Irish customs as tanistry 
and gavelkind, either by quoting the source or by giving his own rendering. 
Tanistry—a system regulating the inheritance of chieftainship of the Celtic 
clans and septs (tribes) in Ireland. Like many other Irish customs, it was a relic 
of the tribal system. According to this custom, the clan chief's successor was 
appointed during the lifetime of the chief from a definite family in the clan, 
whose members were considered the "eldest and worthiest". 
Gavelkind—a term borrowed from the common law of the inhabitants of 
Kent and applied by English jurists to the Irish rules regulating the passing of 
the lands of a deceased member of the clan or sept into other hands. Ever since 
the time when tribal relations prevailed, land was regarded by the indigenous 
Irish not as private property but as a temporary tenure. Thus, after the death 
of its owner it did not pass to his descendants but was distributed among all 
free male kinsmen, including his sons out of wedlock. Although the lands of 
the chiefs and members of the clan élite were by that time no longer parcelled 
out after their death, they were not regarded as their private property and 
were not inherited by the family but passed to a new owner in accordance with 
the described tanistry principle. p. 284 

=====第542页=====
510 Notes 
330 See Note 230. p. 285 
331 See Note 185. p. 286 
332 See Note 237. p. 286 
333 TYie Wars of the Roses (1455-85) — wars between the feudal Houses of York and 
Lancaster fighting for the throne, the white rose being the badge of the House 
of York, and the red rose that of the House of Lancaster. The wars almost 
completely wiped out the ancient feudal nobility and brought Henry VII to 
power to form a new dynasty, that of the Tudors, who established absolute 
monarchy in England. . p. 286 
334 Yhe Brotherhood of St. George had as its members the thirteen most powerful 
English and Irish feudal lords of the Pale. Edward IV, who feared that the Pale 
would separate from England, hastened to renounce the services of this 
Brotherhood. 
The note in brackets to the effect that the fact mentioned in Thomas Moore's 
The History of  Ireland,  Paris, 1835-46, vols. I-IV (there are excerpts from it in 
Notebook II of Engels' preparatory material for The History of Ireland) is not to 
be found in Engels' Chronology of Ireland was apparently inserted at a later 
date. 
Chronology of  Ireland,  compiled by Engels mainly from Moore's book, is 
contained in Engels' notebook XI of excerpts. The number was entered later. 
Engels may have compiled it in the late spring or early summer of 1870 when 
he began work on his preparatory material for The History of Ireland before, or 
simultaneously with, the writing of its first chapters. Written in German, the 
manuscript was first published in Russian in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. X, 
Moscow, 1948. In English it was first published in Marx and Engels, Ireland and 
the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. p. 287 
335 In 1366, the Parliament in Kilkenny adopted the Statute of Kilkenny—a code of 
prohibitions designed to protect the colonists from the spread of Irish customs 
and habits. Under the threat of confiscating land, the Statute forbade the 
English resident in Ireland to intermarry with the Irish, to appoint Irishmen to 
ecclesiastical posts, and to use their apparel, customs, or language. The English 
law was valid within the territory of the Pale. The adoption of the Statute was 
prompted by the desire of the English authorities to intensify their policy of 
conquest in Ireland and to legalise the inequality of the Irish population in the 
occupied part of the island, as well as to counteract the separatist tendencies of 
the Anglo-Irish nobility, whose strength lay in their ties with the Irish clan 
chiefs. p. 287 
336 In his synopsis of Davies' book (in Notebook V), to which Engels is here 
referring, he accused Smith of misinterpreting the quoted sources. Among 
other things, Davies wrote that indigenous Irishmen accused of murder were 
convicted and fined a specified sum of money in favour of the English King. 
From Davies' text it also followed that one Irish chief's answer concerning the 
sheriff was given in jest, whereas Smith quotes it to prove that the laws on the 
legal privileges of English colonists in Ireland are allegedly fully justified. 
Excerpts from Spenser's book, A View of the State of  Ireland,  to which Engels 
also refers in connection with the Kilkenny Statute, are to be found in 
Notebook VI of his preparatory material. p. 287 
337 Geraldines —an Anglo-Irish aristocratic family that descended from the first 
conquerors of Ireland, the Anglo-Norman nobles from South Wales. In 

=====第543页=====
Notes 511 
Ireland, the Geraldines became related to the clan chiefs and thereby acquired 
considerable connections and influence. At the same time they fought in the 
wars of conquest against the indigenous Irish. From the beginning of the 
fourteenth century, two branches of the Géraldine family—the Earls of 
Desmond and the Earls of Kildare — played a particularly prominent role. Both 
were descendants of Maurice Fitzgerald, the leader of one of the armies of the 
Anglo-Norman barons that invaded Ireland in  1169-71.  p. 288 
338 See Note 189. ' p. 288 
339 " Potemkin villages" — an expression for false, ostentatious prosperity, originating 
from rumours that, when the Russian Empress Catherine II made a trip to the 
South in 1787, her favourite G. A. Potemkin, governor-general of the southern 
provinces of Russia, had sham villages put up all along her route to 
demonstrate the "prosperity" of his region. p. 288 
340 See Note 186. p. 289 
341 Orangemen or Orange Lodges (the Orangeist Order) — named after William III, 
Prince of Orange—an organisation set tip in Ireland in 1795. The English 
authorities, the landlords and Protestant clergy used this organisation to fight 
the Irish national liberation movement. The Order united English and Irish 
elements from all layers of society and systematically incited Protestants against 
the Irish Catholics. The Orangemen had a particularly great influence in 
Northern Ireland, where the majority of the population were Protestants. 
p. 289 
342 Sepoys were native Indian soldiers serving in the British colonial army. They 
made up the core of the popular Indian uprising of 1857-59 (Sepoy mutiny) 
against British colonial rule. p. 289 
343 In this passage Engels exposes the apologetic attempts of Smith and other 
English historians to justify English cruelty in Ireland by references to the 
intolerance and fanaticism characteristic of the whole period of the religious 
wars (including the Thirty Years' War, 1618-48, whose main battleground was 
Germany), and to the persecution of the Protestants in the absolutist Catholic 
states of Europe. p. 289 
344 See Note 236. p. 289 
345 Engels refers to MacGeoghegan's History of  Ireland.  Translated by O'Kelly, 
Dublin, 1844 (originally published in French, in Paris in 1758). John Mitchel's 
History of Ireland was written as a continuation of that book (see Note 250). 
p. 290 
346 See Note 311. p. 291 
347 Major battles in the Hundred Years' War between England and France 
(1337-1453) took place at Crécy in 1346 and at Poitiers in 1356. p. 291 
348 Irishry—the name used from the second half of the fourteenth century to 
distinguish the indigenous population of Ireland from the English settlers. The 
former were mainly Irishmen who lived beyond the Pale and who retained 
their independence, their social order and customs up to the sixteenth century. 
p. 292 
349 See Note 278. p. 293 
350 A reference to the uprising in Ulster that broke out on October 23, 1641, under 
the leadership of Phelim O'Neill and sparked off the Irish people's national 
liberation uprising (see Note 229). p. 293 

=====第544页=====
2 Notes 
Sicilian Vespers—a popular uprising against the French invaders that broke out 
in Palermo on March 30, 1282, during vespers. Inflamed by the cruelty of the 
French soldiers, the uprising spread throughout Sicily. As a result, the French 
army was driven out and the Anjou dynasty, which had ruled the Kingdom of 
Sicily from 1266, was dethroned. p. 294 
In 1853, Parliament adopted a Bill on the encumbered estates in Ireland 
belonging to the Irish nobility. At that time there were many estates in Ireland 
which had been mortgaged and mortgaged again because their owners were 
unable to make ends meet. Moreover, according to English legislation they 
were obliged to help the poor residing on their lands. Under the 1853 Act, 
these estates (the remnants of the Irish landed estates) were to be sold quickly 
to the highest bidder and the proceeds used to pay off creditors. This was one 
of the measures that helped English landlords to take possession of Irish lands 
and use them as pasture. p. 295 
Engels' own title for the preparatory material to his unfinished work on the 
history of Ireland, included in Notebook X, is Varia zur Geschichte der iri­
schen Konfiskationen. J. N. Murphy's  Ireland,  Industrial, Political, and Social, 
London, 1870, of which he made a conspectus in the previous notebook, served 
Engels as the main source for this work. In the Varia, however,, Engels 
endeavoured to disclose and generalise the historical facts relevant to the 
cardinal problem in the history of Anglo-Irish relations, the expropriation of 
the indigenous population of Ireland in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
and of her conversion into a mainstay of English landlordism as a result of the 
plunder of Irish lands by the "new" nobility and bourgeoisie. This process, 
which took place in the period of English absolutism and bourgeois revolution, 
led to the final colonial subjugation of Ireland by bourgeois-aristocratic 
England. 
The pages in Notebook X are divided into two columns. Excerpts from 
Murphy's book are in the left-hand column. The right-hand column was, most 
probably, meant for excerpts from other sources but remained blank (except 
for two lines on one of the pages). However, on the basis of numerous 
references made by Engels to his own notebooks, as well as to works and 
collections of documents mentioned by Murphy, we may assume that Engels 
intended to collect extensive material on this subject from various sources and 
to supplement and, in some cases, verify data given by Murphy with evidence 
from other authors (Thomas Leland, Thomas Carte, John Patrick Prendergast, 
Matthew O'Conor and others). The pages of the notebook were numbered by 
Engels. At the top of each one he wrote the title of the relevant section, which 
sometimes repeated that given on the preceding page, adding the word 
"continued". 
The first page, entitled "15th Century", remained blank. The left-hand 
column is sometimes not entirely filled. Some pages are left blank merely 
reproducing the titles given on the preceding page. 
Varia was written by Engels in German and English. Direct quotations from 
different sources (written by Engels as a rule in English) and Engels' close 
renderings of passages in German or English are given in this volume in 
brevier, while Engels' own remarks, mostly in German, are given in great 
primer. Separate English words, titles, or phrases, occurring in the German text 
are given in small caps. 
The work was published in English for the first time in Marx and Engels, 
Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. p. 297 

=====第545页=====
Notes 513 
4 Fee tail—an estate the use of which is limited to a category of heirs stipulated 
in the grant; in practice it means life tenancy. p. 298 
5 Engels refers to W. Camden's Annals, or the History of Elizabeth. The book was 
first published in Latin (London, 1615); the English translation was also 
published there in 1625-29. Here and below Engels quotes this work according 
to Murphy's  Ireland,  Industrial, Political, and Social. p. 298 
*' In this, passage Engels analyses the anti-Catholic act passed by the Government 
of Elizabeth, given by Murphy on pp. 256-60 of his book. (This act imposed 
fines for non-attendance at a Protestant Church, introduced the Oath of 
Supremacy to the Queen as head of the Anglican Church, making this oath a 
condition of access to government service, to practice at the bar and to 
obtaining documents for the acquisition of land, etc.) Engels describes the act 
of 1560 and similar later acts as penal laws, evidently by analogy with the 
widespread term used to describe the anti-Catholic legislation for Ireland at the 
end of the seventeenth century and in the early half of the eighteenth century 
(see Note 238). p. 299 
7 Engels refers here to his excerpts from J. Davies' Historical Tracts (see Note 
329),  pp. 127, 128, 135, 136. p. 299 
H See Note 329. p. 299 
9 See Note 278. p. 299 
11 See Note 334. p. 299 
1 A reference to the book .by Th. Carte, An History of the Life of James, Duke of 
Ormonde, from His Birth in 1610, to His Death in 1688, vols. I-II, London, 
1735-36. Below Engels refers both to the extracts from this edition in Murphy's 
book and to his excerpts from Carte's work included in Notebook VII of his 
preparatory material for his History of  Ireland.  p. 299 
2 Engels' excerpts in the indicated passage describe in detail the confiscation of 
the lands of Irish clans in the province of Leinster during the reign of James I 
under the pretext of defective titles possessed by clan chiefs. The text of the 
corresponding passage from Carte's book is reproduced in Marx-Engels 
Archives, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948, p. 254, and in Marx and Engels, Ireland and the 
Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971, Note 248. p. -300 
3 Engels refers to the passage in his excerpts from M. O'Conor's History of the 
Irish Catholics, already referred to Chronology of  Ireland.  p. 300 
4 "Graces" — minor concessions "granted" to Irish Catholic lords and gentry by 
Charles I in 1628, after receiving from them large financial subsidies over a 
period of three years. The relevant document granted Irish Catholics certain 
guarantors of title deeds and instituted that only those of less than sixty years' 
duration were to be verified; it replaced the Oath of Supremacy to the King as 
head of the Anglican Church by the Oath of Loyalty in the event of Catholics 
being appointed to office; it permitted them to practise at the bar, etc. 
However, these "graces" were not properly formalised, and very soon 
representatives of the English Crown, in particular the Lord Lieutenant of 
Wentworth (Strafford), began grossly to violate them. p. 301 
5 The Court of High Commission was founded in England in 1559 by Elizabeth I 
to deal with breaches of royal edicts and Acts of Parliament instrumental in 
furthering the Reformation, and with offences against the Church of England. 

=====第546页=====
514 Notes 
It was directed not only against the Catholics but also against the radical 
Protestant sects—the Puritans. p. 301 
366 Tne Star Chamber was founded in England in 1487 by Henry VII as a special 
court for the trial of local barons. Under Elizabeth I it became one of the 
supreme judicial bodies investigating political crimes, a weapon in the ruthless 
struggle against the opponents of absolutism. Like the Court of High 
Commission, it was abolished by the Long Parliament in 1641. 
In Ireland, the introduction by Strafford of similar institutions (one of them 
was called the Castle Chamber because it convened in Dublin Castle, the 
residence of the Lord Deputy) mainly served the purpose of expropriation and 
colonisation. p. 301 
367 Edmund Spenser, A View of the State of  Ireland,  in Ancient Irish Histories, Dublin, 
1809.  In Engels' excerpts from Spenser's book (see Note 336) the following 
passage refers to the Irish clergy: 
"...ye may find there ... gross simony, greedy covetousness, fleshly 
incontinency, careless sloth, and generally all disordered life in the common 
clergyman. And besides ... they do go and live like laymen, follow all kinds of 
husbandry and other worldly affairs as other Irishmen do. They neither read 
. Scriptures, nor preach to the people, nor administer the Communion, but 
baptism they do, ... they take the tithes and offerings and gather what fruit else 
they may of their living, ... and some of them ... pay, as due, tributes and 
shares of their livings to their bishops..." (Spenser, pp. 139-40). Engels added 
the following remark: "All the above, apparently, refers to the Protestant priests of 
that time. " p. 302 
368 A reference to an order given in 1641 by Lords Justices Parsons and Borlase to 
the English Commander with instructions to "wound, kill, slay, and destroy all 
the rebels and their adherents and relievers, and burn, spoil, waste, consume, 
destroy, and demolish all the places, towns, and houses where the rebels were 
or have been relieved or harboured, and all the corn and hay there, and to kill 
and destroy all the men there inhabiting able to bear arms". p. 302 
369 In October 1642, the participants in the Irish uprising of 1641-52 (see Note 
229) formed the Catholic Confederation, a state organisation with its centre in 
Kilkenny and the Supreme Council as a provisional government. A struggle 
went on within the Kilkenny Confederation between the Anglo-Irish nobility 
and the high Catholic clergy, on the one hand, and the more radical elements 
from among the gentry expropriated by the English, and émigré officers who 
had returned to Ireland, on the other hand. While the former strove for 
compromise with Charles I, the latter stood for Ireland's independence and 
resolute action both against the English parliamentary forces and the English 
Royalists. The predominance of aristocrats, their policy of vacillation, their 
treaties with Charles I which put him in control of the armed forces and 
resources of the Confederation — all this weakened the Irish resistance and led 
to the defeat of the uprising. p. 302 
370 Cromwell and his followers (who had defeated the Royalist forces in England, 
proclaimed a republic and beheaded Charles I) organised a punitive expedition 
to Ireland on the pretext of destroying a Royalist stronghold. The true aim of 
the expedition was the colonial subjugation of the country. On August 15, 
1649,  Cromwell's army landed in Ireland and commenced the brutal 
suppression of the Irish rebellion, which was continued by Cromwell's 
successors, the Republican generals. 

=====第547页=====
Notes 515 
Drogheda, an ancient fortress in Eastern Ireland, was besieged by Oliver 
Cromwell on September 3, 1649, and taken by storm on September 12. In 
accordance with the Commander-in-Chief's order to show no mercy to anyone 
caught with arms, the three-thousand-strong Irish garrison was massacred and 
many peaceful citizens were killed. p. 302 
371 Soldiers' debentures—titles to plots of Irish land of definite size. They were given 
to soldiers of the Parliamentary army in lieu of wages. In many cases officers 
and profiteers bought them from the soldiers for a song. p. 303 
372 Engels refers to his excerpts from the book by J. Prendergast, Cromwellian 
Settlement of  Ireland,  London, 1865. In these excerpts, Engels describes the Act 
of Settlement (August 12, 1652) and the Act of Satisfaction (September 26, 
1653) (see Note 214). Both acts legalised the expropriation of the local Irish 
population in favour of the English conquerors after suppression of the 
1641-52 national liberation uprising in Ireland. The English set up a special 
commission in Athlone (which is mentioned by Engels below) to implement the 
second act and compensate Irishmen found only partially guilty of revolt by 
allotting them land in the barren province of Connaught and in Clare County. 
This commission defined the size of the domains to be kept, the other one, at 
Lougry, allotted lands in Connaught and Clare on the instructions of a special 
Committee in Dublin. p. 303 
373 See Note 232. p. 303 
374 Engels refers to his notes from Matthew O'Conor's The History of the Irish 
Catholics, supplemented by excerpts from other sources. In this particular case 
the reference is to the passage dealing with the declaration made in 1660 by 
the government of Charles II at the outset of the Stuart Restoration (on the 
Irish policy of the post-Restoration Stuarts see Note 387). According to that 
declaration the "adventurers" (see Note 232), the officers and men of the 
Parliamentary army retained their possessions in Ireland, while officers of 
Ormonde's Royalist army, who had served under him up to 1649 (hence the 
term "forty-nine officers"; in that year the majority of the defeated English 
Royalists left Ireland and the resistance to Cromwell's troops was continued 
mainly by the Irish rebels), received compensation in the form of those same 
confiscated Irish lands. Indigenous Irishmen, who had fought under the King's 
banner during the Civil War and been deprived of their possessions because of 
it, received practically no compensation. p. 304 
375 Given below are data on the confiscations of Irish lands carried out by William 
III after the suppression of the 1689-91 Irish uprising (see Note 229) and in 
violation of the terms of surrender signed with the insurgents at Limerick (see 
Note 236). p. 305 
376 This plan is part of Engels' vast preparatory material for his History of Ireland 
(see Note 184). It includes Engels' own division of Irish history into periods. 
In English this plan was first published in Marx and Engels, Ireland and the 
Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. p. 307 
377 The plan of Chapter Two and the most significant fragments for Engels' 
History of Ireland comprise part of his preparatory material for this work. 
Chapter Two, "Old Ireland", remained unfinished, but its plan gives an idea of 
the problems Engels wanted to raise. 
In English this plan is published for the first time in this volume. Some 
- fragments were first published in English in Marx and Engels, Ireland and the 
Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. 

=====第548页=====
516 Notes 
In this volume the plan and fragments are printed according to the 
manuscript written mostly in German, and partly in English. English words 
used by Engels are given in small caps. p. 308 
378 Engels refers to the works on the history of ancient Ireland by Ed. Ledwich, a 
well-known Irish archaeologist. p. 308 
379 Coshery—an ancient right, dating back to the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries, of an Irish chief of a tribe or a clan with his retainers to claim bed 
and board at the expense of a dependent. This right was widely exercised 
during festivals. p. 310 
380 A reference to an uprising of the Scottish highlanders in 1745. The rebellion 
was caused by oppression and eviction from the land carried out in the 
interests of the Anglo-Scottish landed aristocracy and bourgeoisie. Part of the 
nobility'in the Scottish Highlands, who supported the claims of the overthrown 
Stuart dynasty to the English Crown (the official aim of the insurgents was to 
enthrone Charles Edward, the grandson of James II), took advantage of the 
discontent among the highlanders. The suppression of the rebellion put an end 
to the clan system in the Scottish Highlands and resulted in more evictions. 
p. 312 
381 The Island of Heligoland (North Sea) was settled in early times by a Germanic 
tribe,  the Frisians. Having become a Danish possession in the eighteenth 
century, it was captured by the English in 1807 and ceded to England in 1814 
by the Treaty of Kiel. p. 312 
382 -phe Prussians defeated the Austrians on July 3, 1866, near the village of 
Sadowa, in the vicinity of the town of Königgrätz in Bohemia (now Hradec 
Kralové). 
On the North-German Confederation see Note 102. p. 312 
383 The name given in Ireland to those who took part in the movement against the 
colonial authorities and landlords in the latter half of the seventeenth and early 
eighteenth centuries. The name was derived from the original meaning of the 
word—a bully, a ruffian. The Tories were mostly peasants, their leaders — 
expropriated Irish noblemen. At the end of the seventeenth century there 
emerged detachments made up of peasants alone, the rapparees. The authorities 
used extremely brutal methods in the fight against the Tories and rapparees. 
Those caught were hanged, drawn and quartered. Informers were rewarded 
generously. In England the nickname Tory was given by the Whigs to their 
opponents — the representatives of the conservative aristocratic circles support­
ing the absolutist claims of the Stuarts, who were restored in 1660. 
On the Penal Laws see Note 238. p. 313 
384 A reference to the trial, held in Dublin at the end of 1865, of the prominent 
Fenians, accused of organising an anti-government plot. The principal 
defendants were O'Leary, Luby, Kickham and O'Donovan Rossa, the publishers 
and editors of The Irish People, the Fenian newspaper suppressed by the police 
on September 15. Many other Fenians were also arrested on denunciation by 
agents provocateurs and traitors. The picked pro-English jury was hostile to the 
Irish rebels. The sentences were extremely severe: twenty years' penal servitude 
to O'Leary and Luby, fifteen years' penal servitude to Kickham and penal 
servitude for life to O'Donovan Rossa. p. 314 
38o xhis record of Marx's speech on the Irish question on December 16, 1867 was 
made by Eccarius (for the outline of this report made by Marx himself see this 

=====第549页=====
Notes 517 
volume, pp. 194-206). It was intended for the journal Der Vorbote  and was sent 
by Friedrich Lessner to Johann Philipp Becker in Switzerland but remained 
unpublished. 
The record of Marx's speech was first published in English in Marx and 
Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. 
p. 317 
386 yjjg Reformation, begun  in  England under King Henry VIII  (Act of 
Supremacy, which declared  the  King  the  head  of the  Church  in place  of the 
Pope,  and  other Acts), was completed under Elizabeth  I (the adoption,  in 1571, 
of the "39  articles"  of the  Anglican Church—a variety  of Protestantism).  The 
introduction  of the  Reformation  to  Catholic Ireland was  a means  of subjecting 
, her to the  English absolute monarchy  and  expropriating  her  population  in 
favour  of the  English colonists  on the  pretext  of struggle against Catholicism. 
p. 317 
387 A reference  to the  Restoration  of the  Stuart dynasty  in England  in 1660.  The 
restored Stuarts (Charles  II and  James  II)  continued  to rule  up to the  Glorious 
Revolution  of  1688-89.  The  Restoration  was the  result  of a  compromise 
between  the  bourgeois élite and the  "new" nobility, which  had  grown rich 
during  the  revolution,  and the  aristocrats supporting  the  Stuarts.  The 
adherents  of the  Stuarts, many  of whom  had  lost their estates  in England, now 
received title  to confiscated Irish lands  in compensation. Only  in rare cases  did 
the representatives  of the new  regime take action  on  complaints  and  petitions 
for the  return  of  property  to  Irish owners,  and  after  the 1665 Act  such-
complaints were  no  longer considered. Thus,  the  sweeping expropriation  of the 
Irish population implemented during  the  English bourgeois revolution  was 
sanctioned  by the  restored monarchy.  p. 317 
388 See Note 238. p. 317 
389 See Note 233. p. 317 
390 See Note 123. p. 318 
391 Marx made these speeches to substantiate his proposal to change the venue of 
the congress and the subsequent withdrawal of the relevant resolution. The 
record of his speeches is reproduced from The Bee-Hive  Newspaper  because it is 
more detailed than in the Minute Book of the General Council. p. 320 
392 See Note 18. p. 320 
393 See Note 4. p. 320 
394 Wilhelm Eichhoff wrote this pamphlet with Marx's active assistance. This  was 
the first work  on the  history  of the  International Working Men's Association. 
Wilhelm Eichhoff conceived  it in the  summer  of 1868, when his brother Albert, 
a publisher, planned  to issue  the  Workers' Calender (Arbeiterkalender)  for 1869. 
Wilhelm Eichhoff proposed that the leading item should be devoted to the history 
of the  establishment, spread  and  activity  of the  International Working Men's 
Association.  On  June  6, 1868 Wilhelm Eichhoff informed Marx  of his intention 
and asked  the  latter  to send  the  necessary material  and  help him  in writing  the 
article.  On  June  27  Marx sent  to Berlin many documents  of the  Association, 
newspaper cuttings and notes  on  the activity  of the International. The day before 
Marx wrote  to Engels: "...I am  writing something  for  Eichhoff.  Tomorrow  I shall 
send  it off" (see  present edition, Vol.  43). In his  reply  of  June  29,  Eichhoff 
thanked Marx  for the  material  and  wrote that  he was  going  to use  Marx's 
manuscript word  for  word  and  supplement  and  expand  it as  advised  by  Marx. 

=====第550页=====
8 Notes 
There is every reason to believe that Marx drew up the thesis and plan that 
determined the work's structure, general tendency and basic conclusions. 
Eichhoff's work grew into a pamphlet because of the abundance of material 
sent by Marx. Eichhoff's letters show that in the course of his work Marx 
answered his numerous questions, gave advice and made suggestions. Some 
sections of the pamphlet include documents of the General Council (the 
Inaugural Address, Rules and Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional 
General Council) or give their contents. Eichhoff used the Minutes of the 
Geneva and Lausanne congresses of the International, addresses of the General 
Council and local sections, Becker's pamphlet Die Internationale Arbeiterassocia-
tion und die Arbeitseinstellung in Genf im Frühjahr 1868, the pamphlet Procès de 
LAssociation Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris published in 1868, 
and extracts from English, German, French and Belgian newspapers on the 
activity of local sections of the International. A number of pages in the 
pamphlet contain Marx's own material which he subsequently used elsewhere. 
Thus,  the description of the Charleroi events, the information about an 
incident with the Geneva Congress documents on the French frontier and talks 
of Minister Rouher with the delegate of the Paris Committee of the 
International Working Men's Association were partially included by Marx in 
the Fourth Annual Report of the General Council (see this volume, pp. 12-17). 
Marx presumably wrote the section about the political activity of the General 
Council, the list of periodicals of the Association, etc. From July 12 to 22, 1868 
Marx edited the pamphlet and read the proofs. On July 29 a specimen copy of 
the pamphlet was sent to Marx in London, and the entire edition was printed 
in August 1868. Copies were also sent to Engels, Liebknecht, Becker, Lessner, 
Kugelmann, to the General Council, the German Workers' Educational Society 
in London, and others. p. 322 
In 1824, under public pressure, the British Parliament lifted the ban on the 
trade unions. In 1825, however, it passed a Bill on workers' combinations, 
which, while confirming the raising of the ban on trade unions, greatly 
restricted their activity. In particular any agitation for workers to join unions 
and take part in strikes was regarded as compulsion and violence and punished 
as a crime. p. 323 
The Statutes submitted by Luigi Wolff to the Sub-Committee on October 8, 
1864 were an English translation entitled Fraternal Bond Between the Italian 
Workmen's Associations, which had been published in // Giornale dette Associazioni 
Operaie on July 31, 1864 and adopted by a congress of Italian pro-Mazzini 
working men's associations, held in Naples at the end of October. By 
submitting these Statutes, written from bourgeois-democratic positions, to the 
International Working Men's Association, Mazzini and his followers sought to 
spread their influence on it. p. 323 
At the beginning of April 1864 Garibaldi made a fund-raising Journey to 
England to finance an expedition ' against Austrian rule in Venice. Garibaldi 
hoped to get support from English ruling circles. The people gave the Italian 
national hero an enthusiastic welcome. At first the British Goverrvtoent treated 
Garibaldi as an honoured guest. However, the discontent of the =$ij>gilish ruling 
circles was aroused by his meeting with Mazzini, who was living in London as a 
political emigrant, and his speeches in defence of the Polish insurgents. 
Garibaldi left England at the end of April. p. 323 

=====第551页=====
Notes 519 
398 Eichhoff's pamphlet included the programme documents of the Internation­
al— Inaugural Address and Rules. They were given in a new and highly 
accurate translation made by Eichhoff and edited by Marx. This helped to 
familiarise more people in Germany with these documents. Eichhoff translated 
the Address from the pamphlet Address and Provisional Rules of the Working 
Men's International Association published in London in 1864. Eichhoff's 
translation was later reprinted in a number of German works about the 
International. 
Here, the text of the Address is reproduced from the 1864 English edition, 
with an account of the changes in Eichhoff's German translation. The most 
significant discrepancies are indicated in footnotes. p. 324 
399 Apparently a reference to the articles "The Trade and Navigation Returns" 
and "Pauperism.—July 1850 and 1849" published in The Economist, Vol. VIII, 
No. 363, August 10, 1850. p. 324 
400 Garotters —highway robbers who strangled their victims. In the early 1860s the 
practice was so widespread in London that it was the subject of a special debate 
in Parliament. p. 325 
401 See Note 90. p. 325 
402 The  passage quoted by Marx from Gladstone's speech of April 16, 1863 
appeared in nearly all the London newspaper reports of this parliamentary 
session (The Times, The Morning Star, The Daily Telegraph, April 17, 1863), but 
was omitted in Hansard's semi-official report of parliamentary debates in which 
the text was corrected by the speakers themselves. The German bourgeois 
economist Brentano used this as a pretext for accusing Marx of unscrupulous 
misquotation. Marx replied to this libel in his letters to the Volksstaat editors 
written on May 23 and July 28, 1872 (see present edition, Vol. 23). 
After Marx's death the same accusation was made in November 1883 by the 
British bourgeois economist Sadley Taylor. 
This accusation was refuted by Eleanor Marx in two letters to the magazine 
To-Day in February and March 1884 and then by Engels in the preface to the 
fourth German edition of Capital in June 1890 and in the pamphlet Brentano 
contra Marx in 1891 (see present edition, Vol. 27). p. 327 
403 The Ten Hours' Bill, the battle for which had been fought for many years, was 
passed by Parliament in 1847 against a background of the sharply intensified 
contradictions, generated by the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, between the 
landed aristocracy and the industrial bourgeoisie. To revenge themselves on the 
industrial bourgeoisie, a section of Tory M.P.s supported the Bill. Its provisions 
applied only to women and children. Nevertheless, many manufacturers evaded 
it in practice. 
In 1850 Engels wrote two articles on the Ten Hours' Bill (see present 
edition, Vol. 10, pp. 271-76 and 288-300). True, they were written when 
Marx's economic teaching was not yet sufficiently developed, and this can be 
seen in a certain underestimation of the struggle for a shorter working day. 
p. 330 
404 At the 1863 parliamentary session, the Irish deputies led by Thomas Maguire 
demanded legislative measures limiting the irregularities of the landlords and, 
in particular, they demanded that tenants should have the right to receive 
compensation for all their expenditures on a rented plot when the lease 
expired or was terminated. In his speech on June 23 Palmerston called these 

=====第552页=====
520 Notes 
demands "communistic doctrines" and described them as "subversive of all the 
fundamental principles of social order" (The Times, No. 24593, June 24, 1864). 
p. 331 
During the US Civil War the English workers opposed the government's 
attempts to interfere in the war on the side of the Southern slave-holding 
states.  Their massive campaign, which reached its peak at the end of 1861 and 
the beginning of 1862, prevented the reactionaries from drawing Europe into 
the war on the side of the slave-holders and helped considerably to strengthen 
the international solidarity of the workers. p. 332 
The Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's 
Association were approved by the Geneva Congress on September 5 and 8, 
1866.  These Rules were based on the text of the Provisional Rules, written by 
Marx in October 1864 (see present edition, Vol. 20), with certain changes and 
additions. The Administrative Regulations were drawn up by a Congress 
commission of which Eccarius was a member. The German text of the two 
documents was published by Johann Philipp Becker in Der Vorbote, No. 9, 
September 1866. 
In the autumn of 1867 Eccarius, instructed and assisted by Marx, prepared 
a new official edition of the Rules and Administrative Regulations which was 
sanctioned by the General Council on November 5. The pamphlet Rules and 
Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association came off 
the press in London in 1867. 
Eichhoff translated the Rules into German according to this pamphlet, 
omitting the section "Administrative Regulations" (for the full text of the Rules 
see present edition, Vol. 20, Appendices). p. 332 
This and the preceding paragraphs of a declarative character were included by 
Marx in the Preamble to the Provisional Rules on the insistence of other 
members of the Sub-Committee who discussed the document on October 27, 
1864 (see Marx's letter to Engels on November 4, 1864, present edition, Vol. 
42). p. 333 
The London Conference of the International Working Men's Association was held 
from September 25 to 29, 1865. It was convened on the insistence of Marx who 
believed that the International's sections were not strong enough to hold a 
general congress as envisaged by the Provisional Rules. The conference was 
attended by nine delegates from France, Switzerland and Belgium, and the 
Central (General) Council members. On September 28 a meeting (soirée) was 
held in St. Martin's Hall to celebrate the first anniversary of the founding of 
the Association. 
The conference heard the Central Council's reports and reports of local 
sections. The main question discussed was the agenda of the forthcoming congress 
and the order of its convocation. It was decided to hold it in Geneva in May 
1866 (later it was postponed by the Central Council until the beginning of 
September 1866). Despite the Proudhonists, who demanded that the Polish 
question should be excluded from the agenda of the congress and that any 
member of the Association may have the right to take part in it, the conference 
retained the item on the restoration of Poland's independence and recognised 
as competent only elected delegates. The conference also adopted the Council's 
other proposals on the work of the congress. Prepared and conducted under 
Marx's leadership, the London Conference of 1865 played a big role in the 
establishment of the International and in shaping it as an organisation. 
p. 335 

=====第553页=====
Notes 521 
409 See Note 5. p. 335 
410 The Geneva Congress of the International met from September 3 to 8, 1866. It 
was attended by 60 delegates from the Central (General) Council, the different 
sections of the Association and the workers' societies of England, France, 
Germany and Switzerland. The Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional 
Central Council were drawn up by Marx in August 1866, when the final 
preparations were being made for the Geneva Congress. They were written in 
English and then translated into French by Paul Lafargue. 
The Instructions were read at the congress as the General Council's official 
report. The congress became the scene of a heated debate between Marx's 
followers and the Proudhonists, who countered the Instructions with their own 
programme. Jung, Eccarius and other members of the General Council 
managed to have most points of the Instructions adopted as congress 
resolutions. The Proudhonists were only able to have their resolutions passed 
on matters of secondary importance. 
The Geneva Congress approved the Rules (based on the Provisional Rules 
drawn up by Marx) and the Regulations of the International Working Men's 
Association, and marked the end of the International's organisational period. 
Compared with the original English text (see present edition, Vol. 20), 
Eichhoff's German translation of the Instructions contains some differences in 
reading and abridgements. p. 336 
411 The general scheme of statistical inquiry into the condition of the working class 
as proposed by Marx was unanimously accepted by the Geneva Congress. In 
practice, however, the collection of data and their publication in the form of 
the Central Council's reports were hampered by lack of money and negligence 
on the part of local sections. The Lausanne (1867), Brussels (1868) and Basle 
(1869) congresses of the International confirmed the need to carry the Geneva 
Congress resolution on workers' statistics, while the London Conference of 
1871 included point "c" of Section 2 of the Instructions in the Administrative 
Regulations of the Association (see present edition, Vol. 23). p. 338 
412 After the Civil War, the movement for the legislative introduction of an 
eight-hour working day intensified in the USA. Leagues of struggle for an 
eight-hour working day were formed all over the country. At its inaugural 
congress in Baltimore in August 1866, the National Labour Union (see Note 
26) declared the demand for an eight-hour working day to be an indispensable 
condition for the emancipation of labour. p. 338 
413 The Lausanne Congress of the International was held from September 2 to 8, 
1867.  Marx took part in preparing the congress but did not attend it because 
he was busy reading the proofs of Volume I of Capital. He withdrew his 
candidature at the General Council meeting of August 13, 1867. 
Sixty-four delegates from six countries (England, France, Germany, 
Switzerland, Belgium and Italy) were present at the congress. Apart from the 
General Council's report, the congress heard local reports. The latter showed 
that the influence of the International on the proletarian masses had increased 
and that its organisations in different countries had become stronger. The 
Proudhonist-minded delegates at the congress tried to change the Internation­
al's line and programme principles. Despite the General Council's efforts, they 
managed to impose their own agenda on the congress and sought to revise the 
Geneva Congress decisions in a Proudhonist spirit. They carried out a number 
of their resolutions, in particular on the question of co-operation and credit. 
The Proudhonists, however, failed to achieve their main aim. The congress 

=====第554页=====
522 Notes 
confirmed the Geneva resolutions on economic struggle and strikes. In contrast 
to the Proudhonists' demand for abstention from political struggle, the 
Lausanne Congress resolution on political freedom emphasised that the social 
emancipation of workers was inseparably bound up with their political 
emancipation. Nor did the Proudhonists manage to take over the leadership of 
the International. The congress re-elected the General Council in its previous 
composition and retained London as its seat. p. 341. 
414 On the League of Peace and Freedom and the General Council's attitude to its 
congress, see Note 56. 
The Lausanne Congress ignored the General Council's resolution on the 
attitude of the International Working Men's Association towards the League's 
congress (see present edition, Vol. 20, p. 204), and, influenced by petty-
bourgeois elements, it resolved to take part officially in the League's congress. 
The League's congress itself (several members of the General Council and of 
the International attended) revealed a big difference between the proletarian 
and the abstract-pacifist approach to the struggle for peace. Marx's tactics as 
regards the League of Peace and Freedom was fully acknowledged by the 
Brussels Congress of the International in 1868 which opposed the official 
affiliation to the League. p. 342 
415 The Manchester School—a trend in economic thought reflecting the interests of 
the industrial bourgeoisie. It advocated Free Trade and non-interference by the 
state in economic affairs. In the 1840s and 1850s the Free Traders were an 
independent political group; later they constituted the Left wing of the Liberal 
Party. "" p. 343 
416 The conference of trades delegates in Sheffield was held from July 17 to 21, 
1866 and was attended by 138 delegates representing 200,000 organised 
workers. A resolution calling on trade unions to join the International Working 
Men's Association was published in a book, Report of the Conference of Trades' 
Delegates of the United Kingdom, held in Sheffield, on July 17th, 1866, and Four 
Following Days, Sheffield, 1866. p. 344 
417 See Note 38. p. 344 
418 On British trade unions' participation in the general democratic movement for the 
second electoral reform, see Note 39. p. 345 
419 This refers to the reform finally adopted by the British Parliament on August 
15, 1867. The law extended suffrage to people resident in town for a period of 
not less than 12 months and renting houses or flats. In counties the right to 
vote was granted to tenants with an annual income of £12. The extension of 
suffrage increased the number of voters from one to two million. Apart from 
the middle-class strata of town and country, the law also applied to a better-off 
section of the working class. However, the bulk of the toiling people of 
England, as before, had no right to vote. p. 345 
420 The economic crisis of 1866 involved mainly Britain, France and the USA. It 
was preceded by the US Civil War which caused the notorious "cotton famine". 
The latter proved extremely advantageous for big manufacturers and ruinous 
for hundreds of small factory owners. 
The 1866 crisis chiefly affected finances. At the same time the mining and 
iron and steel industries reduced production, railway construction was curtailed 
and so on. p. 345 

=====第555页=====
Notes 523 
421 This refers to the abrogation of the 1791 Le Chapelier law prohibiting workers' 
coalitions and strikes (France, 1864) and to the lifting of the ban on workers' 
coalitions (Belgium, 1867). p. 345 
422 On the strike of weavers and spinners in Roubaix and of bronze-workers in 
Paris,  see Note 14. p. 347 
423 This appraisal of the Geneva strike was given by Marx — see "The Fourth 
Annual Report of the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association" (see this volume, p. 16) and the "Report of the General Council to 
the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association" 
(this volume, pp. 71-72). p. 349 
424 This description of the situation in Belgium was written by Marx — see "The 
Belgian Massacres" (this volume, p. 47). p. 353 
425 This appeal was drawn up by Eccarius on the instructions of the General 
Council (meeting of February 26, 1867) and published in The International 
Courier, No. 8, March 13, 1867. p. 357 
426 See Note 71. p. 359 
427 See Note 18. p. 360 
428 The Secessionists advocated the withdrawal of the Southern States from the 
USA before and during the Civil War of 1861-65. In 1861 the slave-holders 
staged a rebellion and proclaimed the establishment of the Confederate States 
of America. p. 361 
429 The reference is to the Austro-Prussian war of 1866. See Note 133. 
p. 362 
43fl See Note 278. p. 363 
431 See Note 17. p. 363 
432 See Note 13. p. 364 
433 Eichhoff's description of the incident on the French frontier, and the events 
associated with the seizure of the Memorial of the French delegation (see pp. 
365-66) draws on Marx's material, contained in "The Fourth Annual Report of 
the General Council of the International Working Men's Association" (this 
volume, pp. 12-14). p. 364 
434 See Note 16. p. 366 
435 The text to the end of this section (see pp. 365-74) is based on the book Procès 
de l'Association Internationale de Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris (Paris, 1868) and 
consists either of an abridged rendering of the text or direct quotations. On 
interrogation of Tolain see also pp. 12-15 of this book. p. 366 
436 A reference to the conflict between the ruling circles of Prussia and France 
over their claims to the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg early in 1867. It was 
accompanied by military preparations and brash militarist propaganda in both 
states and marked a stage in the preparations for the Franco-Prussian war of 
1870-71. 
On October 17, 1867 Liebknecht criticised, in a speech to the North-
German Reichstag, Bismarck's policy on the Luxembourg question. At the 
General Council meeting of October 22, Marx read some extracts from it. The 
speech was included in the report of this Council meeting published in The 
Bee-Hive, No. 315, October 26, 1867. Marx attached great importance to it and 

=====第556页=====
524 Notes 
instructed Lafargue to translate it into French and send it to France for 
publication in Le Courrier français. p. 368 
437 See Note 167. p. 371 
438 On December 2, 1852 Louis Napoleon Bonaparte was proclaimed Emperor of 
France under the name of Napoleon III, and this led to the fall of the Second 
Republic. The coup d'état which resulted in the establishment of Louis 
Napoleon's dictatorship, had taken place a year earlier, on December 2, 1851. 
p. 374 
439 See Note 5. p. 375 
440 See Note 4. p. 376 
441 See Note 26. p. 377 
442 Grütli Union (Grütli-Verein) — a Swiss reformist organisation founded in 1838 
as an educational association of artisans and workers. Its name emphasised its 
Swiss national character: according to a legend, representatives of three Swiss 
cantons met in 1307 in the Grütli (Rutli) meadow and concluded an alliance on 
a joint struggle against Austrian rule. p. 378 
443 See Note 21. p. 378 
444 The movement for the eight-hour working day began in the USA in the 1840s 
and 1850s. 
In the 1860s the movement acquired a mass character, with leagues of 
struggle for an eight-hour working day and trade unions taking part. The 
National Labour Union (see Note 26) was also active in it. 
Under pressure from the mass movement a law on an eight-hour working 
day was passed in several states by Congress (see Note 27). However, in practice it 
was either not carried out or was violated by the employers. The National Labour 
Union called on the trade unions to resist the employers. p. 380 
445 In the Minutes of the General Council meeting of July 21, 1868, Marx's speech 
is given as follows: "Citizen Marx. Germany. The General Working Men's Union is 
going to do in a round-about way what the Prussian law prohibits to be done 
directly. There is another working men's union in the Southern and Eastern States 
of Germany which has some affiliations in Switzerland; they also are going to join. 
A new paper, Le Réveil, published by Ledru-Rollin's party, makes favourable 
comments upon the International Association" (see The General Council of the First 
International. 1866-1868, Moscow, 1964, p. 228). 
In this volume the record of Marx's speech is reproduced from a more 
detailed report of this Council meeting in The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 353, 
July 25, 1868). p  381 
446 Marx refers to the Union of German Workers' Associations headed by August 
Bebel (see Note 24). In his letter of July 17, 1868, Wilhelm Liebknecht gave 
Marx details of the preparations for a general congress of the Union and of 
his and Bebel's intention to raise there the question of affiliating to the 
International. p. 381 
447 Marx delivered his speech on the consequences of using machinery under 
capitalism at a meeting of the General Council on July 28, 1868 when the 
agenda of the Brussels Congress were discussed (see Note 8). 
This record of Marx's speech was taken down by the General Council's 

=====第557页=====
Notes 525 
Secretary Eccarius and has been preserved in the Minute Book of the General 
Council in the form of clipping from The Bee-Hive, No. 354, August 1, 1868. 
p. 382 
448 See Note 403. p. 382 
449 This refers to the growing poverty in London, particularly in the East End, 
after the 1866 crisis. It was also mentioned at the General Council meeting of 
August 11, 1868, during the debate on the reduction of the working day. 
p. 384 
450 This appeal was written by Friedrich Lessner in connection with the Brussels 
Congress of the International to be held in September 1868 and was sent to 
Marx for review. When returning it to Lessner, Marx wrote on August 11, 
1868:  "Because of spelling mistakes I have entirely rewritten the enclosed 
appeal" (see present edition, Vol. 43). 
Marx's extant manuscript is identical with the text of the appeal as 
published in the London newspaper Hermann, No. 502, August 15, 1868. 
p. 385 
451 Marx delivered this speech at the General Council meeting of August 11, 1868, 
during the debate on the reduction of the working day, the point included in 
the Brussels Congress agenda. 
The record of this speech has survived in the Minute Book of the General 
Council in the form of a clipping pasted in from The Bee-Hive, No. 358, 
August 22, 1868 with corrections by the Secretary, Eccarius. . p. 387 
452 Here the record mistakenly mentions Eccarius. It was Milner, who, in 
opposition to Eccarius, asserted that the reduction of working hours, though 
desirable, would mean lower production. p. 387 
453 Marx refers to Eccarius' substantiation of the harmful effect of the lengthy 
working day on the workers' health which he made at the General Council 
meeting. p. 387 
4M Marx made this speech at the General Council meeting of January 5, 1869 on 
behalf of the Standing Committee which, at its meeting on January 2 discussed 
a letter from the Rouen Section requesting help for the locked-out Rouen 
workers, and put up this question for discussion by the General Council. After 
Marx's speech, the General Council adopted a resolution, which voiced its 
protest at the French manufacturers' actions and called on the English workers to 
give assistance to the Rouen workers. 
This record by Jung has been preserved in the Minute Book of the General 
Council. The speech was also summarised briefly in the Bee-Hive (No. 379, 
January 16, 1869) report of the General Council meeting. 
The full text of Marx's speech was first published in English in The General 
Council of the First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 388 
455 At the General Council meeting of February 23, 1869 Marx set forth in detail 
the "Report on the Miners' Guilds in the Coalfields of Saxony" written by 
Engels in German (see this volume, pp. 39-44). A record of Marx's speech has 
been preserved in the Minute Book of the General Council. The newspaper 
report of it published in this volume is more complete and precise, p. 389 
456 The agenda of the Basle Congress of the International was approved by the 
General Council on June 22, 1869. As far back as February 16, the Council 
instructed the corresponding secretaries to write to all the Continental sections 
and ask them which additional subjects they would like to be brought before 

=====第558页=====
526 Notes 
the congress apart from the three questions already put on the agenda by 
decision of the previous congress, namely Land, Credit and Education. As a 
result, two more items were included in the final text of the agenda: "The 
right to inheritance" introduced by the Geneva Alliance of Socialist Democracy 
and "The influence of trades unions upon the emancipation of the working 
class"  (introduced by the Paris bronze-workers). 
The agenda of the Basle Congress was discussed in the General Council of 
June 29 and July 6, 13 and 20, 1869. 
It was published by the General Council as a leaflet, Fourth Annual Congress 
of the International Working Men's Association, London, 1869, and was also 
printed in a number of English newspapers and in French in L'Egalité, No. 24, 
July 3, 1869. p. 391 
457 Marx spoke twice on landed property during the discussion of the Basle 
Congress programme at the General Council meeting of July 6, 1869 (see this 
volume, p. 391). Although the Brussels Congress of 1868 had adopted a 
resolution by a majority vote in favour of common property, this question was 
again put on the agenda of the Basle Congress on the insistence of a minor 
group of advocates of small private property in land headed by Proudhonist 
Tolain. 
In his first speech Marx replied to the General Council member Milner who 
had spoken in defence of the natural right of man to land when trying to 
substantiate the Brussels Congress resolution on land. 
In his second speech Marx opposed the French anarchist Elisée Reclus who 
was present at the meeting as a guest and who declared that since the peasants 
did not attend the International congresses they should not be cared for. 
By a majority vote the General Council confirmed the correctness of the 
resolution on landed property adopted by the Brussels Congress. 
Marx's speeches have been preserved in the Minute Book as written down 
by Eccarius. They were also published in brief in the Bee-Hive (No. 404, July 
10, 1869) report of the General Council meeting of July 6, 1869. 
In English they were first published in full in The General Council of the First 
International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. p. 392 
458 The- Committee, elected at the Brussels Congress to prepare a study of landed 
property, presented two reports to the congress on the agrarian question: one 
by Emile Aubry (Rouen Section) and the other by César De Paepe (Brussels 
Section). The Committee informed the congress that they were all unanimous 
on the socialisation of mines, collieries, canals, railways etc., but disagreed over 
arable land. The majority, headed by De Paepe, a Belgian delegate, moved a 
resolution in favour of common property in all land. It was adopted by the 
congress, while the minority headed by Tolain, a Proudhonist, defended the 
ownership by peasants of small private property in land. p. 393 
459 Marx spoke on the right to inheritance at the General Council meeting of July 
20, 1869, during the debate of the programme of the Basle Congress (see this 
volume, p. 391). The record of his speech in Eccarius' hand has been preserved 
in the Minute Book of the General Council. 
There is also a brief summary in The Bee-Hive (No. 406, July 24, 1869) in 
the report of this Council meeting. 
The full text of Marx's speech on the right to inheritance was first 
published in English in The General Council of the First International. 1868-1870, 
Moscow, 1966. p. 394 

=====第559页=====
Notes 527 
4,,u A mistake in Eccarius' entry: the reference is here to Saint-Simon's followers, 
not to Saint-Simon, who died in 1825 (see Note 94). p. 395 
461 Marx delivered a speech on general education at the General Council meeting 
of August 10, 1869 during the debate on the Basle Congress programme (see 
this volume, p. 391), and a concluding speech on August 17. Both speeches 
have been preserved in the Minute Book of the General Council in Eccarius' 
hand. A brief account of the first speech is included in the report of the 
General Council meeting of August 10 printed in The Bee-Hive, No. 409, 
August 14, 1869; a brief account of the concluding speech was published in 
The Bee-Hive, No. 410, August 21, 1869. 
A brief account of Marx's speeches in German translation from The 
Bee-Hive was given in the article "Die Internationale und die Schule", Die Neue 
Zeit, No. 52, Jg. 12, Bd. 2, 1893-1894. p. 398 
462 xhe question of general education was discussed at the previous congresses of 
the International Association—in Geneva (1866), Lausanne (1867) and Brussels 
(1868).  p. 398 
463 Harriet Law's proposition moved at the General Council .meeting of August 17, 
1869 meant the transfer of the Church's property and income to schools. 
p. 399 
464 George Milner proposed at the Council meetings of August 10 and 17, 1869 
that the children should be taught bourgeois political economy, which was 
unacceptable from the proletarian viewpoint and in practice would only 
increase the ideological influence of the ruling bourgeoisie on the rising 
generation. Milner particularly stressed the need to give the pupils an idea of 
the "value of labour" and distribution. He referred, in particular, to the 
American Utopian Socialist Warren who preached the theory of "just 
exchange". p. 399 
465 Marx mentioned the abolition of the standing army because during the debate 
at the General Council meetings, Eccarius and Reclus proposed increasing 
funds for general education by abolishing expenditures on standing armies. 
p. 400 
466 This address is in fact the programme of the Land and Labour League 
founded in October 1869 (see Note 121). It was drawn up by Eccarius who was 
on the commission preparing it, and edited by Marx, and this found expression in 
the League's programme. p. 401 
467 In agitating for the repeal of the Corn Laws, the advocates of the Anti-Corn 
Law League endeavoured to prove to the workers that with the introduction 
of Free Trade their real wages would rise and their loaf of bread would be 
twice as large. Life proved these promises to be utterly false. The industrial 
capital of Britain, which became stronger after the repeal of the Corn Laws (see 
Note 219), intensified its onslaught on the vital interests of the working class. 
p. 401 
468 This category of taxpayers included people deriving their income from trade 
and those of the free professions. p. 402 
469 A reference to the workhouses, where all needy people were sent after the 
passing of the Poor Law of 1834. This law abolished relief for all the poor, who 
liad until then lived in parishes. Because of the prison regime in the 
workhouses, people called them "Bastilles for the poor". p. 403 
'/2 20-733 

=====第560页=====
528 Notes 
470 At the General Council meeting on November 9, 1869 Marx proposed the 
discussion of the following questions: the attitude of the British Government 
towards the Irish prisoners and the position of the English working class in the 
Irish question. 
On November 16 Marx opened the discussion and moved a resolution on 
this question (see this volume, p. 83). Stormy debates followed, particularly on 
November 23, when Mottershead, an Englishman, opposed Marx's resolution 
and tried to justify Gladstone's colonial policy in Ireland; Mottershead was 
supported by Odger, another English member of the General Council. Two 
other speeches (on November 23 and 30) were made by Marx in reply to them 
(see the next article in this volume). Marx described in detail the discussion on 
November 23 in his letter to Engels on November 26 (see present edition, Vol. 
43). 
In the Minute Book of the General Council Marx's speeches on November 
16, 23 and 30 are recorded by Eccarius. 
The report of the General Council meeting of November 16 was published 
in Reynolds's Newspaper, No. 1006, November 21 and The National Reformer, 
November 28, 1869; the report of the November 23 meeting—in Reynolds's 
Newspaper, No. 1007, November 28 and The National Reformer, December 5, 
1869.  However, these reports were brief and inaccurate. The full text of Marx's 
three speeches was first published in English in The General Council of the First 
International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. 
In German a brief account of Marx's first speech (November 16) was 
published in Der Volksstaat, No. 21, December 11, and in French in L'Égalité, 
No. 48, December 18, 1869. 
When preparing his speeches Marx made wide use of material from the 
Irish press, in particular in The Irishman. Their contents have much in common 
with Marx's later articles on the subject written for L'Internationale (see this 
volume, pp. 101-07), and with the articles of Jenny Marx, his daughter, for La 
Marseillaise (see this volume, pp. 414-41). p. 407 
471 See Note 2. p. 407 
472 The amnesty was granted to the participants in the Hungarian national 
liberation movement following the re-organisation of the Austrian Empire into 
Austria-Hungary in 1867. This amnesty was the result of Austria's defeat in the 
Austro-Prussian war of 1866 and the growth of national contradictions within 
the multinational Austrian state. p. 407 
473 See Note 117. p. 407 
474 A reference to Gladstone's negative reply to the petitions for an amnesty for 
Irish prisoners adopted at mass meetings in Ireland, including the one in 
Limerick on August 1, 1869. Gladstone endeavoured to justify his refusal in his 
letters to O'Shea and Butt (see Note 115), which were published in The Times 
on October 23 and 27, 1869. Marx criticised the motives given by Gladstone in 
these letters (see this volume, p. 83). p. 408 
475 This expression was current in the Irish workers' press of the time and meant 
England's 700-years oppression of Ireland (see The Irishman, Nos. 13 and 20, 
September 25 and November 13, 1869). p. 408 
476 An article in the New-York Irish People, a newspaper of Irish emigrants 
published in the USA, said that Gladstone's refusal to grant an amnesty to the 
participants in the Fenian movement, was only furthering the movement (this 
remark was quoted by The Irishman in its issue of November 13, 1869). The 
likening of Gladstone to the Head Centre of the plot is tinged with irony, since this 

=====第561页=====
Notes 529 
was the title of the leader of the Irish Revolutionary Brotherhood, the secret 
Fenian organisation. p. 409 
477 See Note 116. p. 409 
478 On dissenters see Note 295. 
Before the elections, Gladstone, the leader of the Liberal Party, made many 
promises to settle the Irish question in the hope of winning votes among the 
new categories of voters (see Note 117). Even before the election campaign got 
under way, he proposed the separation of the Anglican Church from the state 
in Ireland, thereby depriving it of state support and subsidies. He expected 
that this would win him popularity with the Irish Catholic voters. After winning 
the elections and assuming office at the end of 1868, Gladstone passed a bill 
through Parliament in March 1869 which placed the Anglican Church in 
Ireland on an equal footing with the Catholic Church. Gladstone and the 
Liberals hoped that their policy of moderate reform would weaken the 
revolutionary movement in Ireland. p. 409 
479 In 1840, a single Parliament was set up in England's Canadian possessions. The 
1867 Act transformed them into the self-governing Canadian Confederation 
and granted it Dominion status. p. 410 
480 On October 30, 1869, The Irishman carried a report which said that in his letter 
to the Dublin branch of the Ancient Order of Foresters (a Friendly Society 
founded in England as early as 1745 as a society of royal foresters which 
adopted its name in 1834 and which campaigned for an amnesty on behalf of 
the Irish prisoners), Gladstone had neglected his pre-election promises to 
improve Ireland's position. p. 410 
481 See Note 141. p. 410 
482 Marx had in mind Cobbett's Weekly Political Register. In it William Cobbett and 
other English radicals sharply criticised the policy of the English Government, 
notably its police measures in Ireland. p. 411 
483 yhe British authorities brutally put down the Irish national liberation 
movement in 1798 (see Note 229). Marx compares this act with those during 
the revolution of 1849 in Hungary. p. 411 
484 In the Minutes of this meeting published in Reynolds's Newspaper, November 28, 
1869,  the concluding sentence of Marx's speech is given as follows: "The 
question was which was most important—to conciliate the Irish or make this 
resolution acceptable to Mr. Gladstone." p. 412 
485 On November 23, 1869, during the debate of the draft resolution of the 
General Council of the International on the English Government's policy 
towards the Irish prisoners, Odger, a trade union leader, proposed to delete 
the word "deliberately" from the sentence "Mr. Gladstone deliberately insults 
the Irish nation". At the next meeting on November 30, 1869, he made new 
attempts to subdue the revolutionary and anti-government tone of the 
resolution. p. 412 
48fi In contrast to Marx, who sought to expose the colonialist policy of the English 
Government, Odger demanded that the expressions used by Marx in the draft 
resolution on Gladstone's policy should be toned down. Otherwise, as Odger 
explained, the Council would fail to secure the release of the prisoners. He 
reminded the Council members that, in his replies to the petitions, Gladstone had 
expressed dissatisfaction with the sharp tone of some of them. Odger justified and 
defended Gladstone's policy. This was an attempt by reformist trade union leaders 
i/220* 

=====第562页=====
530 Notes 
to reduce the resolution, a document exposing English policy and expressing 
solidarity with the fighters for Ireland's independence, to a humble appeal to the 
ruling classes for clemency. p. 412 
487 Marx meant the second item in his draft for the debate on the Irish 
question — the attitude of the English working class. Marx explained the 
General Council's stand on this question in "Confidential Communication" (see 
this volume, pp. 119-21) and in his letters to Ludwig Kugelmann on November 
29, to Engels on December 10, 1869, to Paul and Laura Lafargue on March 5, 
and to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt on April 9, 1870 (see present edition, 
Vol. 43). ' p. 413 
488 These eight articles by Marx's daughter Jenny were written for the French 
republican newspaper La Marseillaise and dealt with the problems raised in 
Marx's article "The English Government and the Fenian Prisoners" (see this 
volume, pp. 101-07). The third article was written together with Marx (see his 
letter to Engels of March 19, 1870, present edition, Vol. 43). All articles, except 
the second, were signed: J. Williams (see Marx's letter to Engels of March 5 
and Engels' letter to Marx of March 7, 1870, present edition, Vol. 43). Jenny 
Marx's authorship is confirmed by Marx's letter to Engels of March 10. These 
articles received a widespread response. The sixth article was also published in 
English in The Irishman, No. 45, May 7, 1870 under the heading "Agrarian 
Crime in Ireland (Translated from the Marseillaise)". Passages from Jenny's fifth 
article were quoted in the article "The Irishman in Paris" in The Irishman, 
No. 40, April 2, 1870. 
In English, these articles were first published in full in Marx and Engels, 
Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. p. 414 
489 On February 8, 1870 the French police arrested Henry Rochefort, the 
editor-in-chief of La Marseillaise, for an article published after the assassination 
of the newspaper's journalist, Victor Noir, by Prince Pierre Bonaparte. The 
arrest intensified the opposition movement and resulted in mass affiliation to 
the International Working Men's Association. p. 414 
490 In the small hours of September 16, 1865, the Dublin police raided the 
premises of The Irish People, confiscated its property and imprisoned almost all 
its editors. Mass arrests of Fenians took place in Dublin and, later, in Cork. 
p. 416 
491 La Marseillaise supplied this article by Jenny Marx with a short introduction 
signed A. De Fonvielle, temporarily at liberty. It deals with O'Donovan Rossa's 
activity and the reasons for his persecution by the government. De Fonvielle 
welcomes Rossa's election to the Irish Parliament. p. 417 
492 See notes 341 and 301. p. 419 
493 The demonstration demanding an amnesty for the Fenians detained in English 
prisons was held in Hyde Park on October 24, 1869 (see also Note 115). 
p. 424 
494 An article written by Henry Bruce, Home Secretary in the Liberal Government 
and published anonymously in The Times, No. 26699 of March 16, 1870, 
attempted to deny the facts adduced by O'Donovan Rossa. p. 424 
49;> Moore's speech in the House of Commons and Gladstone's reply there on 
March 17, 1870 were published in The Times, No.  26701,  March 18, 1870. 
p. 426 
496 On December 13, 1867, a group of Fenians set off an explosion in London's 
Clerkenwell Prison in an abortive attempt to free the goaled Fenian leaders. 

=====第563页=====
Notes 531 
The explosion destroyed several neighbouring houses, killing several people 
and wounding 120. This was used by the bourgeois press to incite chauvinistic 
anti-Irish feelings among the English population. p. 426 
'*"' Jenny Marx refers here to announcement in The Irishman on March 12, 1868 
of the publication of a Blue Book: Report of Commission on the Treatment of 
certain Treason-Felony Convicts in English Prison, who have been transferred thereto at 
the request of the Irish Government, 1867. p. 426 
1<)S In December 1868, when the election campaign was in full swing, Gladstone 
and the Liberals sharply criticised in the House of Commons the Conservative 
Government's policy in Ireland, especially the reprisals against the Fenians. The 
Liberals compared the actions of the Conservatives with the subjugation of 
England by William the Conqueror in the eleventh century. 
Ehe Fenian insurrection was prepared by the Fenian Irish Revolutionary 
(republican) Brotherhood early in 1867 with the aim of winning independence 
(or Ireland. It was to begin on March 5. The organisers planned to form 
several mobile columns of insurgents who were to conduct guerrilla warfare 
from bases in woods and mountainous areas. However, weak military 
leadership and the fact that the authorities got to know of the insurgents' 
intentions prevented the plan from being brought to fruition. Armed revolts 
broke out only in some eastern and southern counties. The insurgents seized 
several police barracks and stations and for a short time gained control of the 
town of Killmalock (County Limerick). There were clashes with the police in 
the suburbs of Dublin and Cork. The insurrection failed because of the 
conspiratorial tactics of the Fenians and their weak ties with the masses. Half of 
the 169 participants in the insurrection who had been arrested and brought to 
trial were sentenced to hard labour. p. 426 
1<J" Ehe reference is to the Coercion Bill submitted by Gladstone to the House of 
Commons on March 17, 1870. Aimed at the national liberation movement, the 
Bill provided for the suspension of constitutional guarantees in Ireland and the 
introduction of extraordinary powers for the English authorities in the struggle 
against Irish revolutionaries. The Bill was passed by Parliament. 
On the Land Bill see Note 144. p. 428 
r'(,<) Dahomey, a state in Africa, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was 
notorious for its despotic regime, maintained by espionage and denunciation. 
p. 430 
501 Lawyer Laurier made this speech on March 25, 1870, at the trial of Prince 
Pierre Bonaparte, who was accused of assassinating the journalist Victor Noir. 
Ehe speech was published in the French newspaper La Marseillaise, No. 97, 
March 27, 1870. p. 438 
50- Ecc  arius wrote this letter on the instructions of the General Council after it 
discussed, on April 19, 1870, Hume's letter and the memorial in which he 
suggested that special representatives should be appointed for various 
nationalities in different countries. The Minutes of the General Council 
meeting for April 19 contain the following resume of Marx's speech on the 
subject: "Citizen Marx disagreed with the memorial as the different 
nationalities were represented on the Council and the rest must be left to the 
correspondents of the Association. The letter pointed out that the trade union 
movement tended to assume the form of secret societies in the Linited States. 
Ehis was confirmed by a letter from the German correspondent of New York 
who appealed to the Council to interfere by trying to dissuade Hume and 
19-733 

=====第564页=====
532 Notes 
Jessup from taking part in it." The Council decided that the Secretary should 
solicit further information on the question (see The General Council of the First 
International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966, p. 226). 
Eccarius' letter has been preserved in the form of a clipping from an 
American newspaper (presumably The Democrat) pasted into the Minute Book 
of the General Council, in the Minutes for May 24, 1870. p. 442 
503 In March 1870, Cluseret was appointed the General Council's agent for 
establishing contacts with the French sections in the USA. However, passing 
himself off as an organiser of the International, Cluseret ignored the already 
existing sections in the USA and exceeded his powers. Soon, certain sections of 
the International in the USA censured his behaviour and approached the 
General Council, Johann Philipp Becker and Eugene Varlin with an inquiry 
concerning the powers granted to Cluseret. Marx replied to the inquiry in his 
letter to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt of April 9, 1870 and mentioned the 
matter in a letter to Sorge dated September 1, 1870 (see present edition, Vol. 
43). p. 442 
504 Marx spoke about The Bee-Hive at the General Council meeting of April 26, 
1870,  to substantiate his resolution on it (see this volume, p. 126). p. 444 
505 The Bee-Hive's policy of compromise became particularly manifest in its attitude 
towards the Irish national liberation movement. The newspaper openly 
supported Gladstone's Government in this question, having refused to print the 
General Council's resolution in defence of the Fenians. On November 1, 1869 
Engels wrote to Marx: "I've never seen such a filthy issue as yesterday's. This 
cringing before Gladstone and the whole bourgeois-patronising-philanthropic 
tone should soon break the neck of that paper and make it necessary to have a 
real workers' paper" (see present edition, Vol. 43). p. 444 
506 See Note 499. p. 444 
507 The content of Marx's letter to the Committee of the German Social-
Democratic Workers' Party of June 27, 1870 was given by the President of the 
court proceedings at the Leipzig trial (1872) of Wilhelm Liebknecht, August 
Bebel and Adolph Hepner, all three accused of high treason. It was presented 
as incriminating evidence at the trial of the Brunswick Committee of the 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party in 1871. 
The text is published here from Leipziger Hochverrathsprocess..., Leipzig 1872 
which was reprinted in 1874 and 1894. The latter edition was prepared by 
Wilhelm Liebknecht on the instructions of the Committee of the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party. According to the President of the Leipzig court the 
letter was signed: "In the name of the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association, Karl Marx, Secretary for Germany." p. 445 
508 See Note 172. p. 445 
509 Marx delivered this speech in the General Council on June 28, 1870 to 
substantiate his resolution on the subject (see this volume, p. 136). The speech 
was recorded by Eccarius. p. 446 
510 The reference is to the congress of the Romance Federation held at La 
Chaux-de-Fonds from April 4 to 6, 1870 (see Note 175). The Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy made vigorous preparations for the congress and, as a 
result of various manoeuvres, managed to send 21 delegates representing 13 
minor and often fictitious sections (about 700 members), while the Federal 
Council failed to secure full representation of all its sections and had only 19 
delegates from 23 sections (about 1,500 members). p. 446 

=====第565页=====
533 
NAME INDEX 
A 
Abercorn, James Hamilton, Duke of 
(1811-1885) —Lord Lieutenant of 
Ireland (1866-68, 1874-76).—192, 
202, 206 
Abercromby, Ralph (1734-1801) —Eng­
lish general, Commander-in-Chief in 
Ireland (1797).—257, 281 
Abingdon—see Bertie, Willoughby, Earl 
Abingdon 
Adam of Bremen (d. after 1081) — 
medieval chronicler, author of Gesta 
Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontifi-
cum.—184 
Addington, Henry, Viscount Sidmouth 
(1757-1844) —British statesman, To­
ry, Prime Minister (1801-04).— 
266 
Adrian IV (Nicholas Breakspear) (before 
1100-1159) — Pope  ( 1154-59), English­
man by birth.—195, 285 
Albinus (4th cent.) — Irish Christian 
missionary.—177 
Albinus (second half of the 8th cent.) — 
Irish monk, invited by Charles the 
Great to teach in Pavia.—178 
Alexander II (1818-1881) —Emperor of 
Russia (1855-81).—8 
Alexander of Macedon (Alexander the 
Great) (356-323 B.C.) —soldier and 
statesman of Ancient Greece.—169 Alexeyev—see Bartenev, Viktor Ivanovich 
Alexeyeva—see Barteneva, Yekaterina 
Grigoryevna 
Alfred the Great (849-901) —King of the 
West Saxons (871-901), promoted en­
lightenment.— 177 
Alternent,  Louis—210 
Allen,  William Philip (1848-1867) — 
Irish Fenian, sentenced to death by 
an English court and executed.—  3, 
13 
Ammianus Marcellinus (c. 330-c. 400) — 
Roman historian.—177 
Anne (1665-1714) — Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1702-14).—192, 
196, 317 
Annesley, John, Baron Mountnorris— 
member of the Irish Parliament 
(1799).—262 
Anonymus Ravennatis —geographer in 
Ravenna, author of De Geographiae. — 
177 
Anselm of Canterbury (c. 1033-1109) — 
theologian, representative of early 
scholasticism.— 179 
Applegarth, Robert (1833-1925)—ca­
binet-maker; a trade union leader; 
General Secretary of the Amalga­
mated Society of Carpenters and 
19* 

=====第566页=====
534 Name Index 
Joiners (1862-71), member of the 
London Trades Council; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1865, 1868-72); delegate to 
the Basle Congress of the Interna­
tional (1869); one of the Reform 
League leaders; subsequently left the 
working-class movement.—  26, 38, 51, 
54, 82 
Ardin, Antoine (d. after 1898) — Swiss 
worker; Chairman of the Coach-
makers' and Smiths' Society affiliated 
to the International.— 210 
B 
Bacon, Francis, Baron Verulam, Viscount 
St. Albans (1561-1626) —English phi­
losopher, naturalist and historian, 
Lord Privy Seal and Lord Chancellor 
of England.—287 
Bagenal, Beauchamp—member of the 
Irish Parliament for the County Car-
low (1782).—229, 274 
Bakunin, Mikhail Alexandrovich (1814-
1876) — Russian revolutionary and 
journalist, participant in the 1848-49 
revolution in Germany; later an 
ideologist of Narodism and anarch­
ism; opposed Marxism in the First 
International.—112-16, 125-26, 209, 
445 
Bakunina, Antonina Ksaveryevna (née 
Kvyatkovskaya) (c. 1840-1887)  —Mi­
khail Bakunin's wife.— 210 
Ball, Thomas—Irish lawyer.— 266 
Baquet, Joseph—210 
Bar a, Jules (1835-1900) —Belgian states­
man, Liberal, Minister of Justice 
(1865-70, 1878-84).—14, 15, 50, 320, 
375-76 
Barrett, Michael (d. 1868) — Irish Fe­
nian, sentenced to death by English 
authorities.—432 
Barrington, Sir Johan (1760-1834) — 
lawyer, Protestant, member of the 
Irish Parliament (1790-97, 1798-1800),  opposed the Anglo-Irish 
Union.—266, 290 
Barry, Catherine—Richard Burke's 
sister.—422 
Bartenev, Viktor Ivanovich (1838-1918) — 
Russian army officer, emigrated to 
Switzerland; in 1869 broke with the 
Bakuninists; member of the Russian 
Section Committee of the Interna­
tional in Geneva, vigorously opposed 
the Bakuninist splitting activities after 
1869.—210 
Barteneva, Yekaterina Grigoryevna  (1843-
1914) — Russian revolutionary and 
journalist; took part in founding the 
Russian Section of the First Interna­
tional; actively opposed the Bakunin-
ist splitting activities after 1869; Vik­
tor Bartenev's wife.— 210 
Bauer, Edgar (1820-1886) — German 
philosopher and journalist; Young 
Hegelian; emigrated to England after 
the 1848-49 revolution; editor of the 
London Neue Zeit (1859); Prussian 
official after the 1861 amnesty.— 
27 
Beaufort, Daniel Augustus (1739-1821) — 
Irish geographer and clergyman of 
French origin.—157 
Bebel, August (1840-1913)—a leading 
figure in the international and 
German working-class movement; 
turner; President of the Union of 
German Workers' Associations from 
1867;  member of the First Interna­
tional; deputy to the Reichstag from 
1867;  one of the founders and lead­
ers of German Social-Democracy; 
fought Lassalleanism; friend and as­
sociate of Marx and Engels. — 32 
Becker, Bernhard  ( 1826-1891 )—German 
journalist; follower of Lassalle, Presi­
dent of the General Association of 
German Workers (1864-65); subseq­
uently supported Eisenachers; dele­
gate to the Hague Congress of the 
International (1872).—24 
Becker, Ernest (d. after 1898) — 210 

=====第567页=====
Name Index 535 
Beehr, Johann Philipp (1809-1886) — 
German revolutionary, took part in 
the Gorman and Swiss democratic 
movement in the 1830s and 1840s 
and in the 1848-49 revolution; or­
ganised German sections of the In-
lernational in Switzerland; delegate 
to the London Conference (1865) 
and all the congresses of the Interna­
tional; editor of Der Vorbote (1866-
71); in October 1868 became a 
member of the provisional committee 
of the Alliance of Socialist Democra­
cy, but, influenced by Marx and 
Engels, soon broke with the Bakunin-
ists; friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 90, 114, 122, 209, 336, 348-
49, 378 
Be de (Beda or Baeda) the Venerable (c. 
673-735) — Anglo-Saxon ecclesiastic, 
scholar and historian.— 177 
Bedeau. ./.—210 
Bedell, William (1571-1642) — Bishop of 
Kilmore and Ardagh in Ireland.— 
302 
Bel. André (d. after 1898) — Swiss work­
er, joiner; Secretary of the Joiners' 
Society in Geneva.— 210 
Belli  ngham.  Edward (d. 1549) — Lord 
Deputy ol Ireland from 1548.—297 
Belvidere— Irish Lord.— 263 
Benignus (d. 468) — Irish priest; accord­
ing to tradition, a compiler of Senchus 
M or, a collection of ancient laws.— 
171 
Beresford, John (1738-1805) —Irish sta­
tesman; supporter of the Anglo-Irish 
Union, M. P., Pitt's adviser on Irish 
policy.— 251 
Beresfords—aristocratic family in Ire­
land, Protestants.— 252 
Bernard, Marie—Belgian house-painter; 
member of^ the General Council of 
the International (September 1868-
69); Corresponding Secretary for 
Belgium (September  1 868-November 
1869).—37, 51, 55 Bernard of Clairvaux (Bernard, Saint) 
(c. 1091-1153) —French theologian, 
fanatical champion of Catholicism.— 
172, 285, 308, 311 
Bertel—Mayor of Sotteville-lès-Rouen 
and one of the biggest manufacturers 
there.—388 
Bertie, Willoughby, Earl Abingdon (1740-
1799) — Speaker in the House of 
Lords (1775-99), Whig supporter.— 
232, 275 
Bervi, Vasily Vasilyevich (pseudonym 
N. Flerovsky) (1829-1918) —Russian 
economist and sociologist, enlight-
ener and democrat, Narodnik Uto­
pian socialist; author of The Condition 
of the Working Class in Russia.—110-
11 
Besson, Alexandre—mechanic; French 
refugee in London; member of the 
General Council of the International 
(1866-68), Corresponding Secretary 
for Belgium, a leader of the French 
branch in London; follower of Félix 
Pyat.—4 
Biscamp (Biskamp), Elard—German de­
mocrat, journalist; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution in Germany; 
emigrated after its defeat; member of 
the editorial board of Das Volk, the 
newspaper of the German refugees 
in London published with Marx's 
active participation.— 27 
Bismark (or Bismarek-Schönhausen), Otto, 
Prince von (1815-1898) — statesman of 
Prussia and Germany; diplomat, Am­
bassador to St. Petersburg (1859-62) 
and Paris (1862); Prime Minister of 
Prussia (1862-72, 1873-90), Chancel­
lor of the North-German Confedera­
tion (1867-71) and of the German 
Empire (1871-90); carried through 
the unification of Germany by 
counterrevolutionary means.—  21, 75, 
134-35 
Blackburn, Colin, Baron Blackburn 
(1813-1896) —British judge, presided 
at the trial of the Manchester Fenians 
(October 1867) and took part in the 

=====第568页=====
536 Name Index 
trial of the former Jamaica Governor 
Edward John Eyre (June 1868).—362 
Blackburne, Francis (1782-1867) — Irish 
lawyer and statesman, held high 
posts in English judiciary in Ire­
land.—200 
Blackwood  — see Dufferin and Ava, Fre­
derick Temple Hamilton-Temple-Black-
ivood 
Blake, J.  A.—  British politician, Liberal 
M.P.—431 
Blanc, André —member of the Lyons 
Section of the International.—108 
Blanchard,  D.A. (d. 1869)—owner of a 
printing house in Geneva, member of 
the International.— 210 
Blount, Charles, Lord Mountjoy, Earl of 
Devonshire (1563-1606) — Lord Depu­
ty of Ireland from 1599; directed the 
suppression of Tyrone's uprising 
against the English.—257, 281, 298 
Boate (or Botius), Gerard (1604-1650)  — 
English physician of Dutch origin; 
author of Ireland's Natural History.— 
162 
Bofféty, François (d. after 1898) — Swiss 
worker, joiner.— 210 
Bohn,  Henry George (1796-1884) — 
English publisher.— 173 
Boileau - Despréaux, Nicolas (1636-
1711) — French poet and theoretician 
of Classicism.— 426 
Bond,  Oliver (c. 1760-1798) —member 
of the United Irishmen Society in 
Dublin, Republican.—255, 281 
Boon,  Martin James—British worker, 
mechanic; active in the British work­
ing-class movement, member of the 
General Council of the International 
(1869-72), Secretary of the Land and 
Labour League, member of the Brit­
ish Federal Council (1872).—54, 406 
Borlase (Borlace), Edmund (d. 1682) — 
British historian and physician; son 
of Sir John Borlase; wrote a book on 
the history of the Irish uprising of 
1641-52.—302 Borlase, Sir John (1576-1648) —British 
army officer; Lord Justice of Ireland 
(1640-44); governed Ireland with 
William Parsons in absence of Lord 
Deputy.—302 
Borret, Etienne —210 
Boudet, Paul (b. 1800) — French Minis­
ter of the Interior (1863-65).— 364, 
368 
Bourdon, Antoine Marie (b. 1842) — 
French worker, engraver; active par­
ticipant in the French working-class 
movement; delegate to and secretary 
of the Geneva Congress (1866); 
member of the Paris Committee of 
the International.—  13, 365 
Brechtel, Carl (d. after 1898) — member 
of the Geneva Central Committee of 
the German-speaking sections in 
Switzerland (from 1866); member of 
the Geneva Section of the Interna­
tional named Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy (January-March 1870).— 
210 
Brewer, John Sherren (1810-1879) — 
English historian and philologist, 
professor of King's College, Lon­
don.—173 
Brian Borumha (926-1014) — King of 
Ireland (1001-14) who routed the 
Norsemen at the battle of Clontarf 
(1014).—140, 181-84 
Bright, John (1811-1889) —British man­
ufacturer and politician, a Free 
Trade leader and founder of the 
Anti-Corn Law League; leader of the 
Left wing of the Liberal Party from 
the early 1860s; held several minis­
terial posts.—97, 103, 343, 407, 409, 
430 
Bristol—see Hervey, Frederick, Earl of 
Bristol 
Broadstreet, Samuel—member of the 
Irish Parliament (1782).—228 
Brodhir (Brodir or Brodar) (d. 1014) — 
Norse Viking, killed Irish King 
Brian Borumha at the battle of Clon­
tarf (1014).—181-84 

=====第569页=====
Name Index 537 
Brown, John (1800-1859) — American 
farmer; a prominent leader of the 
revolutionary wing of the abolitionist 
movement; took an active part in the 
armed struggle against the slave­
owners in Kansas (1854-56); attempt­
ed to organise a revolt of Negro 
slaves in Virginia in 1859; was tried 
and executed.—189 
Brownlow—member of the Irish Parlia­
ment (1785).—227, 237, 277 
Bruce, Henry Austin, 1st Baron Aberdare 
(1815-1895) —British Liberal states­
man, Home Secretary (1868-73).— 
81, 103, 104, 408, 421-22, 426-28, 
430-32,  438 
Buckingham—see Grenville, George Nug­
ent-Temple, hi Marquis of Buckingham 
3uckley, James—British trade unionist; 
member of the General Council of 
the International (November 1864-
69) and of the Reform League.—  26, 
54 
Burgh, Walter Hussey (1742-1783) — 
Irish statesman, Whig, lawyer; 
member of the Irish Parliament; Free 
Trader.—222, 271 
Burke, Richard (d. 1870) — Irish Fenian, 
officer in the North-American Army; 
an organiser of the 1867 uprising in 
Ireland; arrested in 1867, died in 
prison.—102, 416, 421, 425-26, 
430-32 
Burke, Thomas F. (b. 1840)  — Irish Fe­
nian, General of the Southern Army 
in the US Civil War; an organiser of 
the 1867 uprising in Ireland; sen­
tenced to life imprisonment in April 
1867.—103 
Burke, Thomas Henry (1829-1882) — 
British statesman, permanent Irish 
Under-Secretary from 1869.—408 
Burnet, Gilbert (1643-1715) —English 
bishop and historian.—-302 
Bushe, Charles Kendal (1767-1843) — 
Lord Chief Justice; member of the 
Irish Parliament from 1796; opposed 
the Anglo-Irish Union.—  261,  266 Butler, James, 12th Earl and 1st Duke of 
Ormonde (1610-1688) — Irish states­
man.—300, 302-04 
Butt, Isaac (1813-1879) —Irish lawyer 
and politician, Liberal M.P.; in the 
1860s came out in defence of the 
Fenian prisoners; an organiser of the 
Home Rule movement in the 
1870s.—83,  408, 410 
Byrne, William (1775-1799) — member 
of the United Irishmen society, 
hanged for taking part in the 1798 
uprising.—  249,  256 
C 
Caesar (Gaius Julius Caesar) (c. 100-44 
B.C.) — Roman general, statesman 
and writer, author of De Bello  Gal­
ileo.—185 
Caird,  Sir James (1816-1892) —Scottish 
agriculturist, Liberal M.P.; author of 
works on the land question in Eng­
land and Ireland.— 158 
Cairnech (5th cent.) — Christian mis­
sionary in Ireland; according to tradi­
tion, a compiler of Senchus M or, a 
collection of ancient laws.—171 
Camden—see Pratt, John Jeffreys, 2nd 
Earl and 1st Marquis of Camden 
Camden, William (1551-1623) — English 
antiquary and historian.—173, 298, 
308, 311 
Campe, Johann Julius Wilhelm (1792-
1867)—German publisher and book­
seller; co-proprietor of the  Hoff­
mann & Campe Publishing House in 
Hamburg (from 1823); published 
works by the authors of the Young 
Germany group in the 1830s.— 56 
Camperio, Philipp (1810-1882) —Swiss 
statesman, Italian by birth, lawyer; 
member of the Grand Council (1847-
70); President of the State Council of 
Geneva and head of the Department 
of Justice and Police.—138, 352 

=====第570页=====
538 Name Index 
Campion, Edmund (1540-1581)—ex­
ponent of Catholicism in Britain, 
author of A History of Ireland.—173, 
307 
Canning, George (1770-1827) —British 
statesman and diplomat, Tory; Fo­
reign Secretary (1807-09, 1822-27), 
Prime Minister (1827).—266 
Carew, George, Baron Carew of Clopton 
and Earl of Totnes (1555-1629) — 
British statesman, president of Muns­
ter (South Ireland); brutally sup­
pressed Irish uprising in Tyrone 
(1595-1603).—257, 281 
Carey, Martin Henley—Irish journalist, 
Fenian, sentenced to five years' penal 
servitude in 1865.—102, 409, 416 
Carkampton—see Luttrel, Henry Lawes, 
Earl of Carhampton 
Carlisle—see  Howard,  Frederick, Earl of 
Carlisle 
Carolan (O'Carolan), Torlogh (1670-
1738) — Irish bard, author of many 
folk songs.—140 
Carte, Thomas (1686-1754) —English 
historian; in his writings defended 
the Stuart dynasty.—299, 300, 302, 
303 
Casey, John—Irish Fenian, arrested and 
sentenced to five years' penal ser­
vitude in 1866.—437-38 
Castlehaven—see Touchet, James, Baron 
Audley of Hely or Heleigh, 3rd Earl of 
Castlehaven 
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, Viscount 
(1769-1822) —British Tory states­
man, Chief Secretary for Ireland 
(1799-1801), Secretary for War and 
for the Colonies (1805-06, 1807-09), 
and Foreign Secretary (1812-22).— 
193, 227, 236, 252, 254, 256, 258-59, 
262, 263, 266, 268, 280-82, 411, 430 
Catalan, Adolphe —Swiss radical journal­
ist, editor of La Liberté delegate to 
the Brussels Congress of the Interna­
tional (1868).—210 
Cavendish, Sir Henry (1732-1804)  —Bri­
tish politician, member of the British (1768-74) and the Irish Parliament 
(1766-68,  1776-1800); Deputy Vice-
Treasurer of Ireland from 1795.— 
238 
Celestine I (Saint) (mid. 4l.h-early 5th 
cent.) — Irish missionary; Pope (422-
32).—177 
Chanoz, Jean Baptiste (b. 1828)--French 
worker, weaver; member of the 
Lyons Section of the International.— 
108 
Charette de la Contrie, François  (1763-
1796) — French army officer, a leader 
of the royalist revolt in Vendee; 
executed after the defeat of the 
Quiberon expedition.— 246 
Charlemont, James  Caulfield,  1st Earl of 
(1728-1799) —Irish aristocrat, politi­
cian, Commander-in-Chief of the 
Irish Volunteers in the Duke of 
Leinster's army; opposed the Anglo-
Irish Union.—219, 223. 231, 234-35, 
245, 271, 273, 275 
Charles I (1600-1649) —King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1625-49); be­
headed during the English Revolu­
tion.—195,  269,  300-01,  304 
Charles II (1630-1685) —King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1660-85).—196, 
289, 304, 305 
Charles II the Bald (823-877)--King of 
France (840-77).—179 
Charles (Carlos) III (1716-1788)—King 
of Spain (1759-88).—  217,  270 
Charles the Great (Charlemagne) (c. 742-
814) —King of the Franks (768-800) 
and Holy Roman Emperor (800-
14).—178 
Charras, Jean Baptiste Adolphe (1810-
1865) — French military leader and 
politician, moderate republican; took 
part in suppressing the June 1848 
uprising of the Paris workers; deputy 
to the Constituent and Legislative 
Assemblies during the Second Re­
public (1848-51); opposed Louis 
Bonaparte; banished from France 
after the coup  d'état  of December 2, 
1851.—57 

=====第571页=====
Name Index 539 
Cheneval, L. J.— 210 
Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich (1828-
1889) — Russian revolutionary demo­
crat, materialist philosopher, writer 
and literary critic; a predecessor of 
Russian Social-Democracy.— 111 
Chevallier, François —active in the Swiss 
working-class movement; member of 
the committee of the Geneva Bakers' 
Cooperative Society which was a sec­
tion of the International.— 210 
Chichester of Belfast, Arthur Chichester, 
Baron (1563-1625) —Lord Deputy of 
Ireland (1604-14).—300, 301 
(Jlanmorris—Irish Lord, member of the 
Irish Parliament (1800).—263 
(Hare—see Fitzgibbon, John, Earl of Clare 
Clarendon, Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of 
(1609-1674) — British statesman and 
historian.— 294 
Clarendon, George William Frederick Vil-
liers, Earl of, Baron Hyde (1800-
1870) — British statesman, Whig, later 
Liberal; Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 
(1847-52), Foreign Secretary  (1853-
58, 1865-66, 1868-70).—29 
Claadianus, Claudius (Claudian) (late 
4th early 5th cent.) — Latin epic poet; 
an Alexandrian by birth.—177 
Clerfayt, Karl, Count (1733-1798) — 
Austrian field marshal; took part in 
the war between Austria and Turkey 
(1788-89); in 1794 and 1795 Com­
mander-in-Chief of the Austrian 
army in the war with the French 
Republic—246 
Cluseret, Gustave Paul (1823-1900) — 
French politician, general; joined 
Garibaldi's volunteers in Italy (1860); 
fought in the US Civil War; member 
of the First International, Bakuninist; 
the General Council's correspondent 
in the USA in the spring of 1870; 
took part in revolutionary uprisings 
in Lyons and Marseille (1870); 
member of the Paris Commune; 
emigrated after its defeat.— 
442 1 Cobbett, William (c. 1762-1835) — 
British politician and radical writ­
er.—251,  266, 411 
Cockburn, Sir Alexander James Edmund 
(1802-1880) —Lord Chief Justice of 
England from 1859.— 363 
Cohn,  James—leading figure in the 
British working-class movement, 
President of the London Association 
of Cigar-Makers; member of the 
General Council of the International 
(1867-71), Corresponding Secretary 
for Denmark (1870-71), delegate to 
the Brussels Congress (1868) and the 
London Conference (1871) of the 
International.—  26, 55 
Columba (c. 521-597) — Irish Christian 
missionary in Scotland.— 178 
Conaing—nephew of the Irish King 
Brian Borumha, killed at the battle 
of Clontarf (1014).—183 
Condon, Edward O'Meagher (c. 1835-
1915) — Irish Fenian; in 1867 was 
sentenced to death; this was com­
muted into imprisonment.—3 
Conolly, Thomas (1738-1803) —Irish 
politician, member of the Irish Parlia­
ment (1761-1800); supporter of the 
Anglo-Irish Union.—229, 234, 242, 
278 
Cooke, Edward (1755-1820) —British 
statesman, held several posts in the 
Irish government (1778-1800), 
member of the Irish Parliament 
(1789-1801), supporter of the Anglo-
Irish Union.— 256 
Coote—Sheriff of the Monagham 
County in Ireland (1870).—313 
Copeland—a leading figure in the 
atheist movement in Britain, member 
of the General Council of the Inter­
national (1868-69).—26 
Coppet, Louis de—210 
Core (5th cent.) — King of Munster; 
according to a legend from Irish 
chronicles, helped in compiling Sen-
chus Mor, a collection of ancient 
laws.—171 

=====第572页=====
540 Name Index 
Cormac Mac Art (Cormac Ulfada) 
(d. 260) —King of Ireland (218-
54).—176 
Cormac McCulinan (836-908) — King of 
Munster and Bishop of Cashel (901-
08).—172 
Cormier, Aristide —worker in the late 
industry, member of the Lyons Sec­
tion of the International.—108 
Cornell, Ezra (J 807-1874) —US capital­
ist and philanthropist, founder of 
Cornell University in Ithaca (USA).— 
161 
Cornwallis, Charles Cornwallis, 1st Mar­
quis (1738-1805) — British politician, 
Governor-General of India (1786-93, 
1805);  as Viceroy of Ireland (1798-
1801) suppressed the Irish uprising 
of 1798.—217, 259-62, 271, 281, 
282 
Costello, Augustin —Irish Fenian, Ameri­
can army officer; in 1867 came to 
Ireland to take part in the uprising, 
was arrested and sentenced to twelve 
years'  penal servitude.—422 
Coulin, L.—210 
Courtois, Jacques—Swiss worker, joiner; 
member of the First International.— 
210 
Cowley, Henry Wellesley, Earl of (1804-
1884) — British diplomat, Ambas­
sador to Paris (1852-67).—364 
Creed,  H. Herries—correspondent of 
The Times; in December 1866-Janu-
ary 1867, in collaboration with W. Wil­
liams,  published a series of articles on 
Belgian industry.— 357 
Crochet, François (d. after 1898) — Swiss 
worker, carpenter.— 210 
Cromwell, Henry (1628-1674) — son of 
Oliver Cromwell; general in the 
English Parliamentary Army; in 1650 
took part in Oliver Cromwell's puni­
tive expedition to Ireland; Comman­
der of the English army in Ireland 
(1654);  Lord Deputy (1655-57) and 
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (1657-
59).—196, 289 Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658) — leader 
of the English Revolution; Lord 
Lieutenant and Commander-in-Chief 
of Ireland from 1649; Lord Protector 
of England, Scotland and Ireland 
from 1653.—140, 192, 194, 195, 196, 
264, 294, 300, 302-04, 317 
Croset, J.— 210 
Croset, Suzette— 210 
Crosset, Edouard —Swiss worker, printer; 
took part in the Inaugural Congress 
of the Romance Federation of the 
International (January 1869); oppo­
nent of Bakunin.— 210 
Curran, John Philpot (1750-1817) — Irish 
politician and judge, member of the 
Irish Parliament, defended leaders of 
the United Irishmen revolutionary 
society at state  trials.—  216,  230, 234, 
236-44, 247-55, 256, 267, 276-80 
Custine, Adam Philippe, comte de (1740-
1793) — French general and politi­
cian; took part in the war of the 
French Republic against the First 
European Coalition, General-in-Chief 
of the Vosges army in  1792.—  249 
D 
Daire (5th cent.)—a ruler of Ulster; 
according to tradition, a compiler of 
Senchus Mor, a collection of ancient 
laws.—171 
Davies, Sir John (1569-1626) —British 
statesman, poet, author of books on 
the history of Ireland, Attorney-
General of Ireland (1606-19), sup­
porter of the English colonisation of 
Ireland.—173,  284-87, 299, 308, 310 
Davis, Jefferson (1808-1889)—American 
statesman, big slave-owner and plant­
er, Democrat; an organiser of the 
Southern slave-holders' revolt; took 
an active part in the war with Mexico 
(1846-48); U.S. Secretary of War 
(1853-57); President of the Confeder­
ate States of America (1861-65).— 
409 

=====第573页=====
Name Index 541 
Davis, Thomas Osborne (1814-1845) — 
Irish democrat, historian and poet; a 
leader of the Young Ireland group; 
prepared a publication of Curran's 
speeches with commentaries.— 219, 
250, 252, 256 
Davisson, A. N.— secretary of the Board 
of Directors of the Schiller Institute 
in Manchester at the end of the 
1860s.— 18 
Dean,  Frederick—English worker, a 
smith; delegate to the Brussels Con­
gress (1868) of the First Interna­
tional.— 26 
Deane, Robert—member of the Irish 
Parliament (1779-80).—222 
Defoe, Daniel (c. 1660-1731) —English 
novelist and journalist.— 269 
Delescluze, Louis Charles (1809-1871) — 
French revolutionary, journalist; par­
ticipant in the revolutions of 1830 
and 1848; founder, editor and pub­
lisher of Le Réveil (1868-71); 
member of the Paris Commune of 
1871.—374 
Dclesvaux—President at the trial of the 
Executive Committee of the Paris 
Section of the First International 
(1868).—366-67 
Dell, William—interior decorator; ac­
tive in the British working-class and 
democratic movement; member of 
the British National League for the 
Independence of Poland; took part 
in the inaugural meeting of the 
International held on September 28, 
1864 at St. Martin's Hall, London; 
member of the General Council of 
the International (1864-69) and its 
Treasurer (1865, 1866-67); partici­
pated in the London Conference 
(1865);  a leader of the Reform 
League.— 26 
Derby, Edward Geoffrey Smith Stanley, 
14th Earl of Derby (1799-1869) — 
British statesman, Tory leader, Prime 
Minister (1852, 1858-59, 1866-68).— 
105. 427 Derkinderen—-member of the General 
Council of the International (1866-
67), Corresponding Secretary for 
Holland (1867).—4 
Desmond,  Gerald  Fitzgerald,  Earl of (d. 
1583)  — powerful Anglo-Irish feudal 
lord; a leader of the uprising against 
English rule in the south of Ire­
land.—299 
Détrax,  Charles—  210 
Dickson, William (1745-1804) —Irish 
Bishop of Down and Connor 
(1783).—  261 
Dinter, Johann Gotlieb (1813-1910) — 
German miner, leader of the miners' 
union in Zwickau.—  43, 389 
Diodoras, Siculus (c. 80-29 B.C.) — 
Greek historian, author of Bib-
liothecae historicae.—174 
Dionysius Areopagiticus (the Areopagite) 
(1st cent.) — first Christian Bishop of 
Athens, member of the Athenian 
Areopagus.—178 
Disraeli, Benjamin, 1st Earl of Beacons-
field (1804-1881) —British statesman 
and writer; adherent of the Young 
England group in the 1840s; later a 
Tory leader; Prime Minister (1868, 
1874-80).—105, 407, 427 
Donat— 210 
Downing, M'Carthy—Irish politician, 
Liberal M.P.—431-32 
Drennan, William (1754-1820) —Irish 
poet, a leader of the United Irishmen 
society in Dublin.— 248 
Dubhghall—son of Amhlaeibh (Amh-
lanibh  Anlaf,  or Olaf), killed at the 
battle of Clontarf (1014).—183 
Dubthach Maccu Lugir (5th cent.) — 
Irish court poet and lawyer; accord­
ing to tradition, a compiler of Senchus 
Mor, a collection of ancient laws.— 
171 
Duchâtel, Charles Marie Tanneguy, comte 
(1803-1867) —French statesman, Or-
leanist, Minister of the Interior 
(1839-40, 1840-February 1848).—373 

=====第574页=====
542 Name Index 
Dufferin and Ava, Frederick Temple 
Hamilton-Temple-Blackwood, ht Mar­
quis of (1826-1902) —British states­
man and diplomat, Liberal, member 
of Gladstone's Cabinet (1868-72), big 
landowner in Ireland.—190, 206, 
428, 435 
Duffy, Edward (1840-1868) —a leader of 
the Irish Revolutionary Brotherhood, 
leader of the Fenian movement in 
Western Ireland; in 1867 was sen­
tenced to fifteen years of penal 
servitude, died in prison.— 418 
Dumas, Alexandre (Dumas père) (1802-
1870) —French writer.—423 
Dumouriez, Charles François du Perier 
(1739-1823) — French general, com­
manded the Northern revolutionary 
army in 1792-93; was close to the 
Girondists, betrayed the revolution in 
March 1793.—248, 249 
Dunaud,  Antoine —Swiss worker, en­
graver; at a congress of the Romance 
Federation of the International, held 
in La Chaux-de-Fonds (April 1870), 
opposed the Bakuninists.— 210 
Duncker, Franz Gustav (1822-1888) — 
German publisher, prominent figure 
in the Party of Progress; founder and 
editor of the Volks-Zeitung (1853-59); 
in 1868, together with Max Hirsch, 
founded reformist trade unions, 
known as Hirsch-Duncker unions, 
which existed until  1933.—  25 
Dungal (died c. 827) — Irish monk, 
scholar and poet, invited to teach in 
Pavia (c. 820).—178 
Dupont, Eugène (c. 1831-1881)  —pro­
minent figure in the French and 
international working-class move­
ment; musical instrument maker; 
took part in the June 1848 uprising 
in Paris; from 1862 on, lived in 
London; member of the General 
Council of the International (No­
vember 1864 to 1872), Correspon­
ding Secretary for France (1865-71); 
participant in the London Con­ference (1865) and the Geneva Con­
gress (1866); Chairman of the 
Lausanne Congress (1867), delegate 
to the Brussels Congress (1868); the 
London Conference (1871) and the 
Hague Congress (1872); associate of 
Marx and Engels; became a member 
of the British Federal Council of the 
International in 1872; moved to the 
USA in 1874.—4, 37, 51, 55, 341, 
364, 443 
Dupraz, Louis—delegate of the Geneva 
building workers at the talks with the 
government during their strike in the 
spring of 1869.—210 
Dutoit, Jules—an editor of L'Egalité 
(1870).—123 
E 
Eccarius, Johann Georg (John George) 
(1818-1889) — prominent figure in 
the German and international work­
ing-class movement; tailor; member 
of the League of the Just, later of the 
Communist League; a leader of the 
German Workers' Educational Socie­
ty in London; participant in the 
inaugural meeting of the Internation­
al held on September 28, 1864 at St. 
Martin's Hall, London; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1864-72), Council's General 
Secretary (1867-71), Corresponding 
Secretary for America (1870-72); de­
legate to all the International's con­
gresses and conferences; until 1872 
follower of Marx; in the spring of 
1872 joined the reformist leaders 
of the British trade unions.—  4, 17, 
51, 55, 82, 139, 358, 364, 378, 406, 
443 
Edgeworth, Richard Lovell (1744-1817) — 
British writer; from 1782 lived in 
Ireland, where he owned an estate; 
member of the Irish Parliament 
(1798-1800); opponent of the Anglo-
Irish Union.— 264 
Edward I (1239-1307) —King of Eng­
land (1272-1307).—287 

=====第575页=====
Name Index 543 
Edward II (1284-1327) —King of Eng­
land (1307-27).—269 
Edward III (1312-1377) —King of Eng­
land (1327-77).—290 
Edward VI (1537-1553) —King of Eng­
land (1547-53).—297 
Edward "the Confessor" (1004-1066) — 
King of England (1043-66).—292 
Eichhoff,  Wilhelm Karl (1833-1895) — 
German socialist and journalist; re­
fugee in London (1861-66); member 
of the International (from 1868) and 
one of its first historians; organiser 
of the Berlin Section of the Interna­
tional; General Council's corre­
spondent; member of the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party of Ger­
many (from 1869).—326, 329, 330, 
337, 345, 354, 357, 363, 364, 377, 
378 
Einhard (Eginhard) (c. 770-840) — 
historian of the Franks, biographer 
of Charles the Great.—177 
Elizabeth I (1533-1603) —Queen of 
England and Ireland (1558-1603).— 
140, 192, 195, 257, 281, 288, 292, 
297-99,  302, 317 
Ella (or Aella) (d. 867) —King of 
Northumbria (c. 862-67).—180 
Elpidin, Mikhail Konstantinovich (1835-
1908) — participant in the Russian 
students' revolutionary movement in 
the early 1860s; in 1865 emigrated to 
Geneva, founded a Russian printing 
plant where the newspaper Narodnoye 
Dyelo (The People's Cause) was pub­
lished.—210 
Ely—Irish aristocrat, Marquis, M.P. 
(1800).—263 
Emmet, Thomas Addis (1764-1827) — 
Irish politician, lawyer, secretary of 
the United Irishmen society from 
1795.—255,  281 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895).—18, 19, 
20, 21, 23, 24, 93, 94, 95, 135, 154, 
156, 158, 161, 185, 284, 286, 299, 
307, 308, 309-11 Ensor, George (1769-1843) — Irish jour­
nalist; opponent of the Anglo-Irish 
Union; in his works denounced the 
colonial policy of the English ruling 
classes.—259, 264, 265-68, 269 
Erdmann, Johann Eduard (1805-1892) — 
German philosopher, Right-wing 
Hegelian.—178 
Erigena, Johannes Scotus (c. 810-c. 877) 
— medieval philosopher, theologian, 
and translator; Irish by birth.—179, 
308, 311 
Erlingr from Straumey—Norse Viking, 
killed at the battle of Clontarf 
(1014).—181 
Eyre, Edward John (1815-1901) —British 
colonial official, Governor of Jamaica 
(1864-66); suppressed a Negro insur­
rection in 1865.—49, 362 
F 
Fane, John, Earl of Westmoreland (1759-
1841) — British statesman, Lord Lieu­
tenant of Ireland (1790-95); opposed 
emancipation of the Catholics.— 
229, 230, 234, 236, 245-47, 249, 
278 
Ferdinand II (1810-1859) —King of the 
Two Sicilies (1830-59), nicknamed 
King Bomba for his bombardment of 
Messina in 1848.—105, 422 
Fergus (5th cent.) — Irish poet; accord­
ing to tradition, a compiler of Senchus 
Mor, a collection of ancient laws.— 
171 
Ferguson, Patrick (1744-1780) — English 
army officer, commanded troops 
during the American War of Inde­
pendence; killed in the battle at 
Kings Mountain in 1780.— 217 
Filliétaz, G. —participant in the Swiss 
working-class movement in the sec­
ond half of the 1860s; member of 
the International.— 210 
Finn—King of Leinster; Murchadh's 
father.—183 

=====第576页=====
544 Name Index 
Fitzgerald, Edward (1763-1798) — Irish 
bourgeois revolutionary; a founder 
of the United Irishmen society; was 
in charge of preparations for the 
1798 rebellion.—194, 198, 255, 281 
Fitzgerald, George Robert (c. 1748-
1786) — member of the Anglo-Irish 
clan of Geraldines; took part in the 
political life of Ireland; supported 
independent legislature in Ireland; 
executed in  1786.—  226 
Fitzgerald, James (1742-1835) —Irish 
lawyer and politician, M.P. from 
1769;  supported emancipation of the 
Catholics; Prime Serjeant of Ireland 
from 1787; in 1799 dismissed for his 
opposition to the Anglo-Irish Union; 
later supporter of the Union.— 
266 
Fitzgerald, John  David,  Lord Fitzgerald 
(1816-1889) —Irish lawyer and Liber­
al politician, M.P.; held a series of 
high judicial posts in the British 
administration in Ireland.—439 
Fitzgerald, William Robert, 2nd Duke of 
Feinster (1749-1804) — member of the 
Irish Parliament from Dublin (1769-
73); colonel in the Dublin volunteers' 
army; supporter of the Anglo-Irish 
Union.—222, 271 
Fitzgeralds (or Geraldines) — the name 
of an ancient Irish dynasty; owners 
of large estates in Leinster and 
Munster. — 288 
Fitzgibbon, John, Earl of Clare (1749-
1802)  — Lord Chancellor of Ireland 
(1789);  member of the Irish Parlia­
ment; supported the government's 
trade policy; adherent of the Anglo-
Irish Union.—225, 227, 234, 236, 
243, 244, 252, 261, 273, 277, 278, 
279 
Fitzherbert, Alleyne, Baron St. Helens 
(1753-1839) — British statesman; 
Chief Secretary of Buckingham's gov­
ernment in Ireland from 1787, 
member of the Irish Parliament.— 
242, 244, 278 Fitzpatrick, Richard (1747-1813) — 
British general and statesman, Whig, 
M.P., Chief Secretary for Ireland 
(1782),  War Secretary  (1783,  1806-
07).—229 
Fitzwilliam, William Wentworth Fitzwil-
liam,  2nd Earl (1748-1833)—Whig 
leader, member of Pitt's government, 
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (January-
March 1795).—220, 245, 251, 252, 
255, 258, 279 
Fleetwood, Charles (d. 1692) — general in 
the Parliamentary Army during the 
English Revolution; Commander-in-
Chief of the English army in Ireland 
from 1652; Lord Deputy of Ireland 
(1654-57).—196 
Flerovsky, N.—see Bervi, Vasily Vasi-
lyevich 
Flood,  Henry (1732-1791)  — Irish states­
man, member of the Irish Parlia­
ment, leader of the people's party; in 
the 1780s spoke in Parliament against 
Grattan's moderate position, moved 
the Renunciation Act adopted in 
1783.—228,  230-33, 236, 240, 273-75 
Forbes, George, 6th Earl of Granard 
(1760-1837) — general, member of 
the House of Lords; opposed the 
Anglo-Irish Union.—237, 238, 277, 
278 
Fornachon, L. H. (d. after 1898) — 
member of the Geneva Section of the 
International named Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy.— 210 
Försterling, Emil (1827-1872)—copper­
smith; member of the General Associ­
ation of German Workers; later Presi­
dent of the Lassallean General Associ­
ation of German Workers founded by 
Hatzfeldt (1867-68); deputy to the 
North German Imperial Diet (1867-
70).—24 
Fortescue—see Parkinson-Fortescue, Chi­
chester Samuel, Baron Carlingford 
Foster, John—English worker., carpent­
er; member of a co-operative society 
in Hull, delegate to the Brussels 

=====第577页=====
Name Index 545 
Congress of the First International 
(1868).—26 
Foster, John—English worker, mechan­
ic; member of a co-operative so­
ciety in Hull, delegate to the Brus­
sels Congress of the First Interna­
tional (1868), John Foster's son.— 26 
Foster, John, Baron Oriel (1740-1828)  — 
Irish lawyer, Privy Councillor; 
Speaker of the Irish House of Com­
mons from 1785; member of the 
united Parliament from 1801; op­
posed the Anglo-Irish Union.—  261, 
266 
Fourier, François Marie Charles (1772-
1837) — French Utopian socialist.— 
175 
Fox, Charles James (1749-1806) — British 
statesman, a Whig leader, Foreign 
Secretary (1782, 1783, 1806).—226, 
228, 230, 231, 240-42, 259, 273-74, 
278 
Fox, Henry Richard V assail, 3rd Ba­
ron Holland (1773-1840) —Whig, 
member of Grenville's Cabinet (1806-
07), opposed the Anglo-Irish Union.— 
266 
Fox, Luke—Irish lawyer, M. P., in 1799 
actively supported the Anglo-Irish 
Union.—261,  282 
Fox, Peter (André, Peter Fox) (d. 1869) — 
journalist, active member of the Brit­
ish democratic and working-class 
movement; Positivist; a leader of the 
British National League for the Inde­
pendence of Poland; participant in 
the inaugural meeting of the Interna­
tional held on September 28, 1864 at 
St. Martin's Hall, London; member 
of the General Council of the Inter­
national (1864-69); General Secretary 
of the Council (September-November 
1866);  Corresponding Secretary for 
America (1866-67); an editor of The 
Commonwealth (1866); member of the 
Executive Committee of the Reform 
League.— 16 
Frederick William IV (1795-1861) — 
King of Prussia  ( 1840-61).— 60 Fridolin or  Fridold,  Saint (6th cent.) — 
Irish Christian missionary among the 
Allemanni of the Upper Rhine.—178 
Friess, J. (or  Fries)  — member of the 
International and of the Central 
Committee of the German-speaking 
sections in Geneva.— 210 
Frodi—son of Harald I Fairhair.— 179 
Fulliquet, Louis—Swiss worker; member 
of the International, Secretary of the 
Geneva cabinet-makers' section.— 210 
G 
Callus (Gall St.) (c. 550-c. 645) —Irish 
Christian missionary.—178 
Gandillon, Ami— 210 
Garbani, Paul— 210 
Gardiner, William or William Neville 
(1748-1806) —English army officer, 
aide-de-camp of the Lord Lieutenant 
of Ireland (1793); member of the 
Irish Parliament from 1799.— 236 
Garibaldi, Giuseppe (1807-1882) — 
Italian revolutionary and democrat; 
took part in the revolutionary move­
ment in South America in the 1830s 
and 1840s and in the 1848-49 revolu­
tion in Italy; headed the struggle for 
Italy's national liberation and unifica­
tion in the 1850s and 1860s.—101, 
323, 341 
Gathorne-Hardy, Gathorne (1814-1906) — 
British statesman, Conservative, 
Home Secretary (1867-68).—3 
Gay, Désirée — 210 
Gay, François —in May 1869 refused to 
join the committee of the Geneva 
Section named Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy.— 210 
Gay, Jules Leopold (1807-d. after 1876)  — 
French journalist; Utopian communist, 
communist, follower of Owen; pub­
lisher of Le Communiste in Paris 
(1849);  member of the International; 
an editor of L'Egalité and La Liberté. — 
210 

=====第578页=====
546 Name Index 
Geib,  August (1842-1879) —German 
bookseller in Hamburg; Social-
Democrat; member of the General 
Association of German Workers; par­
ticipant in the Eisenach Congress 
(1869);  a founder of the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party; Treas­
urer of the Party (1872-78); deputy 
to the Imperial Diet (1874-77).—133 
Gennadius (5th cent.)—Gallic writer.— 
177 
George I (1660-1727) —King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1714-27).—212, 
225, 228, 229, 230, 232, 270, 272-74 
George III (1738-1820) —King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1760-1820).— 
197, 212, 215, 222-24, 226, 227, 228, 
232-34, 241, 242, 252, 257, 259-62, 
264, 273-74, 275, 278 
George IV (1762-1830) —Prince Regent 
(1811-20), King of Great Britain and 
Ireland (1820-30).—242, 256, 278 
Gerlach, Karl Heinrich Eduard Friedrich 
von—Prussian official, Regierungs­
präsident in Cologne (1839-44).—60 
Gillaciarain—Viking, son of Gluniairn, 
killed at the battle of Clontarf 
(1014).—183 
Giraldus Cambrensis (Gerald de Barry) 
(c. 1146-c. 1220) —English writer; 
took part in the military expedition 
to Ireland (1185); author of essays on 
Ireland.—172, 173, 180, 185, 285-86 
Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-1898) — 
British statesman, Tory, later Peelite; 
leader of the Liberal Party in the 
latter half of the 19th century; Chan­
cellor of the Exchequer (1852-55, 
1859-66) and Prime Minister (1868-
74, 1880-85, 1886, 1892-94).—28, 83, 
103, 105, 189, 324, 326, 327, 345, 
407-11,  415, 416-18, 421-30, 434-36, 
438-40 
Gluniairn—father of Gillaciarain.— 
183 
Godfrey, Thomas—English inventor of a 
patent medicine (Godfrey's Cor­
dial).—327 Gordon, James Bentley (1750-1819) — 
English historian, author of works on 
the history of Ireland.— 309 
Gottlob,  Walter—  210 
Gottraux, Jules—a Swiss, who became a 
British subject; member of the Inter­
national.— 364 
Grange, Charles—Swiss worker, plas­
terer; member of the Geneva Section 
named Alliance of Socialist Democ­
racy.—210 
Grattan, Henry (1746-1820) —Irish 
politician, lawyer; from 1775 to 1800 
leader of moderate Liberal opposi­
tion to the British Government in the 
Irish Parliament; member of the 
British Parliament from  1805.—  222, 
227-34, 235, 236, 241, 244, 247, 250, 
254, 258, 271, 273-75, 276, 278, 280 
Graves, Charles (1812-1899) —Irish 
scholar, mathematician; in 1852-99 
member of the government commis­
sion for translating and publishing 
the ancient Irish laws; Bishop of 
Limerick from 1866.—170 
Gray, Sir John (1816-1875) —British 
journalist, member of the House of 
Commons (1865-75).—407 
Gregory XIII (1502-1585) —Pope 
(1572-85).—195 
Grenville, George Nugent-Temple, 1st 
Marquis of Buckingham (1753-1813) — 
British statesman, member of the 
Privy Council, Lord Lieutenant of 
Ireland (1782-83, 1787-90).—222, 
231, 236, 238, 241, 242, 264, 274, 
278 
Grenville, William Wyndham Grenville, 
Baron (1759-1834) — British states­
man, Tory, later Whig; in 1782 he 
became secretary to his brother. Mar­
quis of Buckingham; Foreign Secre­
tary (1791-1801), Prime Minister 
(1806-07).—231,  274 
Greville-Nugent, Reginald—Irish army 
officer, Liberal.— 439 
Grey, Charles, Earl of, Viscount  Howick, 
Baron Grey (1764-1845) —British 

=====第579页=====
Name Index 547 
statesman, a Whig leader; First Lord 
of the Admiralty (1806), Prime 
Minister (1830-34); opposed the 
Anglo-Irish Union of 1801.—266 
Gréy or Gray, Lord  Leonard,  Viscount 
Grane of Ireland (d. 1541) — Deputy-
Governor of Ireland (1535-40).—288 
Griffith, Richard (1752-1820) —member 
of the Irish Parliament (1783-90).— 
239, 276 
Grimm, Jacob Ludwig Carl (1785-
1863)—German philologist, author 
of a historical grammar of the Ger­
man language and of folklore adap­
tations; professor in Göttingen and 
then in Berlin; Liberal.—175, 184 
Grouchy, Emmanuel, marquis de (1766-
1847) — Marshal of France, partici­
pated in the Napoleonic wars.— 254, 
280 
Guerry—210 
Guillaume, James (1844-1916) — Swiss 
teacher; anarchist, Bakunirtist; 
member of the International, dele­
gate to the Geneva (1866), Lausanne 
(1867),  Basle (1869) and the Hague 
(1872) congresses of the Internation­
al; an organiser of the Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy; editor of Progrès, 
La Solidarité and the Bulletin de la 
Fédération Jurassienne; was expelled 
from the International at the Hague 
Congress for his splitting activities.— 
114-15 
Guillmeaux—member of the Romance 
Federation of the International; 
Chairman of the section of turners 
and mechanics; elected member of 
the Egalité editorial board at the 
Federation's congress in January 
1869,  withdrew from the board in 
January 1870, together with the 
other Bakuninists.—123, 210 
Guinet, Jenny—210 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874) — French historian and states­
man; virtually directed France's 
home and foreign policy from 1840 to the February 1848 revolution; 
expressed the interests of the big 
financial bourgeoisie.— 61 
Guyot. Charles— 210 
H 
Habsburgs (or Hapsburgs) — dynasty of 
emperors of the Holy Roman Empire 
from 1273 to 1806 (with intervals), 
Spanish Kings (1516-1700), Austrian 
emperors (1804-67) and Austro-
Hungarian emperors (1867-1918).— 
289 
Haeberling, Adolphe —member of the 
committee of a bakers' co-operative 
society in Geneva affiliated to the 
I nternational.— 210 
Hales, John (b. 1839) —British trade-
union leader; weaver; member of the 
Reform League, the Land and 
Labour League; member of the Gen­
eral Council of the International 
(1866-72) and its Secretary (1871-72); 
delegate to the London Conference 
(1871) and the Hague Congress 
(1872) of the International; headed 
the reformist wing of the British 
Federal Council from the beginning 
of 1872; expelled from the Interna­
tional in 1873.—26, 54 
Hallam, Henry (1777-1859) —English 
historian, author of works on the 
history of English constitution.—  285, 
288 
Hancock, U. Nelson—Irish lawyer, with 
O'Mahony published two volumes of 
Senchus A/or, a collection of ancient 
laws.—170 
Hanmer, Meredith (1543-1604) — Eng­
lish clergyman and historian, author 
of The Chronicle of Ireland.—173 
Hansemann, David Justus (1790-1864) — 
German capitalist, a leader of the 
Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Prussian 
Finance Minister (March-September 
1848).—40 
Harald I Fairhair (c. 850-c. 933) — King 
of Norway (872-930).—179 

=====第580页=====
548 Name Index 
Harcourt, Simon, 1st Earl Harcourt 
(1714-1777) — British aristocrat, held 
various posts at Court; Ambassador 
to Paris (1768-72), Lord Lieutenant 
of Ireland (1772-77).—222, 238 
Hardy, Jean (1763-1802) —French gen­
eral; taken prisoner by the English 
during the expedition to Ireland 
(1798);  later fought in the French 
Rhenish Army.—282 
Harris, Walter (1686-1761) —Irish his­
toriographer, author of works on the 
history of Ireland; published docu­
ments collected by Sir James Ware 
with his additions and comments.— 
269 
Hastings, Francis Rawdon, Marquis of 
Hastings, Earl of Moira (1754-1826) — 
English army officer; member of the 
Irish Parliament from 1780.—-245 
Hatzfeldt, Sophie, Countess von (1805-
1881) — German aristocrat, friend 
and supporter of Lassalle. —-24 
Hay, Peter—governor of Spike Island 
Convict Prison.—106 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher.—  61, 
309 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856) —German 
revolutionär) poet.— 348 
Hely-Hutchinson. John (1724-1794) — 
Secretary of Slate in Ireland from 
1777,  supported English rule in Ire­
land.—227, 273 
Hely-Hutchinson, John, Earl of Donough-
more (1757-1832) —Irish general; 
member of the Irish Parliament; 
supporter of the Anglo-Irish Union; 
son of the above.— 260 
Hennessy, John Pope (1834-1891) —Irish 
politician, Conservative M. P.; pro­
posed several minor reforms in Ire­
land in the early 1860s.—206 
Henry 1 (1068-1  135)  —King of England 
(1100-35).—173 
Hen rv II Plan ta gen et (1133-1189)  — 
King of England (1 154-89).—195, 
285 Henry V (1387-1422) —King of Eng­
land (1413-22).—291 
Henry VII (1457-1509) —King of Eng­
land (1485-1509).—212, 270, 287 
Henry VIII (1491-1547) —King of Eng­
land (1509-47).—287, 288, 292, 297, 
302 
Héridier, Marc —210 
Heron, Denis Caulfield (1824-1881) — 
Irish lawyer and economist, M. P. 
—440 
Hervey, Frederick, Earl of Bristol (1730-
1803) — Bishop of Derry; member of 
the Irish Parliament; commanded a 
volunteer regiment in Londonderry 
(1782),  took an active part in the 
volunteer congress in Dublin in 
1783.—226, 234, 235, 275 
Herzen, Alexander Ivanovich (1812-
1870) — Russian revolutionary demo­
crat, materialist philosopher and writ­
er; left Russia in 1847, from 1852 
lived in England where he estab­
lished the Free Russian Press and 
published the periodical Polyarnaya 
Zvezda (Polar Star) and the news­
paper Kolokol (The Bell).—123 
Hieronym  us—  see Jerome,  St. 
Hirsch, Max (1832-1905) —German eco­
nomist, prominent figure in the Party 
of Progress; in 1868, together with 
Franz Duncker, founded reformist 
trade unions which were known as 
Hirsch-Duncker trade unions and 
which existed until 1933.—25, 26 
Hobart, Robert, Lord Hobart, Earl 
of Buckinghamshire (1760-1816) — 
English army officer; Chief Secretary 
to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 
(1784-93); member of the Irish Par­
liament (1787-93).—234, 236, 238, 
245, 278 
Hoche, Lazare Louis (1768-1797) — 
French general; directed the suppres­
sion of the counter-revolutionary re­
volt in Bretagne and Vendée in 
1794;  in 1795 routed the royalist 
landing party at Quiberon thus put-

=====第581页=====
Name Index 549 
ting an end to Vendean wars; in 
1796 commanded an expeditionary 
corps that was to land in Ireland.— 
246, 254, 280 
Holinshed (or Hollingshead), Raphael 
(died c. 1580)—English historian, 
author of the Chronicles of England, 
Scotland, and Ireland from ancient 
times to the 1570s.—298 
Holland—see Fox, Henry Richard Vas­
sail, 3rd Baron Holland 
Homer—semi-legendary Greek epic 
poet, author of the Iliad and the 
Odyssey.—294 
Hood,  Gunner—Irish Fenian, sentenced 
to four years' penal servitude by a 
military tribunal in 1866.—415-16 
Houchard, Jean Nicolas (1740-1793) — 
French general; commanded the 
Northern army which defeated the 
Duke of York's troops (1793).—246 
Howard, Frederick, Earl of Carlisle (1748-
1825)—Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 
(1780-82).—224, 251 
Howell, George (1833-1910) —British 
mason; a reformist leader of the 
British trade unions; former Chartist, 
Secretary of the London Trades 
Council (1861-62); participant in the 
inaugural meeting of the International 
held on September 28, 1864 at St. 
Martin's Hall, London; member of the 
General Council of the International 
(October 1864 to 1869); participant in 
the London Conference of the Inter­
national (1865); Secretary of the Re­
form League; opposed revolutionary 
tactics.— 26 
Howison—Irish politician, alderman; in 
1790 was put up by the Municipal 
Council as candidate for the post of 
Mayor of Dublin.—244, 279 
Hrafn the Red—Norse Viking, took 
part in the battle of Clontarf 
(1014).—181 
Hugo,  Victor Marie (1802-1885) — 
French writer; deputy to the Con­
stituent and Legislative Assemblies during the Second Republic; opposed 
Louis Bonaparte.— 56 
Humbert, Jean Robert Marie (1755-
1823)—French general; commander 
of a French force that landed in 
Ireland.—281 
Hume, Robert William—American petty-
bourgeois radical, journalist; a leader 
of the National Labour Union; 
member of the International, Gener­
al Council's correspondent.—442-43 
Huriot, Victor—member of the editorial 
board of Le Courrier français (1866-
68).—348 
Huxley, Thomas Henry (1825-1895)— 
English naturalist; close associate of 
Charles Darwin and populariser of 
his teaching.—174 
I 
Ireton, Henry (1611-1651 ) — prominent 
figure in the English Revolution; an 
ideologist of the Independent Party; 
general in the Parliamentary Army; 
participant in Oliver Cromwell's 
punitive expedition to Ireland (1649-
50); succeeded Cromwell as Com­
mander-in-Chief and Lord Deputy of 
Ireland (1650-51).—196 
Isidore of Seville (Isidorus Hispalensis) 
(c. 570-636) — Spanish bishop and 
Catholic writer.—177 
J 
Jackson, William (c. 1737-1795)—Irish 
Catholic clergyman, member of the 
United Irishmen society; in 1794 
came from France to establish links 
with Theobald Wolfe Tone, was ar­
rested and sentenced to death, com­
mitted suicide.—251, 253 
Jaclard, Charles Victor (1843-1900)— 
French journalist, Blanquist; member 
of the International; was active in the 
Paris Commune, 1871; member of 

=====第582页=====
550 Name Index 
the National Guard's Central Com­
mittee, commander of a legion of the 
National Guard; following the sup­
pression of the Paris Commune, 
emigrated to Switzerland and then to 
Russia; after the 1880 amnesty re­
turned to France and resumed his 
activities in the socialist movement.— 
210 
James—alderman and, from 1790, 
Mayor of Dublin; commanded troops 
that crushed the Defenders' upris­
ing near Dublin (1795).—244-45, 
279 
James I (1566-1625) — King of England, 
Scotland and Ireland (1603-25).— 
140, 195, 288, 293, 297, 299-300 
James II (1633-1701) —Duke of York 
(from 1634), King of England, Scot­
land and Ireland (1685-88).—194, 
196, 289-90, 294, 304-05 
Jerome, St. (Eusebius Sophronius Hie-
ronymus) (c. 340-420)—theologian; 
born in Dalmatia; translated the 
Bible into Latin.—176 
Jessup, William J.—American worker, 
carpenter; active participant in the 
American labour movement; Vice-
President (1866) and Corresponding 
Secretary (1867) of the National 
Labour Union of the United States 
for the State of New York; a leader 
of the Workers' Union of New York; 
General Council's correspondent in 
the USA.—443 
Johannard,  Jules (1843-1888) — prom­
inent figure in the French working-
class movement; lithographer; 
member of the General Council of 
the International (1868-69, 1871-72) 
and Corresponding Secretary for 
Italy (1868-69); in 1870 founded a 
section of the International at 
St. Denis; member of the Paris Com­
mune of 1871; sided with the Blan-
quists; after the defeat of the Com­
mune emigrated to London; delegate 
to the Hague Congress (1872).—51, 
55 John (Lackland) (c. 1167-1216) —King 
of England (1199-1216).—173 
Johnstone, James (d. 1798) — Scottish col­
lector and publisher of ancient Scan­
dinavian literature.—181 
Jost, Jean—secretary of the section of 
the Geneva turners, mechanics and 
foundrymen.— 210 
Jourdan, Jean Baptiste, comte (1762-
1833) — Marshal of France; fought in 
the wars of the French Republic and 
Napoleonic France, won a victory at 
Fleurus (1794); commanded the 
French Army in Spain (1808-14); 
Minister of Foreign Affairs during 
the July monarchy.— 246 
Jukes, Joseph Beete (1811-1869)— 
English geologist, supervised the 
geological survey of Ireland in 1850-
69.—148,  151 
Jung, Hermann (1830-1901) —  pro­
minent figure in the international 
and Swiss working-class movement; 
watchmaker; member of the General 
Council of the International and 
Corresponding Secretary for Switzer­
land (November 1864 to 1872); 
Treasurer of the General Council 
(1871-72); participant in the London 
Conference (1865), Chairman of the 
Geneva (1866), Brussels (1868) and 
Basle (1869) congresses and of the 
London Conference (1871) of the 
International; member of the British 
Federal Council; supported Marx be­
fore the Hague Congress of 1872, 
later joined the reformist leaders of 
the British trade unions.—4, 37, 38, 
51, 55, 123, 136, 336-37 
K 
Kamp —Mayor of Seraing (Belgium), 
member of the Cockerill Company.— 
48 
Kane, Sir Robert John (1810-1890) — 
Irish scientist, professor of chemistry 
and physics; also studied the 
economy of Ireland.—152, 163 

=====第583页=====
Name Index 551 
Kelly, Jeremiah Hubert—physician in 
Spike Island Convict Prison.—106-07 
Kenyon, Lloyd Kenyon, 1st Baron (1732-
1802)—British lawyer, Master of the 
Rolls and Lord Chief Justice of 
England, M. P.—265 
Keogh, John (1740-1817)—Irish mer­
chant; member of the Catholic Com­
mittee, supported emancipation of 
the Irish Catholics; on his initiative 
the Relief Act was adopted in 1793; 
member of the United Irishmen soci­
ety.—219,  249 
Kerthialfadh (Kerthialfadr)—Irish sol­
dier, participant in the battle of 
Clontarf (1014).—182-83 
Kickham, Charles Joseph (1826-1882) — 
Irish journalist; took part in the 
national liberation movement of the 
1840s; Fenian; an editor of The Irish 
People (1865); in 1865 was arrested 
and sentenced to 14 years' penal 
servitude, released in 1869.—102, 
422, 440 
Kilian (Chilian, Killian), St. (d. 697) — 
Irish missionary, preached Christiani­
ty in Eastern Franconia; first Bishop 
of Würzburg.— 178 
Kimbaoth (3rd cent. B. C.) — mentioned 
in chronicles as the ruler of Ulster.— 
169 
Knox, Alexander Andrew (1818-1891) — 
English journalist and police magis­
trate;  member of a commission which 
reported to Parliament in 1867 on 
the treatment of political prisoners in 
British prisons.—418, 424, 428, 438 
Kohl, Johann Georg (1808-1878) — 
German geographer, author of sever­
al works on the geography of Euro­
pean countries.—284 
L 
Laeghaire (Loeghaire) (d. 458) — King of 
Ireland (428-58).—171 
Lafargue, Paul  ( 1842-1911 )—prom­
inent figure in the international and French working-class movement; 
member of the General Council of 
the International, Corresponding 
Secretary for Spain (1866-69); helped 
to organise sections of the Interna­
tional in France (1869-70), Spain and 
Portugal (1871-72); delegate to the 
Hague Congress (1872); a founder of 
the Workers' Party of France; disci­
ple and associate of Marx and En-
gels;  husband of Marx's daughter, 
Laura.—4, 55 
Lake,  Gerard,  1st Viscount Lake of Delhi 
and Leswarree (1744-1808) — British 
general, M. P. (1790-1802); com­
manded troops that quelled the Irish 
uprising of 1798.—254, 260, 280 
Lambert, John (1619-1683)—general in 
the Parliamentary Army during the 
English Revolution; took part in all 
major battles with royalist troops and 
in conquering Scotland; Lord Deputy 
of Ireland (1652).—196 
Langrishe, Sir Hercules (1731-1811) — 
Irish politician, M.  P.—  263 
Lanigan, John (1758-1828)—Irish 
bishop, supported the Anglo-Irish 
Union, wrote several works on ec­
clesiastical history.—  263,  265 
Laplace, Jacques—delegate to the third 
congress of the Romance Federation 
of the International from the 
Carouge Section.—210 
Larcom, Sir Thomas Aiskew  (1801-
1879)—Irish government official, 
later major-general; from 1826 
worked at the British geological survey 
of Ireland, studied material on the 
history of old Ireland; permanent 
Irish Under-Secretary from  1853.— 
170 
Larkin, Michael (d. 1867) — Irish Fe­
nian, sentenced to death by English 
court.—3,  13 
Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864)—Ger­
man journalist and lawyer, petty-
bourgeois socialist; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution, founder and first 
President of the General Association 
21-733 

=====第584页=====
552 Name Index 
of German Workers (1863), one of 
the originators of the opportunist 
trend in the German working-class 
movement.—20, 21, 23-24, 59 
Laurier, Clement (1832-1872) —French 
lawyer and politician, Republican; 
after the revolution of September 4, 
1870 was in the service of the Gov­
ernment of National Defence; later a 
monarchist.—438 
La Valette, Charles Jean Marie Félix, 
marquis de (1806-1881) — French 
statesman, Minister of the Interior 
(1865-67).—364 
Lovelle, Patrick—Irish clergyman, sym­
pathised with the Fenians; author of 
the book The Irish Landlord since the 
Revolution.—434 
Lavergne, Louis Gabriel Léonce Guilhaud 
de (1809-1880) —French bourgeois 
economist, author of a number of 
works on agricultural economics.— 
159-60, 283 
Law, Harriet (1832-1897) —a leading 
figure in the atheist movement in 
England; member of the General 
Council (June 1867-72) and of the 
Manchester Section of the Interna­
tional (1872).—26, 55, 399-400 
Lawrence (Laurence), Richard  (1643-
1682) — Parliamentary Army colonel 
during the English Revolution; took 
part in Cromwell's expedition to Ire­
land and in land confiscations there; 
author of pamphlets on Ireland.— 
269 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874) — French journalist and politi­
cian, a leader of the petty-bourgeois 
democrats; editor of La Réforme; 
Minister of the Interior in the Provi­
sional Government in 1848; Deputy 
to the Constituent and Legislative 
Assemblies (leader of the Montagne 
party);  emigrated to England follow­
ing the events of June 13, 1849; 
returned to France in  1870.—  376, 
381, 411 
Ledwich, Edivard (1739-1823) —Irish ar­chaeologist; author of works on the 
history of old Ireland (The Antiquities 
of Ireland and others).—308 
Leinster, Duke of—see Fitzgerald, William 
Robert, 2nd Duke of Leinster 
Leland,  Thomas (1722-1785) —English 
historian, author of The History of 
Ireland from the Invasion of Hen­
ry IL— 298-300, 301-03 
Lepelletier—public prosecutor at the 
trial of the Executive Committee of 
the Paris Section of the International 
(1868).—367 
Leslie, Thomas Edward Cliffe (c. 1827-
1882) —English economist.—191, 205 
Lessner, Friedrich (1825-1910) —  pro­
minent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment; tailor; member of the Com­
munist League from 1847; took part 
in the 1848-49 revolution; prosecuted 
at the Cologne Communist trial in 
1852;  emigrated to London in 1856; 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London and of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (November 1864 to 1872); de­
legate to the London Conference 
(1865),  the Lausanne (1867), Brussels 
(1868),  Basle (1869) and the Hague 
(1872) congresses of the Internation­
al; member of the British Federal 
Council; later a founder of the Brit­
ish Independent Labour Party; friend 
and associate of Marx and Engels. — 
55 
Levy, Joseph Moses (1812-1888)—a 
founder and publisher of The Daily 
Telegraph.—421 
Lewis, Sir George Cornewall, Baronet 
(1806-1863)—British statesman, 
Whig; Financial Secretary to the 
Treasury (1850-52); editor of The 
Edinburgh Review (1852-55); Chancel­
lor of the Exchequer (1855-58), 
Home Secretary (1859-61), Secretary 
of State for War (1861-63).—28 
Liddell, A. F. O.— English employee in 
the Home Office (1870).—422 

=====第585页=====
Name Index 553 
Liebknecht, Wilhelm (1826-1900) — 
prominent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment; participant in the 1848-49 rev­
olution; member of the Communist 
League and the International; dele­
gate to the Basle Congress (1869) of 
the International; deputy to the Im­
perial Diet from 1867; a founder and 
leader of the German Social-
Democratic Workers' Party; friend 
and associate of Marx and Engels. — 
24, 32, 90, 116, 122, 133, 354, 
445 
Limburg, W.— German shoemaker; mem­
ber of the German Workers' Educa­
tional Society in London, member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1868-69).—55 
Lincoln, Abraham (1809-1865)—Ame­
rican statesman; a leader of the Re­
publican Party; President of the 
United States (1861-65); during the 
Civil War, under pressure from the 
masses, carried out a number of 
important bourgeois-democratic re­
forms which led to the adoption of 
revolutionary methods of warfare; 
assassinated by a slave-holders' agent 
in April 1865.—53, 361, 362 
Lindegger, Antoine (d. after 1898) — 
Swiss worker, loader; follower of 
Bakunin; member of the Committee 
of the Geneva Section named Alliance 
of Socialist Democracy; member of the 
Égalité editorial board (1869).—123, 
209 
Lingard,  John (1771-1851) — English his­
torian, author of A History of England 
in eight volumes.—  303,  305 
Loder—Norse ruler of Orkney Islands; 
fought at the battle of Clontarf 
(1014).—183 
Longfield—Irish nobleman, M.P. from 
County Cork (1787).—243 
Longuet, Charles (1839-1903)  —pro­
minent in the French working-class 
movement; journalist; Proudhon-
ist; member of the General Coun­cil of the International (1866-67, 
1871-72); Corresponding Secretary 
for Belgium (1866); delegate to the 
Lausanne (1867), Brussels (1868) and 
the Hague (1872) congresses and the 
London Conference (1871); member 
of the Paris Commune; later joined 
the Possibilists; husband of Marx's 
daughter, Jenny.— 366 
Louis XIV (1638-1715) —King of 
France (1643-1715).—289, 295 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850) —Duke of 
Orleans, King of France (1830-48).— 
328 
Lucas, Charles (1713-1771) — Irish phy­
sician and journalist, patriotic pam­
phleteer.— 212 
Lucraft, Benjamin (1809-1897) — a re­
formist leader of the British trade 
unions; cabinet-maker; participant in 
the inaugural meeting of the Interna­
tional held on September 28, 1864 at 
St. Martin's Hall, London; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1864-71); delegate to the Brus­
sels (1868) and Basle (1869) con­
gresses of the International; member 
of the Executive Committee of the Re­
form League; in 1871 refused to sign 
the General Council's address The 
Civil War in France and withdrew 
from the International.—  26, 55, 139 
Luttrel, Henry Lawes, Earl of Carhampton 
(1743-1821)—English general, mem­
ber of the Irish Parliament; from 1796 
Commander-in-Chief in Ireland.— 
257, 281 
Lynch, John (c. 1599-c. 1673) —Irish 
clergyman, author and translator of 
several works on the history of Ire­
land.—174 
Lynch, John (1832-1866) — Irish Fenian, 
leader of a Fenian organisation in 
Cork; sentenced to ten years' penal 
servitude in January 1866; died in 
Working Prison that year.—418, 
437-38 
Lyons, Robert Spencer Dyer (1826-1886) — 
Irish physician, Liberal, member of 
21* 

=====第586页=====
554 Name Index 
the commission of inquiry (1870) into 
the treatment of the Irish political 
prisoners.—417 
M 
McCann—member of the United Irish­
men society, took part in preparing 
an uprising in 1798.—255, 281 
Macaulay, Thomas Babington Macaulay, 
Baron (1800-1859) —English historian 
and politician, Whig, M.P.—294, 301, 
313 
McCormic—Irish politician, secretary of 
the Catholic Committee in the early 
1790s.—249 
McCracken, Henry Joy (1767-1798) —a 
founder of the United Irishmen soci­
ety in Belfast, leader of the Antrim 
uprising (1798).—219 
M'Donnel—Irish typographer, printed 
the Hibernian Journal at the end of 
the 18th century.—250 
M'Donnell—prison doctor in Dublin dis­
missed from the post because of his 
protest against the brutal treatment 
of the Fenian prisoners.—106-07, 
409, 427 
MacGeoghegan, James (1702-1763) — 
French abbot of Irish origin, author 
of History of Ireland.—290, 299 
Machiavelli, Niccolo (1469-1527) —Ita­
lian politician, historian, military 
theorist and writer.—  75, 419 
MacNevin (MacNeven), William James 
(1763-1841) — Irish physician, mem­
ber of the United Irishmen society.— 
255, 281 
Macpherson, James (1736-1796) — Scot­
tish poet, author of several poems 
based on an Irish epic.—140 
Maelseachlainn II (949-1022) —King of 
Ireland. (980-1002 and 1014-22).— 
183 
Maguane—government spy in the 
United Irishmen society.— 255 
Maguire, Thomas—Irish sailor; arrested 
in 1867 on a false charge of trying to arrange the escape of the imprisoned 
Fenians; was sentenced to be hanged 
but was released soon afterwards.— 3 
Malachy—see Maelseachlainn II 
Malachy, St. (c. 1094-1148) —Irish pre­
late, Archbishop of Armagh and 
papal legate in Ireland.—172, 285 
Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834) — 
English clergyman and economist, 
author of a theory of population.— 
373 
Manners, Charles, Duke of Rutland (1754-
1787) — British statesman, member of 
the Privy Council, Lord Lieutenant of 
Ireland (1784-87).—236, 239, 242, 
243, 276-77 
Mansfield—see Murray, William, Lord 
Mansfield 
Maolmordha (d. 1014) — King of Leins-
ter (999-1014).—181, 183 
Marauda —210 
Marilly, Joseph— 210 
Marly—Irish Catholic leader, Bishop of 
Waterford.— 261 
Martin, John (1812-1875) —Irish politi­
cian, participant in the national liber­
ation movement in the 1840s; a 
founder of the National League 
(1864);  Honorary Secretary of the 
Home Rule League, M.P.  (1871-
75).—439 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) (1814-
1881) —wife of Karl Marx.—61 
Marx, Jenny (1844-1883) —Karl Marx's 
eldest daughter.—414,  420-21,  424 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883)—4, 10, 18, 32, 
33, 35, 38, 51, 55-64, 90, 93, 94, 101, 
110-12,  122, 124, 125, 133, 134, 195, 
210, 278, 317, 320, 322, 323, 324, 
326, 337, 344, 361, 366, 378, 380, 
382, 383, 386, 387, 389, 392-93, 394, 
397, 398, 399, 407, 410, 411, 412, 
413, 443-46 
Mary I (1516-1558)—Queen of Eng­
land (1553-58), wife of Philip II of 
Spain.—289, 297, 298 

=====第587页=====
Name Index 555 
Massey, William Nathaniel (1809-
1881) — English historian, author of 
an unfinished work on the reign of 
George III.—290 
Matis, A.—210 
Maulet, Joseph D.—210 
Maurice, Zévy —tailor; member of the 
General Council of the International 
(1866-72), Corresponding Secretary 
for Hungary (1870-71).—26 
Maxwell—Attorney-General of Ireland 
(1796).—254, 280 
Mayo—see Naas, Richard Southwell 
Bourke, Earl of Mayo 
Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805-1872) — Italian 
revolutionary, democrat; a leader of 
the Italian national liberation move­
ment; headed the Provisional Govern­
ment of the Roman Republic (1849); 
an organiser of the Central Commit­
tee of European Democracy in Lon­
don (1850); after the foundation of 
the International in 1864 tried to 
bring it under his influence.— 323 
Meagher, Thomas Francis (1823-1867) — 
leader of the Irish national liberation 
movement in the 1840s; a founder of 
the Irish Confederation (1847); in 
1848 was arrested and sentenced to 
penal servitude for life for taking 
part in the preparation of an upris­
ing; escaped in 1852 and emigrated 
to the USA; during the US Civil War 
(1861-65) commanded the brigade of 
Irish volunteers that fought on the 
side of the Northerners.—  200,  206, 
318 
Meissner, Otto Karl (1819-1902) — 
Hamburg publisher; brought out 
Marx's Capital and other works by 
Marx and Engels. — 62 
Mela, Pomponius (1st cent.) — Roman 
geographer, author of De situ orbis in 
three volumes.—161 
Mende, Fritz (d. 1879) — member of the 
General Association of German 
Workers; president of the Lassallean 
General Association of German Workers founded by Hatzfeldt (1869-
72); deputy to the North-German 
Imperial Diet (1869).—24 
Mermillod, François —Swiss case-maker; 
took an active part in the Swiss 
working-class movement in the latter 
part of the 1860s; Vice-President of 
the Romance Federation of the Inter­
national; delegate to the Brussels 
Congress (1868).—210 
Methuen, John (c. 1650-1706) —British 
diplomat; in 1703 concluded a trade 
treaty with Portugal known as the 
Methuen Treaty.— 224 
Meyer, Sigfrid (c. 1840-1872) — a prom­
inent figure in the German and 
American working-class movement, 
socialist; engineer; member of the 
General Association of German 
Workers; opposed the Lassallean in­
fluence in the German working-class 
movement; in 1864 published in Ger­
many, at his own expense, the Man­
ifesto of the Communist Party by Marx 
and Engels; in 1866 emigrated to the 
USA, member of the New York 
Communist Club; an organiser of the 
International's sections in the USA; 
follower of Marx and Engels. — 443 
Meyers—doctor at Broadmoor asy-
'lum.—422, 431. 
Milner, George—Irishman, prominent 
figure in the British working-class 
movement; follower of James 
O'Brien; member of the National 
Reform League and of the Land and 
Labour League; member of the Gen­
eral Council of the International 
(1868-72), delegate to the London 
Conference (1871) of the Internation­
al; member of the British Federal 
Council (autumn of 1872 to 1873); 
fought the reformist wing in the 
Council.—26, 55, 387, 392, 399 
Mitchel, John (1815-1875) —Irish rev­
olutionary democrat, Left-wing 
leader of the Young Ireland group; 
deported to a penal colony for taking 
part in the preparation of an uprising 
in 1848; escaped in 1853 and emig-

=====第588页=====
556 Name Index 
rated to the USA; fought on the side 
of the Southerners during the US 
Civil War; author of The History of 
Ireland.—222, 232, 256, 266 
Moira—see Hastings, Francis Rawdon, 
Marquis of Hastings, Earl of Moira 
Molyneux, William (1656-1698) — Irish 
scholar, studied philosophy, mathe­
matics and astronomy; M.P. from 
Dublin University; author of an essay, 
The Case of Ireland (1698).—197, 
212 
Monachon, L.— 210 
Monk (Monck), George, 1st Duke of Al­
bemarle (1608-1670) — English general 
and statesman; originally a royalist; 
later served in Cromwell's army; 
helped restore the Stuart dynasty in 
1660.—264 
Moore, Charles, 6th Earl and 1st Marquis  of 
Drogheda (1730-1822)—Anglo-Irish 
politician; judge; field marshal, M.P., 
supported the Anglo-Irish Union.— 
266 
Moore, George Henry (1811-1870) — Irish 
politician, leader of the tenant-right 
movement, M.P. (1847-57, 1868-70); 
defended the imprisoned Irish Fe­
nians.—103,  313, 408, 410, 415, 422, 
425-26,  430 
Moore, John— coroner of the Midleton 
district.—104, 107, 415 
Moore, Thomas (Morus) (1779-1852) — 
Irish poet and writer, author of The 
History of Ireland in four volumes.— 
287, 309, 310 
Moreau, Jean Victor Marie  (1763-
1813) — French general; took part in 
the wars waged by the French Repub­
lic against European coalitions.— 246 
Morhardt, Emile —Swiss official in the 
Geneva canton in the 1860s.— 71 
Morley, Samuel (1809-1886) —English 
manufacturer and politician; owner 
of The Bee-Hive Newspaper (1869).— 
126 
Moryson, Fynes (1566-1630) — English 
traveller; author of An Itinerary..., a part of which contains the description 
of Ireland.—173 
Mottershead, Thomas (c. 1825-1884) — 
English weaver; member of the Gen­
eral Council (1869-72), Correspond­
ing Secretary for Denmark (1871-72); 
delegate to the London Conference 
(1871) and the Hague Congress 
(1872) of the International; opposed 
Marx's line in the General Council 
and the British Federal Council; ex­
pelled from the International by deci­
sion of the General Council on May 
30, 1873.—411 
Mountjoy—see Blount, Charles, Lord 
Mountjoy, Earl of Devonshire 
Mroczkowsky, Valerien (1840-1889) — 
photographer; took part in the Polish 
insurrection of 1863, after which he 
emigrated first to France and then to 
Switzerland; follower of Bakunin; 
member of the League of Peace and 
Freedom Committee; member of the 
Alliance of Socialist Democracy, both 
the open and the secret alliance.— 
210 
Mulcahy, Denis Dowling (b. 1840) — Irish 
journalist and physician; leader of the 
Fenian organisation in Clonmel; a 
leader of the Irish Revolutionary 
Brotherhood; assistant editor of The 
Irish People (1863-65); sentenced to 
ten years' penal servitude (1865); 
amnestied in 1871.—101 
Müller, Anton — Swiss watchmaker; 
member of the General Council of the 
International (1869).— 55 
Münzer, Thomas (c. 1490-1525) — leader 
of the urban plebeians and poor peas­
ants during the Reformation and the 
Peasant War in Germany (1525); ad­
vocated egalitarian Utopian com­
munism.—93 
Murchadh (d. 1070) — first Irish King of 
the Dublin Danes; son of Finn, King 
of Leinster.—183 
Murphy (called  O'Leary)  — Irish Fenian; 
in 1864 was arrested for agitation 
among the royal army soldiers in 

=====第589页=====
Name Index 557 
Ireland; sentenced to ten years' penal 
servitude.—102, 415 
Murphy, John Nicholas—English journal­
ist, author of several works, including 
Ireland,  Industrial, Political, and Social 
published in London in 1870.—297, 
298,  300, 301-05 
Murray, Patrick Joseph—inspector of a 
convict prison in Dublin.—104, 409, 
427 
Murray, William, Lord Mansfield (1705-
1793)—British statesman, Chief Jus­
tice of the King's Bench.—232, 275 
N 
Naas,  Richard Southwell Bourke, Earl of 
Mayo (1822-1872) —British states­
man, Conservative; Chief Secretary 
for Ireland (1852, 1858-59, 1866-68); 
Viceroy of India (1869-72).—105, 
409, 427 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)— 
Emperor of the French (1804-14 and 
1815).—246, 313 
Napoleon III (Charles Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873)—nephew of 
Napoleon I; President of the Second 
Republic (December 1848 to 1851), 
Emperor of the French (1852-70).— 
13, 18, 42, 49, 57, 62, 72, 97, 189, 
365, 408, 435 
Neilson, Samuel (1761-1803)—an organ­
iser of the United Irishmen society; 
founder of The Northern Star (Belfast, 
1792);  supporter of Ireland's inde­
pendence.—219, 247, 255 
Nennius (8th cent.)—Welsh chronicler, 
author of Historia Britonum.—177, 
308 
Nero (Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus 
Germanicus) (37-68) — Roman Em­
peror (54-68).—328 
Nest or Nesta—daughter of Rhys ap 
Tewdwr, King of South Wales.—172 
Newell—government spy in the United 
Irishmen society.— 255 Newenham, Sir Edward (1732-1814)— 
participant in the volunteer move­
ment in the early 1780s; member of 
the Irish Parliament (1769-97); sup­
porter of the Anglo-Irish Union.— 
245 
Newport, Sir John (1756-1843) — par­
ticipant in the volunteer move­
ment in the early 1780s; Whig, 
member of the British Parliament 
(1803-32); supporter of emancipation 
of the Catholics.—267 
Nicholas I (1796-1855)—Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—429 
Nidegger, Louis—209-10 
Niemtzik, Eduard Richard Julius (1838-
1897)—active in the Slovak working-
class movement; an organiser of 
the workers' educational association 
Vpred (Forward) in Bratislava (Press-
burg) (1869).—78 
North,  Frederick, 2nd Earl of Guilford 
(1732-1792) — British statesman, To­
ry; Chancellor of the Exchequer 
(1767),  Prime Minister (1770-82), 
Home Secretary in Portland's Coali­
tion Cabinet (1783).—222, 226, 231, 
240,  270-71,  273, 274, 295 
Notker, Labeo (c. 952-1022)—German 
monk who taught at the monastic 
school of St. Gall, Switzerland.—175 
O 
Oates, Titus (1649-1705)—English Pro­
testant clergyman.— 289 
O'Braein, Tighearnach (d. 1088)—Irish 
annalist and abbot.—168-69, 309 
O'Brien—government spy in the United 
Irishmen society.— 255 
O'Brien, James (literary pseudonym 
Bronterre) (1805-1864)—British jour­
nalist, Chartist leader; editor of Poor 
Man's Guardian (1830s); author of 
several social reform projects; found­
er of the National Reform League 
(1849).—26 

=====第590页=====
558 Name Index 
O'Brien, Sir Lucius Henry (d. 1795) — 
member of the Irish Parliament, 
member of the Privy Council from 
1787,  clerk of the High Court of 
Chancery.—225 
O'Brien, Michael (d. 1867) —Irish Fe­
nian, executed by sentence of an 
English court.—  3, 13 
O'Byrnes—noble Irish family.— 301 
O'Clery,  Michael (1575-1643) —Irish 
monk, chronicler, a compilor of An­
nales IV Magistrorum.— 168, 309 
O'Connell,  Daniel (1775-1847) —Irish 
lawyer and politician; leader of the 
liberal wing in the national liberation 
movement.—192, 194, 201 
O'Connor,  Arthur (1763-1852)—a prom­
inent figure in the Irish national 
liberation movement; in 1797-98 a 
leader of the United Irishmen society 
and editor-in-chief of its organ, The 
Press; arrested on the eve of the 1798 
uprising; emigrated to France in 
1803.—169, 255, 281 
O'Connor,  Brian (or Bernard) (c. 1490-
c. 1560) — Leinster chieftain, Lord of 
Offaly.—289, 297 
O'Connor,  Feargus Edward (1794-
1855)—Left-wing Chartist leader, 
editor-in-chief of The Northern Star; 
reformist after 1848.—169 
O'Connors—noble Irish family from Of­
faly County (later King's County) in 
Leinster Province.— 297 
O'Conor,  Charles (1764-1828) —Irish 
priest and collector of antiquities, 
translator and editor of Irish chroni­
cles.—168 
O'Conor,  Matthew (1773-1844) —Irish 
historian, author of The History of the 
Irish Catholics...—283, 300, 304 
O'Curry,  Eugene (1796-1862) —Irish his­
torian, authority on the chronicles; 
from 1852 member of the govern­
ment commission for translating and 
publishing the ancient Irish laws; 
author of a work on ancient Irish 
manuscripts.— 170 Odger, George (1820-1877) —shoe­
maker; a reformist leader of the 
British trade unions, Secretary of the 
London Trades Council (1862-72); 
member of the British National 
League for the Independence of Po­
land, the Land and Labour League; 
participant in the inaugural meeting 
of the International held on Sep­
tember 28, 1864 at St. Martin's Hall, 
London; member of the General 
Council of the International (1864-
71), its President (1864-67); took part 
in the London Conference (1865) and 
the Geneva Congress (1866); member 
of the Executive Committee of the 
Reform League; opposed revolution­
ary tactics; in 1871 refused to sign 
the General Council's address The 
Civil War in France, and left the 
Council.—26, 55, 344, 356, 412 
O'Dogherty, Sir Cahir (1587-1608) — 
Irish feudalist, leader of the 1608 
uprising.— 300 
O'Donnell—see M'Donnell 
O'Donnell,  Hugh Mac-Manus, Lord of 
Tyrconnel from 1566—North Irish 
chieftain; father of Irish insurgent 
leader Hugh O'Donnell.—298 
O'Donnell,  Hugh Roe (Red Hugh), Lord of 
Tyrconnel (c. 1571-1602) — a leader of 
the anti-English insurrection.— 298 
O'Donnell,  Rory, 1st Earl of Tyrconnel 
(1575-1608)—North Irish chieftain, 
brother of Hugh O'Donnell.—293 
O'Donovan, John (1809-1861)—Irish 
philologist and historian, from 1852 
member of government commission 
on the translation and publication of 
ancient Irish laws.—168, 169-70, 
\73-74 
O'Donovan Rossa, Jeremiah (1831-1915) 
a leader of the Fenian move­
ment; publisher of The Irish People 
(1863-65); in 1865 was arrested and 
sentenced to life imprisonment; am­
nestied in 1870; emigrated to the 
USA where he headed the Fenian 
organisation; retired from political 

=====第591页=====
Name Index 559 
life in the 1880s.—101, 103, 410, 
414,  415, 416-22, 423-24, 427-28, 
436,  438, 450 
O'Donovan Rossa, Mary J.—wife of 
Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa; organ­
ised the collection of funds for the 
families of the Irish political prisoners 
in 1865-66; author of an appeal to 
Irish women published in The Work­
man's Advocate on January 6, 1866 by 
the decision of the General 
Council.—417 
O'Leary—see Murphy (called O'Leary) 
O'Mahony, Thaddens —Irish philologist; 
jointly with Hancock he published 
two volumes of Senchus Mor, a collec­
tion of ancient laws.—170 
O'More, Guilpatrick—chieftain of the 
big Irish clan; owner of the County 
Leix; fought against English domina­
tion until 1542.—289, 297 
O'Mores—Irish clan from County Leix 
(later Queen's County) in Leinster 
Province.— 297 
O'Neill,  Conn Bacach (c. 1484-c. 1559) 
— descendant of the ancient Irish 
feudal clan in Northern Ireland; Earl 
of Tyrone (from 1542).—297 
O'Neill,  Hugh, Earl of Tyrone (c. 1540-
1616) — head of an influential clan in 
Ulster; leader of an insurrection 
against the English (1595-1603).— 
293, 298 
O'Neill,  John, 1st Viscount O'Neill (1740-
1798) — member of the Irish Parlia­
ment, Governor of the County of 
Antrim; killed during the Irish upris­
ing of 1798.—224, 242, 244 
O'Neill,  Sir Phelim (c. 1604-1653) — 
Irish nobleman, participant in the 
1641 uprising.—293 
O'Neills Shane, Earl of Tyrone (c. 1530-
1567)—leader of a rebellion against 
the English (1559-67).—288 
O'Neills—an Irish family from North­
ern Ireland.—289 
Orde, afterwards Orde-Powlett, 1st Baron 
Bolton (1746-1807) —English lawyer; member of the Irish Parliament 
(1784-90); member of the Privy 
Council of Ireland and its Chief 
Secretary (1784-87).—236, 237, 239-
42, 276-78 
Oriel—see Foster, John, Baron Oriel 
Ormonde—see Butler, James, 12th Earl 
and 1st Duke of Ormonde 
Orr, William (1766-1797) —Irish far­
mer, member of the United Irish­
men society; executed for taking part 
in the movement.—255, 280 
O'Shea, William Henry (1840-1905)— 
Irish public figure; came out in 
support of the imprisoned Fenians in 
1869.—83 
Ospakr—Irish soldier, fought at the 
battle of Clontarf (1014).—182 
Owen, Robert (1771-1858) —English Uto­
pian socialist.—331, 382 
P 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, 3rd Vis­
count (1784-1865)—British statesman, 
Tory, from 1830 Whig; Foreign Sec­
retary (1830-34,  1835-41,  1846-51), 
Home Secretary (1852-55) and Prime 
Minister (1855-58, 1859-65).—193, 
322, 331, 435 
Parkinson- Fortescue, Chichester Samuel, 
Baron Carlingford (1823-1898) — 
British Liberal statesman, M.P. (1847-
74), Chief Secretary for Ireland 
(1865-66, 1868-70).—408 
Parnell, Sir John (1744-1801) —Irish 
lawyer, Protestant; member of the 
Irish Parliament from 1761, Chancel­
lor of the Exchequer from 1799; 
opposed the Anglo-Irish Union.— 
261, 266 
Parsons, Sir Lawrence, 2nd Earl of Rosse 
(1758-1841) — Irish politician, mem­
ber of the Irish Parliament.— 254, 
261 
Parsons, Sir William (1570-1650) —Lord 
Justice of Ireland (1640-43), inspired 

=====第592页=====
560 Name Index 
policy of Ireland's colonial subjuga­
tion.—300, 302 
Patrick, St. (c. 389-c. 461) —Christian 
missionary in Ireland; founder of the 
Irish Catholic Church and its first 
bishop.—171,  176, 178, 433 
Patterson, William— Irish physician, 
author of Observations on the Climate 
of Ireland.—  164 
Peel, Sir Robert (1788-1850)—British 
statesman, moderate Tory, Prime 
Minister (1834-35, 1841-46); repealed 
the Corn Laws in 1846.—28-30, 158, 
382 
Pelagius (c. 360-c. 420) —a British the­
ologian; condemned as a heretic 
for preaching the doctrine of righte­
ousness by the exercise of free will.— 
176-77 
Pelham, Thomas, Earl of Chichester (  1756-
1826) — member of the Irish Parlia­
ment, Whig; opposed emancipation 
of Catholics; Chief Secretary of the 
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland Camden 
in 1795-98.—254, 280 
Pellaton, S.—Secretary of the Bakers' 
Co-operative Society in Geneva; 
member of the Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy, withdrew from it in Feb­
ruary 1869.—210 
Pellegrin-Druart, A.—210 
Pelletier, Claude (1816-1881)—French 
democrat; deputy to the Constituent 
and Legislative Assemblies (1848-51); 
exiled from France after the coup 
d'état of December 2, 1851; emig­
rated to the USA; the International's 
correspondent for the French-
language section in America.—442 
Perret, Henri—prominent figure in the 
Swiss working-class movement; en­
graver, a leader of the International 
in Switzerland, General Secretary of 
the Romance Federal Committee 
(1868-73); member of the Égalité 
editorial board; delegate to the Gene­
va (1866) and Basle (1869) congresses 
and to the London Conference (1871) 
of the International; member of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy; in 
1869 broke with the Bakuninists, but 
adopted a conciliatory stand after the 
Hague Congress of the International 
(1872).—84, 117, 123, 210 
Perrié— 210 
Perron, Charles Eugène (1837-1919) — 
active in the Swiss working-class 
movement; enamel painter, then 
carthographer; delegate to the 
Lausanne (1867) and Brussels (1868) 
congresses of the International; fol­
lower of Bakunin; member of the 
Central Bureau of the Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy; an editor of 
LEgalité (1869) and La Solidarité; a 
leader of the Jura Federation; subse­
quently left the working-class move­
ment.—114, 123, 210 
Perrot, Sir John (c. 1527-1592) —Lord 
President of Munster (1570-73), Lord 
Deputy of Ireland (1584-88).—298 
Pétrie, George (1789-1866) —Irish scho­
lar, archaeologist; member of the 
Irish Royal Academy; author of 
works on ancient Irish architecture; 
from 1852 member of the govern­
ment commission for translating and 
publishing  . the ancient Irish laws.— 
165, 169, 170 
Petty, Sir William (1623-1687)—English 
economist and statistician, founder of 
the classical school of bourgeois politi­
cal economy in Britain.—  268-69,  303, 
305 
Phelan, William (1789-1830)—Irish 
scholar; author of works on the 
history of Ireland.— 290 
Philip, Prince (1837-1905)—Count of 
Flanders, son of Leopold I of Bel­
gium.—48 
Philip II (1527-1598)—King of Spain 
(1556-98), Mary I's husband.—298 
Pichegru, Charles (1761-1804) —French 
general; in 1794-95 conducted mili­
tary operations in Holland.— 246 
Pigott, Richard (c. 1828-1889)—Irish 
journalist, publisher of The Irishman 
(1865-79); supporter of the Fenians; 

=====第593页=====
Name Index 561 
sided with the British government in 
the 1880s.—415, 437 
Piniére (or Pinier) (d. after 1898) — 
Swiss shopkeeper; Bakuninist; mem­
ber of the editorial board of L'Éga­
lité (1869).—123, 210 
Pirmez, Eudore (1830-1890) —Belgian 
statesman, Liberal M.P. (1857-90); 
Home Minister (1868-70), Director of 
the National Bank.—48 
Pisteur, Fr.—210 
Pitt, William (1759-1806)—British 
statesman, a Tory leader; Prime Minis­
ter (1783-1801, 1804-06).—227, 235, 
236, 240-42, 246, 252, 256-62, 265, 
276, 281, 282, 290, 295 
Placide, Margarittaz — 210 
Plantagenets—English royal dynasty 
(1154-1399).—292 
Pliny the Elder (Gains Plinius Secundus) 
(A.D.  23-79) — Roman scholar, author 
of Natural History in 37 volumes.— 
175, 312 
Plunket, Oliver (1629-1681) —Irish 
Archbishop in Armagh County.— 289 
Plunket, Thomas Span, 2nd Lord Plunket 
of Newtown (1792-1866)—elder son 
of William Conyngham Plunket; Bi­
shop in Ireland from 1839.— 266 
Plunket, William Conyngham, 1st Baron 
Plunket (1764-1854) —Irish lawyer; 
Lord Chancellor of Ireland from 
1830,  member of the King's Council 
from 1797; M.P.; opponent of the 
Anglo-Irish Union; after the Union 
was a member of the government.— 
261, 266 
Poerio, Carlo (1803-1867) — Italian poli­
tician, Liberal; Prefect of Police and 
Minister of Education in Naples 
in 1848; imprisoned in 1849-59 for 
taking part in the national movement; 
Vice-President of Parliament  (1861-
67).—105 
Pollock, George D.—British army doctor; 
member of the commission, which in 
June 1867 submitted to the Parlia­ment a report on the treatment of the 
political prisoners in the English con­
vict prisons.—418, 424, 427-29, 438 
Ponsonby, George (1755-1817) — lawyer; 
member of the Irish Parliament from 
1776;  Lord Chancellor of Ireland.— 
227, 254, 273, 280 
Portland,  William Henry Cavendish Ben-
tinck,  3rd Duke of (1738-1809) — 
English statesman, a Whig leader; 
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (1782-
83); Home Secretary (1794-1801), 
Prime Minister  (1783,  1807-09).— 
226,  227-31,  273-74 
Postleb, Charles— 210 
Potemkin, Grigory Alexandrovich, Prince 
Tavrichesky (1739-1791) —Russian 
statesman, field marshal-general, 
Commander-in-Chief of the Russian 
army in the Russo-Turkish war of 
1787-91.—288 
Potot,  John—  210 
Potter, George (1832-1893) — British wor­
ker, carpenter; a reformist leader 
of the trade-union movement; 
member of the London Trades Coun­
cil and a leader of the Amalgamated 
Union of Building Workers; founder, 
editor and publisher of The Bee-Hive 
Newspaper.—26, 37 
Poynings, Sir Edward (1459-1521) — 
British statesman, Henry VII's Attor­
ney-General, Lord Deputy of Ireland 
(1494-96).—212, 215, 225, 270, 272, 
287 
Pratt, John Jeffreys, 2nd Earl and 1st 
Marquis of Camden (1759-1840) — 
British statesman; Lord Lieutenant of 
Ireland (1795-99); English Secreta­
ry for War (1804-05); advocated 
Orangeism.—  245,  252-54, 257, 258, 
279, 280 
Prendergast, John Patrick (1808-1893) — 
Irish historian, Liberal, author of 
works on the history of Ireland.— 303 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865)— 
French writer, economist and sociol­
ogist; a founder of anarchism.—  56-
57, 61, 344, 393, 399 

=====第594页=====
562 Name Index 
Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus) (2nd 
cent.)—Greek mathematician, as­
tronomer and geographer; founder 
of the geocentric conception of the 
universe.—175 
Pyat, Félix (1810-1889) —French jour­
nalist, playwright and politician; 
democrat; took part in the 1848 
revolution; emigrated in 1849 to Swit­
zerland and later to Belgium and 
England; opposed independent work­
ing-class movement; conducted a 
slander campaign against Marx and 
the First International; member of 
the Paris Commune (1871).—  7 
R 
Radcliffe, Thomas, 3rd Earl of Sussex 
(c. 1526-1583) —Lord Deputy of Ire­
land from 1556.—298, 300 
Raleigh, Sir Walter (c. 1552-1618) — 
British military figure and explorer; 
favourite of Elizabeth I; took part in 
suppressing uprisings in Ireland.— 
288 
Raspail, François Vincent (1794-1878) — 
French naturalist and writer; socialist; 
sympathised with the revolutionary 
proletariat; took part in the revolu­
tions of 1830 and 1848; after the 
revolution of 1848 was imprisoned, 
then lived in exile in Belgium; re­
turned to France in 1863; deputy to 
the Constituent Assembly (1869).— 71 
Rau, Wilhelm —member of the Central 
Committee of the German-speaking 
sections in Geneva.— 210 
Raymond, Charles—delegate to the first 
congress of the Romance Federation 
of the International (January 1869); 
Secretary of the Central Section in 
Geneva (1870).—210 
Reilly, Henry—Sheriff of the County of 
Dublin; supporter of reforms; in 
1784 was prosecuted for an attempt 
to organise, in the county, election of 
members to a national congress.— 
237, 276 Rémy, Theodor —Swiss teacher; Secretary 
of the Central Committee of the 
German-speaking sections in Geneva; 
follower of Bakunin; member of the 
Geneva Section of the International 
named Alliance of Socialist Democ­
racy.—209 
Reynolds, Thomas (1771-1836)—joined 
the United Irishmen society in 1797; 
reported to the government on the 
plan for the uprising; later an English 
official.—256 
Rhys ap Tewdwr (d. 1093) —King of 
South Wales (1078-93).—173 
Richard, Albert (1846-1925) —French 
journalist; a leader of the' Lyons 
Section of the International; member 
of the secret Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy; took part in the Lyons 
uprising of September 1870; after the 
suppression of the Paris Commune, a 
Bonapartist.—108 
Richelieu, Armand Jean du Plessis de 
(1585-1642) — French statesman, Car­
dinal, Chief Minister of Louis XIII.— 
293 
Robin, Paul (1837-1912) —French 
teacher; Bakuninist; a leader of the 
Alliance of Socialist Democracy; 
member of the General Council 
(1870-71); delegate to the Basle Con­
gress (1869) and the London Confer­
ence (1871) of the First International; 
an editor of L'Égalité (1870).—123 
Rochambeau, Jean Baptiste Donatien de 
Vimeur, comte de (1725-1807) — 
Marshal of France; commanded a 
French corps during the American 
War of Independence.— 217 
Rachat, François— 210 
Rochefort, Henri, marquis de Rochefort-
Luçay (c. 1831-1913) —French jour­
nalist and politician; Left-wing repub­
lican; publisher of the journal La 
Lanterne (1868-69) and the news­
paper La Marseillaise (1869-70); after 
the revolution of September 4, 1870, 
a member of the Government of 

=====第595页=====
Name Index 563 
National Defence; monarchist from 
the end of the 1880s.~414, 436 
Rochow, Gustav Adolf Rochus von (1792-
1847) — Prussian Minister of the In­
terior (1834-42).—43 
Rockingham— see Watson- Wentworth, 
Charles, 2nd Marquis of Rockingham 
Rogers—English army officer, major of 
artillery, served in Ireland (1799).— 
262, 264 
Ross, J.—English worker; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1869).—55 
Rossa (5th cent.)—according, to tradi­
tion, a compiler of Senchus Mor, a 
collection of ancient laws.—171 
Rossety (or Rossetti), Biagip (Blaise)— 
Italian worker; President of the 
Italian Section in Geneva; member of 
the Romance Federal Committee 
from 1870.—210 
Rouher, Eugene (1814-1884) — French 
statesman, Bonapartist; deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assemb­
lies during the Second Republic; 
Minister of Justice (1849-52, with 
intervals); held several government 
posts during the Second Empire.— 
13, 365, 366, 374 
Rowan, Archibald Hamilton  (1751-
1834) — Irish politician; English army 
officer; Secretary of the United Irish­
men society in Dublin; in 1794 was 
prosecuted for the Proclamation to the 
Volunteers of Ireland.— 245, 248, 
251 
Ruchet, Charles—210 
Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880)—German 
radical journalist; Young Hegelian; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly in 1848 (Left wing); a 
leader of German petty-bourgeois re­
fugees in England during the 1850s; 
National-Liberal after  1866.—  61 
Rush-worth, John (c. 1612-1690)—. 
English historian and statesman.— 
294 Russell, John Russell, 1st Earl (1792-
1878)—British statesman, Whig 
leader; Prime Minister (1846-52, 
1865-66), Foreign Secretary (1852-53, 
1859-65).—28, 345 
Russell, Thomas (1767-1803) —Irish 
army officer; a founder of the United 
Irishmen society in Belfast; executed 
for taking part in the movement in 
1803.—219 
Rutland—see Manners, Charles, Duke of 
Rutland 
Rutty, John (1698-1775) —Irish physi­
cian and meteorologist; author of 
works on medicine and me­
teorology.—162-63 
S 
Saint-Paul, Wilhelm (c. 1815-1852) — 
Prussian army officer, then an official 
in the Ministry of the Interior; censor 
of the Rheinische Zeitung in 1843.—60 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
comte de (1760-1825) —French Uto­
pian socialist.—66, 115, 208, 395 
Sampson, William  ( 1764-1836) — mem­
ber of the United Irishmen soci­
ety, was arrested and deported to 
France for taking part in the 1798 
uprising.—  255,  281 
Sanguinède, J.—210 
Sanguinède, Rosalie—210 
Saurin, William (c. 1757-1839) —Irish 
lawyer; member of the Irish Parlia­
ment from 1799; Attorney-General 
of Ireland; opposed the Anglo-Irish 
Union.—261,  265 
Saxo Grammaticus (mid-12th-beginning 
of 13th cent.) — Danish chronicler; 
author of Gesta Danorum (Historia 
Danica).—184 
Schettel, Adrien — French worker, me­
chanic; Left-wing Republican; took 
part in the revolution of 1848; an 
organiser of the Lyons Section of the 
International; delegate to the Geneva 

=====第596页=====
564 Name Index 
(1866) and Lausanne (1867) congres­
ses of the International; was impris­
oned for taking part in the revolutio­
nary events in Lyons in September 
1870.—108 
Schönburg, Prinz —owner of coal-mines 
in Saxony (1869).—40, 41 
Schulze-Delitzsch, Franz Hermann (1808-
1883)—German economist; liberal 
politician; advocated unification of 
Germany under Prussia's supremacy; 
a founder of the National Association 
and a leader of the Party of Progress; 
sought to divert the workers from 
revolutionary struggle by organising 
co-operative societies.—  25, 37 
Schweitzer, Johann Baptist von  (1833-
1875) — German lawyer; a Lassallean 
leader; editor of Der Social-Demokrat 
(1864-67); President of the General 
Association of German Workers 
(1867-71); supported unification of 
Germany under Prussia's supremacy; 
fought against the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party; expelled from the 
General Association for his contacts 
with the Prussian authorities 
(1872).—10, 32, 33,  90-91,  116, 122, 
133-34 
Scopini, J. J.— Chairman and then De­
puty Secretary of the Geneva Section 
of joiners, mechanics and rollers; 
delegate to the Chaux-de-Fonds Con­
gress of the Romance Federation 
(April 1870).—210 
Scott, John, Earl of Clonmel (1739-
1798) — Irish lawyer; member of the 
Irish Parliament; Attorney-General 
of Ireland.—227, 265, 273 
Senior, Nassau William (1790-1864) — 
English economist, vulgarised Ricar-
do's theory; opposed reduction of the 
working day.— 330 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616) — 
English poet and dramatist.—435 
Shannon—Irish Lord (late 18th-early 
19th cent.).—263 
Shaw, Robert (d. 1869)—a leader of the 
British working-class movement; house-painter; participant in the in­
augural meeting of the International 
held on September 28, 1864 at St. 
Martin's Hall, London; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1864-69), Treasurer of the 
Council (1867-68), Corresponding 
Secretary for America (1867-69); de­
legate to the London Conference 
(1865) and the Brussels Congress 
(1868) of the International.—4, 17, 
26, 51, 55, 92, 358 
Sheares, Henry (1753-1798) —Irish 
lawyer; member of the United Irish­
men society; executed as a leader of 
the 1798 uprising.—255, 281 
Sheares,  John (1766-1798) — Irish lawyer; 
member of the United Irishmen 
society; executed as a leader of the 
1798 uprising; brother of Henry Shea­
res.—255,  281 
Sidney, Sir Henry (1529-1586)—Lord 
Deputy of Ireland at the beginning 
of the 1580s.—298 
Sigurd Laudrisson (11th cent.)—ruler of 
Orkney Islands.—181-83 
Sihtric or Sigtryggr (d. 1042) — Norse 
King of Dublin.—182-83 
Sismondi, Jean Charles Léonard Simonde 
de (1773-1842) — Swiss economist; 
representative of economic romanti­
cism.— 57 
Smith,  Edward (c. 1818-1874)—English 
physician and medical officer of the 
Privy Council to Inquire into the 
Nourishment of the Poorer Labour­
ing Classes.— 325 
Smith,  Goldwin (1823-1910) —British 
historian, economist and publicist; 
Liberal; supported British colonial 
policy in Ireland; went to the USA in 
1868,  and to Canada in 1871.—161, 
166, 184, 283-96, 313 
Smith,  Sir Thomas (1513-1577) —British 
statesman, professor of civil law; in 
1572 proposed a plan for establishing 
a colony of Scottish Protestants in 
Ireland.—288 

=====第597页=====
Name Index 565 
Snider, Jacob (d. 1866) — American in­
ventor of a breechloading rifle.— 80 
Snorri, Sturluson (c. 1178-1241) — 
Icelandic scald and chronicler.—179 
Solinus, Gaius Julius (first half of the 
3rd cent.) — Roman writer.— 175, 312 
Souham, Joseph, comte (1760-1837) — 
French general; commanded troops 
in the wars of the French Republic.— 
246 
Spencer, John Poyntz Spencer, 5th Earl 
(1835-1910) —British statesman; 
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (1868-74, 
1882-85); First Lord of the Admiralty 
(1892-95).—435 
Spenser (Spencer), Edmund (c. 1552-
1599) — English poet and historian; 
private secretary to the Lord Deputy 
of Ireland (1580-82); author of the 
treatise A View of the State of Ireland 
and the poem The Faerie Queene.— 
173, 287, 288, 302, 308 
Speyer, Karl (b. 1845)—joiner; Secret­
ary of the German Workers' Educa­
tional Society in London in the 
1860s; from 1870 member of the 
General Council of the First Interna­
tional in London and then in the 
USA.—32 
Stacpoole, William—Irish army officer; 
Liberal M. P. (1860-80).—416 
Stampa, Gaspare—member of the Cen­
tral Council of the Italian workers' 
associations; delegate to the London 
Congress of the First International 
(1867).—341 
Stanley, Edward Henry, 15th Earl of 
Derby (1826-1893) —British states­
man, Tory, subsequently Liberal; 
Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs 
(1852),  Secretary of State for Col­
onies (1858, 1882-85); Secretary of 
State for India (1858-59), Foreign 
Secretary (1866-68, 1874-78); son of 
Edward Derby.—12, 364 
Stepney, Cowell William Frederick (1820-
1872)—active participant in the Brit­
ish working-class movement; member 
of the Reform League; member of the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1866-72) and its Treasurer 
(1868-70); delegate to the Brussels 
(1868) and Basle (1869) congresses, 
and the London Conference (1871) 
of the International; member of the 
British Federal Council.—26, 51, 55, 
82 
Stieber, Wilhelm (1818-1882) —Prussian 
police officer; an organiser of and 
chief witness for the prosecution in 
the Cologne Communist trial (1852); 
jointly with Wermuth wrote Die Com-
munisten-V er schwörungen des neunzehn­
ten Jahrhunderts; later chief of the 
Prussian political police.— 72 
Stieler, Adolf (1775-1836)—German 
cartographer.—154 
Stofflèt, Jean Nicolas (1751-1796)— 
French peasant; an organiser of the 
royalist mutiny in Vendée (1793-96) 
during the French Revolution; exe­
cuted.— 246 
Strabo (c. 63 B.C.-A.D. c. 20)—Greek 
geographer and historian.—174 
Strafford,  Thomas Wentworth, Earl of 
(1593-1641) — English statesman; 
principal minister to Charles I from 
1628;  Lord Deputy of Ireland (1632-
40); advocate of absolutism.—  289, 
. 300-01 
Stuart, James Francis Edward (1688-
1766)—James II's son, pretender to 
the British throne after the dynasty 
of the Stuarts was deposed.— 290 
Stuarts (also Steuarts) — royal dynasty in 
Scotland (1371-1714) and England 
(1603-49, 1660-1714).—196, 294, 295 
Stumpf,  Paul (1826-1912)—German 
mechanic; member of the German 
Workers' Society in Brussels (1847); 
member of the Communist League; 
took part in the 1848-49 revolution 
in Germany, member of the First 
International; delegate to the 
Lausanne Congress of the Interna­
tional (1867); member of the German 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party.— 
133-34 

=====第598页=====
566 Name Index 
Sullivan, Sir Edward (1822-1885)—Irish 
lawyer, conducted the trial of Fenians 
in 1865; Attorney-General for Ire­
land (1868-70); Master of the Rolls 
and Lord Chancellor of Ireland 
(1883-85).—-410 
Sumner, Charles  ( 1811 -1874) — Ame­
rican politician, a leader of the Re­
publican Party (Left wing); Senator 
(from 1851); Chairman of the Senate 
Committee for Foreign Affairs  (1861-
71), favoured revolutionary methods 
of struggle against the slave-owning 
South; after the victory of the North 
in the US Civil War (1861-65) spoke 
in support of political rights for the 
Negroes.— 379 
Sussex, Earl of—see Radcliffe, Thomas, 
3rd Earl of Sussex 
Swift, Jonathan (1667-1745) —Irish 
satirist.—212, 290 
Sylvis, William (1828-1869)—pro­
minent figure in the American work­
ing-class movement; a founder of the 
International Ironmoulders' Union 
(1859) and its President (1863-69); 
took part in the US Civil War  (1861-
65) on the side of the North; a 
founder of the National Labour 
Union of the United States (1866) 
and its President (1868-69); favoured 
affiliation to the International.—  81, 
82 
Symons, George James (1838-1900) — 
English meteorologist.—164, 166 
T 
Tait, Archibald Campbell (1811-1882)— 
Archbishop of Canterbury (1868-
82).—423 
Tandy, James Napper (1740-1803)— 
Irish politician, Whig; favoured free 
trade; a founder of the United Irish­
men society.—223, 244, 248, 271, 
279 
Terbert, Michael—Irish Fenian, sen­
tenced to seven years' penal servitude in 1866; died in prison in 1870.— 
104-07 
Thiers, Louis Adolphe (1797-1877)— 
French historian and statesman, 
Prime Minister (1836, 1840); deputy 
to the Constituent (1848) and Legis­
lative (1849-51) Assemblies, head of 
the Orleanists after 1848; dealt brut­
ally with the Paris Communards 
(1871);  President of the Republic 
(1871-73).—348 
Thorgils—see Thurkill, Thorkill or 
Turgesius 
Thorgils—son of Harald I Fairhair.— 
179 
Throsteinn Siduhallzson — Norse Vik­
ing; fought at the battle of Clontarf 
(1014).—181-82 
Thurkill, Thorkill or Turgesius (d. 
845)—Danish King of North Ire­
land.—179, 181 
Thurloe, John (1616-1668)—English 
politician, Secretary of State  (1653-
60).—303 
Thurneysen, Edward (1824-1890)—Swiss 
politician, jurist; member of the 
Basle Grand Council (1869).—69 
Tierney, George (1761-1830)—English 
statesman, M.P. (1796-1830); mem­
ber of the Privy Council; op­
posed Pitt's government policy, and 
the Anglo-Irish Union.— 266 
Tighearnach—see O'Braein, Tighearnach 
Tippoo Saib (Tipu Sahib) (1750-
1799)—Sultan of Mysore (1782-99); 
waged wars against the British con­
querors of India in the 1780s and 
1790s.—259 
Tirrel, John—Mayor of Dublin 
(1602).—299 
Todd,  James Henthorn (1805-1869)— 
Irish scholar, philologist; from 1852 
member of the government commis­
sion for translating and publishing 
the ancient Irish laws; President of 
the Irish Royal Academy (1856-60).— 
170 

=====第599页=====
Name Index 567 
Toirdhealbhach—grandson of Brian 
Borumha; killed at the battle of 
Clontarf (1014).—183 
Tolain, Henri Louis (1828-1897) — 
French engraver; prominent figure 
in the French working-class move­
ment, Proudhonist; a leader of the 
Paris Section of the International; 
delegate to the London Conference 
(1865) and the Geneva (1866), 
Lausanne (1867), Brussels (1868) and 
the Basle (1869) congresses of the 
International; deputy to the National 
Assembly after September 4, 1870; 
sided with the Versaillists during the 
Paris Commune; expelled from the 
International in 1871; subsequently 
senator.—366-68, 369, 370 
Tone, Peter (d. 1805) —father of 
Theobald Wolfe Tone.—219 
Tone, Theobald Wolfe (1763-1798)— 
Irish bourgeois revolutionary, demo­
crat; founder and leader of the 
United Irishmen society; an organ­
iser of the 1798 uprising in Ire­
land.—194, 198, 219, 236, 247, 248, 
249, 251, 253-54, 280-82 
Touchet, James, Baron Audley of Hely or 
Heleigh, 3rd Earl of Castlehaven 
(c. 1617-1684) —Anglo-Irish aristo­
crat, Catholic; supporter of the Stuart 
dynasty.— 302 
Townshend,  George, 4th Viscount and 1st 
Marquis Townshend (1724-1807) — 
British soldier and politician; Lord 
Lieutenant of Ireland (1767-72).— 
233, 245 
Tremenheere, Hugh Seymour (1804-
1893) — British official and journalist; 
member of various government com­
missions inspecting labour condi­
tions.—327 
Trevellick—member of the National 
Labour Union of the United States.— 
16 
Troy, John Thomas (1739-1823) — 
Catholic Bishop of Dublin; supported 
the Anglo-Irish Union.—263 Tudors—royal dynasty in Britain (1485-
1603).—292 
Turgesius—see Thurkill, Thorkill or 
Turgesius 
Tyrconnel—see  O'Donnell,  Rory, 1st Earl 
of Tyrconnel 
Tyrone—see  O'Neill,  Hugh, Earl of 
Tyrone 
U 
Ulfr Hraeda—Irish soldier, fought at 
the battle of Clontarf (1014).—182-
83-
Underwood,  Thomas Nelson—Irish public 
figure, spoke in defence of the im­
prisoned Fenians.—421 
Urban VIII (Maffeo Barberini) (1568-
1644) —Pope from 1623.—293 
Ure, Andrew (1778-1857)—English 
chemist and economist, Free 
Trader.—330 
V 
Varlin, Louis Eugene (1839-1871) — 
prominent figure in the French 
working-class movement; bookbind­
er; Left-wing Proudhonist; one of 
the International's leaders in France; 
delegate to the London Conference 
(1865),  the Geneva (1866) and Basle 
(1869) congresses of the Internation­
al; took part in the Paris Commune; 
shot by the Versaillists on May 28, 
1871.—371 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901).— 
421 
Vindry, Augustin —French worker, 
dyer; member of the Lyons Section 
of the International.—108 
Virgilius, Saint or Fergil (d. 785)— 
Irish missionary', Bishop of Salz­
burg.—178 
Vogt, August (c. 1830-c. 1883)  —pro­
minent in the German and Ameri-

=====第600页=====
568 Name Index 
can labour movement; shoemaker; 
member of the Communist 
League; participant in the 1848-49 
revolution in Germany; member 
of the General Association of German 
Workers; together with Liebknecht 
opposed Lassalleanism; member 
of the International; in 1867 emi­
grated to the USA; member of 
the New York Communist Club; an 
organiser of the International's sec­
tions in the United States; correspon­
dent of the General Council; suppor­
ter of Marx and Engels. —443 
Vogt, Karl (1817-1895) — German na­
turalist; petty-bourgeois democrat; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848-49; one 
of the five imperial regents (June 
1849);  left Germany in 1849; later 
received subsidies from Napoleon 
III; slandered Marx and Engels. — 
18, 63 
Vollrath, C. W.— publisher and printer 
of the Demokratisches Wochenblatt 
(1868 to April 1869).—354 
Voltaire, (François Marie Arouet) (1694-
1778) — French philosopher, writer 
and historian of the Enlighten­
ment.—423 
Vyrubov, Grigory Nikolayevich  (1843-
1913)—Russian crystallographer and 
positivist philosopher; lived in Paris 
from 1864; a founder and publisher 
of La Philosophie positive-, member of 
the League of Peace and Freedom.— 
113 
W 
Wakefield, Edward (1774-1854) —Eng­
lish statistician and agronomist, 
author of  Ireland,  Statistical and Politi­
cal,— 156, 157, 158, 160, 162, 163, 
164, 165, 166, 175, 288, 312 
Walpoie, Spencer Horatio (Horace) (1806-
1898) — British statesman, Tory, 
Home Secretary (1852, 1858-59, 
1866-67).—362 Walsh, David—member of the Irish 
Parliament (1782).—228 
Walton, Alfred Armstrong (b. 1816) — 
participant in the British democratic 
movement; architect; member of the 
Reform League, President of the 
National Reform League; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1867-70); delegate to the 
Lausanne Congress (1867).—26 
Warren, John—British worker, trunk-
maker; member of the General 
Council from the London Trunk-
Makers' Society (1869); member of 
the Reform League.— 55 
Warren, Josiah (c. 1799-1874)—Amer­
ican Utopian socialist; follower of 
Owen; preached theory of just ex­
change according to labour value.— 
399 
Washington, George (1732-1799) — 
American statesman, Commander-in-
Chief during the war of the North 
American colonies for their indepen­
dence (1775-83); first President of 
the United States (1789-97).—217 
Watkin, Sir Edward William (1819-
1901)—English railway promoter, 
Liberal M. P.—29 
Watson-Wentworth, Charles, 2nd Marquis 
of Rockingham (1730-1782)  —M.P., 
Whig, Chancellor in the Coalition 
Government after capitulation of the 
North (1782).—226, 231, 273, 274 
Weiss, Ludwig (Louis) (d. before 
1898)—Swiss worker, jeweller; a 
founder of the first section of the 
International in Switzerland; member 
of the Central Committee of the 
German-speaking sections headed by 
Johann Philipp Becker.— 210 
Weldon, James (died c. 1795) — Irish 
cavalryman; member of a secret or­
ganisation of Defenders in Dublin.— 
253 
Wellesley, H.—see Cowley, Henry Welles-
ley, Earl of 

=====第601页=====
Name Index 569 
Wenckheim, Bêla (1811-1879)—Hun­
garian statesman; Liberal, Home 
Minister (1867-69).—79 
Wentworth—see Strafford, Thomas Went-
worth,  Earl of 
Westmoreland—see Fane, John, Earl of 
Westmoreland 
Weston, John—active in the British 
labour movement; carpenter; subse­
quently manufacturer; follower of 
Owen; participant in the inaugural 
meeting of the International held on 
September 28, 1864 at St. Martin's 
Hall, London; member of the Gener­
al Council of the International (1864-
72); delegate to the London Confer­
ence (1865); member of the Execu­
tive Committee of the Reform 
League; a leader of the Land and 
Labour League.—4, 26, 55, 139, 393, 
406 
Westphalen, Ferdinand Otto Wilhelm Hen­
ning von (1799-1876)—Prussian 
statesman, Minister of the Interior 
(1850-58); step-brother of Jenny 
Marx, Karl Marx's  wife.—  61 
Westphalen, Johann Ludwig von (1770-
1842)—Jenny Marx's father; Privy 
Councillor in Trier.— 61 
Weydemeyer, Joseph (1818-1866) — lead­
ing figure in the German and 
American working-class movement; 
member of the Communist League; 
took part in the 1848-49 revolution; 
editor of the Neue Deutsche Zeitung 
(1849-50); emigrated to the USA 
after the defeat of the revolution; 
fought in the US Civil War on the 
side of the North; helped to dissemi­
nate the ideas and documents of the 
International in the USA; friend and 
associate of Marx and Engels. — 56 
Wigand, Otto W. (1795-1870)—German 
publisher and bookseller; owner of a 
publishing firm in Leipzig which 
printed works by radical writers.— 56 
William I the Conqueror (c. 1027-
1087) —King of England (1066-
87).—292 William III (1650-1702)—Prince of 
Orange, Stadtholder of the Nether­
lands (1672-1702); King of England, 
Scotland and Ireland (1689-1702),— 
140, 194, 196, 197, 305, 317 
William IV (1765-1837)—King of 
Great Britain and Ireland (1830-
37).—268 
William, Duke of Leinster—see Fitz­
gerald,  William Robert, 2nd Duke of 
Leinster 
Williams, Charles Owen—British work­
er, plasterer; co-operator; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1866-68); at the Brussels Con­
gress (1868) was re-elected to the 
Council but did not take part in its 
work.— 26 
Williams W.—correspondent of The 
Times; in December 1866 and 
January 1867, together with Creed 
H. Herries, published a series of 
articles on Belgian industry.— 357 
Wolsey, Thomas (c. 1475-1530)—Eng­
lish prelate and statesman.— 287 
Woodward, Richard (1726-1794) —Eng­
lish bishop; wrote books and pam­
phlets defending the rights of the 
Irish poor and the Irish Church.— 
244 
Wucher, Leopold (d. before 1898) — 
German worker, tailor; member of 
the International; Chairman of the 
tailors' section in Geneva.— 210 
Y 
Yelverton, Barry, 1st Viscount Avonmore 
(1736-1805) — Irish lawyer; member 
of the Irish Parliament from 1774; 
Attorney-General of Ireland.— 234 
Yonge, Sir George, 5th Baronet  (1731-
1812) — member of the British Parlia­
ment; Vice-Treasurer of Ireland 
(1782).—232, 275 
York, Duke of—see James II 
York, Frederick Augustus, Duke of York 
and Albany, Earl of Ulster  (1763-

=====第602页=====
570 Name Index 
1827)—second son of George III of 
Great Britain; field marshal from 
1795;  Commander-in-Chief of the 
British army (1798-1809, 1811-27).— 
246, 251 
Young, Arthur (1741-1820)—English 
economist, writer on agriculture, sup­
porter of the quantity theory of 
money.—155-56, 157, 158, 162 
Young, Sir George—see Yonge, Sir 
George, 5th Baronet 
Z 
Zabicki, Antoni (1818-1889)—active 
member of the Polish national libera­
tion movement; compositor; left Po­
land after 1831; participant in the 
Hungarian revolution of 1848-49; 
from 1851 a refugee in England; 
from 1863 published Glos Wolny — 
newspaper of the Polish democratic 
refugees; Secretary of the Polish Na­
tional Committee; member of the 
General Council of the International 
Aeneas (Gr. Myth.)—son of Anchises 
and Aphrodite, a chief defender of 
Troy, legendary ancestor of the Ro­
mans,  the hero of Virgil's epic poem 
The Aeneid.—169 
Arthegall—a character in Edmund 
Spenser's Faerie Queene.— 288 
Beowulf—title character of an Anglo-
Saxon epic poem.—185 
Ceasair—grand-daughter of Noah.— 
169 
Comus—personification of revelry.— 
294 
Fingal—hero of the poems Fingal and 
Temora by James Macpherson.—138, 
176 
Finn MacCumhal (Cumhaill)—hero of (1866-71); Corresponding Secretary 
for Poland (1866-71).—4, 51, 55 
Zagorsky, Jean—Polish refugee in Swit­
zerland; member of the committee of 
the League of Peace and Freedom; 
in the late 1860s left for Italy and 
deserted the movement.— 210-11 
Zampérini, J.— Italian worker, hatter; 
member of the Italian Section of the 
First International in Geneva.— 210 
Zhukovsky, Nikolai Ivanovich  (1833-
1895) — Russian anarchist, a refugee 
in Switzerland from 1862; member 
of the committee of the League of 
Peace and Freedom; a leader of the 
secret Bakuninist Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy.—210 
Zimmermann, Wilhelm (1807-1878)— 
German historian, democrat; took 
part in the 1848-49 revolution; depu­
ty to the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly (Left wing), author of the All­
gemeine Geschichte des großen Bauern­
krieges published in 1841-43.—93, 94 
Zöller, Phil.— 210 
the Irish epic, who, according to 
legend, reorganised the Irish 
troops.—140, 176. 
George, Saint—mythological dragon-
slayer.—287 
Hildebrand —hero of the ancient Ger­
man epic series Das Hildebrandslied 
(Hildebrand, Lay of), Nibelungenlied, 
and others.—184 
Japheth (Bib.)—Noah's son.—169 
Judas Iscariot (Bib.)—one of the twelve 
apostles, betrayed Christ for thirty 
pieces of silver.—415 
Lycurgus—legendary legislator of an­
cient Sparta, said to have lived in the 
9th-8th centuries B.C.—43 
Medusa (Gr. Myth.)—one of the three INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第603页=====
Name Index 571 
snake-haired Gorgons, whose terrify­
ing aspect turned the beholder to 
stone.—326 
Michael (Bib.)—one of the seven ar­
changels.—69 
Moloch — a Sun-God in Carthage 
and Phoenicia; his worship was 
accompanied by human sacrifice.— 
330 
Moses (Bib.)—a prophet.—169 
Noah (Bib.) — a patriarch; said to have 
built an ark in which he and his 
family were- saved from the De­
luge.—169 
Odin (Othin)—supreme deity of ancient 
Scandinavian mythology.—181 
Oliver—a character in the French epic 
Chanson de Roland,  mentioned in 
Shakespeare's Henry VI.—435 
Paul (Bib.)—one of Christ's twelve 
apostles.—70 
Penelope—in Homer's Odyssey, the 
hero's wife and the personification of 
conjugal fidelity. She waited more than twenty years for her husband's 
return from the Trojan War and 
kept her importunate suitors at bay 
for three years by weaving a shroud 
for her father-in-law, but unravelling 
it secretly every night so that it was 
never finished.—130 
Ragnar Lodbroh—Viking, legendary 
hero in the'Scandinavian epos.—180 
Roland—hero of the French epic Chan­
son de Roland,  mentioned in Shakes­
peare's Henry VI.—435 
Samuel (Bib.)—a prophet.— 58 
Sangrado—a character in Le Sage's 
L'Histoire de Gil Blas de Santillane, a 
physician who held that all ailments 
could be cured with hot water and 
blood-letting.—428 
Solomon (Bib.)—King of Israel, reputed 
to be very wise.—423 
Stiggins—character in Charles Dickens' 
The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick 
Club,  a hypocrite.—430 
Tuathal—semi-legendary King of Ire­
land.—310 

=====第604页=====
572 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America (present edition, 
Vol. 20). In: The Daily News, No. 5813, December 23, 1864; The Miner and 
Workman's Advocate, No. 95, December 24, 1864.—54, 361 
Address to the National Labour Union of the United States. London, May 12, 1869 (this 
volume).— 81 
The Belgian Massacres. To the Workmen of Europe and the United States. London, 
May 4, 1869 (this volume).—72 
Capital. A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. I, Book One: The  Process  of Production of 
Capital (present edition, Vol. 35) 
— Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band, Buch I: Der 
Produktionsprocess des Kapitals. Hamburg, 1867.—63, 386 
The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich 1848 bis 1850 (published in 1850 under 
the title 1848 bis 1849). In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue, Erstes Heft, Januar 1850; Zweites Heft, Februar 1850, Drittes Heft, 
März 1850; Fünftes und Sechstes Heft, Mai bis Oktober  1850.—  94 
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (present edition, Vol. 29) 
— Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, Erstes Heft. Berlin,  1859.—  59, 63 
[Draft Resolution of the General Council on the Policy of the British Government Towards 
the Irish Prisoners] (this volume). In: Reynolds's Newspaper, No. 1006, 
November 21, 1869; Le Courrier français, 24 novembre 1869.—87, 89, 119, 121, 
410,  411 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (present edition, Vol. 11) 
— Der 18te Brumaire des Louis Napoleon. In: Die Revolution. Eine Zeitschrift 
in zwanglosen Heften. Erstes Heft. New York,  1852.—  56, 62, 94 
— Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte. 2. Ausg. Hamburg, 
1869.—56, 62 
The Fenian Prisoners at Manchester and the International Working Men's Association 
(this volume) 
— A M. G. Hardy, secrétaire d'État de sa Majesté. In: Le Courrier français, 
No. 163, 24 novembre 1867.—13, 89, 121, 363 

=====第605页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 573 
The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association (this volume). In: The Times, No. 26225, September 9, 1868.—47 
The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to the Central 
Bureau of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy (this volume) 
— Le Conseil Général au Comité Central d'Alliance Internationale de la 
Démocratie Socialiste. 9 mars 1869.—115 
The General Council of the International Working Men's Association to Committee 
Members of the Russian Section in Geneva (this volume) 
— TAaBHWH CoBfeT Me?K4yHapoAHaro ToBapumecTBa PaôoHHXb. HAeHain 
KoMHTeTa PyccKOH cenqiH Bt >KeHeBi. A0H40H, 24 MapTa 1870 r. In: 
Hapoduoe A&io, JVe l, 15 anpeAH 1870 r.—124 
The General Council to the Federal Council of Romance Switzerland (this volume) 
— Le Conseil général au Conseil fédéral de la Suisse Romande. Londres, 1-er 
janvier 1870.—116-22 
Herr Vogt (present edition, Vol. 17) 
— Herr Vogt. London, I860.—18, 63 
Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association, Established Sep­
tember 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting Held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, London 
(present edition, Vol. 20) 
— Address. In: Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International 
Association, Established September 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting held at St. 
Martin's Hall, Long Acre, London. [London], 1864.—53, 112, 323-24, 361, 
367-68,  444 
Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional Central Council. The Different Questions 
(present edition, Vol. 20). In: The International Courier, Nos. 6-7, February 20, 
and Nos. 8-10, March 13, 1867.—336-41 
The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy (this volume) 
— L'Association Internationale des Travailleurs et l'Alliance Internationale de 
la Démocratie Socialiste. Londres, 22 décembre 1868.—114 
Outline of a Report on the Irish Question Delivered to the German Workers' Educational 
Society in London on December 16, 1867] (this volume).—191 
The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by M. Proudhon 
(present edition, Vol. 6) 
— Misère de la philosophic Réponse à la philosophie de la misère de 
M. Proudhon. Paris-Bruxelles,  1847.—61,  344 
Preface to the First Edition of Volume I of "Capital" (present edition, Vol. 35) 
— Vorwort. London, 25. Juli 1867. In: Marx, K. Das Kapital. Kritik der 
politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band, Buch I: Der Produktionsprocess des 
Kapitals. Hamburg, 1867.—326, 380 
Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly. First Article. Debates on Freedom of the 
Press and Publication of the Proceedings of the Assembly of the Estates (present 
edition, Vol. 1) 
— Die Verhandlungen des 6. rheinischen Landtags. Erster Artikel. Debatten 
über Pressfreiheit und Publikation der Landständischen Verhandlungen. In: 
Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 125, 128, 130, 132, 135 und 139; 5., 8., 10., 12., 15. 
und 19. Mai 1842, Beilage.— 60 

=====第606页=====
574 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly. Third Article. Debates on the Law on 
Thefts of Wood (present edition, Vol. 1) 
— Verhandlungen des 6. rheinischen Landtags. Dritter Artikel. Debatten über 
des Holzdiebstahls-Gesetz. In: Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 298, 300, 303, 305 und 
307; 25., 27. und 30. Oktober; 1. und 3. November 1842.—60 
Provisional Rules of the Association (present edition, Vol. 20). In: Address and 
Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association, Established 
September 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, 
London. [London], 1864.—89, 121-22, 323-24, 337, 444 
[Resolution on Changing the Place of the International's Congress in 1868] (this volume) 
— Considering 1-st, that the Belgian Parliament.... In: The Bee-Hive Newspaper, 
No. 347, June 6, 1868.—320-21 
Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association 
(present edition, Vol. 20). In: Rules of the International Working Men's Association. 
Founded September 28th, 1864. London. Printed by the Westminster Printing 
Company, 1867.—6, 35, 45, 85, 117-18, 131-33, 209, 337, 367-68 
Statuts de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs votés à la séance du 5 septembre au 
Congrès de Genève. In: Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Statuts et 
Règlements. Londres, 1866.—323-24 
Engels, Frederick 
Chronology of  Ireland.—  287, 299, 300, 308-09 
On the Dissolution of the Lassallean Workers' Association (this volume) 
— Zur Auflösung des Lassalleanischen Arbeiter-Vereins. In: Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt, Nr. 40, 3. Oktober 1868.—24 
The Peasant War in Germany (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Der deutsche Bauernkrieg. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung-Politisch-Ökonomische 
Revue. London-Hamburg-New York, 1850, Heft 5-6, Mai-Oktober. — 93-95, 
97 
— Der deutsche Bauernkrieg von Friedrich Engels. Zweiter, mit einer 
Einleitung versehener Abdruck. Leipzig,  1870.—  93, 100 
— Der deutsche Bauernkrieg. Dritter Abdruck. Leipzig, 1875.—93, 100 
The Prussian Military Question and the German Workers' Party (present edition, 
Vol. 20) 
— Die preussische Militärfrage und die deutsche Arbeiterpartei. Hamburg, 
1865.—20-24 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick 
Fictitious Splits in the International. Private Circular of the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association (present edition, Vol. 23) 
— Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale. Circulaire privée du Conseil 
Général de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Gençve,  1872.—  35-
36, 46, 90-91 
Manifesto of the Communist Party (present edition, Vol 6) 
— Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei. London, 1848.—61 

=====第607页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 575 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Alfred the Great. Anglo-Saxon Version of the Historian Orosius.—177 
Ammianus Marcellinus. Rerum gestarum. Libri qui supersunt ex recensione Valesio— 
Gronoviana. Liber XX. Lipsiae, 1773.—177 
Anonymus Ravennatis qui circa saeculum VII. Vixit. De Geographiae libri quinque. 
Ex. Ms. Codice Bibliothecae Regiae eruit et Notis illustravit D. Placidus 
Porcheron. Parisiis, 1688.—177 
Bakounine, M. Discours de M. Bakounine. In: Discours prononcés au Congrès de la Paix 
et de la Liberté à Berne (1868). Par M. M. Mroczkowski et Bakounine. Genève, 
1869.—112-14 
— Hertzen. In: La Marseillaise, No. 72, 73; 2, 3 mars 1870; Le Progrès,  No. 10, 
11, 12; 5, 12, 19 mars 1870.—123 
Bara, J. [Speech in the Chamber of Deputies on May 16, 1868.] In: La Liberté, 
No. 47, 17 mai 1868 (in the article "Le droit de réunion en Belgique"). —14-
15, 50, 320, 375 
Barry, C. [Letter to the Home Minister Bruce, February 22, 1870.] In: The 
Irishman, No. 37, March 12, 1870.—422 
Bazard, Amand. Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. Première année. 1829. Paris, 
1830.—66 
Beaufort, D. A. Memoir of a Map of  Ireland.  London, 1792.—157 
Becker, B. Enthüllungen über das tragische Lebensende Ferdinand Lassalle's. Schleiz, 
1868.—24 
— Rede des Vereins-Präsidenten Bernhard Becker gehalten in der Versammlung der 
Hamburger Mitglieder des Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Vereins am 22. März 
1865. In: Der Social-Demokrat, Nr. 39, Beilage, 26. März 1865.—24 
Becker J. Ph. Die Internationale Arbeiter-Association und die Arbeiterbewegung in Basel 
im Winter 1868 auf 1869.  Genf,  1869: [Circular letters of Basle manufacturers. 
1868].—69, 70 
— Die Internationale Arbeiter-Association und die Arbeitseinstellung in Genf im 
Frühjahr 1868.  Genf,  1868.—137, 348-53 
Beda Venerabilis. Historiae Ecclesiasticae libri quinque. —177 
Beowulf.—  185 
St. Bernard. De Vita S. Malachiae. In: Florilegium insulae sanctorum seu Vitae et acta 
sanctorum Hiberniae; quibus accesserunt non vulgaria monumenta, hoc est, Sancti 
Patricii Purgatorium, S. Malachiae Prophetia de summis pontificibus, aliaque nonnula 
... omnia nunc primum partim ex MS, codicibus, partim typis editis collegit et publicabat 
T. M[essingham]. Parisiis, 1624.—172, 285, 308 
Bible 
The New Testament 
Matthew. —440 
Blackwood, F. T. H. Mr. Mill's Plan for the Pacification of Ireland Examined. London, 
1868.—428 
Boate, G. Natural History of  Ireland.  London, 1652.—162 
[Boileau-Despréaux, N.] Les satires de Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux. Jena, 1834.—426 

=====第608页=====
576 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Borlase, Ed. The History of the Execrable Irish Rebellion  traced  from many preceding acts 
to the grand eruption, the 23 of October, 1641, and thence pursued to the Act of 
Settlement. MDCL XII. Parts III. London, 1680.—302 
Bruce, H. A. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 4, 1869.] In: The 
Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.—103, 408 
— [Speech in the House of Commons on June 7, 1869.] In: The Times, 
No. 26442, June 8, 1869.—81 
— [Letter to Th. N. Underwood dated January 11, 1870.] In: The Irishman, 
No. 37, March 12, 1870.—426 
— [Speech in the House of Commons on February 18, 1870.] In: The Times, 
No. 26975, February 19, 1870.—104 
— To P. Callan, Esq., M. P., Home Office, January 19. In: The Irishman, No. 32, 
February 5, 1870 (in the article "The Political Prisoners and the Govern­
ment").—103 
Burgh, H. [Amendment to the Address to His Majesty George III of October 12, 
1779.] In: Mitchel, J. The History of  Ireland...,  Vol. I. Dublin, 1869.—222 
Burnet, G. The Life of William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore in  Ireland.  (The copies of 
certain letters ... in matter of religion, concerning the general motives to the Roman 
obedience....) London,  1685.—  302 
Caesar, Gaius Julius. Commentarii de hello Gallico. —185 
[Caird, J.] The Plantation Scheme; or, the West of Ireland as a Field of Investment. By 
James Caird. Edinburgh and London, 1850.—158 
Callan, Ph. To the Right Hon. H. A. Bruce, Home Secretary. Reform Club, January 18. 
In: The Irishman, No. 32, February 5, 1870 (in the article "The Political 
Prisoners and the Government").—103 
[Camden, W.] Britannia: or a Chorographical Description of Great Britain and  Ireland, 
together with the Adjacent Islands. Written in Latin by William Camden and 
Translated into English, with Additions and Improvements. The Second Edition. 
Vols.  III. London, 1722.—173 
— Annales rerum anglicarum et hibernicarmn régnante Elizabetha  [1615].—  298 
[Campion, E.] A Historie of Ireland,  Written in the Year 1571 by Edmund Campion, 
sometime fellow of St. John's Colledge, in  Oxford.  Vol. I. Dublin, 1809. In: Ancient 
Irish Histories. The Works of Spencer, Campion, Hanmer, and Marleburrough. In two 
volumes. Dublin, 1809.—173 
[Carlisle, F.] A Letter ... to Earl Fitzwilliam, in Reply to his Lordship's Two Letters. 
London, 1795.—251 
Carte, Th. An History of the Life of James, Duke of Ormonde, from his Birth in 1610, to 
his Death in 1688. In two volumes, to which is added..., in another volume, a 
collection of letters.... London, 1736.—299-300, 302, 303 
Charras, J. B. A. Histoire de la campagne de 1815. Waterloo. Bruxelles,  1857.—  57 
The Chronicles of Eri, being the History of the Gaal Sciot Iber, or the Irish People, 
translated from the original manuscripts in the Phoenician dialect of the Scythian 
Language by O'Connor, Vols. 1-2. London, 1822.—169 
Clarendon, E. H. The History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in Ireland Begun in the 
Year 1641. Oxford, 1712.—294 
Claudianus. De IV Consulatu Honorii Augusti panegiricus.—177 

=====第609页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 577 
Claudius Ptolemaeus, Geographia, Book II, Chapter 2. Lipsiae, 1845.—175 
Costello, A. E. Barbarism as illustrated in British Bastiles. In: The Irishman, Nos. 19, 
20, 22, November 6, 13, 27, 1869: Costello's Jail Narrative.—422 
— The English Bastiles. In: The Irishman, No. 5, July 31, 1869: Augustine 
Costello's Jail Journal.—422 
— Important letter from Augustine E. Costello. 4 September, 1869. In: The 
Irishman, No. 13, September 25, 1869.—422 
— Barbarism as illustrated in British Bastiles. In: The Irishman, No. 17, 
October 23, 1869: Costello's Jail Narrative.—422 
Creed, H. Herries and Williams, W. Foreign Competition with British Manufactures. 
To the Editor of the Times. Brussels, Dec. 4. In: The Times, No. 25678, 
December 11, 1866.—357 
— Foreign Competition with British Manufactures. To the Editor of the Times. Dover, 
Dec. 10. In: The Times, No. 25689, December 24, 1866.—357 
— The Belgian Ironworks. To the Editor of the Times. West Bromwich, December. 
In: The Times, No. 25692, December 27, 1866.—357 
— Foreign Competition in the Iron Trade. To the Editor of the Times. West Bromwich, 
Dec. 29. In: The Times, No. 25695, December 31, 1866.—357 
— Foreign Competition. To the Editor of the Times. Jan. 12. In: The Times, 
No. 25708, January 15, 1867.—357 
[Curran, J. Ph.] The Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran.  Edited,  with 
Memoir and Historical Notices, by Thomas Davis. Dublin, 1855.—216, 234, 236-39, 
240, 241, 243-44,  247-51,  253-54, 256, 276-80 
— [Speech at the General Election in Newry on October 17, 1812.] In: The 
Speeches of the Right Honorable John Philpot Curran. Dublin,  1855.—  267 
Davies, J. Historical Tracts. London, 1786.—173, 285-87, 299, 308, 310 
Deane, R. [Address to George III, October 12, 1779.] In: Grattan, H. The 
Speeches..., Vol. I. London, 1822.—222 
Defoe, D. The History of the Union of Great Britain. Edinburgh,  1709.—  269 
Delescluze, Ch. Le droit d'Association. Devant la justice. In: Le Réveil, No. 2, 9 juillet 
1868.—374, 381 
Delfosse, N. J. A. [Speech in the House of Representatives on March 1, 1848.] In: 
Les Annales Parlementaires 1847-1848. Chambre des Représentants. Séance du 1 er 
mars 1848.—51 
Diodorus Siculus. Bibliothecae historicae liber quintus. Insularis. Argentorati, 1798.— 
174 
Edda.— 185 
Eginhard. Annales Regum Francorum Pipini, Caroli Magni et Lodovici, ab anno 741 
usque at annum 829, autore quidem incerto, sed docto, Benedictinae religionis 
monacho. Item, Caroli Cognomento Magni, Imperatoris Occidentalis Primi vita et 
gesta. Coloniae, Birckmannus, 1561.—177 
Ensor, G. Anti-Union. Ireland as She Ought to Be. Newry, 1831.—259-70, 281-82 
Erdmann, J. E. Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie, 2 Aufl., Bd. I. Berlin, 
1869.—179 
Fitzgibbon, J. [Speech in the Irish Parliament on Parliamentary Reform Bill, about 
November 10, 1783.] In: Grattan, H. The Speeches..., Vol. I.—234 

=====第610页=====
578 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
[Fitzwilliam.] A Letter from Earl Fitzwilliam to the Earl of Carlisle.  1795.—  251-52 
d>AepoBCKiü, H.  Ylonootceuie  paèouazo  KJiacca  a» Pocciu. C.-neTep6ypre>, 1869.—110, 
111 
Fourier, Ch. Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire, ou invention du procédé 
d'industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées [Paris, 1829].—175 
Garibaldi, G. The Rule of the Monk, or Rome in the nineteenth century. London, 
1870.—101 
Gennadius. Illustrium virorum catalogus. Basiliae, 1529.—177 
Giraldus Cambrensis. Topographia Hibernica, et Expugnatio Hibernica. Edited by 
James F. Dimock. London, 1867. In: Giraldi Cambrensis, Opera..., London, 
Longman, 1861-1891. In eight volumes, Vol. V.—174, 185, 285, 286, 308 
— The Historical Works of Giraldus Cambrensis. Bohn, H. G., London,  1863.—  172 
Gladstone, W. E. Ecce homo. London, Strahan, 1868.—417 
— The Functions of Laymen in the Church.—417 
— The Government and the Fenians. Hawarden, Chester, Oct. 18. In: The Times, 
No. 26579. October 23, 1869.—83, 105, 407-12 
— Hawarden, Chester, Oct. 23. In: The Times, No. 26583, October 27, 1869.— 
83, 105, 408, 410, 412 
— Prayers.—417 
— Propagation of the Gospel.—417 
— [Speeches in the House of Commons:] 
— April 16, 1863. In: The Times, No. 24535, April 17, 1863.—326-27 
— April 7, 1864. In: The Times, No.  24841,  April 8, 1864.—324 
— February 15, 1870. In: The Times, No. 26673, February 16, 1870.—105 
— March 3, 1870. In: The Times, No. 26689, March 4, 1870.—417 
— Two Letters to the Earl of Aberdeen on the State Persecutions of the Neapolitan 
Government. London, 1851.—105, 410 
Gordon, J. A History of  Ireland,  from the Earliest Account to the Accomplishment of the 
Union with Great Britain in 1801, Vols. I-IV. London, 1805.—309 
— A History of the Rebellion in Ireland in 1789. Dublin,  1801.—  309 
[Grattan, H.] The Speeches of the Right Honourable Henry Grattan, in the Irish, and in 
the Imperial Parliament. In four volumes. London, 1822-1830.—222, 224, 230, 
231, 234, 236, 254, 271, 273-75, 277-78 
— [Amendment to the Address to His Majesty George III of October 12, 
1779.] In: Mitchel, J. The History of  Ireland...,  Vol. I. Dublin, 1869.—222 
Gray, J. [Enquiry in the House of Commons concerning the treatment of the Irish 
prisoners.] In: The Irishman, No. 3, July 17, 1869.— ÎÔ^, 407 
Grenville, G. N. [Speech at the opening of the Irish Parliament on October 12, 
1779.] In: Grattan, H. The Speeches..., Vol. I.—222 
Grimm, J. Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer. Göttingen, 1828.—175, 184 
Hallam, H. The Constitutional History of England, from the Accession of Henry VII to 
the Death of George II. Vols. MIL. London, 1869.—285 
[Hanmer, M.] The Chronicle of  Ireland,  Collected by Meredith Hanmer, Doctor of 
Divinity, in the Year 1571, Vol. II. Dublin, 1809. In: Ancient Irish Histories. The 
Works of Spencer, Campion, Hanmer, and Marleburrough. In two volumes. Dublin, 
1809.—173 

=====第611页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 579 
Hansemann, D. [Speech in the first United Diet on June 8, 1847.] In: Preussens 
erster Reichstag, Th. 7. Berlin, 1847.—40 
Hegel, G. W. F. Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. Bd. 3. In: Werke, 
Bd. XV. Berlin, 1836.—178, 309 
Heine, H. Neue Gedichte: Romanzen 7, Anno 1829.—348 
Hieronymus S. Eusebius, Commentariorum in Jeremiam Prophetam libri sex. Prologus. 
In: Patrologiae, cursus completus, seu bibliotheca universalis, intégra, uniformis, 
commoda, oeconomica, ... Series latina, 1865.—176 
Das Hildebrandslied. —185 
Holinshed. Chronicles of England, Scotland, and  Ireland.  In six volumes. Volume VI. 
Ireland.  London, 1807.—298 
Hugo, V. Napoleon le petit. 6 e éd. Londres, 1852.—56 
Huriot, V. M. Thiers a dit qu'en matière de relations internationales, il n'y avait point de 
politique nouvelle.... In: Le Courrier français, No. 12, 24 mars 1867.—348 
Huxley, T. H. Professor Huxley on political ethnology. 9 January 1870. In: Manchester 
Daily Examiner and Times, January 12, 1870.—174 
Isidörus Hispalensis. Etymologiarum libri XX.—177 
Johnstone, J. Lodbrokar-Quida; or the Death-Song of Lodbroc. London, 1782.—181 
[Jukes, J.] The Student's Manual of Geology by J. Beete Jukes, M. A. F. R. S. 
A New Edition. Edinburgh, 1862.—148. 151-52 
Kane, R. The Industrial Resources of  Ireland.  Second Edition. Dublin, 1845.—152, 
163-64 
Kickham, Ch. J. Political Articles and Literary Sketches. In: The Irishman, Nos. 1-11, 
July 3, 10, 17, 24 and 31, August 7, 14, 21 and 28, September 4 and 11, 1869: 
Ireland's Cause.—422 
Kohl, J. G. Reisen in  Irland.  Bd. MI, Dresden und Leipzig, 1843.—284 
Krâkumâl.— 180 
Lassalle, F. Offenes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comité zur Berufung eines 
Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Congresses zu Leipzig. Zürich,  1863.—  21 
Laurier, C. [Speech in the Haute Cour de Justice, 25 mars 1870.] In: La 
Marseillaise, No. 97, 27 mars 1870.—438 
Lavelle, P. The Irish Landlord since the Revolution; with Notices of Ancient and Modern 
Land Tenures in Various Countries. Dublin, 1870.—434 
— To the Tenants and Tenant-Farmers of  Ireland.  In: The Freeman's Journal, 
March 29, 1870.—434 
[Lavergne, Léonce de.] The Rural Economy of England, Scotland and  Ireland. 
Translated from the French. Edinburgh and London, 1855.—159, 160, 283 
Ledru-Rollin, A. A. The Decline of England, 2nd ed. London, 1850.—411 
Leland, Th. The History of Ireland from the Invasion of Henry II, Vols. MIL London, 
1773.—298-300, 302-03 
Leslie, Cliffe. [Article on the Economic Position of Ireland.] In: The Economist, 
February 9, 1867.—191, 205 

=====第612页=====
580 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Liddell, A. F. O. [Reply to Underwood's enquiry made on behalf of Bruce] 
January 11, 1870. In: The Irishman, No. 30, January 22, 1870.—422 
— [Reply to a letter from C. Barry,] February 24, 1870. In: The Irishman, 
No. 37, March 12, 1870. In the article "Colonel Richard Burke".—422 
Liebknecht, W. Erklärung. Leipzig, 18. Februar 1869. In: Demokratisches Wochenblatt, 
Nr. 8, 20. Februar  1869.—91,  122 
[Lincoln, A.] Mr. Lincoln and the International Working Men's Association. London, 
Jan. 31. In: The Times, No.  25101,  February 6, 1865.—362 
Lingard, J. A History of England, from the First Invasion by the Romans. Vols. I-VIII. 
London, 1819-1830.—303, 305 
Lucas, Ch. Barber's Letters. Dublin,  1747.—  212 
Macaulay, Lord. The History of England from the Accession of James the  Second, 
Vols.  I-VIII. London, 1862.—294, 301, 313 
MacGeoghegan, J. History of  Ireland.  Translated by O'Kelly. Dublin, 1844.— 290, 
299 
[Macpherson, J.] Fingal, an Ancient Epic Poem in six Books, together with Several Other 
Poems composed by Ossian, the Son of Fingal, translated from the Gaelic Language. In: 
The Works of Ossian. 1765.—140, 176 
Massey, W. A History of England during the Reign of George the  Third.  Vols. I-IV. 
London, 1855-1863.—290 
Mela Pomponius. De Situ Orbis libri III. Lipsiae, 1831.—161 
Meyers, J. [Official report on Richard Burke's state of health, dated January 11, 
1870.] In: The Irishman, No. 37, March 12, 1870. In the article "Colonel 
Richard Burke".—422 
Mitchel, J. The History of  Ireland,  from the Treaty of Limerick to the Present Time: Being 
a Continuation of the History of the Abbé MacGeoghegan, Vols. I-II. Dublin, 
1869.—222, 224-25, 232, 251, 256, 257, 260, 266 
Molyneux, W., Esq. The Case of Ireland's Being Bound by Acts of Parliament in 
England  Stated.  Dublin, 1698.—197, 212 
[Moore, G. H.] Mr. G. H. Moore's Motion upon the Treatment by England of Irish 
Political Prisoners. In: The Irishman, No. 1, July 3, 1869.—103, 408, 415 
— [Speech in the House of Commons on March 14, 1870.] In: The Times, 
No. 26699, March 15, 1870.—313 
— [Speech in the House of Commons on March 17, 1870.] In: The Times, 
No. 26702, March 18, 1870.—425 
Moore, Th. The History of  Ireland.  Paris, 1835-1846. Vols. I-IV.— 287, 309, 310 
Morhardt, E. Genève, le 2 mai (lisez juin) 1869. Le Chancelier de la République et 
Canton de Genève. In: L'Égalité, No. 20, 5 juin 1869.— 71 
Moryson, F. An Itinerary Containing Ten Years Travels through the Twelve Dominions 
of Germany, Bohmerland, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Denmark,  Poland,  Italy, 
Turkey, France, England, Scotland and  Ireland.  London, 1617.—173 
Murphy, J. N.  Ireland,  Industrial, Political, and Social. London, 1870.— 297-305 

=====第613页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 581 
Nennius. Historia Britonum, with an English version by Gunn. London, 1819.—177, 
308 
Njâl's Saga.— 181-84 
O'Conor, M. The History of the Irish Catholics from the Settlement in 1691, with a View 
of the State of Ireland from the Invasion by Henry II to the Revolution. Dublin, 
1813.—283,  300, 310 
O'Donnell, J. F. The Barbarous Treatment of O'Donovan Rossa. To the Editor of the 
Irishman. In: The Irishman, No. 12, September 18, 1869.—104 
— Leaves from the Diary of a Fenian Prisoner at Chatham (Communicated by 
John F. O'Donnell). In: The Irishman, No. 15, October 9, 1869.—104 
O'Donovan, J. Annala Rioghachta Eireann. Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the 
Four Masters, from the earliest period to the year 1616. Dublin, 1856.—168, 169, 
170, 171, 174 
O'Donovan Rossa. [Letter] 5 mars 1870. In: La Marseillaise, No. 79, 9 mars 
1870.—436 
— [Letter.] In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 22, 16. März 1870: Politische Uebersicht. —436 
— Letter from the Member for Tipperary. In: The Irishman, No. 32, February 5, 
1870.—419 
O'Neill, Ph. [Address to His Majesty of October 9, 1781.] In: Grattan, H. The 
Speeches..., Vol. I. London, 1822.—224 
Orde, Th. [Propositions regarding the trade between Ireland and Great Britain made on 
Februai-y 11, 1785.] In: Grattan, H. The Speeches..., Vol. I. London, 1822.—236, 
276 
Palmerston, J. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 23, 1863.] In: The 
Times, No. 24593, June 24, 1863.—331 
Patterson, W. Observations on the Climate of  Ireland.  Dublin, 1804.—164 
Pétrie, G. The Ecclesiastical Architecture of  Ireland,  anterior to the Anglo-Norman 
Invasion. Dublin, 1845.—165, 169 
Petty, W. The Political Anatomy of  Ireland.  In: Tracts; Chiefly Relating to  Ireland.... 
Dublin, 1769.—268, 269, 303, 305 
Phelan, W. The Remains. With a biographical memoir by John [Jebb], Bishop of 
Limerick. Vols. I-II. London, 1832.—290 
Plinius Gaius Secundus (Pliny the Elder). Historiae naturalis, Lugduni Batavorum, 
1635.—175 
Portland, W. H. [Speech in the Irish Parliament on May 27, 1782.] In: Grattan, H. 
The Speeches..., Vol. I. London, 1822.—228 
— [Speech at the closing of the Irish Parliament on July 27, 1782.] In: Grat­
tan, H. The Speeches..., Vol. I. London, 1822.—231 
Prendergast, J. P. The Cromwellian Settlement of  Ireland.  London,  1865.—  303 
Proudhon, P. J. La Revolution sociale démontrée par le coup d'état du 2 décembre.  2 e éd. 
Paris,  1852.—56 
— Système des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère. T. 1-2. Paris, 
1846.—61 
Pyat, F. [Speech at a Public Meeting at Cleveland Hall in London on June 29, 
1868.] In: L'Espiègle, No. 25, 5 juillet 1868.—7 

=====第614页=====
582 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Raspail, F. V. [Speech in the Corps législatif on July 8, 1869.] In: Annales du Sénat et 
du Corps  législatif.  Session extraordinaire du 28 juin au 6 septembre 1869. Paris, 
1869.—71 
Romieu, A. Le spectre rouge de 1852. Bruxelles,  1851.—  78 
Rouher, E. [Interview with a delegate of the Paris Executive Committee of the 
International Working Men's Association. March 10, 1867.] In: Le Courrier 
français, No. 112, 1 mai 1868.—13, 365 
Rush worth, J. Historical Collections of Private  Passages  of State, Weighty Matters in Law. 
Remarkable proceedings in Five Parliaments. Beginning The Sixteenth Year of King 
James, Anno 1618. And ending the Fifth Year of King Charles, Anno 1629. London, 
1682.—294 
Rutty, J. An Essay towards a Natural History of the County of Dublin. In two volumes. 
Dublin, 1772.—162, 163 
Schweitzer, J. B. An Herrn Carl Marx in London. Berlin, 6. Juli 1868. In: Der 
Social-Demokrat, Nr. 95, 14. August 1868.—10 
— An die Mitglieder des Allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiter-Vereins. (Die bevor­
stehende Generalversammlung betreffend.) In: Der Social-Demokrat, Nr. 80, 
10. Juli 1868.—10 
— Politischer Theil. Berlin, 15. Juli 1869. In: Der Social-Demokrat, Nr. 82, 
16. Juli 1869.—90, 122 
Shakespeare, W. King Henry the Sixth.—435 
Sismondi, J. C. L. Simonde de. Etudes sur l'économie politique. T. 1. Paris, 1837.—57 
Smith, G. Irish History and Irish Character. Oxford and London, 1861.—161, 166, 
184, 283-96 
Snorri Sturlason. Haraldsaga. —179 
Solinus, C. J. Cosmographia.—175 
Spenser, E. The Faerie Quèene.... London, 1862.— 288 
— A View of  the State of  Ireland,  written Dialogue-wise,  between  Eudoxus and Irenaeus  by 
Edmund Spenser, Esq. In 1596. Vol. I. Dublin, 1809. In: Ancient Irish Histories. 
The Works of Spencer, Campion, Hanmer, and Marleburrough. In two volumes. 
Dublin, 1809.—173, 302 
Stacpoole, W. [Speech in the House of Commons on March 3, 1870.] In: The 
Times, No. 26689, March 4, 1870.—417 
Stieler, A. Hand-Atlas über alle Theile der Erde und über das Weltgebäude. Gotha, 
1864.—154 
Strabo, Geographie, translated by K. Kärcher, Buch 7. Tübingen, 1835.—174 
[Strafford, Th. W.] Letters and dispatches, with an essay towards his life by Sir 
G. Radcliffe. Vols. MI. London, 1739.—300-02 
Swift, J. Drapier's Letters. Dublin,  1725.—  212 
— A Short View of the State of  Ireland.  Dublin, 1727.—212 
— A Modest Proposal for preventing the Children of the Poor from being a Burden to 
their Parents or Country, and for making them beneficial to the Publick. In eight 
volumes. Dublin, 1729.—290 

=====第615页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 583 
Sylvis, W. H. [Reply to the General Council's letter, May 26, 1869.] In: The 
Bee-Hive, No. 400, June 12, 1869 (in the article "The International Working 
Men's Association").—82 
Symons, G. J. British Rainfall over the British Isles. London, Stanford, 1862.—164, 
166 
[Thurloe, J.] A Collection of the State Papers of John Thurloe, Esq; ... Containing 
Authentic memorials of the English Affairs from the Year 1638, to the Restoration of 
King Charles II. Vols. I-VII. London, 1742.—303 
Thurneysen, E. [Description of the sanitary condition in primary public schools.] 
In: Becker, J. Ph. Die Internationale Arbeiter-Association und die Arbeiterbewegung 
in Basel ira Winter 1868 auf 1869.  Genf,  1869.—69 
[Tone, Th. W.] An Argument on behalf of the Catholics of  Ireland,  by a Northern Whig 
[Belfast, 1791].—219 
— Memoricd on the present state of  Ireland,  drawn up for the Rev. W. Jackson, to be 
presented to the French Government [1794,  MS].—  253 
[Touchet, J.) The Memoirs of James Touchet ... Earl of Castlehaven, his engagement and 
carriage in the wars of Ireland from the year 1642 to the year 1651. Written by 
himself.—302 
Triads.—177 
Underwood, Th. N. [Letter to Bruce, the Home Secretary.] In: The Irishman, 
No. 28, January 8, 1870: Shall O'Connell  die?—  421 
Voltaire, F.-M. L'Enfant Prodigue. In: Chefs-d'oeuvre dramatiques de Voltaire. Tome 
second. Paris, 1824.—423 
[Wakefield, Ed.] An Account of  Ireland,  Statistical and Political. By Edward 
Wakefield. In two volumes. London, 1812.—156-58, 160-66, 175, 315 
Watkin, E. W. [Speech in the House of Commons on July 31, 1866.] In: The Times, 
No. 25565, August 1, 1866.—29 
White, C. W. [Speech in the House of Commons on February 18, 1870.] In: The 
Times, No. 26975, February 19, 1870.—103 
Young, A. Tour in Ireland in 1776, 1777 and 1778. 2 vols. Dublin, 1780.—155-56, 
158, 162 
Zimmermann, W. Allgemeine Geschichte des grossen Bauernkrieges. Th. 1-3. Stuttgart, 
1841-1843.—93 
DOCUMENTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING 
MEN'S ASSOCIATION 3 
Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association, Established 
September 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, 
London. [London], 1864.—53, 112, 126, 444 
a Documents written by Marx see in the section "Works by Kail Marx and 
Frederick Engels; Marx, Karl". 
22-733 

=====第616页=====
584 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Address of English to French Workmen. In: The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 112, 
December 5, 1863.—322 
Address of the Land and Labour League to the Working Men and Women of Great Britain 
and Ireland.  London, 1869.—401-06 
[Address of the Paris Bureau to the workers of Paris in support of the Geneva  strike.]  In: Le 
Courrier français, No. 101, 20 avril 1868, in the section "Tribune des 
travailleurs".— 370, 371 
Adresse au Conseil d'État de la République de Genève. Genève, le 31 mai 1869. In: 
L'Égalité, No. 20, 5 juin 1869.—71 
Adresse collective au Congrès de la paix à Genève de la part des Travailleurs réunis en 
Congrès à Lausanne. In: Rapports lus au Congrès Ouvrier réuni du 2 au 8 septembre 
1867 à Lausanne. Chaux-de-Fonds,  1867.—  342 
Adresse des ouvriers de la fabrique de Genève aux ouvriers du bâtiment. In: L'Égalité, 
No. 24, 18 juin 1870.—138 
Die Arbeiter Wien's an die französischen und englischen Arbeiter. In: Der Vorbote, Nr. 8, 
August 1868.—15 
Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Statuts et règlements. Londres,  1866.—  324 
Bulletin de la grève. Supplément au No. 23 de L'Egalité. —138 
Central Council of the International Working Men's Association to the Miners and 
Iron-Workers of Great Britain. In: The International Courier, No. 8, March 13; Le 
Courrier International, No. 11, 16 mars; and The Working Man, No. 4, April 6, 
1867.—357-58 
Congrès de Genève. Mémoire de  délégués  français. Bruxelles, 1866.—12-13, 364-66, 368 
Congrès ouvrier. Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Règlement provisoire [Paris, 
1864].—89, 121 
Congrès ouvrier de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs tenu à Genève du 3 au 
8 septembre 1866. Genève, 1866.—85, 117 
Die Generalversammlung des A//g[emeinen] deutsch[en] Arbeiter-Vereins. In: Der 
Social-Demokrat, Nr. 100, 102, 28. August, 2. September 1868.—14-15, 23 
The International Working Men's Association. In: The Bee-Hive, August 22, 1868.—16 
The International Working Men's Association. Resolutions of the Congress of Geneva, 
1866, and the Congress of Brussels, 1868. London [1869].—11, 31, 35, 143, 
399-400 
Leipziger Hochverrathsprozess. Ausführlicher Bericht über die Verhandlungen des 
Schwurgerichts zu Leipzig in dem Prozeß gegen Liebknecht, Bebel und Hepner wegen 
Vorbereitung zum Hochverrath vom 11.-26. März 1872. Leipzig, Verl. der 
Expedition des "Volksstaat", 1872.—445 
Manifeste de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs suivi du règlement provisoire. 
Bruxelles, 1866.—90, 122, 366 
A Monsieur Bar a, ministre de la justice. In: La Tribune du peuple, No. 5, 24 mai 
1868.—  375-76 

=====第617页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 585 
A M. le ministre de l'intérieur. Vendredi, 9 mars 1867. In: Le Courrier français, 
No. 112, 1 mai 1868 (in the article "Cour imperiale de Paris"). —13, 365 
Programm und Statuten der social-demokratischen Arbeiter-Partei. In: Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt, Nr. 33, 14. August 1869.—79 
Procès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris. Paris, 
1868.—366-74 
Protestation votée en Assemblée populaire nationale tenue au Bâtiment Electoral 7 juin 
1870. In: L'Égalité, No. 23, 11 juin 1870.—138 
[Protest by the Brussels Committee against J. Bara's statement.] In: La Tribune 
peuple, No. 5, 24 mai 1868.—321 
Rules of the International Working Men's Association. Founded September 28th, 1864. 
London. Printed by the Westminster Printing Company, 1867.— 6, 35, 45, 
85, 117, 131-33, 209, 337, 367-68 
Rapports lus au Congrès ouvrier réuni du 2 au 8 septembre 1867 à Lausanne. 
Chaux-de-Fonds, 1867.—341, 376 
Report of the Conference of Trades' Delegates of the United Kingdom, held in Temperance 
Hall, Townhead Street, Sheffield, on July 17th, 1866, and Four following Days. 
Sheffield, 1866.—344 
Report of the Fourth Annual Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held 
at Basle, in Switzerland from the 6th to the 11th September, 1869. London 
[1869].—67, 100, 108 
[Resolution adopted at the General Congress of British Trades Unions in 
Birmingham on September 4, 1869.] In: The Bee-Hive, No. 412, September 4, 
1869.—81 
Richard, A. Aux membres du Conseil général des sections belges. 6 juillet 1869. In: 
L'Internationale, No. 26, 11 juillet 1869.—77 
Third Annual Report of the International Working Men's Association. In: The Bee-Hive, 
No. 309, September 14, 1867 (see present edition, Vol. 20).—346 
Verhandlungen des IV. Congresses des internationalen Arbeiterbundes in Basel. Nr. 1-7, 
7-14. September 1869, Basel [1869].—86 
Der Vorort der Deutschen Arbeitervereine wird dem Vereinstage zu Nürnberg folgende 
Anträge zur Annahme vorschlagen.... In: Demokratisches Wochenblatt; Nr. 35, 
29. August 1868.—15 
nepean  pyccKan  ceuuiH.  npoepaMMa. In: Hapoduoe  /(ÜAO,  N° 1, 15 anpeA« 1870 r.—110, 
124 
Ycmaeh  PyccKOÜ  CeKU,iu.  In: Hapoduoe  /J&JIO,  JV» 1, 15 anpeAH 1870.—110, 124 
DOCUMENTS 
An Act for the better securing of the dependency of the Kingdom of Ireland upon the 
Crown of Great Britain (The Declaratory Act, 1719).—212, 225, 229, 230, 232, 
270, 272-74 
22* 

=====第618页=====
586 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
An Act for Continuing and Amending the Act for Facilitating the Sale and Transfer of. 
Encumbered Estates in Ireland  (1853).—  202 
An Act for the Extension of the Factory Acts [15th August,  1867].—  63-64 
An Act for the preservation of the Health and Morals of Apprentices and others, employed 
in cotton and other mills, and cotton and other factories (The Health and Morals of 
Apprentices Act, 1802).—63 
An Act for punishing officers or soldiers who shall mutiny or desert their majesties' service 
(Mutiny Act, 1689).—224 
An Act for regulating the Hours of Labour for Children, Young Persons, and Women, 
employed in Workshops; and for other purposes relating thereto [21st August, 
1867].—64 
An act for the relief of his majesty's popish, or Roman catholic subjects of Ireland (The 
Catholic Relief Act [1793]).—220, 250-52 
An act for removing and preventing all doubts which have arisen, or might arise, 
concerning the exclusive rights of the Parliament and Courts of  Ireland,  in matters of 
legislation and judicature; and for preventing any writ of error or appeal from any of 
His Majesty's courts in that kingdom from being received,  heard,  and adjudged, in any 
of His Majesty's Courts in the Kingdom of Great Britain (The Renunciation Act, 
1783).—198, 232, 261, 275 
An act for the union of Great Britain and Ireland (1801).—88, 258-59, 261-62, 264-70 
An act that no parliament be holden in this land until the acts be certified into England, 
1495 (Poynings' Law).—212, 270, 272 
An Act to Amend an Act of the Tenth Year of Her Present Majesty, for Amending the 
Laws Relating to the Removal of the Poor  (1847).—  202 
An Act to limit the Hours of Labour of Young Persons and Females in Factories, June 8, 
1847.— 382 
An act to prevent tumults and riotous assemblies, and for the more speedy and effectual 
punishing [Riot Act,  1715].—  81 
An Act to Regulate the Issue of Bank Notes, and for Giving to the Governor and Company 
of the Bank of England Certain Privileges for a Limited  Period,  July 19, 
1844.—28-30 
An Act to Regulate the Labour of Children and Young Persons in the Mills and Factories 
of the United Kingdom. August 29, 1833.— 382 
An act to repeal an act, made in the sixth year of the reign of his late Majesty King George 
the first  entitled:  An act for the better securing of the dependency of the Kingdom of 
Ireland upon the Crown of Great Britain (1782).— 229, 230 
An Act to repeal the Laws relative to the Combination of Workmen; and for other purposes 
therein mentioned (The Combination Act)  [1824].—  323 
An Act to repeal the Laws relating to the combinations of Workmen, and to make other 
Provisions in lieu thereof (The Combination Act) [1825].— 343 
Ancient Laws of  Ireland.  Senchus Mor. Introduction to Senchus Mor, and Athgabhail; or, 
Law of Distress, as contained in the Harleian Manuscripts. Vols. I-III. Dublin, 
London, 1865-1873.—165, 170, 171, 172, 176, 308, 310 
Annales IV Magistrorum. Ex ipso O'Clerii Autographo in Bibliotheca Stowense. Nunc 
primum editit C. O'Conor. In: Rerum Hibernicarum Scriptores. T. 3. Buckin-
ghamiae. 1826.—168, 169, 171, 183, 309 

=====第619页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 587 
Annales Tigernachi, ex Codice Bodleiano, Rawlinson, No. 488, Annales Inisfalenses, 
ex duobus Codicibus, Dubliniense et Bodleiano, itemque Annales Buellianos, ex 
Codice Cottoniano, Titus A. Nunc primum editit C. O.'Conor. Ebendort, T. 2. 
Buckinghamiae, 1825.—168, 169, 182, 309 
Annales Ultonienses, Ab anno DCCCCXXXI, ad annum DMCXXXI, ex Codice 
Bodleiano: itemque indicem generalem. Nunc primum editit C. O'Conor, 
Ebendort, T. 4. Buckinghamiae, 1826.—168-70 
Articles of Confederation, and Perpetual Union  [1777].—  216 
The Bill for Relieving his Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects from Certain Pains and 
Penalties Imposed on Them by an Act of King William [1704].—198 
Bonaparte, L. N. Constitution faite en vertu des pouvairs délégués par le peuple français à 
Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, par le vote des 20 et 21 décembre 1851. In: Collection 
complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, règlements et avis du Conseil d'État... Par 
J. B. Duvergier, T. 52, Paris, 1852.—42 
Census of England and Wales for the year 1861. London,  1863.—  328 
Children's Employment Commission (1862). First Report of the Commissioners. London, 
1863.—327 
Clarendon, G. W. Foreign office. May 12. In: The Times, No. 25504, May 22, 1866 
(in the article "The Recent Commercial  Panic").—  29 
Code Napoléon. Paris. Leipzig, 1808.—312 
Code pénal, ou code des délits et des peines. Cologne, 1810.—14, 215, 219-20, 230, 270, 
317, 370 
Coercion Bill—see Peace Preservation Bill 
A Collection of the Parliamentary Debates in England, from the Year, MDC LXVIII to the 
present Time, Vol. VI, 1740: [Debates in the English House of Lords on the 
Union with Scotland, June 2, 1713].—270 
Criminal Justice Act [1855].—193 
Declaration of Independence in Congress, July 4, 1776. The Unanimous Declaration of the 
Thirteen United States of America.—216 
Desiderata Curiosa Hibernica; or a Select collection of state papers, consisting of royal 
instructions, directions, dispatches and letters, to which are added some historical tracts. 
Vols MI. Dublin, 1772.—301 
Deuxième Congrès de la Paix et de la Liberté convoqué pour le 22 septembre 1868 à Berne. 
Programme. Berne [1868].—113 
[Draft Rules of Lassallean trade unions adopted at a General German Workers' 
Congress in Berlin.] In: Der Social-Demokrat, Nr. 112, 25. September 1868, 
Beilage.— 33 
Erlass der drei Zensurminister betr. Unterdrückung der Rheinischen Zeitung zum 1. April 
1843.  Berlin 1843. 21. Januar.— 60 
Flood, H. A Bill for the more equal representation of the people in parliament, 
November 29, 1783. In: Grattan, H. The Speeches..., Vol. I.—230, 275 
George III. [Message to the British Parliament of April 8, 1782.] In: The 
Parliamentary History of England, from the earliest period to the year 1803. London, 
1814,  Vol. XXII.—226, 273 

=====第620页=====
588 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Gladstone, W. E. and Russell, J. To the Governor and Deputy-Governor of the Bank of 
England. May 11, 1866. In: The Times, No. 25497, May 14, 1866.—28-29 
Habeas Corpus Act. 1679.—104, 189, 225, 254, 258, 272, 280 
The Irish Land Bill. 1870.—105, 428, 429, 434, 435 
The [Irish] Statutes at Large. Vols. I-XX. Dublin, 1765-1801.—299 
[Judgement of tribunal at the trial of the Paris section of the IWMA, March 20, 
1868.] In: Procès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris. 
Paris,  Chevalier, 1868.—14 
[Judgement of tribunal at the trial of the Paris section of the IWMA, May 22, 
1868.] In: Procès de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. Bureau de Paris. 
Paris,  Chevalier, 1868.—14 
[Knox, A. and Pollock, G.] Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the 
Treason-Felony Convicts in the English Convict Prisons, London, 1867.—102, 105, 
424,  428 
La loi des étrangers, 22 septembre 1835.— 6, 14, 335 
La loi des étrangers, mai 1868.—6, 375 
Leges barbarorum. — 185 
Loi sur les associations, 10-11 avril 1834. In: Collection complète des lois, décrets, 
ordonnances, règlements et avis du Conseil d'État... Par J. B. Duvergier, T. 34. 
Paris,  1835.—14, 363, 365, 368, 370 
Onzième protocole de la Conference tenue à Londres, le 20 janvier 1831. In: 
Martens, G. F. Nouveau Recueil de Traités d'Alliance, de Paix, de Trêve, de 
Neutralité, de Commerce... [Groupe II]. T. 10. Goettingue, 1836.— 49. 
Palmerston, H. J. T. and Lewis G. C. [Letter to the Governor and Deputy-Governor of 
the Bank of England. November 12, 1857.] In: The Times, No. 22837, 
November 13, 1857.—28 
Peace Preservation Bill (Coercion Bill), 1870.—428-30, 435, 444 
Programme et Règlement de l'Alliance internationale de la Démocratie Socialiste. Genève 
[1868].—34-36, 45-46, 113-14, 207-09 
Public Health. Sixth Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council. With appendix, 
1863.  London, 1864.—325-26 
Report addressed to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, 
relative to the Grievances complained of by the Journeymen Bakers; with Appendix of 
Evidence. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by command of Her Majesty. 
London, 1862.—327 
Report of the Commissioners appointed to inquire into the operation of the acts (16 & 17 
Vict. c. 99 and 20 & 21 Vict. c. 3) relating to transportation and penal servitude. 
Vol. I. Report and appendix. Vol. II. Minutes of evidence presented to both 
Houses of Parliament by command of Her Majesty. London,  1863.—  325 
Report of the Commissioners on the Treatment of the Treason-Felony Convicts in the 
English Convict Prisons—see [Knox, A. and Pollock, G. ] Report of the Commissioners 
on the Treatment.... 

=====第621页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 589 
[Report of the Commission inquiring into the state of public schools in 
Switzerland.] In: Becker J. Ph. Die Internationale Arbeiter-Association und die 
Arbeiterbewegung in Basel im Winter 1868 auf 1869.  Genf,  1869.—69 
Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the 
Home Department for the half year ending 31st October 1863. London, 1864.—327-
28 
Resolutions of the Ulster Volunteers at the convention of Dungannon, 15 February 
1782.—224-26 
Russell, J. and Wood, Ch. To Governor and Deputy-Governor of the Bank of England. 
October 25, 1847. In: Report from the Secret Committee of the House of Lords 
appointed to inquire into the causes of the distress ... together with the minutes of 
evidence, and an appendix. London,  1848.—  28 
The Society of United Irishmen at Dublin. To the Volunteers of Ireland.—248 
Speyer, K. Der deutsche Arbeiter-Bildungsverein in London an die Arbeiter Deutschlands. 
London am 9. Dezember 1868. In: Der Vorbote, Nr. 12, Dezember 1868; Nr. 1, 
Januar 1869.—32 
Victoria, R. [Address to the British Parliament on November 19, 1867.] In: The 
Times, No. 25973, November 20, 1867.—189 
AAeKcaH4p II. 06r> ynpa3dueHiu npaeumejfbcmeeuHoü KoMucciu BnympeHHUxt 
/fhJiT» er> IJapcmeh  nojihCKOMz»  u donojiuumesi'bH'bvxft  npaewit K& Bhiconaüme 
ymeepJKdeHHOMy  19 (31) denaopn 1866 zoda nojiojtceuiw o zyöepucKOMh  u yt>3dH0Mb 
ynpaejieuiu e& ayoepuinxb Ifapcmea nojibCKoeo. 29 <j>eBpaA« 1868 r. In: nojiuoe 
coöpanue  3aKonoe  POCCUÜCKOÜ  UMnepuu.  CoôpaHHe 2,  T. 43, OT4.  I, CITI6.,  1873.—  8 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS PUBLISHED 
IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 9, 9. Januar, 1869: Schweiz. Aus Basel, 5. Jan.... — 70 
— Nr. 13, 13. Januar 1869: Deutschland, Augsburg, 12. Jan.— 10 
The Bee-Hive, No. 392, April 17, 1869: The International Working Men's Association. 
Council Meeting. Tuesday, April 13 [1869].—115 
— No. 400, June 12, 1869: Riot at Mold.—80 
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register 
— Vol. XI, No. 7, February 14, 1807: Mr. Perceval.  Ireland.—  266-67 
— Vol. XVI, No. 23, December 9, 1809: Danger to  Ireland.—  267 
— Vol. XIX, No. 15, February 20, 1811: Summary of politics.—  251,  267 
Le Constitutione^ 1 mai 1870: Les principaux organisateurs. —127 
La Coopération, No. 18, 3 mai 1868: Correspondance. Travail et Coopération. Londres. 
27 avril 1868.—372-73 
Le Courrier français, No. 71, 14 mars 1868: Association Internationale des Travailleurs. 
Bureau de Paris. — 370 
The Daily News, No. 7445, March 11, 1870: The "Marseillaise" of Tuesday last 
was....—420 
The Daily Telegraph, No. 4598, March 11, 1870.—421 

=====第622页=====
590 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nr. 20, 16. Mai, Nr. 21, 23. Mai 1868: Die Lage der 
belgischen Kohlenarbeiter. —354-56 
The Echo, No. 391, March 11, 1870: O'Donovan Rossa's Woes.—422 
The Economist, February 9, 1867: [Article on the condition of the working class in 
Ireland].—191,  205 
L'Économiste belge, No. 3, 9 février 1867: La grève de Marchienne-au-Pont. — 357 
L'Égalité 
— No. 10, 27 mars 1869: Grève des  Typographes. — 71 
— No. 11, 3 avril 1869: Suisse. Genève, 2 avril 1869.— 71 
— No. 13, 17 avril 1869: Genève, 16 avril 1869.—  71, 72 
— No. 42, 6 novembre 1869: Le Bulletin du Conseil général. —116 
— No. 43, 13 novembre 1869: L'Organisation de l'Internationale. —116 
— No. 47, 11 décembre 1869: Réflexions.—  84, 85, 87,  89-91,  116, 117, 119, 
121-23 
— No. 2, 8 janvier 1870: Aux sections romands. —123 
— No. 3, 15 janvier 1870: Avis de la Redaction.—123 
— No. 24, 18 juin 1870: Appréciation de la grève. —138 
The Evening Standard, March 10, 1870.—423 
La Figaro, No. 122, 2 mai 1870: Le complot.— 127 
L'International, No. 2345, 3 août 1868: La Dictature  universelle. — 75 
L'Internationale, No. 14, 18 avril 1869: Moralités de l'affaire de Seraing. —48 
— No. 15, 25 avril 1869: Episodes de troubles de Seraing et du Borinage. —48 
— [Announcement of the Belgian Central Committee about its intention to 
institute an inquiry into the massacres of Seraing and Le Borinage.] — 51 
— No. 16, 2 mai 1869: Arrestations et condamnations. — 50 
— No. 26, 11 juillet 1869: Déclaration au Conseil général de Londres. Lyon, 
6 juillet 1869.—77 
— No. 33, 29 a.4ût 1869: L'Internationalomanie. — 77 
The Irishman, No. 49, June 12, 1869: O'Donovan Rossa. To the Editor of "The 
Irishman"; The Press on the Treatment of the Political Prisoners: The Treatment of 
O'Donovan Rossa.—102 
— No. 4, July 24, 1869: The Gladstone Government and the Political Prisoners.— 
407-08 
— No. 6, August 7, 1869: The Meeting in Limerick.—408 
— No. 7, August 14, 1869: Director Murray.—104, 407, 409 
— No. 12, September 18, 1869: The Irishman in Paris. John O'Mahony and Pagan 
O'Leary.— l02 
— The Amnesty Movement. Speech of G. H. Moore.—407 
— No. 13, September 25, 1869: The Political Prisoners.—407 
— No. 16, October 16, 1869: The Great National Demonstration in Dublin. 
Speeches of Isaac Butt Q. C, George Henry Moore, M. P.—408 
— No. 17, October 23, 1869: The Under-Secretary, the People, and the Police. A 
Letter to Thomas Burke, Esq. Under-Secretary to the Lord lieutenant by Isaac 
Butt Q. C— 408 
— No. 18, October 30, 1869: The Bursting of the Bubble.—410 
— No. 19, November 6, 1869: Inspector Murray.—105, 409 
— No. 20, November 13, 1869: No Amnesty.—409 
— Gladstone and His Victims. To the Editor of the Irishman.—102, 409 
— Seven Centuries of Unlimited Tyranny.—410 
— No. 27, January 1, 1870: More Prison Horrors. Irish Political Prisoners Being 

=====第623页=====
Index  of Quoted  and  Mentioned Literature 591 
Done  to Death  in English Prisons.—102,  421 
— No. 30,  January  22, 1870: The  Political Prisoners—Misguided  Men and  their 
Desires.—102 
— The  Irish Political Prisoners  and Her  Majesty's Government.—102 
— No. 34,  February  19, 1870:  Inquest  at Spike  Island.—  Condemnation  of the 
Prison Treatment.—104, 106-07,  415 
— No. 37,  March  12, 1870:  Lord Dufferin's Lease.— Landlord Confiscation. —435 
— No. 38,  March  19, 1870: The  Fenian Prisoner Burke.—431 
— No. 40,  April  2, 1870: The  Irishman  in New  York.—436 
La Liberté,  No. 105, 27  juin 1869:  Massacres  de Saint-Etienne.— 76 
La Marseillaise,  No. 60, 18  février  1870: [An  article from  The  Daily News about  the 
election  of O'Donovan Rossa.]  In the  section  "Les  journaux".— 414 
Le Moniteur universel,  No. 172, 21  juin 1869:  [Subscriptions  for the  victims  of the 
miners  of St.  Etienne]. — 76 
— No. 121, 1 mai 1870: Le complot contre  la vie de  l'empereur. —127 
— No. 122, 2 mai 1870: Le complot.— 127 
— No. 125, 5 mai 1870:  Nous recevons  de Marseille.... —127 
— No. 128, 8 mai 1870:  Nous n'avons pas....— 127 
Neue freie Presse 
— Nr. 1286,  Beilage,  29. März  1868: Cenf, 25. März, Abends [Orig.-Corr.]  (Der 
Strike  der Bau-Arbeiter). — 350 
— Nr. 1288, 31.  März  1868: Genf, 27. März. [Orig. Corr] (Weiterer Verlauf  der 
Arbeiterbewegung). — 350 
— Nr. 1291, 3.  April  1868: Genf, 30. März, Nachts [Orig.-Corr.] (Schreitern  der 
Verständigung zwischen Meistern  und  Arbeitern. Französische Interventions-
Gelüste).—  350 
La Presse,  2 mai 1870: Le complot. —127 
Le Progrès,  No. 25, 4  décembre  1869:  Chronique  du travail.—  84, 89-90,  116, 117, 
121 
Reynolds's Newspaper. March  20,  1870.—429 
Der Social-Demokrat,  Nr. 24, 24.  Februar  1869:  [Concerning  the  conflict between 
Karl Liebknecht  and  Johann Schweitzer]. —90,  122 
— Nr. 47, 21.  April  1869:  Vereins Theil  (Für den  Allgem. Deutschen Arbeiter­
verein). Generalversammlung (Fortsetzung).— 79 
The Spectator,  No. 2176,  March  12,  1870.—423 
The Times,  No.  24372, October  9, 1862: Mr.  Gladstone  in the  North.—83,  409 
— No.  25909, September  6, 1867:  International Working Men's Congress (From  a 
Correspondent). Lausanne, Sept.  2.—  342 
— No.  25911,  September  9, 1867:  International Working Men's Congress (From  a 
Correspondent). Lausanne, Sept. 4.— 342 
— No.  25912, September  10, 1867:  International Working Men's Congress (From  a 
Correspondent). Lausanne, Sept. 5.— 342 
— No.  25913, September  11, 1867:  International Working Men's Congress (From  a 
Correspondent). Lausanne, Sept.  7.—  342 
— No.  25974, November  21, 1867:  London Meetings.— 363 
— No.  26225, September  9, 1868: [The  Leader].  —25 
— No.  26228, September  12, 1868: [The  LeaderJ.—25 
— No.  26230, September  15, 1868: [The  Leader].—25 

=====第624页=====
592 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 26234, September 19, 1868: [The Leader].—25 
— No. 26694, March 10, 1870: The Fenian Convict O'Donovan Rossa.—420 
— No. 26699, March 16, 1870: [An article refuting the facts cited by 
O'Donovan Rossa].—424 
— No. 26723, April 8, 1870: House of Commons. London, Friday, April 8.—440 
Volksstimme, Nr. 9, 8. August 1869: Der Prozeß gegen die Sozial-Demokraten Most und 
Brüßhaver. — 79 
— Die neue Ara in Transleithanien. Ein Muster von einem Bourgeois-Minister. — 79 
Der Vorbote, Nr. 8, August 1868: Neuenburg 9. August. —16 
— Nr. 12, Dezember, 1868: Bericht über die Arbeiterbewegung in Basel. —69 

=====第625页=====
593 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Allgemeine Zeitung —a conservative daily founded in 1798; published in Augsburg 
from 1810 to 1882.—26, 27, 70 
Augsburgerin—see Allgemeine Zeitung 
The Bee-Hive Newspaper—a weekly trade-unionist newspaper published under 
various titles in London from 1861 to 1876; from November 1864 to April 
1870,  it printed documents of the International; in view of the growing influence 
of the bourgeois radicals on the newspaper editorial board, the General Council 
of the International broke off relations with it in April  1870.—  26, 37, 38, 82, 
89, 115, 126, 322, 378, 444 
The Chronicle—a weekly of the Catholic trend published in London in 1867 and 
1868.—189 
La Cigale —a weekly newspaper published in Brussels from December 1867 to July 
1869,  organ of the Belgian sections of the First International.— 378 
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register—a radical weekly published in London from 1802 
to 1835 under different  titles.—  266,  411 
Le Constitutione  I—a daily published in Paris from 1815 to 1817 and from 1819 to 
1870;  in the 1840s it voiced the views of the monarchist bourgeoisie (Thiers' 
party) and after the coup d'état of 1851 those of the Bonapartists.—127. 
La Coopération. Journal du progrès social—a bi-monthly newspaper published in Paris 
from September 1866 to June 1868, organ of the Workers' co-operative societies 
which were under the influence of the republicans.— 372 
Le Courrier français —a Left-republican newspaper published in Paris from 1861 to 
1868,  first as a weekly and from June 1867 onwards as a daily; from May 1866 
it was the de facto organ of the International in France.—4, 13, 348, 365, 367, 
370, 376, 378 
The Daily News—a liberal daily of the British industrial bourgeoisie published in 
London from 1846 to 1930.—414, 420, 430 
The Daily Telegraph—a liberal and, from the 1880s, conservative daily published in 
London from 1855 to 1937.—421, 430 

=====第626页=====
594 Index of Periodicals 
Demokratisches Wochenblatt —a workers' newspaper published under this title in 
Leipzig from January 1868 to September 1869 under the editorship of Wilhelm 
Liebknecht; at the Eisenach Congress in 1869 it was declared Central Organ of 
the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party and renamed Der Volksstaat.— 15, 
79, 91, 122, 354, 378 
Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher —a German-language yearly published in Paris under 
the editorship of Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge; only the first issue, a double 
one, appeared in February 1844. It carried a number of works by Marx and 
Engels. — 61 
Le Devoir—a Belgian weekly which appeared in Liège from March 1865 to May 
1869;  from 1868 it was the organ of the Liège Section of the International.— 
378 
The Echo—a liberal daily published in London from 1868 to  1905.—  422 
The Economist. Weekly Commercial Times, Bankers' Gazette, and Railway Monitor: a 
Political, Literary, and General Newspaper—a weekly published in London since 
1843,  mouthpiece of the big industrial bourgeoisie.—191, 205 
L'Économiste belge. Organe des intérêts politiques et économiques des consommateurs —a 
magazine published in Brussels from 1855 to  1920.—  357 
-L'Egalité —a French-language daily published in Geneva from December 1868 to 
December 1872, organ of the Romance Federation of the International; from 
1869 to January 1870 it was controlled by the Bakuninists.—71, 72, 84-87, 89-90, 
114-19,  121-23, 138 
L'Eguaglianza. Giornale degli opérai —a weekly organ of the Naples Section of the 
International; published from November 1869 to January 1870; was under the 
influence of Bakuninists.—115 
L'Espiègle. Journal satirique, politique, artistique et littéraire —a satirical weekly of the 
anti-Bonapartist and anti-clerical trend; it appeared in Brussels from 1864 to 
1869.  The newspaper published material on the activity of the International.— 
7, 378 
The Evening Standard—a conservative daily founded in London in 1827.—423, 439 
The Evening Star—a newspaper of the United Irishmen published in Dublin after 
January 1792.—247 
La Federacion—a Spanish-language newspaper which appeared in Barcelona from 
August 1869 to November 1873; the weekly organ of the Barcelona Section 
and, later, of the Federal Council of the International in Barcelona.—  80, 115 
Le Figaro—a conservative daily, published in Paris since 1854; was connected with 
the government of the Second Empire.—127 
The Fortnightly Review—a historical, philosophical and literary magazine founded 
in 1865 by a group of radicals; subsequently it became liberal in character; 
under this title it was published in London till  1934.—  87, 119 
Freeman—see The Freeman's Journal 
The Freeman's Journal—a liberal daily published in Dublin from 1763 to 1924; from 
the 1840s to the 1860s it supported the demand for the repeal of the Union 
and defended the Irish tenants' rights.—434 

=====第627页=====
Index of Periodicals 595 
The Galway Mercury and Connaught Weekly Advertiser—an Irish weekly.—202 
Hibernian Journal or Chronicle of Liberty—an Irish newspaper published approxi­
mately from 1771 to 1820.—250 
L'Indépendance belge. Journal mondial d'informations politiques et littéraires —a liberal 
daily founded in Brussels in  1831.—  359 
L'International —a French-language daily published in London from 1863 to 1871; 
semi-official organ of the French Government.— 75 
L'Internationale —a weekly published in Brussels from 1869 to 1873; organ of the 
Belgian sections of the International.—48, 51, 72, 77, 106 
The Irishman—a weekly published from 1858 to 1885 first in Belfast and then in 
Dublin; came out in defence of Fenians.—102, 103, 104-06,. 107, 206, 407-08, 
409, 410, 415, 419, 421-22, 426,  430-31,  435-36, 437 
The Irish People—a weekly, the main organ of the Fenians which appeared in 
Dublin from 1863 to 1865; was banned by the British Government.—101, 414, 
416, 420 
Journal de Genève national, politique et littéraire —a conservative daily published in 
Geneva from 1826.—350 
Kölnische Zeitung —a daily published in Cologne from 1802 to 1945; during the 
1848-49 revolution and in subsequent years it expressed the interests of the 
Prussian liberal bourgeoisie.— 379 
La Liberté—a Belgian democratic newspaper published in Brussels from 1865 to 
1873;  from 1867, an organ of the International Working Men's Association in 
Belgium.—15, 50, 76, 375, 378 
La Liberté —a conservative evening daily published in Paris from 1865 to 
1940.—378 
La Marseillaise—a daily newspaper, organ of the Left republicans, published in 
Paris from December 1869 to September 1870; the paper carried material on 
the activity of the International and the working-class movement.—123, 414, 
415, 422, 423, 424, 425, 436 
Le Mirabeau —a daily which appeared in Verviers, Belgium, from 1868 to 1874, 
organ of the Belgian sections of the International.— 378 
Moniteur —see Le Moniteur universel 
Le Moniteur universel —a daily published in Paris from 1789 to 1901; from 1799 to 
1869 it was an official government newspaper; it appeared under this title from 
1811.—76, 127, 435 
The Morning Chronicle—a daily published in London from 1770 to 1862; in the 
1840s the newspaper of the Whigs, in the early 1850s of the Peelites and then 
of the Conservatives.— 268 
The Morning Star—a daily of the English Free Traders published in London from 
1856 to 1869.—27 
Narodnoye Dyelo—a magazine (from April 1870, newspaper) published in Geneva in 
1868-70 by a group of Russian revolutionary émigrés; the first issue was 

=====第628页=====
596 Index of Periodicals 
prepared by Bakunin; in October 1868, the editors, among whom was Nikolai 
Utin, broke off relations with Bakunin and opposed his views; in April 1870 it 
became the organ of the Russian Section of the International Working Men's 
Association which pursued the policy of Marx and the General Council; it 
published documents of the International.—110, 124 
Neue freie Presse —a daily newspaper which appeared in Vienna from 1864 to 
1939.—350 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie —a daily newspaper of the German 
revolutionary-proletarian democrats during the 1848-49 revolution in Germany; 
it was published in Cologne under the editorship of Marx from June 1, 1848 to 
May 19, 1849 (with an interval between September 27 and October 12, 1848); 
Engels was one of its editors.—61 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue —a journal published by Marx 
and Engels from December 1849 to November 1850, theoretical organ of the 
Communist League.—62, 93-94 
Neue Zürcher-Zeitung —a German-language liberal newspaper published under this 
title in Zurich from July 1, 1821; from 1780 to 1821 it came out under the title 
Zürcher-Zei tung. — 350 
New-York Daily Tribune—a newspaper founded by Horace Greeley and published 
from 1841 to 1924; until the mid-1850s it spoke for the Left wing of the 
American Whigs and subsequently for the Republican Party. In the 1840s and 
1850s it voiced progressive views and opposed slavery. Marx and Engels 
contributed to it from August 1851 to March  1862.—  62 
New-York Irish People—409 
New-  Yorker  Handelszeitung — 379 
North German Correspondence—an English-language daily information bulletin of 
Bismarck's government published in Berlin in 1869-70.—135 
The Northern Star—the newspaper of the United Irishmen founded in Belfast in 
January 1792 by Samuel Neilson; at the beginning of 1798 it was banned by the 
government.—  247,  248 
L'Opinion Nationale —a daily published in Paris from 1859 to 1874.-—367 
L'Opinion Publique —an illustrated weekly, published in Montreal from January 
1870 to December 1883.—378 
The Pall Mall Gazette—a conservative daily which appeared in London from 1865 
to 1921.—87, 119, 430 
Le Peuple Belge —a daily newspaper published in Brussels from January 1867 to 
September 1877; an official organ of the International from  1871.—  378 
La Philosophie positive—a philosophical magazine published in Paris from 1867 to 
1883;  it advocated the positivism of Auguste Comte.— 113 
Political Register—see Cobbett's Weekly Political Register 
The Press—a newspaper of the United Irishmen, published from September 1797 
to 1798.—247 
Le Progrès —a Bakuninist newspaper which opposed the General Council of the 
International; it was published in French in Le Locle under the editorship of 

=====第629页=====
Index of Periodicals 597 
James Guillaume from December 1868 to April 1870.—84-85, 89-90, 114-17, 
121-23 
Le Réveil —a weekly and, from May 1869 onwards, daily newspaper of the Left 
Republicans published in Paris under the editorship of Charles Delescluse 
between July 1868 and January 1871.—374, 381 
Die Revolution—a communist German-language journal published in New York in 
1852 by Joseph Weydemeyer. On January 6 and 13 two weekly issues 
appeared, in May and June two "non-periodic" issues appeared.— 56 
La Révolution sociale —a weekly published in Geneva in 1871 and 1872, organ of 
Bakunin's Alliance of Socialist Democracy.—210 
Revue Positiviste —see La Philosophie positive 
Reynolds's Newspaper. A Weekly Journal of Politics, History, Literature and General 
Intelligence—a radical newspaper published by George William Reynolds in 
London from 1850; was close to the working-class movement.—429, 430 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a daily founded on January 1, 
1842 as the organ of the Rhenish bourgeois opposition. It was published in 
Cologne till March 31, 1843. From October 15, 1842 to March 17, 1843 it was 
edited by Marx and assumed a strongly pronounced revolutionary-democratic 
complexion, which led to its suppression. Engels was one of its contributors.— 
60 
La Rive Gauche—a democratic weekly published from October 1864 to August 
1866,  first in Paris and then in Brussels, by a group of French Left 
Republicans; it printed documents of the International. Its editor was Charles 
Longuet. —90 
Saturday Review—see Saturday review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art 
Saturday Review of  Politics,  Literature, Science and Art— an English weekly published in 
London from 1855 to 1938.—27, 87, 119, 363, 412 
Le Siècle—a daily published in Paris from 1836 to 1939.—367, 378 
Der Social-Demokrat —organ of the Lassallean General Association of German 
Workers. It was published under this title in Berlin from December 15, 1864 to 
1871;  in 1864-65 it was edited by Johann Baptist von Schweitzer.—10, 24, 
90-91,  122 
The Spectator—a weekly published in London since 1828, originally liberal, later 
conservative.—  87, 119, 423 
Standard—see The Evening Standard 
Telegraph—see The Daily Telegraph 
The Times—a daily newspaper published in London since  1785.—  25, 27, 28, 29, 
81, 83, 103-04, 105, 206, 313, 326, 342, 357, 362, 363, 409, 410, 412, 416, 420, 
425,  430, 439-40 
Le Travail—a weekly of the Paris sections of the International published in Paris 
from October 3 to December 12, 1869.—85, 116-17 
La Tribune du Peuple —a democratic newspaper of the socialist and atheistic society 
"Peuple" published in Brussels from May 1861 to April 1869; from August 
1865 the  de facto and from January 1866 official newspaper of the International in 
Belgium.—321,  375, 376 

=====第630页=====
598 Index of Periodicals 
La Voix de l'Avenir —a weekly published in La Chaux-de-Fonds from 1865 to 1868; 
from 1867 official organ of the Romance sections of the International in 
Switzerland; was under the Proudhonists' influence.—  321,  375, 378 
Der Volksstaat —Central Organ of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party 
published in Leipzig from October 2, 1869 to September 29, 1876, first twice 
and, from 1873, three times a week.—134, 436 
Volksstimme —a newspaper of the Austrian Social-Democrats published in Vienna 
from April to December 1869; it supported the General Council of the 
International.— 79 
Volks-Zeitung —a liberal daily published in Berlin since  1853.—  25 
Der Vorbote —a monthly of the German sections of the International in Switzerland 
published in Geneva from 1866 to 1871 under the editorship of Johann Philipp 
Becker; on the whole, it upheld the line pursued by Marx and the General 
Council by regularly publishing documents of the International and informa­
tion about its activity in various countries.—15, 32, 69, 336, 348, 378 
De Werkman—a newspaper published in Amsterdam from 1868 to 1874; weekly 
organ of the Dutch Central Section of the International from 1869.— 80 
Weser-Zeitung —a liberal daily published in Bremen from 1844 to  1930.—  26, 27 
The Workingman's Advocate—a weekly published in Chicago from 1864 to 1877; 
printed material dealing with the trade union movement, and documents of the 
International; organ of the National Labour Union.— 378 
The Workmen's Advocate—see The Workingman's Advocate 
Die Zukunft —a democratic newspaper, organ of the People's Party, published in 
1867 in Königsberg, and from 1868 to 1871 in Berlin; printed Marx's preface 
to Volume One of Capital and Engels' review of this volume.—134 
Hapoduoe /(tJio—see Narodnoye Dyelo 

=====第631页=====
599 
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Agriculture 
— and natural conditions—154-60 
— in various historical periods—94, 
203 
— and use of machines—166, 384 
Alemanni—178 
Alliance of Socialist Democracy—see In­
ternational Alliance of Socialist Democ­
racy 
Ancient Egypt—169, 203 
Ancient Rome—89, 120 
— slaves, their labour—57, 394 
— agriculture — 203 
— family—394 
— classes, class struggle—57 
— Roman Empire  —328,  395 
See also Navy—of Ancient Rome 
Anglo-American war, 1812-14—271 
Anglo-Saxons—147, 174, 178 
Aristocracy, nobility 
— Austrian—78 
— English—193, 292, 317, 319, 
363, 395, 410, 423; see also 
Landlords, landlordism—in En­
gland 
— French—22 
— German—22, 94, 97, 100 
— Irish—194, 197, 292, 317, 318; 
see also Landlords, landlordism— 
in Ireland 
— US financial aristocracy—54 Army 
— as a tool of reaction and means 
for suppressing revolutionary 
movements—47-50, 88, 89, 120, 
404, 405 
— standing—54, 89, 120, 405 
— demand for abolishing the stand­
ing army—400, 405 
— in slave society—176 
— Belgian—47-50 
— British—49, 88, 119-20, 193, 
198, 218, 225, 268, 273 
— French—217 
— German—97, 99 
— US—49 
Austria (Austria-Hungary from 1867)— 
291, 296 
— home policy, its anti-labour 
character—16, 77-78, 79, 95, 
407 
— and Germany—96 
— and Italy —296 
— and Prussia—95, 98 
See also Aristocracy, nobility — 
Austrian; Austro-Prussian war, 1866; 
Bourgeoisie— Austrian ; International 
Working Men's Association in Austria; 
Working-class movement in Austria 
Austro-Prussian war, 1866—13, 77, 94, 
96, 312, 362 
B 
Bakuninism, Bakuninists 
— as a variety of petty-bourgeois 
socialism—46 

=====第632页=====
600 Subject Index 
— untenability of theoretical te­
nets—46, 112-15, 207-09, 394-96 
— sectarian character—113 
— Bakuninists' disorganising ac­
tivities in working-class move­
ment—34-36, 46,  90-91,  112-24, 
394, 395, 445, 446; see also Inter­
national Alliance of Socialist Democ­
racy; International Working-Men's 
Association—struggle against Ba­
kuninism and Bakuninists 
— in France—123, 445 
— in Italy—114 
— in Spain—114 
— in Switzerland—113-16, 123, 
445 
Bank of England—28-30 
Basques— 174 
Belgium—47, 353 
— economics—353, 357, 358 
— reactionary, anti-labour character 
of its home policy—6, 14,  47-51, 
72-73,  80, 89, 320, 335, 353, 
358, 359-61 
— the press—51 
— its neutrality—49 
— and France—48-49, 198, 336 
See also Army—Belgian; Bour­
geoisie—Belgian; International Work­
ing Men's Association in Belgium; 
Working class in Belgium 
Bonapartism—57 
— manoeuvring between contend­
ing classes—12-13 
— and working class—12-14, 74-
75 
— Prussian—15 
See also International Working Men's 
Association—struggle against Bona­
partism 
Bourgeoisie—96-98, 311 
— its economic domination—66, 
90, 396 
— and political (state) power—49-
50, 94, 96-97 
— petty—97-98 
— and working class—97; see also Classes, class struggle—in bour­
geois society 
— and peasantry—99-100 
— Austrian—78, 94, 98 
— Belgian—47-51 
— English—88, 97, 120, 166, 401, 
402 
— French—97 
— German—20-22, 94-99 
— Irish—194, 242 
— Prussian—94, 98 
— Swiss—68-72 
— US—54, 88, 120 
Britons—147, 174, 177 
Bureaucracy 
— as a prop of reaction—21, 22, 
96, 97, 100 
C 
Canada—410 
Capital 
— its definition—99 
— and wage labour—63, 383 
— control over production as its 
function—86, 118 
"Capital" by K. Marx—59-64 
Celts—174, 175, 178, 185, 312 
Chartism, Chartist movement—329 
Child's labour 
— its exploitation in capitalist socie­
ty—63,  69, 339-40, 357, 382, 
383 
— demand for its regulation by 
law—340, 387 
— under communism — 339 
China— 318 
Christianity—176-78, 395 
See also Ireland—spread of Chris­
tianity,—Protestants,—Catholics, 
their persecution; Reformation 
Church—  285,  395, 399, 440 
Cimbri—184 
Classes, class struggle 
— in ancient society—see Ancient 
Rome—classes, class struggle 

=====第633页=====
Subject Index 601 
— in feudal society—93 
— in bourgeois society—12, 57, 74, 
86, 97-98, 118, 403 
— class prejudices—403 
— and religion—94 
— abolition of classes under com­
munism—46, 90, 114, 121 
See also Aristocracy, nobility; Bour­
geoisie; Peasantry; Revolution, bour­
geois, bourgeois-democratic; Revolution 
proletarian, socialist; Working class 
Clergy, the—178, 439. 
— as advocate of class interests of 
exploiters—22, 78, 97 
— and national liberation move­
ments—194, 197-98, 318 
Communism (socialism), scientific 
— its theoretical sources—61; see 
also Fourierism; Saint-Simonism, 
Saint-Simonists 
— Marxist political economy as its 
foundation—63 
— dissemination of its ideas—87, 
119 
Communist League, the—59, 61 
Co-operation, co-operative movement—98, 
100, 331, 392 
See also International Working Men's 
Association—and co-operative move­
ment 
Corn Laws (England)  —200,  201, 401 
D 
Denmark—179, 184 
E 
Economic crises—329, 345, 358 
Economic struggle of workers—74, 89-90, 
121 
See also Co-operation, co-operative 
movement: Strikes, strike movement; 
Trade(s) unions, trade union movement; 
Working-class movement—necessity to combine workers' economic and 
political struggle; Working day— 
struggle for its reduction 
Education, training—  391,  398-99, 
404 
Emigration 
— as a result of capitalist develop­
ment—201,  329, 403 
— political—62, 329 
See also Ireland—mass emigration as 
a result of colonial oppression 
England (Great Britain) 
— natural conditions—157, 160-
61 
— population—86, 118, 312; see 
also Anglo-Saxons; Britons, Norse­
men 
— English nation, national charac­
ter—193,  197, 288 
— history—147-48, 17? 192, 194-
99, 286-88, 293-94, 295, 317-18 
— in the 1860s—29-30, 80, 81 
— as leading capitalist country, 
industrial and trade mono­
poly—29,  86, 87, 96, 118, 119, 
328 
— industry—29, 73, 201, 330, 353, 
357, 383 
— agriculture—166, 202, 392 
— concentration of landed pro­
perty—86, 99, 118, 167, 192, 
328 
— possibility of land nationalisation t 
by the state—393 
— trade—29, 212, 218, 221, 324, 
401-02;  see also Corn Laws 
— classes, class struggle—86, 118, 
see also Aristocracy, nobility— 
English; Bourgeoisie—English; 
Peasantry—English; Working class 
in England 
— class, oligarchic character of gov­
ernment—101,  171, 191, 192. 
404, 423 
— illusory character of bourgeois 
democracy—101-07, 408, 411 
— legislation, judicial system—80, 
193, 212, 287, 301, 313, 362, 
395, 410, 414 
— election system—97, 98 

=====第634页=====
602 Subject Index 
— political parties of the ruling 
classes, their corruption in the 
1860s—16, 423; see also Liberal 
Party; Tories; Whigs 
— the press—25, 87, 103, 119, 135, 
189, 193, 343, 430 
— prerequisites and prospects of 
proletarian revolution —  87, 88, 
97, 118-19, 121, 372 
— and India—259 
— colonial policy in Ireland—88, 
101-06,  119-20, 148, 152, 162, 
189-206, 212, 218, 221, 223-24, 
271, 287, 289, 292-93, 297-98, 
307, 313, 317-18, 407-12, 428-
30, 434; see also  Ireland;  Irish 
question, the 
— and Canada—410 
— and France—217, 218 
— and Holland—218 
— and Italy—105 
— and Poland—8, 193, 412 
— and Russia—8, 29-30 
— and Spain—217 
— and the USA—53, 54, 83, 88, 
120, 215, 319, 409, 411; see also 
Anglo-American war, 1812-14; 
War of North American  colonies  for 
independence, 1775-83 
See also Army—British; Bank of Eng­
land;  International Working Men's As­
sociation in England; Navy—British; 
Parliament—British; Scotland; Wales 
F 
Famine (as social phenomenon)—191, 
192, 200, 201, 204, 318, 403 
Farmhands—22, 166, 191, 199, 203 
Female labour 
— its exploitation under capital­
ism—63,  357, 382, 383 
— demand for its regulation by 
law—387 
Fenians, Fenianism 
— character and specific features of 
the movement—193, 194, 318 
— conspiratorial tactics of strug­
gle—12,  409, 423 — in the USA—193, 194, 206, 408-
09, 436 
— struggle against persecution of 
Fenians by the British govern­
ment, and International Work­
ing Men's Association — 3-4, 13, 
83, 101-07, 189, 314, 362-63, 
407-12,  414-27,  430-31,  435-
36 
Feudalism—383, 395 
First International—see International 
Working Men's Association 
Fourierism— 175 
France 
— French nation, its formation — 
185 
— during the First Republic and 
First Empire—198, 408 
— coup d'état of December 2, 
1851  — 12-14, 56, 62, 374 
— economics—22, 37-38, 73, 96, 
353, 358, 388 
— possibility of nationalisation of 
land by the state—393 
— reactionary character of home 
policy—21,  104 
— suffrage—21, 22, 74, 98 
— the  press—21,  74-77, 342, 
362 
— prospects of proletarian revolu­
tion—86,  118 
— and Belgium—48-49, 198, 335 
— and England—217, 218 
— and Germany—362 
— and Prussia—362 
— and Spain—217, 270 
— and Switzerland—137 
— and the USA—216, 270, 442 
See also Aristocracy, nobility—French; 
Bonapartism; Bourgeoisie—French; 
French Revolution, 1789-94; Interna­
tional Working Men's Association in 
France; Peasantry—French; Revolution 
of 1848-49—in France; Wars of the 
First French Republic; Working class in 
France 
French Revolution, 1789-94—236, 238, 
239, 242, 278, 312, 318 
Frisians—147, 312 

=====第635页=====
Subject Index 603 
G 
Gaels—176, 177, 192 
General Association of German Workers— 
15, 21-24, 32-33 
— sectarian character—23, 90, 122, 
123 
— relations with the Prussian Gov­
ernment—20, 21, 23, 134 
— and International Working 
Men's Association—10, 15, 23, 
32-33,  90-91,  122-23, 134 
— its congresses—10, 15, 32-33 
Geographical environment 
— its role in development of so­
ciety—147-67 
Germanic tribes—169, 179, 185 
German People's Party (from 1865)—96 
German Social-Democracy 
— Social-Democratic Workers' Par­
ty, Eisenachers (1869-75)—32-
33, 78-80, 90, 122, 132-34 
German Workers' Educational Society in 
London, 1840-1918—32, 386 
Germany 
— population—22 
— Germans, national character of 
— 185 
— history—286 
— economic development in 1850-
60s—96-98,  165 
— social progress—96 
— burghers—94, 97-98 
— political system—100, 110 
— bureaucracy—22, 96, 97-98, 100 
— suffrage—21-23, 95, 99-100 
— the press—25, 26 
— prospects of revolution—96 
— and Austria—96 
— and France—362 
— and Poland—110 
— and Russia—110 
See also Aristocracy, nobility—Ger­
man; Army—German; Bour­
geoisie—German; Germanic tribes; 
German People's Party; Internation­
al Working Men's Association in Ger­
many; National-Liberals; North-Ger­man Confederation; Peasantry—Ger­
man; Prussia; Revolution of 1848-49 
—in Germany; Working class in Ger­
many 
Great Britain—see England 
H 
Habeas Corpus Act—189, 225, 272, 280, 
429 
Hegel, Hegelianism—60-61, 178 
Historical materialism, materialist concep­
tion of history—94 
Historical sources—168-74, 184-85, 306 
Historiography 
— its class character—161 
— of Middle Ages—168, 173 
— bourgeois (19th cent.), its apologe­
tic and nationalistic features—57, 
93-94,  169-70, 173, 175, 179, 184, 
283-96,  313 
— creation and development of Marx­
ist historiography —  57, 94 
See also Historical sources 
History (as science)—57, 93-94 
See also Historical materialism, mate­
rialist conception of history; Historiog­
raphy 
Hungary—  95, 296, 407 
See also International Working Men's 
Association and Hungary; Revolution of 
1848-49—in Hungary; Working-class 
movement in Hungary 
I 
Iberians— 174 
India—  259,  383 
International Alliance of Socialist Democ­
racy—  34-36,  45-46, 48, 85, 113-15, 
207-10, 394, 395, 446 
Internationalism, proletarian—see  Work­
ing-class movement—internationalism 
as its inherent feature 
International Working Men's Association 
(First International) 
— general characteristics, its histori­
cal significance—12, 17, 45, 46, 
64, 91, 122, 127 
— foundation of—322-23, 332, 333 

=====第636页=====
604 Subject Index 
— first programme documents (In­
augural Address and Provisional 
Rules)—89, 121, 322, 324-35, 337 
— emancipation of workers as its 
aim—45,  89, 121, 127, 332, 333 
— struggle for class proletarian 
character of—12-14, 126, 323 
— struggle for international solidari­
ty and united actions of the work­
ing class in all countries—10, 17, 
45, 138, 323, 334, 337, 386, 
442-43 
— socialist principles in its pro­
gramme—100, 143, 385, 391, 
393 
— and political struggle of working 
class—10, 87-89,  119-21,  127, 
333 
— and trade unions—5, 16, 25-26, 
37, 74,  78-81,  87, 89, 92, 119, 
125, 343-44,  347-51,  391 
— and strikes—13, 14, 16,  47-51, 
68-78,  137-39, 345-53,  357-61, 
388 
— struggle for reduction of the 
working day—10, 11, 16-17, 338, 
385-87 
— questions of female and child's 
labour, education —  69, 339-41, 
383, 387, 391, 398-99 
— and co-operative movement—26, 
143, 334, 385 
— and agrarian question—143, 385, 
391-93 
— and national question —  87-89, 
119-21,  423 
— and the Irish question —  3, 13, 83, 
87-89,  101-07, 116,  119-21,  189-
91, 362-63,  407-41,  444; see also 
Fenians, Fenianism— struggle 
against persecution of Fenians by 
the British government, and Inter­
national Working Men's Associa­
tion 
— and the Polish question — 8, 110, 
322, 362 
— struggle against Bonapartism — 
12-15,  74 
— struggle for independent stand of 
proletariat in foreign policy, 
against wars of conquest—8, 13, 
53-54,  80-81,  143, 332, 342, 361 — struggle against Mazzinism and 
Mazzinists—323 
— struggle against Proudhonism 
and Proudhonists—364-65, 393, 
399 
— struggle against Lassalleanism and 
Lassalleans—23, 33, 90, 122, 134 
— struggle against reformism —  92, 
126 
— struggle against Bakuninism and 
Bakuninists—34-36, 46, 65-67, 
84-91,  110-24, 209, 394-97, 446 
— and League of Peace and Free­
dom—35,  78, 112-13, 342 
— and Reform League—362 
— organisational principles (general 
points)—35,  45, 84, 108-09, 117, 
127, 323, 334, 336, 337, 364 
— Rules and Regulations—6, 35, 45, 
46, 77, 79, 84-86, 108, 110, 112, 
114, 116-18, 127, 132, 133, 209, 
444 
— General (Central) Council, its 
functions and activities —  3, 6-8, 
10, 13, 15-16, 31, 34-38, 45-46, 
51, 52, 54, 68, 73-74,  77-83, 
84-87,  89-92, 108, 110, 112-19, 
121-26,  131-37, 138-39, 142, 143, 
209, 320, 322, 333-35, 337, 344, 
346, 348, 350, 352, 357, 358, 
360-64, 369, 376, 378, 385, 387, 
391, 394, 412, 413, 442-46 
— Sub-Committee, Standing Com­
mittee—10, 391 
— Marx's role in founding the Inter­
national and in its activities—10, 
64, 324 
— Marx as Corresponding Secretary 
pro tern for Belgium —  37, 84-91 
— Marx as Corresponding Secretary 
for Germany—32-33, 51, 91, 122, 
131-32,  378, 389, 443 
— Marx as Corresponding Secretary 
for Russia—110-11, 124 
— its press—26, 45, 72, 80, 84-86, 
114, 116-18, 123, 126, 336, 378, 
444 
— and ruling classes, and police and 
judicial persecution—12-14, 50, 
70-73,  74-79, 131, 346, 350, 
363-76 
See also International Working Men's 
Association. Congresses; International 

=====第637页=====
Subject Index 605 
Working Men's Association (in differ­
ent countries) 
International Working Men's Association. 
Congresses 
— their functions and aims—45, 333 
— Geneva Congress (1866)—11-13, 
31, 34, 37, 85, 108, 117, 143, 324, 
335-41,  343, 345, 364, 387, 399 
— Lausanne Congress (1867) —  34, 
37, 108, 320, 337, 341-42, 345, 
364, 375, 387 
— Brussels Congress (1868)—6, 
9-17, 25, 31, 34, 35, 37, 50, 92, 
320, 375, 376, 385-87, 393, 400 
— Basle Congress (1869) —68-82, 
86, 100, 108, 113, 115, 118, 132, 
391, 446 
— Mainz Congress (1870, reasons 
for postponing the congress) — 
132-34, 143, 445 
International Working Men's Association 
and Hungary—78 
International Working Men's Association 
and Russia—110, 124 
See also International Working Men's 
Association—Marx as Corresponding 
Secretary for Russia 
International Working Men's Association 
and the USA—16, 53-54, 126, 127, 
377 
International Working Men's Association 
in Austria—15-16, 77-79, 131 
International Working Men's Association 
in Belgium—14-16, 25, 37,  50-51,  72, 
123, 320, 350, 352-53, 358, 360, 
375-77 
See also International Working Men's 
Association—Marx as Corresponding 
Secretary pro tern for Belgium 
International Working Men's Association 
in England—16, 25-26, 86-87, 92, 
118-19,  126, 127, 336, 377 
International Working Men's Association 
in France—12-14, 16, 72-77, 123, 
127-31,  336, 347-48, 352, 360, 362, 
364-74, 376-77, 381 
See also International Working Men's 
Association— struggle against Bona-
partism,— struggle against Prou-
dhonism and Proudhonists,— strug­
gle against Bakuninism and Baku-
ninists 
International Working Men's Association in Germany—15, 16, 33, 37, 78-80, 
90, 122, 133-34, 349, 378, 381 
See also General Association of German 
Workers—and International Working 
Men's Association; German Social-
Democracy; International Working 
Men's Association—Marx as Corres­
ponding Secretary for Germany; 
Union of German Workers' Associations 
International Working Men's Association 
in Ireland—377 
See also International Working Men's 
Association—and the Irish question 
International Working Men's Association 
in Italy—15, 79, 341-42, 377 
See also International Working Men's 
Association—struggle against Mazzin-
ism and Mazzinists 
International Working Men's Association 
in the Netherlands—79, 377 
International Working Men's Association 
in Spain—  79, 377 
International Working Men's Association 
in Switzerland—16, 37, 77, 84-85, 91, 
113-17,  123, 136, 349-53, 360, 376-
78, 446; 
See also International Alliance of Social­
ist Democracy; International Working 
Men's Association—struggle against 
Bakuninism and Bakuninists 
Ireland—103-04, 148, 175, 317, 319, 
324, 432 
— natural conditions—147-67, 192, 
283, 306 
— population—173-85, 190-92, 197, 
200, 203-05, 215, 299, 317, 403; 
see also Celts; Gaels; Picts; Scots 
— Irish nation, national character— 
147, 148, 161, 169, 174, 185, 192, 
193, 195-97, 221, 223, 232, 235, 
275 
— gens, tribe, commune, clan, 
sept—174, 284, 307-09 
— before British conquest in the 
12th cent.—165, 168-85, 307-12 
— ancient laws—165, 169-73 
— spread of Christianity—171, 176-
78, 307 
— British conquests in 12th-15th 
cent.—147, 172-73, 194-95, 285, 
306, 317 
— completion of British conquest of 
the country in 16th-l7th cent.— 

=====第638页=====
606 Subject Index 
140, 165, 168, 173, 192, 195-96, 
289, 307, 317, 318 
— and English Revolution (17th 
cent.)—189, 192, 194-96 
— in 18th cent.—165, 169, 194, 196-
99, 215-82, 317 
— Anglo-Irish Union of 1801—88, 
89, 120, 121, 192, 193, 198, 202, 
212, 226, 234, 251, 261, 281-82, 
307, 318 
— as British colony and citadel of 
British landlordism  —88,  119-20, 
162, 192, 194-206, 212, 218, 307, 
317-19 
— under British ruling classes—88, 
103-06,  120, 192-93, 194-95, 218, 
221, 223, 271, 287, 289, 292, 
297-98,  312, 317, 428-30, 434 
— famine as a result of British 
rule—191-92, 200-02, 204, 205, 
318, 403 
— industry and its destruction by 
British competition—152, 197-
201, 215, 218, 221, 224, 271, 272, 
317, 318 
— agriculture, agrarian relations — 
105, 165, 166, 190-92, 200-06, 
284, 285, 300, 318, 403, 427, 
432-33 
— trade, struggle against British 
monopoly—197, 198, 215, 218, 
221-23,  271, 276 
— and abolition of Corn Laws in 
England  —200,  201, 318 
— legislation, judicial system—199, 
224, 231-32, 245, 255-56, 272, 
287, 410, 414 
— crime (as social phenomenon) — 
193, 206 
— mass emigration as a result of 
colonial oppression —  88, 120, 
141, 161, 167, 190-92, 201, 204, 
284, 318, 403 
— interconnection between national 
liberation and economic struggle 
(the land question as social basis 
of the national question) —  88, 
120, 319 
— national movements and uprisings 
in 17th cent.—194, 196-97, 198, 
293, 318, 411 
— national movements and uprisings 
in 18th-19th cent.—193, 194, 198, 200.  218, 220, 239, 250-53,255-58, 
277,  280-81, 307, 318, see also 
Fenians, Fenianism 
—- the Volunteer movement—218-
26. 227-28, 229-36, 248, 270-77 
— religious antagonism, its social 
character—193, 195, 197, 215. 
220.  252. 317-18. 410, 439 
— Protestants—194, 195, 197, 215, 
217.  218, 220, 221. 242. 252, 
270-72,  279, 302, 314 
— Catholics, their persecution—140, 
178, 194-98, 215-16, 219-20, 230, 
231,  235, 236, 247, 251. 270-72. 
274.  275, 279, 280, 282, 285, 290. 
293,  299, 314 
See also Aristocracy, nobility—Irish; 
Bourgeoisie—  Irish;  International Work­
ing Men's Association in  Ireland ;  Irish 
question, the; Landlords, landlordism— 
in Ireland; Parliament—Irish; Peasan­
try—  Irish;  Working class in Ireland 
Irish duestion, the 
— its character, significance—87-89, 
119-21,  319, 407, 409, 413 
— ways of settlement—194, 319 
Italy 
— anti-labour character of home 
policy—15 
— and Austria—296 
— and England—105 
See also International Working Men's 
Association in Italy; Revolution of 1848-
49—in Italy; Sicily; Working class in 
Italy 
J 
Jamaica—49, 359 
June insurrection of Paris proletariat, 
1848—12, 97 
L 
Land and Labour League (England, from 
1869)—87, 119, 401-06 
Landed property 
— and land rent — 65 
— liquidation of feudal landed prop­
erty—392 
— its monopolisation under capital­
ism—86. 118. 192, 392 

=====第639页=====
Subject Index 607 
— ousting of small peasant property 
under capitalism  —99,  192, 392, 
393 
— historical necessity of replacement 
of private property in land by 
common property—100, 392, 
393, 397, 405 
— according to Saint-Simonists—66 
Landlords, landlordism 
— in England  —86-88,  101, 105, 
118-20, 191-92, 193, 396, 402, 
423 
— in Ireland—192, 197, 202, 277, 
314, 428, 434, 435 
Lassalle anism, Lassalleans 
— Lassalle and his role in German 
working-class movement—59 
— dogmatic and sectarian character 
of Lassalleanism  —23,  90, 122 
— and demand for universal  suf­
frage—21 
See also General Association of German 
Workers; International Working Men's 
Association—struggle against Lassal­
leanism and Lassalleans 
Law 
— as superstructure, its dependence 
on economic basis — 65-67 
— abstract—392 
— civil—44, 65 
— critique of Hegel's philosophy of 
law by Marx — 60-61 
League of Peace and Freedom (from 
1867)—35,  78, 112-13, 342-43 
Liberal Party (England) 
— policy in the Irish question —  83, 
104, 189, 407-12 
— and working class—87, 119 
Literature 
— folklore—140-41, 168-69, 177, 
180, 184 
— satire and humour—57 
— ancient German—185 
— ancient Scandinavian—172, 179-
80, 185 
— French — 56-57 
— Icelandic—181-84 
— Irish—140-41, 168-69, 171-74, 
177, 308, 310, 312 
Lock-out—  37, 70, 137-38, 345-46, 347, 
351 
Lumpenproletariat — 98 M 
Machinery (machine production) — 9, 
166, 324, 329, 382-85, 387 
Malthusianism—383 
Marxism—60-61,  63 
See also Communism (socialism), scien­
tific; Historical materialism, materialist 
conception of history; Marxist political 
economy 
Marxist political economy—64 
Mongols— 318 
N 
National Labour Union of the United 
States—16, 53-55, 81, 377 
National-Liberals (Germany, from 
1866)  —95,  96 
National movement 
— as part of bourgeois-democratic 
revolutions —  88, 119 
— and working class —  88, 120 
Navy—147 
— of ancient Rome—147 
— British  —218,  280 
— French —217, 218, 270 
— Spanish —217, 218, 270 
Neoplatonism— 178 
"Neue Rheinische Zeitung" —61-62 
Norsemen—147, 177, 179-84 
North-German Confederation (1867-71) — 
75, 311 
Norway, Norwegians—182-83, 291 
P 
Pan-Slavism—123, 124 
Parliament (in bourgeois society) 
— its use by working class—95, 98, 
396 
— British  —87,  119, 189, 193, 196, 
215, 217, 222-23, 226-27, 229, 
230, 232, 233, 271-76, 278, 281, 
290, 325-26, 330, 331, 345, 362, 
396, 410 
— Irish—195-98, 212-19,  220-21, 
222, 224-27, 229, 232-37, 247, 
268, 270-80, 282, 290, 317 

=====第640页=====
608 Subject Index 
Pauperism 
— as consequence of capitalism — 
324, 328-29, 402-04 
Peace 
— as one of the main concerns of 
working class —  53-54,  81 
Peasantry 
— big—99, 100 
— small—99, 393 
— its ideologists—393 
— and bourgeoisie—98-99 
— and working class — 98-100 
— English—195, 
— French  —21,  22 
— German —  22, 98-99; see also Peas­
ant War in Germany, 1524-25; 
Working class in Germany—ag­
ricultural 
— Irish—99, 198-205, 206, 220, 318 
Peasant War in Germany, 1524-25—93, 
94, 98 
Phoenicians— 169 
Picts—177-78 
Poland 
— Tsarist Russia's policy towards Po­
land—8,  110, 148, 296, 429-30 
— and England  —8,  193, 412 
See also International Working Men's 
Association—and the Polish question 
Political economy—61, 63, 330-31 
See also Marxist political economy 
Politics, political struggle 
—• as a form of class struggle—94 
— political struggle of working class 
— 10,89-90, 116, 120-21,127,143, 
332-33 
See also Working-class movement— 
necessity to combine workers' eco­
nomic and political struggle 
Press, the 
— freedom of the press and its 
significance for working-class 
movement—20, 21, 61-62 
— illusory character of freedom of 
the press in bourgeois society— 
20, 60, 101, 428 
— persecution of the proletarian 
press in bourgeois society—20, 
62, 78, 329 
See also Belgium— the press; Eng­
land—  the press; France—the press; 
Germany—the press; International 
Working Men's Association—its press; "Neue Rheinische Zeitung"; Prussia— 
the press 
Production 
— social —9, 383 
— application of science—328-29, 
330-31 
— its capitalist form —  86, 118 
— under communism — 9, 330-31 
See also Machinery 
Proudhonism, Proudhonists—364-65, 393, 
399 
See also International Working Men's 
Association— struggle against Prou­
dhonism and Proudhonists 
Prussia 
— in the 1840s —61 
— home policy—408 
— finances—95 
— legislation—15, 33, 395 
— the press — 75 
— education — 399 
— and Austria—94-95, 98 
— and France—362 
— and German states—95-96 
— and Switzerland—137 
See also Austro-Prussian war, 1866; 
Bonapartism— Prussian  ; Bourgeoisie-
Prussian; North-German Confederation 
(1867-71);  Trade(s) unions, trade union 
movement—in Prussia 
R 
Red Indians— 195 
Reformation— 317 
Reform League (England, from 1865)  — 
26, 193, 345, 362 
Religion 
— as superstructure, form of social 
consciousness—94 
— religious struggle as reflection of 
class struggle — 93 
— religious strife, its utilisation by 
ruling classes—88, 120; see also 
Ireland—religious antagonism, its 
social character 
See also Christianity; Church; Clergy, 
the 
Revolution, bourgeois, bourgeois-demo­
cratic 
— and working class—97-98 
— and national question —  88, 120, 
121 

=====第641页=====
Subject Index 609 
See also French Revolution, 1789-94; 
Revolution of 1848-49; US Civil War, 
1861-65; War of North American col­
onies for independence, 1775-83 
Revolution, economic—86, 118 
Revolution of 1848-49—329 
— in France—61, 97; see also June 
insurrection of Paris proletariat, 
1848 
— in Germany—59, 61-62, 93-98 
— in Hungary—411 
— in Italy—105 
Revolution, proletarian, socialist 
— prerequisites for—9, 66, 86-87, 
97, 118-19, 384, 396 
— as the highest form of class strug­
gle of proletariat against bour­
geoisie —12 
— international character of—86, 
118 
— and radical socio-economic and 
political changes—66-67, 99, 397, 
404 
— and national question —  88, 89, 
120, 121 
— and trade unions—92 
Revolution, social—  66, 86-89, 113, 118-
21, 396 
See also Revolution, bourgeois, bour­
geois-democratic; Revolution, proletar­
ian, socialist 
Right 
— of inheritance—65-67, 112-13, 
115, 391, 394-97 
— property right—65, 192, 197, 434 
Romania—96, 165 
Russia 
— history—218, 270 
— economics—29-30, 53, 96, 165 
— reactionary character of its home 
policy—408 
— revolutionary movement—110-11 
— international significance of the 
Russian revolution—110 
— Marx's contacts with Russian rev-
olutionaires  —110-11,  123-24 
— annexation of the Caucasus — 332 
— Tsarist policy towards Poland — 8, 
110, 148, 296, 318, 332,429-30 
— and England  —8,  29-30 
— and Germany—110 
— and Switzerland—137 
— and the USA —53 S 
Saint -Simonism, Saint-Simonists — 66, 
115, 208, 395 
Scandinavia, Scandinavians—147, 170, 
179-85 
See also Literature—ancient Scan­
dinavian; Norway, Norwegians; Sweden 
Schiller Institute, the (Manchester, 2nd 
half of 19th cent.)—18-19 
Scotland—147, 176-78, 179, 192 
See also Scots 
Scots—147, 169, 173-74, 176-78, 310 
Sicily— 203 
Slavery—  65, 310 
— in ancient Rome—57, 394 
— in the USA—54, 88 
Society, bourgeois 
— economic basis  of—65,  66, 404 
— contradictions of—328-29 
See also Bourgeoisie; Capital; Peasant­
ry; Wage labour; Working class 
Society, slave—57 
See also Ancient Rome 
Spain— M3, 217 
See also International Working Men's 
Association in Spain 
State power 
— its social functions—403-04 
— as a tool of class domination of 
exploiters —48-49, 192, 353, 403 
-04 
See also Bureaucracy 
Strikes, strike movement—47-50, 68-75, 
343, 345-46, 348 
Sweden—154, 184-85, 291 
Switzerland—69, 137 
See also Bourgeoisie—Swiss; Interna­
tional Working Men's Association in 
Switzerland; Working class in Switzer­
land 
T 
Taxes—  66, 396, 398, 404, 405 
Tories (England)  —313,  345, 401, 423 
Trade(s) unions, trade union movement 
— their tasks and role in the class 
struggle of proletariat —  92, 343-
44, 391 
— critique of reformist views of 
trade union leaders—43-44, 92, 
389-90 

=====第642页=====
610 Subject Index 
— in England—16, 25-26, 37, 73, 
81, 86, 87, 92, 118, 119, 322, 
343-45,  347-48, 357, 377, 443 
— in France—73-74, 347-48 
— in Germany—37, 43-44, 79, 98, 
389-90 
— in Prussia—79 
— in Switzerland—350, 351 
See also Economic struggle of workers; 
International Working Men's Associa­
tion—and trade unions 
U 
Union of German Workers' Associations— 
15, 32-33,  381 
United States of America 
— history—216, 217 
— immigration, its role in composi­
tion of population—88, 120, 141, 
216, 319, 329 
— trade—53, 165 
— financial policy—54 
— bourgeois parties — 54 
— home policy—54, 386, 407 
— legislation — 395 
— system of education—398 
— and England—53, 54, 83, 88, 
120, 215, 319, 409, 411 
— and France—216, 270, 442 
— and Russia—53 
— and Spain—217, 270 
See also Anglo-American war, 1812-
14; Aristocracy, nobility—US financial 
aristocracy; Army—US; Bourgeoisie— 
US; Fenians, Fenianism—in the USA; 
International Working Men's Associa­
tion, and the USA,Slavery—in the USA; 
US Civil War, 1861-65; War of North 
American colonies for independence, 
1775-83;  Working class in the USA 
US Civil War, 1861-65 
— its results and significance—53, 
54 
— and US working class—54 
— and England—83, 409, 411 
— and English working class—53, 
325 
— and European working class—47, 
380, 391 
— and International Working Men's 
Association —  53, 54 W 
Wage labour 
— and capital  —63,  383 
— as specific form of slavery—383 
— necessity of abolition of wage 
labour system—9 
Wales— 283 
War(s) 
— influence on economy and social 
progress—53-54 
See also Anglo-American war, 1812-
14; Army; Austro-Prussian war, 1866; 
Navy; Peasant War in Germany, 1524-
25; US Civil War, 1861-65; War of 
North American colonies for indepen­
dence, 1775-83; Wars of the First 
French Republic 
War of North American colonies for inde­
pendence, 1775-83—53-54, 198, 212-
18, 259, 270, 271, 318, 361, 380, 
386 
Wars of the First French Republic—198, 
246, 250, 280 
Whigs (England)—230, 235, 276 
Workers' societies 
— mutual aid — 39-44 
See also Co-operation, co-operative 
movement; German Workers' Education­
al Society in London; Trade(s) unions, 
trade union movement; Union of Ger­
man Workers' Associations 
Working class 
— its emergence and development— 
45, 97 
— world-historic role—10, 17 
— development of its class conscious­
ness—23,  98 
— and revolutionary theory—87, 
119 
— and peasantry—99-100 
— and urban petty bourgeoisie—97-
99 
See also Classes, class struggle—in 
bourgeois society; Wage labour;  Work­
ing class (in different countries); 
Working-class movement; Working 
day—importance of its reduction for 
working class 
Working class in Belgium—354-56 
See also Working-class movement in 
Belgium 
Working class in England 

=====第643页=====
Subject Index 611 
— living and labour conditions—5, 
86, 87, 118, 119, 324-30, 354, 
357, 402 
— and suffrage — 98 
— and the Irish question —  88, 120, 
212 
See also Liberal Party (England)—and 
working class; Working-class movement 
in England 
Working class in France 
— its condition —21-22, 37-38, 98, 
354, 388, 442 
— and Bonapartism—12-14, 74 
— and suffrage—21-22, 74, 98 
See also Working-class movement in 
France 
Working class in Germany 
— during 1848-49 revolution — 98 
— its composition — 22 
— its condition  —5,  39-44, 389 
— and suffrage—21, 23, 95, 98 
— and bourgeoisie—94, 96-98 
— and petty bourgeoisie —  98, 99 
— and peasantry—99-100 
— and lumpenproletariat—98 
— agricultural  —22,  23, 99-100 
See also Working-class movement in 
Germany 
Working class in Ireland—87-88, 120 
Working class in Italy—15 
See also Working-class movement in 
Italy 
Working class in Switzerland—137-39 
See also Working-class movement in 
Switzerland 
Working class in the USA—54, 81, 442 
See also Working-class movement in the 
USA 
Working-class movement 
— its aims and tasks—10, 45, 46, 64, 
88-90,  120-21,  127, 143, 331-32, 
333, 344 
— significance of its organisation 
and unity—10, 17, 45, 331, 334, 
386 
— objective laws of its rise—17 
— necessity to combine workers' 
economic and political struggle — 
10, 90, 121, 333 
— and revolutionary theory—45 
— internationalism as its inherent 
feature—10, 15, 17, 53, 73, 74, 
77, 89, 120, 138, 323, 331-33, 344, 346, 348, 350, 357, 358, 385, 
442-43 
— and democratic freedoms—10, 
20, 23, 77 
— and struggle against national op­
pression—77, 88,  120-21,  212 
— and struggle for peace, against 
wars—53-54, 81, 143, 332 
See also Communist League, the; 
Economic struggle of workers; Interna­
tional Working Men's Association; Mar­
xism;  Parliament—its use by working 
class;  Politics, political struggle— 
political struggle of working class; 
Revolution, proletarian, socialist; Strikes, 
strike movement; Trade(s) unions, trade 
union movement; Workers' societies; 
Working-class movement (in different 
countries) 
Working-class movement in Austria—15-
16, 77-78 
See also International Working Men's 
Association in Austria 
Working-class movement in Belgium—47-
52, 72,  320-21,  357-60 
See also International Working Men's 
Association in Belgium 
Working-class movement in England—16, 
47, 80-81,  98, 377 
See also Chartism, Chartist movement; 
International Working Men's Association 
in England;  Land and Labour League; 
Reform League; Trade(s) unions, trade 
union movement—in England 
Working-class movement in France—13, 
72-77 
See also Bakuninism, Bakuninists—in 
France; International Working Men's 
Association in France; Revolution of 
1848-49—in France; Trade(s) unions, 
trade union movement—in France 
Working-class movement in Germany—20-
23, 59, 79, 95, 98, 100, 378, 381, 387 
See also Communist League, the; Gener­
al Association of German Workers; Ger­
man Social-Democracy; International 
Working Men's Association in Germany; 
Revolution of 1848-49—in Germany; 
Trade(s) unions, trade union move­
ment—in Germany; Union of German 
Workers' Associations 
Working-class movement in Hungary—78-
79 

=====第644页=====
612 Subject Index 
Working-class movement in Italy—15, 377 
See also Bakuninism, Bakuninists—in 
Italy; International Working Men's As­
sociation in Italy; Revolution of 1848-
49—in Italy 
Working-class movement in Switzerland— 
16, 79, 137-38, 349, 377-78 
See also Bakuninism, Bakuninists—in 
Switzerland; International Working 
Men's Association in Switzerland; 
Trade(s) unions, trade union movement— 
in Switzerland 
Working-class movement in the USA—16, 
17, 54, 338, 377, 379, 380, 442-43 See also National Labour Union of the 
United States 
Working day 
— and intensification of labour— 
382-83 
— and introduction of machines— 
382-83,  387 
— of women and children—63, 382, 
387 
— importance of its reduction for 
working  class—11,  330, 382, 
387 
— struggle for its reduction—10, 11, 
16-17,  330, 379-80, 383, 385, 387, 
405 

=====第645页=====
