# Volume 2

==========

## Table of contents








Marx & Engels Selected Works (Vol. 2)




MIA: M.I.A. Library: Marx & Engels: Selected Works (Vol. 2)


 

Marx Engels Selected Works Volume 2 



Inaugural Address of the Working Men’s International Association. (M) 11
General Rules of the International Working Men’s Association. (M) 19
To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America. (M) 22
On Proudhon (letter from Marx to J. B. Schweitzer) 24
Wages, Price and Profit. (M)31
[Preliminary] 31
I. [Production and Wages] 31
II. [Production, Wages, Profits] 33
III. [Wages and Currency] 41
IV. [Supply and Demand] 44
V. [Wages and Prices] 45
VI. [Value and Labour] 48
VII. Labouring Power 55
VIII. Production of Surplus Value 57
IX. Value of Labour 59
X. Profit Is made by Selling a Commodity at Its Value 60
XI. The Different Parts into Which Surplus Value Is Decomposed 61
XII. General relation of Profits, Wages and Prices 64
XIII. Main Cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting Their Fall 65
XIV. The Struggle Between Capital and Labour and Its Results. 71
Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council, the Different Questions. (M) 77
1. Organisation of the International Association 77
2. International Combination of Efforts, by the Agency of the Association, in the Struggle Between Labour and Capital 77
3. Limitation of the Working Day 79
4. Juvenile and Children’s Labour (Both Sexes) 79
5. Co-operative Labour 81
6. Trades’ Unions. Their Past, Present and Future 82
7. Direct and Indirect Taxation 83
8. International Credit 84
9. Polish Question 84
10. Armies 84
11. Religious Question 85
Preface to the First German edition of the First Volume of Capital. (M) 86
Afterword to the Second German Edition of the First Volume of Capital. (M) 91
Capital. Part VIII. The So-Called Primitive Accumulation. (M) 100
Chapter XXVI.-The Secret of Primitive Accumulation100
Chapter XXVII.-Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land103
Chapter XXVIII.-Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing Down of Wages by Acts of Parliament118
Chapter XXIX.-Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer126
Chapter XXX.-Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial Capital128
Chapter XXXI.-Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist132
Chapter XXXII.-Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation142
Marx’s Capital. (E) 146
I. 146
II. 149
From the Preface to the Second Volume of Capital. (E) 153
Address to the National Labour Union of the United States. (M) 156
Preface to Second Edition of The Peasant War in Germany, 1870. (E) 158
Supplement to the Preface of 1870 for the Third Edition of 1875165
The General Council of the International to the Russian Section in Geneva. (M) 172
Confidential Communication (Excerpt). (M) 174
The Civil War in France. (M) 178
Introduction by Engels178
First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association on the Franco-Prussian War190
Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association on the Franco-Prussian War195
I202
II210
III217
IV230
Notes 241
I 241
II 242
Apropos of Working-Class Political Action. Reporter’s Record of the Speech made at the London Conference of the International Working Men’s Association, September 21, 1871. (E) 245
Fictitious Splits in the International. Private Circular from the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association. (M/E)247
I 247
II250
III259
IV266
V278
VI280
VII283
Resolutions of the Meeting held to Celebrate the Anniversary of the Paris Commune. (M) 287
The Nationalisation of the Land. (M) 288
From the Resolutions of the General Congress held in The Hague. (M/E)291
The Hague Congress. Reporter’s Record of the Speech Made at the Meeting Held in Amsterdam on September 8, 1872. (M) 292
The Housing Question. (E) 295
Preface to the Second Edition295
Part One. How Proudhon Solves the Housing Question 305
Part Two. How the Bourgeoisie Solves the Housing Question323
I 323
II 336
III 350
Part Three. Supplement on Proudhon and the Housing Question353
I 353
II 358
III 366
IV 370
On Authority. (E) 376
Programme of the Blanquist Commune Emigrants (Article II from Refugee Literature). (E) 380
On Social Relations in Russia (Article V from Refugee Literature) (E)387
Afterword to the Work. “On Social Relations in Russia”. (E) 398
From Comments on Bakunin’s Statehood and Anarchy. (M) 411
Letters. 413
Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann, February 23, 1865413
Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. October 9, 1866413
Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann, July 11, 1868418
Marx to L. Kugelmann. April 12, 1871420
Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann, April 17-18, 1871421
Marx to F. Bolte. November 23, 1871422



Selected Works Index
Marx & Engels Internet Archive | MIA

 






==========

## Inaugural Address of the Working Men’s International Association







Inaugural Address of the International Working Men's Association




The International Workingmen’s Association 1864
Inaugural Address 
of the International Working Men’s Association
“The First International”

* * *

Written: October 21-27, 1864;
First Published: Printed as a pamphlet in Inaugural Address and Provisional Rules of the International Working Men’s Association, along with the “General Rules”. London.
Source: Original pamphlet;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac/Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx & Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000.
* * *
 

Workingmen:
It is a great fact that the misery of the working masses has not diminished
from 1848 to 1864, and yet this period is unrivaled for the development
of its industry and the growth of its commerce. In 1850 a moderate organ
of the British middle class, of more than average information, predicted
that if the exports and imports of England were to rise 50 per cent, English
pauperism would sink to zero. Alas! On April 7, 1864, the Chancellor of
the Exchequer delighted his parliamentary audience by the statement that
the total import and export of England had grown in 1863 “to 443,955,000
pounds! That astonishing sum about three times the trade of the comparatively
recent epoch of 1843! “With all that, he was eloquent upon “poverty”.
“Think,” he exclaimed, “of those who are on the border of that region,”
upon “wages... not increased”; upon “human life... in nine cases out of
ten but a struggle of existence! “He did not speak of the people of Ireland,
gradually replaced by machinery in the north and by sheepwalks in the south,
though even the sheep in that unhappy country are decreasing, it is true,
not at so rapid a rate as the men. He did not repeat what then had been
just betrayed by the highest representation of the upper ten thousand in
a sudden fit of terror. When garrote panic had reached a certain height
the House of Lords caused an inquiry to be made into, and a report to be
published upon, transportation and penal servitude. Out came the murder
in the bulky Blue Book of 1863 and proved it was, by official facts and
figures, that the worst of the convicted criminals, the penal serfs of
England and Scotland, toiled much less and fared far better than the agricultural
laborers of England and Scotland. But this was not all. When, consequent
upon the Civil War in America, the operatives of Lancashire and Cheshire
were thrown upon the streets, the same House of Lords sent to the manufacturing
districts a physician commissioned to investigate into the smallest possible
amount of carbon and nitrogen, to be administered in the cheapest and plainest
form, which on an average might just suffice to “avert starvation diseases”.
Dr. Smith, the medical deputy, ascertained that 28,000 grains of carbon
and 1,330 grains of nitrogen were the weekly allowance that would keep
an average adult... just over the level of starvation diseases, and he
found furthermore that quantity pretty nearly to agree with the scanty
nourishment to which the pressure of extreme distress had actually reduced
the cotton operatives (1). But now mark! The same
learned doctor was later on again deputed by the medical officer of the
Privy Council to enquire into the nourishment of the poorer laboring classes.
The results of his research are embodied in the “Sixth Report on Public
Health”, published by order of Parliament in the course of the present
year. What did the doctor discover? That the silk weavers, the needlewomen,
the kid glovers, the stock weavers, and so forth, received on an average,
not even the distress pittance of the cotton operatives, not even the amount
of carbon and nitrogen “just sufficient to avert starvation diseases”.

 “Moreover: — we quote from the report — “as regards the examined
families of the agricultural population, it appeared that more than a fifth
were with less than the estimated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that
more than one-third were with less than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogeneous
food, and that in three counties (Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somersetshire)
insufficiency of nitrogeneous food was the average diet.”

 “It must be remembered,” adds the official report, “that privation of
food is very reluctantly borne, and that, as a rule, great poorness of
diet will only come when other privations have preceded it.... Even cleanliness
will have been found costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful
endeavors to maintain it, every such endeavor will represent additional
pangs of hunger.”

 “These are painful reflections, especially when it is remembered that
the poverty to which they advert is not the deserved poverty of idleness;
in all cases it is the poverty of working populations. Indeed the work
which obtains the scanty pittance of food is for the most part excessively
prolonged.”

The report brings out the strange and rather unexpected fact:

 “That of the division of the United Kingdom,” England, Wales, Scotland,
and Ireland, “the agricultural population of England,” the richest division,
 “is considerably the worst fed”; but that even the agricultural laborers
of Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somersetshire fare better than great numbers
of skilled indoor operatives of the East of London.

Such are the official statements published by order of Parliament in 1864,
during the millennium of free trade, at a time when the Chancellor of the
Exchequer told the House of Commons that

 “the average condition of the British laborer has improved in a degree
we know to be extraordinary and unexampled in the history of any country
or any age.”

Upon these official congratulations jars the dry remark of the official
Public Health Report:

 “The public health of a country means the health of its masses, and
the masses will scarcely be healthy unless, to their very base, they be
at least moderately prosperous.”

Dazzled by the “Progress of the Nation” statistics dancing before his eyes,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer exclaims in wild ecstasy:

 “From 1842 to 1852, the taxable income of the country increased by
6 per cent; in the eight years from 1853 to 1861, it has increased from
the basis taken in 1853, 20 per cent! The fact is so astonishing to be
almost incredible! ... This intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power,”
adds Mr. Gladstone, “is entirely confined to classes of property.”

If you want to know under what conditions of broken health, tainted morals,
and mental ruin that “intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power...
entirely confined to classes of property” was, and is, being produced by
the classes of labor, look to the picture hung up in the last Public Health
Report of the workshops of tailors, printers, and dressmakers! Compare
the “Report of the 
Children’s Employment Commission” of 1863, where it
states, for instance, that

 “the potters as a class, both men and women, represent a much degenerated
population, both physically and mentally”, that “the unhealthy child is
an unhealthy parent in his turn”, that “a progressive deterioration of
the race must go on”, and that “the degenerescence of the population of
Staffordshire would be even greater were it not for the constant recruiting
from the adjacent country, and the intermarriage with more healthy races.”

Glance at Mr. Tremenheere’s Blue Book of the “Grievances Complained of
by the Journeymen Bakers”! And who has not shuddered at the paradoxic made
by the inspectors of factories, and illustrated by the Registrar General,
that the Lancashire operatives, while put upon the distress pittance of
food, were actually improving in health, because of their temporary exclusion
by the cotton famine from the cotton factory, and the mortality of the
children was decreasing, because their mothers were now at last allowed
to give them, instead of Godrey’s cordial, their own breasts.

Again, reverse the medal! The income and property tax returns laid before
the House of Commons on July 20, 1864, teach us that the persons with yearly
incomes valued by the tax gatherer of 50,000 pounds and upwards had, from
April 5, 1862, to April 5, 1863, been joined by a dozen and one, their
number having increased in that single year from 67 to 80. The same returns
disclose the fact that about 3,000 persons divide among themselves a yearly
income of about 25,000,000 pounds sterling, rather more than the total
revenue doled out annually to the whole mass of the agricultural laborers
of England and Wales. Open the census of 1861 and you will find that the
number of male landed proprietors of England and Wales has decreased from
16,934 in 1851 to 15,066 in 1861, so that the concentration of land had
grown in 10 years 11 per cent. If the concentration of the soil of the
country in a few hands proceeds at the same rate, the land question will
become singularly simplified, as it had become in the Roman Empire when
Nero grinned at the discovery that half of the province of Africa was owned
by six gentlemen.

We have dwelt so long upon these facts “so astonishing to be almost
incredible” because England heads the Europe of commerce and industry.
It will be remembered that some months ago one of the refugee sons of Louis
Philippe publicly congratulated the English agricultural laborer on the
superiority of his lot over that of his less florid comrade on the other
side of the Channel. Indeed, with local colors changed, and on a scale
somewhat contracted, the English facts reproduce themselves in all the
industrious and progressive countries of the Continent. In all of them
there has taken place, since 1848, an unheard-of development of industry,
and an unheard-of expansion of imports and exports. In all of them, as
in England, a minority of the working classes got their real wages somewhat
advanced; while in most cases the monetary rise of wages denoted no more
a real access of comforts than the inmate of the metropolitan poorhouse
or orphan asylum, for instance, was in the least benefited by his first
necessaries costing £9 15s. 8d. in 1861 against £7 7s. 4d. in 1852. Everywhere
the great mass of the working classes were sinking down to a lower depth,
at the same rate at least that those above them were rising in the social
scale. In all countries of Europe it has now become a truth demonstrable
to every unprejudiced mind, and only decried by those whose interest it
is to hedge other people in a fool’s paradise, that no improvement of machinery,
no appliance of science to production, no contrivances of communication,
no new colonies, no emigration, no opening of markets, no free trade, not
all these things put together, will do away with the miseries of the industrious
masses; but that, on the present false base, every fresh development of
the productive powers of labor must tend to deepen social contrasts and
point social antagonisms. Death of starvation rose almost to the rank of
an institution, during this intoxicating epoch of economical progress,
in the metropolis of the British empire. That epoch is marked in the annals
of the world by the quickened return, the widening compass, and the deadlier
effects of the social pest called a commercial and industrial crisis.

After the failure of the Revolution of 1848, all party organizations
and party journals of the working classes were, on the Continent, crushed
by the iron hand of force, the most advanced sons of labor fled in despair
to the transatlantic republic, and the short-lived dreams of emancipation
vanished before an epoch of industrial fever, moral marasm, and political
reaction. The defeat of the continental working classes, partly owed to
the diplomacy of the English government, acting then as now in fraternal
solidarity with the Cabinet of St. Petersburg, soon spread its contagious
effects to this side of the Channel. While the rout of their continental
brethren unmanned the English working classes, and broke their faith in
their own cause, it restored to the landlord and the money lord their somewhat
shaken confidence. They insolently withdrew concessions already advertised.
The discoveries of new gold lands led to an immense exodus, leaving an
irreparable void in the ranks of the British proletariat. Others of its
formerly active members were caught by the temporary bribe of greater work
and wages, and turned into “political blacks”. All the efforts made at
keeping up, of remodeling, the Chartist movement failed signally; the press
organs of the working class died one by one of the apathy of the masses,
and in point of fact never before seemed the English working class so thoroughly
reconciled to a state of political nullity. If, then, there had been no
solidarity of action between the British and the continental working classes,
there was, at all events, a solidarity of defeat.

And yet the period passed since the Revolutions of 1848 has not been
without its compensating features. We shall here only point to two great
factors.

After a 30 years’ struggle, fought with almost admirable perseverance,
the English working classes, improving a momentaneous split between the
landlords and money lords, succeeded in carrying the Ten Hours’ Bill. The
immense physical, moral, and intellectual benefits hence accruing to the
factory operatives, half-yearly chronicled in the reports of the inspectors
of factories, are now acknowledged on all sides. Most of the continental
governments had to accept the English Factory Act in more or less modified
forms, and the English Parliament itself is every year compelled to enlarge
its sphere of action. But besides its practical import, there was something
else to exalt the marvelous success of this workingmen’s measure. Through
their most notorious organs of science, such as Dr. Ure, Professor Senior,
and other sages of that stamp, the middle class had predicted, and to their
heart’s content proved, that any legal restriction of the hours of labor
must sound the death knell of British industry, which, vampirelike, could
but live by sucking blood, and children’s blood, too. In olden times, child
murder was a mysterious rite of the religion of Moloch, but it was practiced
on some very solemn occassions only, once a year perhaps, and then Moloch
had no exclusive bias for the children of the poor. This struggle about
the legal restriction of the hours of labor raged the more fiercely since,
apart from frightened avarice, it told indeed upon the great contest between
the blind rule of the supply and demand laws which form the political economy
of the middle class, and social production controlled by social foresight,
which forms the political economy of the working class. Hence the Ten Hours’
Bill was not only a great practical success; it was the victory of a principle;
it was the first time that in broad daylight the political economy of the
middle class succumbed to the political economy of the working class.

But there was in store a still greater victory of the political economy
of labor over the political economy of property. We speak of the co-operative
movement, especially the co-operative factories raised by the unassisted
efforts of a few bold “hands”. The value of these great social experiments
cannot be overrated. By deed instead of by argument, they have shown that
production on a large scale, and in accord with the behests of modern science,
may be carried on without the existence of a class of masters employing
a class of hands; that to bear fruit, the means of labor need not be monopolized
as a means of dominion over, and of extortion against, the laboring man
himself; and that, like slave labor, like serf labor, hired labor is but
a transitory and inferior form, destined to disappear before associated
labor plying its toil with a willing hand, a ready mind, and a joyous heart.
In England, the seeds of the co-operative system were sown by Robert Owen;
the workingmen’s experiments tried on the Continent were, in fact, the
practical upshot of the theories, not invented, but loudly proclaimed,
in 1848.

At the same time the experience of the period from 1848 to 1864 has
proved beyond doubt that, however, excellent in principle and however useful
in practice, co-operative labor, if kept within the narrow circle of the
casual efforts of private workmen, will never be able to arrest the growth
in geometrical progression of monopoly, to free the masses, nor even to
perceptibly lighten the burden of their miseries. It is perhaps for this
very reason that plausible noblemen, philanthropic middle-class spouters,
and even keep political economists have all at once turned nauseously complimentary
to the very co-operative labor system they had vainly tried to nip in the
bud by deriding it as the utopia of the dreamer, or stigmatizing it as
the sacrilege of the socialist. To save the industrious masses, co-operative
labor ought to be developed to national dimensions, and, consequently,
to be fostered by national means. Yet the lords of the land and the lords
of capital will always use their political privileges for the defense and
perpetuation of their economic monopolies. So far from promoting, they
will continue to lay every possible impediment in the way of the emancipation
of labor. Remember the sneer with which, last session, Lord Palmerston
put down the advocated of the Irish Tenants’ Right Bill. The House of Commons,
cried he, is a house of landed proprietors. To conquer political power
has, therefore, become the great duty of the working classes. They seem
to have comprehended this, for in England, Germany, Italy, and France,
there have taken place simultaneous revivals, and simultaneous efforts
are being made at the political organization of the workingmen’s party.

One element of success they possess — numbers; but numbers weigh
in the balance only if united by combination and led by knowledge. Past
experience has shown how disregard of that bond of brotherhood which ought
to exist between the workmen of different countries, and incite them to
stand firmly by each other in all their struggles for emancipation, will
be chastised by the common discomfiture of their incoherent efforts. This
thought prompted the workingmen of different countries assembled on September
28, 1864, in public meeting at St. Martin’s Hall, to found the International
Association.

Another conviction swayed that meeting.

If the emancipation of the working classes requires their fraternal
concurrence, how are they to fulfill that great mission with a foreign
policy in pursuit of criminal designs, playing upon national prejudices,
and squandering in piratical wars the people’s blood and treasure? It was
not the wisdom of the ruling classes, but the heroic resistance to their
criminal folly by the working classes of England, that saved the west of
Europe from plunging headlong into an infamous crusade for the perpetuation
and propagation of slavery on the other side of the Atlantic. The shameless
approval, mock sympathy, or idiotic indifference with which the upper classes
of Europe have witnessed the mountain fortress of the Caucasus falling
a prey to, and heroic Poland being assassinated by, Russia: the immense
and unresisted encroachments of that barbarous power, whose head is in
St. Petersburg, and whose hands are in every cabinet of Europe, have taught
the working classes the duty to master themselves the mysteries of international
politics; to watch the diplomatic acts of their respective governments;
to counteract them, if necessary, by all means in their power; when unable
to prevent, to combine in simultaneous denunciations, and to vindicate
the simple laws or morals and justice, which ought to govern the relations
of private individuals, as the rules paramount of the intercourse of nations.

The fight for such a foreign policy forms part of the general struggle
for the emancipation of the working classes.

Proletarians of all countries, unite!



1.
We need hardly remind the reader that, apart from the elements of water
and certain inorganic substances, carbon and nitrogen form the raw materials
of human food. However, to nourish the human system, these simple chemical
constituents must be supplied in the form of vegetable or animal substances.
Potatoes, for instance, contain mainly carbon, while wheaten bread contains
carbonaceous and nitrogenous substances in a due proportion. — K.M.

 


International Workingmen’s Association Index |
Works by Date
Marx-Engels Archive
 




==========

## General Rules of the International Working Men’s Association







General Rules of the International Working Men's Association




The International Working Men's Association 1864


General Rules



Written: October, 1871

First Published: October 24, 1871

Source: Original pamphlet

Transcription/Markup: Zodiac/Brian Baggins

Online Version: Marx & Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000


 

Considering,

That the emancipation of the working
classes must be conquered by the working classes themselves, that the struggle
for the emancipation of the working classes means not a struggle for class
privileges and monopolies, but for equal rights and duties, and the abolition
of all class rule;

That the economical subjection of the man of labor to the monopolizer
of the means of labor — that is, the source of life — lies at the bottom
of servitude in all its forms, of all social misery, mental degradation,
and political dependence;

That the economical emancipation of the working classes is therefore
the great end to which every political movement ought to be subordinate
as a means;

That all efforts aiming at the great end hitherto failed from
the want of solidarity between the manifold divisions of labor in each
country, and from the absence of a fraternal bond of union between the
working classes of different countries;

That the emancipation of labor is neither a local nor a national,
but a social problem, embracing all countries in which modern society exists,
and depending for its solution on the concurrence, practical and theoretical,
of the most advanced countries;

That the present revival of the working classes in the most industrious
countries of Europe, while it raises a new hope, gives solemn warning against
a relapse into the old errors, and calls for the immediate combination
of the still disconnected movements;

For these reasons —

The International Working Men's Association has been founded.

It declares:

That all societies and individuals adhering to it will acknowledge
truth, justice, and morality as the basis of their conduct toward each
other and toward all men, without regard to color, creed, or nationality;

That it acknowledges no rights without duties, no duties
without rights;


And, in this spirit, the following Rules have been drawn up.


1. This Association is established to afford a central medium of communication
and co-operation between workingmen's societies existing in different countries
and aiming at the same end; viz., the protection, advancement, and complete
emancipation of the working classes.

2. The name of the society shall be "The International Working Men's Association."

3. There shall annually meet a General Working Men's Congress, consisting
of delegates of the branches of the Association. The Congress will have
to proclaim the common aspirations of the working class, take the measures
required for the successful working of the International Association, and
appoint the General Council of the society.

4. Each Congress appoints the time and place of meeting for the next Congress.
The delegates assemble at the appointed time and place, without any special
invitation. The General Council may, in case of need, change the place,
but has no power to postpone the time of the General Council annually.
The Congress appoints the seat and elects the members of the General Council
annually. The General Council thus elected shall have power to add to the
number of its members.

On its annual meetings, the General Congress shall receive a public
account of the annual transactions of the General Council. The latter may,
in case of emergency, convoke the General Congress before the regular yearly
term.


5. The General Council shall consist of workingmen from the different countries
represented in the International Association. It shall, from its own members,
elect the officers necessary for the transaction of business, such as a
treasurer, a general secretary, corresponding secretaries for the different
countries, etc.

6. The General Council shall form an international agency between the different
and local groups of the Association, so that the workingmen in one country
be consistently informed of the movements of their class in every other
country; that an inquiry into the social state of the different countries
of Europe be made simultaneously, and under a common direction; that the
questions of general interest mooted in one society be ventilated by all;
and that when immediate practical steps should be needed — as, for instance,
in case of international quarrels — the action of the associated societies
be simultaneous and uniform. Whenever it seems opportune, the General Council
shall take the initiative of proposals to be laid before the different
national or local societies. To facilitate the communications, the General
Council shall publish periodical reports.

7. Since the success of the workingmen's movement in each country cannot be
secured but by the power of union and combination, while, on the other
hand, the usefulness of the International General Council must greatly
depend on the circumstance whether it has to deal with a few national centres
of workingmen's associations, or with a great number of small and disconnected
local societies — the members of the International Association shall use
their utmost efforts to combine the disconnected workingmen's societies
of their respective countries into national bodies, represented by central
national organs. It is self-understood, however, that the appliance of
this rule will depend upon the peculiar laws of each country, and that,
apart from legal obstacles, no independent local society shall be precluded
from corresponding directly with the General Council.

8. Every section has the right to appoint its own secretary corresponding
directly with the General Council.

9. Everybody who acknowledges and defends the principles of the International
Working Men's Association is eligible to become a member. Every branch
is responsible for the integrity of the members it admits.

10. Each member of the International Association, on removing his domicile
from one country to another, will receive the fraternal support of the
Associated Working Men.

11. While united in a perpetual bond of fraternal co-operation, the workingmen's
societies joining the International Association will preserve their existent
organizations intact.

12. The present Rules may be revised by each Congress, provided that two-thirds
of the delegates present are in favor of such revision.

13. Everything not provided for in the present Rules will be supplied by special
Regulations, subject to the revision of every Congress.


256, High Holborn, W. C.,
London, 24th October, 1871

 


Marx & Engels Internet Archive





==========

## To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America







Marx's letter to Abraham Lincoln



The International Workingmen's Association 1864

Address of the International Working Men's Association to Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America


Presented to U.S. Ambassador Charles Francis Adams
January 28, 1865 [A]



Written: by Marx between November 22 & 29, 1864, and included in the Minutes of the General Council on 29th November 1864;
First Published: The Bee-Hive Newspaper, No. 169, January 7, 1865, and in German translation in Der Social Demokrat on 30 Dezember 1864;
Source: The General Council of the First International 1864-1866, Progress Publishers;
Transcription/Markup: Zodiac/Brian Baggins;
Online Version: Marx & Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000.

 

Sir:

We congratulate the American people upon your re-election by a
large majority. If resistance to the Slave Power was the reserved watchword
of your first election, the triumphant war cry of your re-election is Death
to Slavery.

From the commencement of the titanic American strife the workingmen
of Europe felt instinctively that the star-spangled banner carried the
destiny of their class. The contest for the territories which opened the
dire epopee, was it not to decide whether the virgin soil of immense tracts
should be wedded to the labor of the emigrant or prostituted by the tramp
of the slave driver?

When an oligarchy of 300,000 slaveholders dared to inscribe, for
the first time in the annals of the world, "slavery" on the banner of Armed
Revolt, when on the very spots where hardly a century ago the idea of one
great Democratic Republic had first sprung up, whence the first Declaration
of the Rights of Man was issued, and the first impulse given to the European
revolution of the eighteenth century; when on those very spots counterrevolution,
with systematic thoroughness, gloried in rescinding "the ideas entertained
at the time of the formation of the old constitution", and maintained slavery
to be "a beneficent institution", indeed, the old solution of the great
problem of "the relation of capital to labor", and cynically proclaimed
property in man "the cornerstone of the new edifice" — then the working
classes of Europe understood at once, even before the fanatic partisanship
of the upper classes for the Confederate gentry had given its dismal warning,
that the slaveholders' rebellion was to sound the tocsin for a general
holy crusade of property against labor, and that for the men of labor,
with their hopes for the future, even their past conquests were at stake
in that tremendous conflict on the other side of the Atlantic. Everywhere
they bore therefore patiently the hardships imposed upon them by the cotton
crisis, opposed enthusiastically the proslavery intervention of their betters
— and, from most parts of Europe, contributed their quota of blood to
the good cause.

While the workingmen, the true political powers of the North,
allowed slavery to defile their own republic, while before the Negro, mastered
and sold without his concurrence, they boasted it the highest prerogative
of the white-skinned laborer to sell himself and choose his own master,
they were unable to attain the true freedom of labor, or to support their
European brethren in their struggle for emancipation; but this barrier
to progress has been swept off by the red sea of civil war.

The workingmen of Europe feel sure that, as the American War of
Independence initiated a new era of ascendancy for the middle class, so
the American Antislavery War will do for the working classes. They consider
it an earnest of the epoch to come that it fell to the lot of Abraham Lincoln,
the single-minded son of the working class, to lead his country through
the matchless struggle for the rescue of an enchained race and the reconstruction
of a social world. [B]


Signed on behalf of the International Workingmen's Association, the
Central Council:

Longmaid, Worley, Whitlock, Fox, Blackmore, Hartwell, Pidgeon,
Lucraft, Weston, Dell, Nieass, Shaw, Lake, Buckley, Osbourne, Howell, Carter,
Wheeler, Stainsby, Morgan, Grossmith, Dick, Denoual, Jourdain, Morrissot,
Leroux, Bordage, Bocquet, Talandier, Dupont, L.Wolff, Aldovrandi, Lama,
Solustri, Nusperli, Eccarius, Wolff, Lessner, Pfander, Lochner, Kaub, Bolleter,
Rybczinski, Hansen, Schantzenbach, Smales, Cornelius, Petersen, Otto, Bagnagatti,
Setacci;

George Odger, President of the Council; P.V. Lubez, Corresponding
Secretary for France; Karl Marx, Corresponding Secretary for Germany; G.P.
Fontana, Corresponding Secretary for Italy; J.E. Holtorp, Corresponding
Secretary for Poland; H.F. Jung, Corresponding Secretary for Switzerland;
William R. Cremer, Honorary General Secretary.

18 Greek Street, Soho.



[A]
From the minutes of the Central (General) Council
of the International — November 19, 1864:


"Dr. Marx then brought up the report of the subcommittee, also a draft
of the address which had been drawn up for presentation to the people of
America congratulating them on their having re-elected Abraham Lincoln
as President. The address is as follows and was unanimously agreed to."


[B]
 The minutes of the meeting continue:


"A long discussion then took place as to the mode of presenting the
address and the propriety of having a M.P. with the deputation; this was
strongly opposed by many members, who said workingmen should rely on themselves
and not seek for extraneous aid.... It was then proposed... and carried
unanimously. The secretary correspond with the United States Minister asking
to appoint a time for receiving the deputation, such deputation to consist
of the members of the Central Council."



Ambassador Adams Replies


Legation of the United States
London, 28th January, 1865


Sir:

I am directed to inform you that the address of the Central Council
of your Association, which was duly transmitted through this Legation to
the President of the United [States], has been received by him.

So far as the sentiments expressed by it are personal, they are
accepted by him with a sincere and anxious desire that he may be able to
prove himself not unworthy of the confidence which has been recently extended
to him by his fellow citizens and by so many of the friends of humanity
and progress throughout the world.

The Government of the United States has a clear consciousness
that its policy neither is nor could be reactionary, but at the same time
it adheres to the course which it adopted at the beginning, of abstaining
everywhere from propagandism and unlawful intervention. It strives to do
equal and exact justice to all states and to all men and it relies upon
the beneficial results of that effort for support at home and for respect
and good will throughout the world.

Nations do not exist for themselves alone, but to promote the
welfare and happiness of mankind by benevolent intercourse and example.
It is in this relation that the United States regard their cause in the
present conflict with slavery, maintaining insurgence as the cause of human
nature, and they derive new encouragements to persevere from the testimony
of the workingmen of Europe that the national attitude is favored with
their enlightened approval and earnest sympathies.

I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant,

Charles Francis Adams

 


International Workingmen's Association Index |
Documents





==========

## On Proudhon






Letters: The International Workingmen's Association, To the editor of the Berliner Reform



The International Workingmen’s Association
Letter to J B Schweizer
“On Proudhon”


Written: by Marx on January 24, 1865;
Source: Marx Engels Selected Works, Volume 2;
First Published: Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 16, 17 and 18, February 1, 3 and 5, 1865;
Written: by Marx on January 24, 1865.

Der Social-Demokrat, No. 16, February 1, 1865
London, January 24, 1865
Dear Sir.
Yesterday I received a letter in which you demand from me a detailed
judgment of Proudhon. Lack of time prevents me from fulfilling your
desire. Added to which I have none of his works to hand. However,
in order to assure you of my good will I will quickly jot down a brief
outline. You can then complete it, add to it or cut it – in short do anything
you like with it. [The editors of Der Social-Demokrat supplied a footnote
here: “We found it better to print the letter without any changes.” ]
Proudhon’s earliest efforts I no longer remember. His school work
about the Langue universelle shows how unceremoniously he tackled
problems for the solution of which he still lacked the first elements of
knowledge.
His first work, Qu’est-ce que la propriété?,
is undoubtedly his best. It is epoch-making, if not because of the novelty
of its content, at least because of the new and audacious way of expressing
old ideas. In the works of the French socialists and communists he knew
 “propriété” had, of course, been not only criticised
in various ways but also “abolished” in a utopian manner. In this
book Proudhon stands in approximately the same relation to Saint-Simon
and Fourier as Feuerbach stands to Hegel. Compared with Hegel, Feuerbach
is certainly poor. Nevertheless he was epoch-making after Hegel
because he laid stress on certain points which were disagreeable
to the Christian consciousness but important for the progress of criticism,
points which Hegel had left in mystic clair-obscur [semi-obscurity].
In this book of Proudhon’s there still prevails, if I may be allowed
the expression, a strong muscular style. And its style is in my opinion
its chief merit. It is evident that even where he is only reproducing old
stuff, Proudhon discovers things in an independent way – that what he
is saying is new to him and is treated as new. The provocative defiance,
which lays hands on the economic “holy of holies,” the ingenious paradox
which made a mock of the ordinary bourgeois understanding, the withering
criticism, the bitter irony, and, revealed here and there, a deep and genuine
feeling of indignation at the infamy of the existing order, a revolutionary
earnestness – all these electrified the readers of Qu’est-ce que la
propriété? and provided a strong stimulus on its first
appearance. In a strictly scientific history of political economy the book
would hardly be worth mentioning. But sensational works of this kind have
their role to play in the sciences just as much as in the history of the
novel. Take, for instance, Malthus’s book on Population.
Its first edition was nothing but a “SENSATIONAL PAMPHLET” and plagiarism
from beginning to end into the bargain. And yet what a stimulus was produced
by this lampoon on the human race!
If I had Proudhon’s book before me I could easily give a few examples
to illustrate his early style. In the passages which he himself
regarded as the most important he imitates Kant’s treatment of the
antinomies – Kant was at that time the only German philosopher
whose works he had read, in translations – and he leaves one with a strong
impression that to him, as to Kant, the resolution of the antinomies is
something “beyond” human understanding, i.e., something that remains
obscure to him himself.
But in spite of all his apparent iconoclasm one already finds
in Qu’est-ce que la propriété’? the contradiction
that Proudhon is criticising society, on the one hand, from the standpoint
and with the eyes of a French small-holding peasant (later petit bourgeois)
and, on the other, that he measures it with the standards he inherited
from the socialists.
The deficiency of the book is indicated by its very title. The
question is so badly formulated that it cannot be answered correctly. Ancient
 “property relations” were superseded by feudal property relations
and these by “bourgeois” property relations. Thus history itself
had expressed its criticism upon past property relations. What Proudhon
was actually dealing with was modern bourgeois property as it exists
today. The question of what this is could have only been answered by a
critical analysis of “political economy,” embracing the totality
of these property relations, considering not their legal
aspect as relations of volition but their real form, that is, as
relations of production. But as Proudhon entangled the whole of
these economic relations in the general legal concept of “property,”
 “la propriété,” he could not get beyond the answer which,
in a similar work published before 1789, Brissot had already given
in the same words: “La propriété’ c’est le vol.”
The upshot is at best that the bourgeois legal conceptions of
 “theft” apply equally well to the “honest” gains of the bourgeois
himself. On the other hand, since “theft” as a forcible violation
of property presupposes the existence of property, Proudhon entangled
himself in all sorts of fantasies, obscure even to himself, about true
bourgeois property.
During my stay in Paris in 1844 I came into personal contact with
Proudhon. I mention this here because to a certain extent I am also to
blame for his “SOPHISTICATION”: as the English call the adulteration
of commercial goods. In the course of lengthy debates often lasting all
night, I infected him very much to his detriment with Hegelianism, which,
owing to his lack of German, he could not study properly. After my expulsion
from Paris Herr Karl Grün continued what I had begun. As a
teacher of German philosophy he also had the advantage over me that he
himself understood nothing about it.
Shortly before the appearance of Proudhon’s second important work,
the Philosophie de la misère, etc., he himself announced
this to me in a very detailed letter in which he said, among other things:
"J’attends votre férule critique." This criticism, however,
soon dropped on him (in my Misère de la philosophie, etc.,
Paris, 1847), in a way which ended our friendship for ever.
Der Social-Demokrat, No. 17, February 3, 1865
From what I have said here, you can see that Proudhon’s
Philosophie de la misère ou Système des contradictions
èconomiques first contained the real answer to the question
Qu’est-ce que la propriété? In fact it was only after
the publication of this work that he had begun his economic studies; he
had discovered that the question he had raised could not be answered by
invective, but only by an analysis of modern "political
economy". At the same time he attempted to present the system
of economic categories dialectically. In place of Kant’s insoluble
"antinomies", the Hegelian “contradiction" was to be introduced
as the means of development.
For an estimate of his book, which is in two fat volumes, I must
refer you to the refutation I wrote. There I have shown, among other things,
how little he had penetrated into the secret of scientific dialectics and
how, on the contrary, he shares the illusions of speculative philosophy,
for instead of regarding economic categories as the theoretical expression
of historical relations of production, corresponding to a particular stage
of development in material production, he garbles them into pre-existing
eternal ideas, and how in this roundabout way he arrives once more
at the standpoint of bourgeois economy. [“When the economists say that
present-day relations – the relations of bourgeois production – are natural,
they imply that these are the relations in which wealth is created and
productive forces developed in conformity with the laws of nature. These
relations therefore are themselves natural laws independent of the influence
of time. They are eternal laws which must always govern society. Thus there
has been history, but there is no longer any” (p. 113 of my work).]
I show furthermore how extremely deficient and at times even schoolboyish
is his knowledge of “political economy” which he undertook to criticise,
and that he and the utopians are hunting for a so-called “science”
by means of which a formula for the “solution of the social question” is
to be devised a priori, instead of deriving science from a critical
knowledge of the historical movement, a movement which itself produces
the material conditions of emancipation. My refutation shows in
particular that Proudhon’s view of exchange-value, the basis of
the whole theory, remains confused, incorrect and superficial, and that
he even mistakes the utopian interpretation of Ricardo’s theory
of value for the basis of a new science. With regard to his general point
of view I have summarised my conclusions thus:
 “Every economic relation has a good and a bad side, it is the one point
on which M. Proudhon does not give himself the lie. He sees the good side
expounded by the economists; the bad side he sees denounced by the socialists.
He borrows from the economists the necessity of eternal relations; he borrows
from the socialists the illusion of seeing in poverty nothing but poverty
(instead of seeing in it the revolutionary, destructive aspect which will
overthrow the old society). He is in agreement with both in wanting to
fall back upon the authority of science. Science for him reduces itself
to the slender proportions of a scientific formula; he is the man in search
of formulas. Thus it is that M. Proudhon flatters himself on having given
a criticism of both political economy and of communism: he is beneath them
both. Beneath the economists, since as a philosopher who has at his elbow
a magic formula, he thought he could dispense with going into purely economic
details; beneath the socialists, because he has neither courage enough
nor insight enough to rise, be it even speculatively, above the bourgeois
horizon....
“He wants to soar as the man of science above the bourgeois and
the proletarians; he is merely the petty bourgeois, continually
tossed back and forth between capital and labour, political economy and
communism."

Severe though the above judgment may sound I must even now endorse every
word of it. At the same time, however, one has to bear in mind that when
I declared his book to be the code of socialism of the petit bourgeois
and proved this theoretically, Proudhon was still being decried as an ultra-arch-revolutionary
both by political economists and by socialists. That is why later on I
never joined in the outcry about his "treachery" to the revolution.
It was not his fault that, originally misunderstood by others as well as
by himself, he failed to fulfil unjustified hopes.
Der Social-Demokrat, No. 18, February 5, 1865

In the Philosophie de la misère all the defects of Proudhon’s
method of presentation stand out very unfavourably in comparison with Qu’est-ce
que la propriété? The style is often what the French
call ampoule. High-sounding speculative jargon, purporting to
be German-philosophical, appears regularly on the scene when his Gallic
astuteness fails him. A noisy, self-glorifying, boastful tone and especially
the twaddle about “science” and sham display of it, which are always
so unedifying, are continually jarring on one’s ears. Instead of the genuine
warmth which permeates his first work, he here systematically works himself
up into a sudden flush of rhetoric in certain passages. There is in addition
the clumsy repugnant show of erudition of the self-taught, whose natural
pride in his original reasoning has already been broken and who now, as
a parvenu of science, feels it necessary to give himself airs with
what he neither is nor has. Then the mentality of the petty bourgeois who
for instance makes an indecently brutal attack, which is neither shrewd
nor profound nor even correct, on a man like Cabet – worthy of
respect for his practical attitude towards the French proletariat and on
the other hand pays compliments to a man like Dunoyer (a “State
Councillor,” it is true) although the whole significance of this Dunoyer
lay in the comic zeal with which, throughout three fat, unbearably boring
volumes, he preached a rigorism characterised by Helvetius as follows:
 “On veut que les malheureux soient parfaits” (It is demanded that
the unfortunate should be perfect).
The February Revolution certainly came at a very inconvenient
moment for Proudhon, who had irrefutably proved only a few weeks before
that “the era of revolutions” was past for ever. His speech in the
National Assembly, however little insight it showed into existing conditions,
was worthy of every praise. After the June insurrection it was an
act of great courage. In addition it had the fortunate consequence that
M. Thiers, by his reply opposing Proudhon’s proposals, which was
then issued as a special booklet, proved to the whole of Europe what infantile
catechism served this intellectual pillar of the French bourgeoisie as
a pedestal. Compared with M. Thiers, Proudhon indeed swelled to
the size of an antediluvian colossus.
Proudhon’s discovery of “crédit gratuit” and the
 “people’s bank” (banque du peuple), based upon it, were his last
economic “deeds.” My book A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy, Part I, Berlin, 1859 (pp. 59-64) contains the proof that the
theoretical basis of his idea arises from a misunderstanding of the basic
elements of bourgeois “political economy,” namely of the relation between
commodities and money, while the practical superstructure
was simply a reproduction of much older and far better developed schemes.
That under certain economic and political conditions the credit system
can be used to accelerate the emancipation of the working class, just as,
for instance, at the beginning of the eighteenth, and again later, at the
beginning of the nineteenth century in England, it facilitated the transfer
of wealth from one class to another, is quite unquestionable and self-evident.
But to regard interest-bearing capital as the main form of capital
and to try to make a particular form of the credit system comprising the
alleged abolition of interest, the basis for a transformation of society
is an out-and-out petty-bourgeois fantasy. This fantasy, further
diluted, can therefore actually already be found among the economic
spokesmen of the English petty bourgeoisie in the seventeenth century.
Proudhon’s polemic with Bastiat (1850) about interest-bearing capital is
on a far lower level than the Philosophie de la misère. He
succeeds in getting himself beaten even by Bastiat and breaks into burlesque
bluster when his opponent drives his blows home.
A few years ago Proudhon wrote a prize essay on Taxation, the
competition was sponsored, I believe, by the government of Lausanne. Here
the last flicker of genius is extinguished. Nothing remains but the petit
bourgeois tout pur.
So far as Proudhon’s political and philosophical writings are
concerned they all show the same contradictory, dual character as his economic
works. Moreover their value is purely local, confined to France. Nevertheless
his attacks on religion, the church, etc., were of great merit locally
at a time when the French socialists thought it desirable to show by their
religiosity how superior they were to the bourgeois Voltairianism of the
eighteenth century and the German godlessness of the nineteenth. Just as
Peter the Great defeated Russian barbarism by barbarity, Proudhon did his
best to defeat French phrase-mongering by phrases.
His work on the Coup d’état, in which he flirts
with Louis Bonaparte and, in fact, strives to make him palatable to the
French workers, and his last work, written against Poland, in which
for the greater glory of the tsar he expresses moronic cynicism, must be
described as works not merely bad but base, a baseness, however, which
corresponds to the petty-bourgeois point of view.
Proudhon has often been compared to Rousseau. Nothing
could be more erroneous. He is more like Nicolas Linguet, whose
Théorie des loix civiles, by the way, is a very brilliant
book.
Proudhon had a natural inclination for dialectics. But as he never
grasped really scientific dialectics he never got further than sophistry.
This is in fact connected with his petty-bourgeois point of view. Like
the historian Raumer, the petty bourgeois is made up of on-the-one-hand
and on-the-other-hand. This is so in his economic interests and therefore
in his politics, religious, scientific and artistic views. And likewise
in his morals, IN EVERYTHING. He is a living contradiction. If, like Proudhon,
he is in addition an ingenious man, he will soon learn to play with his
own contradictions and develop them according to circumstances into striking,
ostentatious, now scandalous now brilliant paradoxes. Charlatanism in science
and accommodation in politics are inseparable from such a point of view.
There remains only one governing motive, the vanity of the subject,
and the only question for him, as for all vain people, is the success of
the moment, the éclat of the day. Thus the simple moral sense, which
always kept a Rousseau, for instance, from even the semblance of compromise
with the powers that be, is bound to disappear.
Posterity will perhaps sum up the latest phase of French development
by saying that Louis Bonaparte was its Napoleon and Proudhon its Rousseau-Voltaire.
You yourself have now to accept responsibility for having imposed
upon me the role of a judge of the dead so soon after this man’s death.
Yours very respectfully,
Karl Marx
 


International Workingmen’s Association Index |
Marx-Engels Archive
Letters Index |
Works by Date
 



==========

## Wages, Price and Profit










Economic Manuscripts: Value, Price and Profit, Karl Marx 1865




Value, Price and Profit
Speech by Marx to the First International Working Men's Association, June 1865


Source: Marx, Karl. Value, Price and Profit. New York: International Co., Inc, 1969;
Written: between end of May and June 27, 1865;
First published: 1898;
 Edited: by Eleanor Marx Aveling;
HTML Mark-up: Mike Ballard, 1995;
Proofed: and corrected by Brandon Poole, 2009.

Introduction


    Preface by Edward Aveling

    Preliminary
 1. Production and Wages
 2. Production, Wages, Profits
 3. Wages and Currency
 4. Supply and Demand
 5. Wages and Prices
 6. Value and Labour
 7. Labour Power
 8. Production of Surplus Value
 9. Value of Labour
10. Profit is made by Selling a Commodity at its Value
11. The different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed
12. The General Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices
13. Main cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall
14. The Struggle between Capital and Labour, and its Results

 


Study Guide |
Notes by Marx
Marx and Engels on Political Economy |
Marx Engels Archive





==========

## Preliminary










Economic Manuscripts: VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT


Value, Price and Profit

Preliminary
CITIZENS,
Before entering into the subject-matter, allow me to make a few
preliminary remarks. There reigns now on the Continent a real epidemic of
strikes, and a general clamour for a rise of wages. The question will turn up
at our Congress. You, as the head of the International Association, ought to
have settled convictions upon this paramount question. For my own part, I
considered it therefore my duty to enter fully into the matter, even at the
peril of putting your patience to a severe test.
Another preliminary remark I have to make in regard to Citizen Weston. He
has not only proposed to you, but has publicly defended, in the interest of the
working class, as he thinks, opinions he knows to be most unpopular with the
working class. Such an exhibition of moral courage all of us must highly
honour. I hope that, despite the unvarnished style of my paper, at its
conclusion he will find me agreeing with what appears to me the just idea lying
at the bottom of his theses, which, however, in their present form, I cannot
but consider theoretically false and practically dangerous.
I shall now at once proceed to the business before us.

I. Production and Wages
Citizen Weston's argument rested, in fact, upon two premises:
firstly, the amount of national production is a fixed thing, a constant
quantity or magnitude, as the mathematicians would say; secondly, that the
amount of real wages, that is to say, of wages as measured by the quantity of
the commodities they can buy, is a fixed amount, a constant magnitude.
Now, his first assertion is evidently erroneous. Year after year you will
find that the value and mass of production increase, that the productive powers
of the national labour increase, and that the amount of money necessary to
circulate this increasing production continuously changes. What is true at the
end of the year, and for different years compared with each other, is true for
every average day of the year. The amount or magnitude of national production
changes continuously. It is not a constant but a variable magnitude, and apart
from changes in population it must be so, because of the continuous change in
the accumulation of capital and the productive powers of labour. It is
perfectly true that if a rise in the general rate of wages should take place
today, that rise, whatever its ulterior effects might be, would, by itself, not
immediately change the amount of production. It would, in the first instance,
proceed from the existing state of things. But if before the rise of wages the
national production was variable, and not fixed, it will continue to be
variable and not fixed after the rise of wages.
But suppose the amount of national production to be constant instead of
variable. Even then, what our friend Weston considers a logical conclusion
would still remain a gratuitous assertion. If I have a given number, say eight,
the absolute limits of this number do not prevent its parts from changing their
relative limits. If profits were six and wages two, wages might increase to six
and profits decrease to two, and still the total amount remain eight. The fixed
amount of production would by no means prove the fixed amount of wages. How
then does our friend Weston prove this fixity? By asserting it.
But even conceding him his assertion, it would cut both ways, while he
presses it only in one direction. If the amount of wages is a constant
magnitude, then it can be neither increased nor diminished. If then, in
enforcing a temporary rise of wages, the working men act foolishly, the
capitalists, in enforcing a temporary fall of wages, would act not less
foolishly. Our friend Weston does not deny that, under certain circumstances,
the working men can enforce a rise of wages, but their amount being
naturally fixed, there must follow a reaction. On the other hand, he knows also
that the capitalists can enforce a fall of wages, and, indeed,
continuously try to enforce it. According to the principle of the constancy of
wages, a reaction ought to follow in this case not less than in the former. The
working men, therefore, reacting against the attempt at, or the act of,
lowering wages, would act rightly. They would, therefore, act rightly in
enforcing a rise of wages, because every reaction against the
lowering of wages is an action for raising wages. According to Citizen
Weston's own principle of the constancy of wages, the working men
ought, therefore, under certain circumstances, to combine and struggle for a
rise of wages. If he denies this conclusion, he must give up the premise from
which it flows. He must not say that the amount of wages is a constant
quantity, but that, although it cannot and must not rise, it can
and must fall, whenever capital pleases to lower it. If the capitalist
pleases to feed you upon potatoes instead of upon meat, and upon oats instead
of upon wheat, you must accept his will as a law of political economy, and
submit to it. If in one country the rate of wages is higher than in another, in
the United States, for example, than in England, you must explain this
difference in the rate of wages by a difference between the will of the
American capitalist and the will of the English capitalist, a method which
would certainly very much simplify, not only the study of economic phenomena,
but of all other phenomena.
But even then, we might ask, why the will of the American
capitalist differs from the will of the English capitalist? And to answer the
question you must go beyond the domain of will. A person may tell me
that God wills one thing in France, and another thing in England. If I summon
him to explain this duality of will, he might have the brass to answer me that
God wills to have one will in France and another will in England. But our
friend Weston is certainly the last man to make an argument of such a complete
negation of all reasoning.
The will of the capitalist is certainly to take as much as
possible. What we have to do is not to talk about his will, but to
enquire into his power, the limits of that power, and the
character of those limits.


II. Production, Wages, Profits
The address Citizen Weston read to us might have been compressed
into a nutshell.
All his reasoning amounted to this: If the working class forces the
capitalist class to pay five shillings instead of four shillings in the shape
of money wages, the capitalist will return in the shape of commodities four
shillings' worth instead of five shillings' worth. The working class would have
to pay five shillings for what, before the rise of wages, they bought with four
shillings. But why is this the case? Why does the capitalist only return four
shillings' worth for five shillings? Because the amount of wages is fixed. By
why is it fixed at four shillings' worth of commodities? Why not at three, or
two, or any other sum? If the limit of the amount of wages is settled by an
economical law, independent alike of the will of the capitalist and the will of
the working man, the first thing Citizen Weston had to do was to state that law
and prove it. He ought then, moreover, to have proved that the amount of wages
actually paid at every given moment always corresponds exactly to the necessary
amount of wages, and never deviates from it. If, on the other hand, the given
limit of the amount of wages is founded on the mere will of the
capitalist, or the limits of his avarice, it is an arbitrary limit. There is
nothing necessary in it. It may be changed by the will of the
capitalist, and may, therefore, be changed against his will.
Citizen Weston illustrated his theory by telling you that a bowl contains a
certain quantity of soup, to be eaten by a certain number of persons, an
increase in the broadness of the spoons would produce no increase in the amount
of soup. He must allow me to find this illustration rather spoony. It reminded
me somewhat of the simile employed by Menenius Agrippa. When the Roman
plebeians struck against the Roman patricians, the patrician Agrippa told them
that the patrician belly fed the plebeian members of the body politic. Agrippa
failed to show that you feed the members of one man by filling the belly of
another. Citizen Weston, on his part, has forgotten that the bowl from which
the workmen eat is filled with the whole produce of national labour, and that
what prevents them fetching more out of it is neither the narrowness of the
bowl nor the scantiness of its contents, but only the smallness of their
spoons.
By what contrivance is the capitalist enabled to return four shillings'
worth for five shillings? By raising the price of the commodity he sells. Now,
does a rise and more generally a change in the prices of commodities, do the
prices of commodities themselves, depend on the mere will of the capitalist? Or
are, on the contrary, certain circumstances wanted to give effect to that will?
If not, the ups and downs, the incessant fluctuations of market prices, become
an insoluble riddle.
As we suppose that no change whatever has taken place either in the
productive powers of labour, or in the amount of capital and labour employed,
or in the value of the money wherein the values of products are estimated, but
only a change in the rate of wages, how could that rise of
wages affect the prices of commodities? Only by affecting the
actual proportion between the demand for, and the supply of these
commodities.
It is perfectly true that, considered as a whole, the working class spends,
and must spend, its income upon necessaries. A general rise in the
rate of wages would, therefore, produce a rise in the demand for, and
consequently in the market prices of necessaries. The capitalists who
produce these necessaries would be compensated for the risen wages by the
rising market prices of their commodities. But how with the other capitalists
who do not produce necessaries? And you must not fancy them a small
body. If you consider that two-thirds of the national produce are consumed by
one-fifth of the population — a member of the House of Commons stated it
recently to be but one-seventh of the population — you will understand
what an immense proportion of the national produce must be produced in the
shape of luxuries, or be exchanged for luxuries, and what an immense
amount of the necessaries themselves must be wasted upon flunkeys, horses,
cats, and so forth, a waste we know from experience to become always much
limited with the rising prices of necessaries.
Well, what would be the position of those capitalists who do not
produce necessaries? For the fall in the rate of profit, consequent
upon the general rise of wages, they could not compensate themselves by a
rise in the price of their commodities, because the demand for those
commodities would not have increased. Their income would have decreased, and
from this decreased income they would have to pay more for the same amount of
higher-priced necessaries. But this would not be all. As their income had
diminished they would have less to spend upon luxuries, and therefore their
mutual demand for their respective commodities would diminish. Consequent upon
this diminished demand the prices of their commodities would fall. In these
branches of industry, therefore, the rate of profit would fall, not
only in simple proportion to the general rise in the rate of wages, but in the
compound ratio of the general rise of wages, the rise in the prices of
necessaries, and the fall in the prices of luxuries.
What would be the consequence of this difference in the rates of
profit for capitals employed in the different branches of industry? Why,
the consequence that generally obtains whenever, from whatever reason, the
average rate of profit comes to differ in different spheres of
production. Capital and labour would be transferred from the less remunerative
to the more remunerative branches; and this process of transfer would go on
until the supply in the one department of industry would have risen
proportionately to the increased demand, and would have sunk in the other
departments according to the decreased demand. This change effected, the
general rate of profit would again be equalized in the different
branches. As the whole derangement originally arose from a mere change in the
proportion of the demand for, and supply of, different commodities, the cause
ceasing, the effect would cease, and PRICES would return to their former level
and equilibrium. Instead of being limited to some branches of industry, the
fall in the rate of profit consequent upon the rise of wages would have
become general. According to our supposition, there would have taken place no
change in the productive powers of labour, nor in the aggregate amount of
production, but that given amount of production would have changed its
form. A greater part of the produce would exist in the shape of
necessaries, a lesser part in the shape of luxuries, or what comes to the same,
a lesser part would be exchanged for foreign luxuries, and be consumed in its
original form, or, what again comes to the same, a greater part of the native
produce would be exchanged for foreign necessaries instead of for luxuries. The
general rise in the rate of wages would, therefore, after a temporary
disturbance of market prices, only result in a general fall of the rate of
profit without any permanent change in the prices of commodities. If I am told
that in the previous argument I assume the whole surplus wages to be spent upon
necessaries, I answer that I have made the supposition most advantageous to the
opinion of Citizen Weston. If the surplus wages were spent upon articles
formerly not entering into the consumption of the working men, the real
increase of their purchasing power would need no proof. Being, however, only
derived from an advance of wages, that increase of their purchasing power must
exactly correspond to the decrease of the purchasing power of the capitalists.
The aggregate demand for commodities would, therefore, not
increase, but the constituent parts of that demand would
change. The increasing demand on the one side would be counterbalanced
by the decreasing demand on the other side. Thus the aggregate demand remaining
stationary, no change whatever could take place in the market prices of
commodities. You arrive, therefore, at this dilemma: Either the surplus wages
are equally spent upon all articles of consumption — then the expansion
of demand on the part of the working class must be compensated by the
contraction of demand on the part of the capitalist class — or the
surplus wages are only spent upon some articles whose market prices will
temporarily rise. The consequent rise in the rate of profit in some, and the
consequent fall in the rate of profit in other branches of industry will
produce a change in the distribution of capital and labour, going on until the
supply is brought up to the increased demand in the one department of industry,
and brought down to the diminished demand in the other departments of industry.
On the one supposition there will occur no change in the prices of commodities.
On the other supposition, after some fluctuations of market prices, the
exchangeable values of commodities will subside to the former level. On both
suppositions the general rise in the rate of wages will ultimately result in
nothing else but a general fall in the rate of profit.
To stir up your powers of imagination Citizen Weston requested you to think
of the difficulties which a general rise of English agricultural wages from
nine shillings to eighteen shillings would produce. Think, he exclaimed, of the
immense rise in the demand for necessaries, and the consequent fearful rise in
their prices! Now, all of you know that the average wages of the American
agricultural labourer amount to more than double that of the English
agricultural labourer, although the prices of agricultural produce are lower in
the United States than in the United Kingdom, although the general relations of
capital and labour obtain in the United States the same as in England, and
although the annual amount of production is much smaller in the United States
than in England. Why, then, does our friend ring this alarm bell? Simply to
shift the real question before us. A sudden rise of wages from nine shillings
to eighteen shillings would be a sudden rise to the amount of 100 percent. Now,
we are not at all discussing the question whether the general rate of wages in
England could be suddenly increased by 100 percent. We have nothing at all to
do with the magnitude of the rise, which in every practical instance
must depend on, and be suited to, given circumstances. We have only to inquire
how a general rise in the rate of wages, even if restricted to one percent,
will act.
Dismissing friend Weston's fancy rise of 100 percent, I propose calling your
attention to the real rise of wages that took place in Great Britain from 1849
to 1859.
You are all aware of the Ten Hours Bill, or rather Ten-and-a-half Hours
Bill, introduced since 1848. This was one of the greatest economical changes we
have witnessed. It was a sudden and compulsory rise of wages, not in some local
trades, but in the leading industrial branches by which England sways the
markets of the world. It was a rise of wages under circumstances singularly
unpropitious. Dr. Ure, Professor Senior, and all the other official economical
mouthpieces of the middle class, [The aristocracy was the
upper class of Great Britain, while the capitalists composed what was known to
Marx as the middle class] proved, and I must say upon much
stronger grounds than those of our friend Weston, that it would sound the
death-knell of English industry. They proved that it not only amounted to a
simple rise of wages, but to a rise of wages initiated by, and based upon, a
diminution of the quantity of labour employed. They asserted that the twelfth
hour you wanted to take from the capitalist was exactly the only hour from
which he derived his profit. They threatened a decrease of accumulation, rise
of prices, loss of markets, stinting of production, consequent reaction upon
wages, ultimate ruin. In fact, they declared Maximillian Robespierre's Maximum
Laws[1] to be a small affair
compared to it; and they were right in a certain sense. Well, what was the
result? A rise in the money wages of the factory operatives, despite the
curtailing of the working day, a great increase in the number of factory hands
employed, a continuous fall in the prices of their products, a marvellous
development in the productive powers of their labour, an unheard-of progressive
expansion of the markets for their commodities. In Manchester, at the meeting,
in 1860, of the Society for the Advancement of Science, I myself heard Mr.
Newman confess that he, Dr. Ure, Senior, and all other official propounders of
economical science had been wrong, while the instinct of the people had been
right. I mention Mr. W. Newman, not Professor Francis Newman, because he
occupies an eminent position in economical science, as the contributor to, and
editor of, Mr. Thomas Tooke's History Of Prices, that magnificent work
which traces the history of prices from 1793 to 1856. If our friend Weston's
fixed idea of a fixed amount of wages, a fixed amount of production, a fixed
degree of the productive power of labour, a fixed and permanent will of the
capitalist, and all his other fixedness and finality were correct, Professor
Senior's woeful forebodings would been right, and Robert Owen[2], who already in 1816 proclaimed a
general limitation of the working day the first preparatory step to the
emancipation of the working class, and actually in the teeth of the general
prejudice inaugurated it on his own hook in his cotton factory at New Lanark,
would have been wrong.
In the very same period during which the introduction of the Ten Hours Bill,
and the rise of wages consequent upon it, occurred, there took place in Great
Britain, for reasons which it would be out of place to enumerate here, a
general rise in agricultural wages. Although it is not required for my
immediate purpose, in order not to mislead you, I shall make some preliminary
remarks.
If a man got two shillings weekly wages, and if his wages rose to four
shillings, the rate of wages would have risen by 100 per cent. This
would seem a very magnificent thing if expressed as a rise in the rate of
wages, although the actual amount of wages, four shillings
weekly, would still remain a wretchedly small, a starvation pittance. You must
not, therefore, allow yourselves to be carried away by the high sounding per
cents in rate of wages. You must always ask: What was the
original amount?
Moreover, you will understand, that if there were ten men receiving each 2s.
per week, five men receiving each 5s., and five men receiving 11s. weekly, the
twenty men together would receive 100s., or £5, weekly. If then a rise,
say by 20 per cent, upon the aggregate sum of their weekly wages took
place, there would be an advance from £5 to £6. Taking the average,
we might say that the general rate of wages had risen by 20 per cent,
although, in fact, the wages of the ten men had remained stationary, the wages
of the one lot of five men had risen from 5s. to 6s. only, and the wages of the
other lot of five from 55s. to 70s.[3] One half of the men would not have improved at all
their position, one quarter would have improved it in an imperceptible degree,
and only one quarter would have bettered it really. Still, reckoning by the
average, the total amount of the wages of those twenty men would have
increased by 25 per cent, and as far as the aggregate capital that employs
them, and the prices of the commodities they produce, are concerned, it would
be exactly the same as if all of them had equally shared in the average rise of
wages. In the case of agricultural labour, the standard wages being very
different in the different counties of England and Scotland, the rise affected
them very unequally.
Lastly, during the period when that rise of wages took place counteracting
influences were at work such as the new taxes consequent upon the Russian war,
the extensive demolition of the dwelling-houses of the agricultural labourers,
and so forth. Having premised so much, I proceed to state that from 1849 to
1859 there took place a rise of about 40 percent in the average rate
of the agricultural wages of Great Britain. I could give you ample details in
proof of my assertion, but for the present purpose think it sufficient to refer
you to the conscientious and critical paper read in 1860 by the late Mr. John
C. Morton at the London Society of Arts on “The Forces used in
Agriculture.” Mr. Morton gives the returns, from bills and other
authentic documents, which he had collected from about one hundred farmers,
residing in twelve Scotch and thirty-five English counties.
According to our friend Weston's opinion, and taken together with the
simultaneous rise in the wages of the factory operatives, there ought to have
occurred a tremendous rise in the prices of agricultural produce during the
period 1849 to 1859. But what is the fact? Despite the Russian war, and the
consecutive unfavourable harvests from 1854 to 1856, the average price of
wheat, which is the leading agricultural produce of England, fell from about 3
Pounds per quarter for the years 1838 to 1848 to about 2 Pounds 10 Shillings
per quarter for the years 1849 to 1859. This constitutes a fall in the price of
wheat of more than 16 percent simultaneously with an average rise of
agricultural wages of 40 percent. During the same period, if we compare its end
with its beginning, 1859 with 1849, there was a decrease of official pauperism
from 934,419 to 860,470, the difference being 73,949; a very small decrease, I
grant, and which in the following years was again lost, but still a
decrease.
It might be said that, consequent upon the abolition of the Corn Laws, the
import of foreign corn was more than doubled during the period from 1849 to
1859, as compared with the period from 1838 to 1848. And what of that? From
Citizen Weston's standpoint one would have expected that this sudden, immense,
and continuously increasing demand upon foreign markets must have sent up the
prices of agricultural produce there to a frightful height, the effect of
increased demand remaining the same, whether it comes from without or from
within. What was the fact? Apart from some years of failing harvests, during
all that period the ruinous fall in the price of corn formed a standing theme
of declamation in France; the Americans were again and again compelled to burn
their surplus produce; and Russia, if we are to believe Mr. Urquhart, prompted
the Civil War in the United States because her agricultural exports were
crippled by the Yankee competition in the markets of Europe.
Reduced to its abstract form, Citizen Weston's argument would come
to this: Every rise in demand occurs always on the basis of a given amount of
production. It can, therefore, never increase the supply of the articles
demanded, but can only enhance their money prices. Now the most
common observation shows than an increased demand will, in some instances,
leave the market prices of commodities altogether unchanged, and will, in other
instances, cause a temporary rise of market prices followed by an increased
supply, followed by a reduction of the prices to their original level, and in
many cases below their original level. Whether the rise of demand
springs from surplus wages, or from any other cause, does not at all change the
conditions of the problem. From Citizen Weston's standpoint the general
phenomenon was as difficult to explain as the phenomenon occurring under the
exceptional circumstances of a rise of wages. His argument had, therefore, no
peculiar bearing whatever upon the subject we treat. It only expressed his
perplexity at accounting for the laws by which an increase of demand produces
an increase of supply, instead of an ultimate rise of market prices.


III. Wages and Currency
On the second day of the debate our friend Weston clothed his
old assertions in new forms. He said: Consequent upon a general rise in money
wages, more currency will be wanted to pay the same wages. The currency being
fixed, how can you pay with this fixed currency increased money wages?
First the difficulty arose from the fixed amount of commodities accruing to the
working man despite his increase of money wages; now it arises from the
increased money wages, despite the fixed amount of commodities. Of course, if
you reject his original dogma, his secondary grievance will disappear. However,
I shall show that this currency question has nothing at all to do with the
subject before us.
In your country the mechanism of payments is much more perfected than in any
other country of Europe. Thanks to the extent and concentration of the banking
system, much less currency is wanted to circulate the same amount of values,
and to transact the same or a greater amount of business. For example, as far
as wages are concerned, the English factory operative pays his wages weekly to
the shopkeeper, who sends them weekly to the banker, who returns them weekly to
the manufacturer, who again pays them away to his working men, and so forth. By
this contrivance the yearly wages of an operative, say of 52 Pounds, may be
paid by one single Sovereign turning round every week in the same circle. Even
in England the mechanism is less perfect than in Scotland, and is not
everywhere equally perfect; and therefore we find, for example, that in some
agricultural districts, much more currency is wanted to circulate a much
smaller amount of values.
If you cross the Channel you will find that the money wages are
much lower than in England, but that they are circulated in Germany, Italy,
Switzerland, and France by a much larger amount of currency. The same
Sovereign will not be so quickly intercepted by the banker or returned to the
industrial capitalist; and, therefore, instead of one Sovereign circulating 52
Pounds yearly, you want, perhaps, three Sovereigns to circulate yearly wages to
the amount of 25 Pounds. Thus, by comparing continental countries with England,
you will see at once that low money wages may require a much larger currency
for their circulation than high money wages, and that this is, in fact, a
merely technical point, quite foreign to our subject.
According to the best calculations I know, the yearly income of the working
class of this country may be estimated at 250,000,000 Pounds. This immense sum
is circulated by about three million Pounds. Suppose a rise of wages of fifty
per cent to take place. Then, instead of three millions of currency, four and a
half millions would be wanted. As a very considerable part of the working-man's
daily expenses is laid out in silver and copper, that is to say, in mere
tokens, whose relative value to gold is arbitrarily fixed by law, like that of
inconvertible money paper, a rise of money wages by fifty per cent would, in
the extreme case, require and additional circulation of Sovereigns, say to the
amount of one million. One million, now dormant, in the shape of bullion or
coin, in the cellars of the Bank of England, or of private bankers would
circulate. But even the trifling expense resulting from the additional minting
or the additional wear and tear of that million might be spared, and would
actually be spared, if any friction should arise from the want of the
additional currency. All of you know that the currency of this country is
divided into two great departments. One sort, supplied by bank-notes of
different descriptions, is used in the transactions between dealers and
dealers, and the larger payments from consumers to dealers, while another sort
of currency, metallic coin, circulates in the retail trade. Although distinct,
these two sorts of currency intermix with each other. Thus gold coin, to a very
great extent, circulates even in larger payments for all the odd sums under 5
Pounds. If tomorrow 4 Pound notes, or 3 Pound notes, or 2 Pound notes were
issued, the gold filling these channels of circulation would at once be driven
out of them, and flow into those channels where they would be needed from the
increase of money wages. Thus the additional million required by an advance of
wages by fifty per cent would be supplied without the addition of one single
Sovereign. The same effect might be produced, without one additional bank-note,
by an additional bill circulation, as was the case in Lancashire for a very
considerable time.
If a general rise in the rate of wages, for example, of 100 per cent, as
Citizen Weston supposed it to take place in agricultural wages, would produce a
great rise in the prices of necessaries, and, according to his views, require
an additional amount of currency not to be procured, a general fall in
wages must produce the same effect, on the same scale, in the opposite
direction. Well! All of you know that the years 1858 to 1860 were the most
prosperous years for the cotton industry, and that peculiarly the year 1860
stands in that respect unrivalled in the annals of commerce, while at the same
time all other branches of industry were most flourishing. The wages of the
cotton operatives and of all the other working men connected with their trade
stood, in 1860, higher than ever before. The American crisis came, and those
aggregate wages were suddenly reduced to about one-fourth of their former
amount. This would have been in the opposite direction a rise of 400 per cent.
If wages rise from five to twenty, we say that they rise by 400 per cent; if
they fall from twenty to five, we say that they fall by seventy-five per cent;
but the amount of rise in the one and the amount of fall in the other case
would be the same, namely, fifteen shillings. This, then, was a sudden change
in the rate of wages unprecedented, and at the same time extending over a
number of operatives which, if we count all the operatives not only directly
engaged in but indirectly dependent upon the cotton trade, was larger by
one-half than the number of agricultural labourers. Did the price of wheat
fall? It rose from the annual average of 47 shillings 8d per quarter
during the three years of 1858-1860 to the annual average of 55 shillings 10d
per quarter during the three years 1861-1863. As to the currency, there were
coined in the mint in 1861 8,673,323 Pounds, against 3,378,792 Pounds in 1860.
That is to say, there were coined 5,294,440 Pounds more in 1861 than in 1860.
It is true the bank-note circulation was in 1861 less by 1,319,000 Pounds than
in 1860. Take this off. There remains still a surplus of currency for the year
1861, as compared with the prosperity year, 1860, to the amount of 3,975,440
Pounds, or about 4,000,000 Pounds; but the bullion reserve in the Bank of
England had simultaneously decreased, not quite to the same, but in an
approximating proportion.
Compare the year 1862 with 1842. Apart from the immense increase in the
value and amount of commodities circulated, in 1862 the capital paid in regular
transactions for shares, loans, etc. for the railways in England and Wales
amounted alone to 320,000,000 Pounds, a sum that would have appeared fabulous
in 1842. Still, the aggregate amounts in currency in 1862 and 1842 were pretty
nearly equal, and generally you will find a tendency to a progressive
diminution of currency in the face of enormously increasing value, not only of
commodities, but of monetary transactions generally. From our friend Weston's
standpoint this is an unsolvable riddle. Looking somewhat deeper into this
matter, he would have found that, quite apart from wages, and supposing them to
be fixed, the value and mass of the commodities to be circulated, and generally
the amount of monetary transactions to be settled, vary daily; that the amount
of bank-notes issued varies daily; that the amount of payments realized without
the intervention of any money, by the instrumentality of bills, cheques,
book-credits, clearing houses, varies daily; that, as far as actual metallic
currency is required, the proportion between the coin in circulation and the
coin and bullion in reserve or sleeping in the cellars of banks varies daily;
that the amount of bullion absorbed by the national circulation and the amount
being sent abroad for international circulation vary daily. He would have found
that this dogma of a fixed currency is a monstrous error, incompatible with our
everyday movement. He would have inquired into the laws which enable a currency
to adapt itself to circumstances so continually changing, instead of turning
his misconception of the laws of currency into an argument against a rise of
wages.


IV. Supply and Demand
Our friend Weston accepts the Latin proverb that
“repetitio est mater studiorum,” that is to say, that
repetition is the mother of study, and consequently he repeated his original
dogma again under the new form, that the contraction of currency, resulting
from an enhancement of wages, would produce a diminution of capital, and so
forth. Having already dealt with his currency crotchet, I consider it quite
useless to enter upon the imaginary consequences he fancies to flow from his
imaginary currency mishap. I shall proceed to at once reduce his one and
the same dogma, repeated in so many different shapes, to its simplest
theoretical form.
The uncritical way in which he has treated his subject will become evident
from one single remark. He pleads against a rise of wages or against high wages
as the result of such a rise. Now, I ask him: What are high wages and what are
low wages? Why constitute, for example, five shillings weekly low, and twenty
shillings weekly high wages? If five is low as compared with twenty, twenty is
still lower as compared with two hundred. If a man was to lecture on the
thermometer, and commenced by declaiming on high and low degrees, he would
impart no knowledge whatever. He must first tell me how the freezing-point is
found out, and how the boiling-point, and how these standard points are settled
by natural laws, not by the fancy of the sellers or makers of thermometers.
Now, in regard to wages and profits, Citizen Weston has not only failed to
deduce such standard points from economical laws, but he has not even felt the
necessity to look after them. He satisfied himself with the acceptance of the
popular slang terms of low and high as something having a fixed meaning,
although it is self-evident that wages can only be said to be high or low as
compared with a standard by which to measure their magnitudes.
He will be unable to tell me why a certain amount of money is given for a
certain amount of labour. If he should answer me, “This was settled by
the law of supply and demand,” I should ask him, in the first instance,
by what law supply and demand are themselves regulated. And such an answer
would at once put him out of court. The relations between the supply and demand
of labour undergo perpetual change, and with them the market prices of labour.
If the demand overshoots the supply wages rise; if the supply overshoots the
demand wages sink, although it might in such circumstances be necessary to
test the real state of demand and supply by a strike, for example, or
any other method. But if you accept supply and demand as the law regulating
wages, it would be as childish as useless to declaim against a rise of wages,
because, according to the supreme law you appeal to, a periodical rise of wages
is quite as necessary and legitimate as a periodical fall of wages. If you do
not accept supply and demand as the law regulating wages, I again
repeat the question, why a certain amount of money is given for a certain
amount of labour?
But to consider matters more broadly: You would be altogether mistaken in
fancying that the value of labour or any other commodity whatever is ultimately
fixed by supply and demand. Supply and demand regulate nothing but the
temporary fluctuations of market prices. They will explain to you why
the market price of a commodity rises above or sinks below its value,
but they can never account for the value itself. Suppose supply and
demand to equilibrate, or, as the economists call it, to cover each other. Why,
the very moment these opposite forces become equal they paralyze each other,
and cease to work in the one or other direction. At the moment when supply and
demand equilibrate each other, and therefore cease to act, the market
price of a commodity coincides with its real value, with the
standard price round which its market prices oscillate. In inquiring into the
nature of that VALUE, we have therefore nothing at all to do with the temporary
effects on market prices of supply and demand. The same holds true of wages and
of the prices of all other commodities.


V. Wages and Prices
Reduced to their simplest theoretical expression, all our
friend's arguments resolve themselves into this one dogma: “The
prices of commodities are determined or regulated by wages."
I might appeal to practical observation to bear witness against this
antiquated and exploded fallacy. I might tell you that the English factory
operatives, miners, shipbuilders, and so forth, whose labour is relatively
high-priced, undersell by the cheapness of their produce all other nations;
while the English agricultural labourer, for example, whose labour is
relatively low-priced, is undersold by almost every other nation because of the
dearness of his produce. By comparing article with article in the same country,
and the commodities of different countries, I might show, apart from some
exceptions more apparent than real, that on an average the high-priced labour
produces the low-priced, and low priced labour produces the high-priced
commodities. This, of course, would not prove that the high price of labour in
the one, and its low price in the other instance, are the respective causes of
those diametrically opposed effects, but at all events it would prove that the
prices of commodities are not ruled by the prices of labour. However, it is
quite superfluous for us to employ this empirical method.
It might, perhaps, be denied that Citizen Weston has put forward the dogma:
“The prices of commodities are determined or regulated by
wages.” In point of fact, he has never formulated it. He said, on
the contrary, that profit and rent also form constituent parts of the prices of
commodities, because it is out of the prices of commodities that not only the
working man's wages, but also the capitalist's profits and the landlord's rents
must be paid. But how in his idea are prices formed? First by wages. Then an
additional percentage is joined to the price on behalf of the capitalist, and
another additional percentage on behalf of the landlord. Suppose the wages of
the labour employed in the production of a commodity to be ten. If the rate of
profit was 100 per cent, to the wages advanced the capitalist would add ten,
and if the rate of rent was also 100 per cent upon the wages, there would be
added ten more, and the aggregate price of the commodity would amount to
thirty. But such a determination of prices would be simply their determination
by wages. If wages in the above case rose to twenty, the price of the commodity
would rise to sixty, and so forth. Consequently all the superannuated writers
on political economy who propounded the dogma that wages regulate prices, have
tried to prove it by treating profit and rent as mere additional
percentages upon wages. None of them were, of course, able to reduce the
limits of those percentages to any economic law. They seem, on the contrary, to
think profits settled by tradition, custom, the will of the capitalist, or by
some other equally arbitrary and inexplicable method. If they assert that they
are settled by the competition between the capitalists, they say nothing. That
competition is sure to equalize the different rates of profit in different
trades, or reduce them to one average level, but it can never determine the
level itself, or the general rate of profit.
What do we mean by saying that the prices of the commodities are determined
by wages? Wages being but a name for the price of labour, we mean that the
prices of commodities are regulated by the price of labour. As
“price” is exchangeable value — and in speaking of value I
speak always of exchangeable value — is exchangeable value expressed
in money, the proposition comes to this, that “the value of
commodities is determined by the value of labour,” or that
“the value of labour is the general measure of value."
But how, then, is the “value of labour” itself
determined? Here we come to a standstill. Of course, we come to a standstill if
we try reasoning logically, yet the propounders of that doctrine make short
work of logical scruples. Take our friend Weston, for example. First he told us
that wages regulate the price of commodities and that consequently when wages
rise prices must rise. Then he turned round to show us that a rise of wages
will be no good because the prices of commodities had risen, and because wages
were indeed measured by the prices of the commodities upon which they are
spent. Thus we begin by saying that the value of labour determines the value of
commodities, and we wind up by saying that the value of commodities determines
the value of labour. Thus we move to and fro in the most vicious circle, and
arrive at no conclusion at all.
On the whole, it is evident that by making the value of one commodity, say
labour, corn, or any other commodity, the general measure and regulator of
value, we only shift the difficulty, since we determine one value by another,
which on its side wants to be determined.
The dogma that “wages determine the price of commodities,”
expressed in its most abstract terms, comes to this, that “value is
determined by value,” and this tautology means that, in fact, we know
nothing at all about value. Accepting this premise, all reasoning about the
general laws of political economy turns into mere twaddle. It was, therefore,
the great merit of Ricardo that in his work on the principles of political
economy, published in 1817, he fundamentally destroyed the old popular,
and worn-out fallacy that “wages determine prices,” a fallacy which
Adam Smith and his French predecessors had spurned in the really scientific
parts of their researches, but which they reproduced in their more exoterical
and vulgarizing chapters.
 

1. The
Maximum Law was introduced during the Great French Revolution in 1792, fixing
definite price limits for commodities and standard rates of wages. The chief
supporters of the Maximum Law were the so-called “madmen” who
represented the interests of the urban and village poor. Robespierre, the
leader of the Jacobin Party, introduced this law at a time when the Jacobins as
a result of tactical considerations had formed a bloc with the
“madmen.” – Ed.
2. Robert
Owen (1771-1858) was a British manufacturer who became a utopian socialist. He
introduced in his factory the ten-hour day, and also organised sickness
insurance, consumers' co-operative societies, etc. – Ed.
3. These
figures, 55s.-70s., refer to the total wages of the group of five men. The wage
of each man in the group would increase from 11s. to 14s. – Ed.
 

Table of Contents | Next Section | Marx Engels
Archive | Economics Index 




==========

## Value and Labour










Economic Manuscripts: VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT


Value, Price and Profit

VI. Value and Labour
Citizens, I have now arrived at a point where I must enter upon the real development of the question. I cannot promise to do this in a very satisfactory way, because to do so I should be obliged to go over the whole field of political economy. I can, as the French would say, but “effleurer la question,” touch upon the main points. The first question we have to put is: What is the value of a commodity? How is it determined?

At first sight it would seem that the value of a commodity is a thing quite relative, and not to be settled without considering one commodity in its relations to all other commodities. In fact, in speaking of the value, the value in exchange of a commodity, we mean the proportional quantities in which it exchanges with all other commodities. But then arises the question: How are the proportions in which commodities exchange with each other regulated? We know from experience that these proportions vary infinitely. Taking one single commodity, wheat, for instance, we shall find that a quarter of wheat exchanges in almost countless variations of proportion with different commodities. Yet, its value remaining always the same, whether expressed in silk, gold, or any other commodity, it must be something distinct from, and independent of, these different rates of exchange with different articles. It must be possible to express, in a very different form, these various equations with various commodities.

Besides, if I say a quarter of wheat exchanges with iron in a certain proportion, or the value of a quarter of wheat is expressed in a certain amount of iron, I say that the value of wheat and its equivalent in iron are equal to some third thing, which is neither wheat nor iron, because I suppose them to express the same magnitude in two different shapes. Either of them, the wheat or the iron, must, therefore, independently of the other, be reducible to this third thing which is their common measure.

To elucidate this point I shall recur to a very simple geometrical illustration. In comparing the areas of triangles of all possible forms and magnitudes, or comparing triangles with rectangles, or any other rectilinear figure, how do we proceed? We reduce the area of any triangle whatever to an expression quite different from its visible form. Having found from the nature of the triangle that its area is equal to half the product of its base by its height, we can then compare the different values of all sorts of triangles, and of all rectilinear figures whatever, because all of them may be resolved into a certain number of triangles.

The same mode of procedure must obtain with the values of commodities. We must be able to reduce all of them to an expression common to all, and distinguishing them only by the proportions in which they contain that identical measure.

As the exchangeable values of commodities are only social functions of those things, and have nothing at all to do with the natural qualities, we must first ask: What is the common social substance of all commodities? It is labour. To produce a commodity a certain amount of labour must be bestowed upon it, or worked up in it. And I say not only labour, but social labour. A man who produces an article for his own immediate use, to consume it himself, creates a product, but not a commodity. As a self-sustaining producer he has nothing to do with society. But to produce a commodity, a man must not only produce an article satisfying some social want, but his labour itself must form part and parcel of the total sum of labour expended by society. It must be subordinate to the division of labour within society. It is nothing without the other divisions of labour, and on its part is required to integrate them.

If we consider commodities as values, we consider them exclusively under the single aspect of realized, fixed, or, if you like, crystallized social labour. In this respect they can differ only by representing greater or smaller quantities of labour, as, for example, a greater amount of labour may be worked up in a silken handkerchief than in a brick. But how does one measure quantities of labour? By the time the labour lasts, in measuring the labour by the hour, the day, etc. Of course, to apply this measure, all sorts of labour are reduced to average or simple labour as their unit. We arrive, therefore, at this conclusion. A commodity has a value, because it is a crystallization of social labour. The greatness of its value, or its relative value, depends upon the greater or less amount of that social substance contained in it; that is to say, on the relative mass of labour necessary for its production. The relative values of commodities are, therefore, determined by the respective quantities or amounts of labour, worked up, realized, fixed in them. The correlative quantities of commodities which can be produced in the same time of labour are equal. Or the value of one commodity is to the value of another commodity as the quantity of labour fixed in the one is to the quantity of labour fixed in the other.

I suspect that many of you will ask: Does then, indeed, there exist such a vast or any difference whatever, between determining the values of commodities by wages, and determining them by the relative quantities of labour necessary for their production? You must, however, be aware that the reward for labour, and quantity of labour, are quite disparate things. Suppose, for example, equal quantities of labour to be fixed in one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold. I resort to the example because it was used by Benjamin Franklin in his first Essay published in 1721, and entitled A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency, where he, one of the first, hit upon the true nature of value.

Well. We suppose, then, that one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold are equal values or equivalents, because they are crystallizations of equal amounts of average labour, of so many days' or so many weeks' labour respectively fixed in them. In thus determining the relative values of gold and corn, do we refer in any way whatever to the wages of the agricultural labourer and the miner? Not a bit. We leave it quite indeterminate how their day's or their week's labour was paid, or even whether wage labour was employed at all. If it was, wages may have been very unequal. The labourer whose labour is realized in the quarter of wheat may receive two bushels only, and the labourer employed in mining may receive one-half of the ounce of gold. Or, supposing their wages to be equal, they may deviate in all possible proportions from the values of the commodities produced by them. They may amount to one-fourth, one-fifth, or any other proportional part of the one quarter of corn or the one ounce of gold. Their wages can, of course, not exceed, not be more than the values of the commodities they produced, but they can be less in every possible degree. Their wages will be limited by the values of the products, but the values of their products will not be limited by the wages. And above all, the values, the relative values of corn and gold, for example, will have been settled without any regard whatever to the value of the labour employed, that is to say, to wages. To determine the values of commodities by the relative quantities of labour fixed in them, is, therefore, a thing quite different from the tautological method of determining the values of commodities by the value of labour, or by wages. This point, however, will be further elucidated in the progress of our inquiry.

In calculating the exchangeable value of a commodity we must add to the quantity of labour previously worked up in the raw material of the commodity, and the labour bestowed on the implements, tools, machinery, and buildings, with which such labour is assisted. For example, the value of a certain amount of cotton yarn is the crystallization of the quantity of labour added to the cotton during the spinning process, the quantity of labour previously realized in the cotton itself, the quantity of labour realized in the coal, oil, and other auxiliary substances used, the quantity of labour fixed in the steam-engine, the spindles, the factory building, and so forth. Instruments of production properly so-called, such as tools, machinery, buildings, serve again and again for longer or shorter period during repeated processes of production. If they were used up at once, like the raw material, their whole value would at once be transferred to the commodities they assist in producing. But as a spindle, for example, is but gradually used up, an average calculation is made, based upon the average time it lasts, and its average waste or wear and tear during a certain period, say a day. In this way we calculate how much of the value of the spindle is transferred to the yarn daily spin, and how much, therefore, of the total amount of labour realized in a pound of yarn, for example, is due to the quantity of labour previously realized in the spindle. For our present purpose it is not necessary to dwell any longer upon this point.

It might seem that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour bestowed upon its production, the lazier a man, or the clumsier a man, the more valuable his commodity, because the greater the time of labour required for finishing the commodity. This, however, would be a sad mistake. You will recollect that I used the word “social labour,” and many points are involved in this qualification of “social.” In saying that the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour worked up or crystallized in it, we mean the quantity of labour necessary for its production in a given state of society, under certain social average conditions of production, with a given social average intensity, and average skill of the labour employed. When, in England, the power-loom came to compete with the hand-loom, only half the former time of labour was wanted to convert a given amount of yarn into a yard of cotton or cloth. The poor hand-loom weaver now worked seventeen or eighteen hours daily, instead of the nine or ten hours he had worked before. Still the product of twenty hours of his labour represented now only ten social hours of labour, or ten hours of labour socially necessary for the conversion of a certain amount of yarn into textile stuffs. His product of twenty hours had, therefore, no more value than his former product of ten hours.

If then the quantity of socially necessary labour realized in commodities regulates their exchangeable values, every increase in the quantity of labour wanted for the production of a commodity must augment its value, as every diminution must lower it.

If the respective quantities of labour necessary for the production of the respective commodities remained constant, their relative values also would be constant. But such is not the case. The quantity of labour necessary for the production of a commodity changes continuously with the changes in the productive powers of labour, the more produce is finished in a given time of labour; and the smaller the productive powers of labour, the less produce is finished in the same time. If, for example, in the progress of population it should become necessary to cultivate less fertile soils, the same amount of produce would be only attainable by a greater amount of labour spent, and the value of agricultural produce would consequently rise. On the other hand, if, with the modern means of production, a single spinner converts into yarn, during one working day, many thousand times the amount of cotton which he could have spun during the same time with the spinning wheel, it is evident that every single pound of cotton will absorb many thousand times less of spinning labour than it did before, and consequently, the value added by spinning to every single pound of cotton will be a thousand times less than before. The value of yarn will sink accordingly.

Apart from the different natural energies and acquired working abilities of different peoples, the productive powers of labour must principally depend: —

Firstly. Upon the natural conditions of labour, such as fertility of soil, mines, and so forth.

Secondly. Upon the progressive improvement of the social powers of labour, such as are derived from production on a grand scale, concentration of capital and combination of labour, subdivision of labour, machinery, improved methods, appliance of chemical and other natural agencies, shortening of time and space by means of communication and transport, and every other contrivance by which science presses natural agencies into the service of labour, and by which the social or co-operative character of labour is developed. The greater the productive powers of labour, the less labour is bestowed upon a given amount of produce; hence the smaller the value of the produce. The smaller the productive powers of labour, the more labour is bestowed upon the same amount of produce; hence the greater its value. As a general law we may, therefore, set it down that: —

The values of commodities are directly as the times of labour employed in their production, and are inversely as the productive powers of the labour employed.

Having till now only spoken of value, I shall add a few words about price, which is a peculiar form assumed by value.

Price, taken by itself, is nothing but the monetary expression of value. The values of all commodities of the country, for example, are expressed in gold prices, while on the Continent they are mainly expressed in silver prices. The value of gold or silver, like that of all other commodities is regulated by the quantity of labour necessary for getting them. You exchange a certain amount of your national products, in which a certain amount of your national labour is crystallized, for the produce of the gold and silver producing countries, in which a certain quantity of their labour is crystallized. It is in this way, in fact by barter, that you learn to express in gold and silver the values of all commodities, that is the respective quantities of labour bestowed upon them. Looking somewhat closer into the monetary expression of value, or what comes to the same, the conversion of value into price, you will find that it is a process by which you give to the values of all commodities an independent and homogeneous form, or by which you express them as quantities of equal social labour. So far as it is but the monetary expression of value, price has been called natural price by Adam Smith, “prix necessaire” by the French physiocrats.

What then is the relation between value and market prices, or between natural prices and market prices? You all know that the market price is the same for all commodities of the same kind, however the conditions of production may differ for the individual producers. The market price expresses only the average amount of social labour necessary, under the average conditions of production, to supply the market with a certain mass of a certain article. It is calculated upon the whole lot of a commodity of a certain description.

So far the market price of a commodity coincides with its value. On the other hand, the oscillations of market prices, rising now over, sinking now under the value or natural price, depend upon the fluctuations of supply and demand. The deviations of market prices from values are continual, but as Adam Smith says:

 “The natural price is the central price to which the prices of commodities are continually gravitating. Different accidents may sometimes keep them suspended a good deal above it, and sometimes force them down even somewhat below it. But whatever may be the obstacles which hinder them from settling in this center of repose and continuance, they are constantly tending towards it.” 

I cannot now sift this matter. It suffices to say the if supply and demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will correspond with their natural prices, that is to say with their values, as determined by the respective quantities of labour required for their production. But supply and demand must constantly tend to equilibrate each other, although they do so only by compensating one fluctuation by another, a rise by a fall, and vice versa. If instead of considering only the daily fluctuations you analyze the movement of market prices for longer periods, as Mr. Tooke, for example, has done in his History of Prices, you will find that the fluctuations of market prices, their deviations from values, their ups and downs, paralyze and compensate each other; so that apart from the effect of monopolies and some other modifications I must now pass by, all descriptions of commodities are, on average, sold at their respective values or natural prices. The average periods during which the fluctuations of market prices compensate each other are different for different kinds of commodities, because with one kind it is easier to adapt supply to demand than with the other.

If then, speaking broadly, and embracing somewhat longer periods, all descriptions of commodities sell at their respective values, it is nonsense to suppose that profit, not in individual cases; but that the constant and usual profits of different trades spring from the prices of commodities, or selling them at a price over and above their value. The absurdity of this notion becomes evident if it is generalized. What a man would constantly win as a seller he would constantly lose as a purchaser. It would not do to say that there are men who are buyers without being sellers, or consumers without being producers. What these people pay to the producers, they must first get from them for nothing. If a man first takes your money and afterwards returns that money in buying your commodities, you will never enrich yourselves by selling your commodities too dear to that same man. This sort of transaction might diminish a loss, but would never help in realizing a profit. To explain, therefore, the general nature of profits, you must start from the theorem that, on an average, commodities are sold at their real values, and that profits are derived from selling them at their values, that is, in proportion to the quantity of labour realized in them. If you cannot explain profit upon this supposition, you cannot explain it at all. This seems paradox and contrary to every-day observation. It is also paradox that the earth moves round the sun, and that water consists of two highly inflammable gases. Scientific truth is always paradox, if judged by every-day experience, which catches only the delusive appearance of things.

VII. Labour Power
Having now, as far as it could be done in such a cursory manner, analyzed the nature of value, of the value of any commodity whatever, we must turn our attention to the specific value of labour. And here, again, I must startle you by a seeming paradox. All of you feel sure that what they daily sell is their Labour; that, therefore, Labour has a price, and that, the price of a commodity being only the monetary expression of its value, there must certainly exist such a thing as the value of labour. However, there exists no such thing as the value of labour in the common acceptance of the word. We have seen that the amount of necessary labour crystallized in a commodity constitutes its value. Now, applying this notion of value, how could we define, say, the value of a ten hours working day? How much labour is contained in that day? Ten hours' labour.

To say that the value of a ten hours working day is equal to ten hours' labour, or the quantity of labour contained in it, would be a tautological and, moreover, a nonsensical expression. Of course, having once found out the true but hidden sense of the expression “value of labour,” we shall be able to interpret this irrational, and seemingly impossible application of value, in the same way that, having once made sure of the real movement of the celestial bodies, we shall be able to explain their apparent or merely phenomenal movements.

What the working man sells is not directly his labour, but his labouring power, the temporary disposal of which he makes over to the capitalist. This is so much the case that I do not know whether by the English Laws, but certainly by some Continental Laws, the maximum time is fixed for which a man is allowed to sell his labouring power. If allowed to do so for any indefinite period whatever, slavery would be immediately restored. Such a sale, if it comprised his lifetime, for example, would make him at once the lifelong slave of his employer.

One of the oldest economists and most original philosophers of England — Thomas Hobbes — has already, in his Leviathan, instinctively hit upon this point overlooked by all his successors. He says: “the value or worth of a man is, as in all other things, his price: that is so much as would be given for the use of his power.” Proceeding from this basis, we shall be able to determine the value of labour as that of all other commodities.

But before doing so, we might ask, how does this strange phenomenon arise, that we find on the market a set of buyers, possessed of land, machinery, raw material, and the means of subsistence, all of them, save land in its crude state, the products of labour, and on the other hand, a set of sellers who have nothing to sell except their labouring power, their working arms and brains? That the one set buys continually in order to make a profit and enrich themselves, while the other set continually sells in order to earn their livelihood? The inquiry into this question would be an inquiry into what the economists call “previous or original accumulation,” but which ought to be called original expropriation. We should find that this so-called original accumulation means nothing but a series of historical processes, resulting in a decomposition of the original union existing between the labouring Man and his Instruments of Labour. Such an inquiry, however, lies beyond the pale of my present subject. The separation between the Man of Labour and the Instruments of Labour once established, such a state of things will maintain itself and reproduce itself upon a constantly increasing scale, until a new and fundamental revolution in the mode of production should again overturn it, and restore the original union in a new historical form.

What, then, is the value of labouring power?

Like that of every other commodity, its value is determined by the quantity of labour necessary to produce it. The labouring power of a man exists only in his living individuality. A certain mass of necessaries must be consumed by a man to grow up and maintain his life. But the man, like the machine, will wear out, and must be replaced by another man. Beside the mass of necessaries required for his own maintenance, he wants another amount of necessaries to bring up a certain quota of children that are to replace him on the labour market and to perpetuate the race of labourers. Moreover, to develop his labouring power, and acquire a given skill, another amount of values must be spent. For our purpose it suffices to consider only average labour, the costs of whose education and development are vanishing magnitudes. Still I must seize upon this occasion to state that, as the costs of producing labouring powers of different quality differ, so much differ the values of the labouring powers employed in different trades. The cry for an equality of wages rests, therefore, upon a mistake, is an inane wish never to be fulfilled. It is an offspring of that false and superficial radicalism that accepts premises and tries to evade conclusions. Upon the basis of the wages system the value of labouring power is settled like that of every other commodity; and as different kinds of labouring power have different values, or require different quantities of labour for their production, they must fetch different prices in the labour market. To clamour for equal or even equitable retribution on the basis of the wages system is the same as to clamour for freedom on the basis of the slavery system. What you think just or equitable is out of the question. The question is: What is necessary and unavoidable with a given system of production? After what has been said, it will be seen that the value of labouring power is determined by the value of the necessaries required to produce, develop, maintain, and perpetuate the labouring power.

VIII. Production of Surplus Value
Now suppose that the average amount of the daily necessaries of a labouring man require six hours of average labour for their production. Suppose, moreover, six hours of average labour to be also realized in a quantity of gold equal to 3s. Then 3s. would be the price, or the monetary expression of the daily value of that man's labouring power. If he worked daily six hours he would daily produce a value sufficient to buy the average amount of his daily necessaries, or to maintain himself as a labouring man.

But our man is a wages labourer. He must, therefore, sell his labouring power to a capitalist. If he sells it at 3s. daily, or 18s. weekly, he sells it at its value. Suppose him to be a spinner. If he works six hours daily he will add to the cotton a value of 3s. daily. This value, daily added by him, would be an exact equivalent for the wages, or the price of his labouring power, received daily. But in that case no surplus value or surplus produce whatever would go to the capitalist. Here, then, we come to the rub.

In buying the labouring power of the workman, and paying its value, the capitalist, like every other purchaser, has acquired the right to consume or use the commodity bought. You consume or use the labouring power of a man by making him work, as you consume or use a machine by making it run. By buying the daily or weekly value of the labouring power of the workman, the capitalist has, therefore, acquired the right to use or make that labouring power during the whole day or week. The working day or the working week has, of course, certain limits, but those we shall afterwards look more closely at.

For the present I want to turn your attention to one decisive point. The value of the labouring power is determined by the quantity of labour necessary to maintain or reproduce it, but the use of that labouring power is only limited by the active energies and physical strength of the labourer. The daily or weekly value of the labouring power is quite distinct from the daily or weekly exercise of that power, the same as the food a horse wants and the time it can carry the horseman are quite distinct. The quantity of labour by which the value of the workman's labouring power is limited forms by no means a limit to the quantity of labour which his labouring power is apt to perform. Take the example of our spinner. We have seen that, to daily reproduce his labouring power, he must daily reproduce a value of three shillings, which he will do by working six hours daily. But this does not disable him from working ten or twelve or more hours a day. But by paying the daily or weekly value of the spinner's labouring power the capitalist has acquired the right of using that labouring power during the whole day or week. He will, therefore, make him work say, daily, twelve hours. Over and above the six hours required to replace his wages, or the value of his labouring power, he will, therefore, have to work six other hours, which I shall call hours of surplus labour, which surplus labour will realize itself in a surplus value and a surplus produce. If our spinner, for example, by his daily labour of six hours, added three shillings' value to the cotton, a value forming an exact equivalent to his wages, he will, in twelve hours, add six shillings' worth to the cotton, and produce a proportional surplus of yarn. As he has sold his labouring power to the capitalist, the whole value of produce created by him belongs to the capitalist, the owner pro tem. of his labouring power. By advancing three shillings, the capitalist will, therefore, realize a value of six shillings, because, advancing a value in which six hours of labour are crystallized, he will receive in return a value in which twelve hours of labour are crystallized. By repeating this same process daily, the capitalist will daily advance three shillings and daily pocket six shillings, one half of which will go to pay wages anew, and the other half of which will form surplus value, for which the capitalist pays no equivalent. It is this sort of exchange between capital and labour upon which capitalistic production, or the wages system, is founded, and which must constantly result in reproducing the working man as a working man, and the capitalist as a capitalist.

The rate of surplus value, all other circumstances remaining the same, will depend on the proportion between that part of the working day necessary to reproduce the value of the labouring power and the surplus time or surplus labour performed for the capitalist. It will, therefore, depend on the ratio in which the working day is prolonged over and above that extent, by working which the working man would only reproduce the value of his labouring power, or replace his wages.

IX. Value of Labour
We must now return to the expression, “value, or price of labour.” We have seen that, in fact, it is only the value of the labouring power, measured by the values of commodities necessary for its maintenance. But since the workman receives his wages after his labour is performed, and knows, moreover, that what he actually gives to the capitalist is his labour, the value or price of his labouring power necessarily appears to him as the price or value of his labour itself. If the price of his labouring power is three shillings, in which six hours of labour are realized, and if he works twelve hours, he necessarily considers these three shillings as the value or price of twelve hours of labour, although these twelve hours of labour realize themselves in a value of six shillings. A double consequence flows from this.

Firstly. The value or price of the labouring power takes the semblance of the price or value of labour itself, although, strictly speaking, value and price of labour are senseless terms.

Secondly. Although one part only of the workman's daily labour is paid, while the other part is unpaid, and while that unpaid or surplus labour constitutes exactly the fund out of which surplus value or profit is formed, it seems as if the aggregate labour was paid labour.

This false appearance distinguishes wages labour from other historical forms of labour. On the basis of the wages system even the unpaid labour seems to be paid labour. With the slave, on the contrary, even that part of his labour which is paid appears to be unpaid. Of course, in order to work the slave must live, and one part of his working day goes to replace the value of his own maintenance. But since no bargain is struck between him and his master, and no acts of selling and buying are going on between the two parties, all his labour seems to be given away for nothing.

Take, on the other hand, the peasant serf, such as he, I might say, until yesterday existed in the whole of East of Europe. This peasant worked, for example, three days for himself on his own field or the field allotted to him, and the three subsequent days he performed compulsory and gratuitous labour on the estate of his lord. Here, then, the paid and unpaid parts of labour were sensibly separated, separated in time and space; and our Liberals overflowed with moral indignation at the preposterous notion of making a man work for nothing.

In point of fact, however, whether a man works three days of the week for himself on his own field and three days for nothing on the estate of his lord, or whether he works in the factory or the workshop six hours daily for himself and six for his employer, comes to the same, although in the latter case the paid and unpaid portions of labour are inseparably mixed up with each other, and the nature of the whole transaction is completely masked by the intervention of a contract and the pay received at the end of the week. The gratuitous labour appears to be voluntarily given in the one instance, and to be compulsory in the other. That makes all the difference.

In using the word “value of labour,” I shall only use it as a popular slang term for “value of labouring power."

X. Profit is Made by Selling a Commodity at its Value
Suppose an average hour of labour to be realized in a value equal to sixpence, or twelve average hours of labour to be realized in six shillings. Suppose, further, the value of labour to be three shillings or the produce of six hours' labour. If, then, in the raw material, machinery, and so forth, used up in a commodity, twenty-four hours of average labour were realized, its value would amount to twelve shillings. If, moreover, the workman employed by the capitalist added twelve hours of labour to those means of production, these twelve hours would be realized in an additional value of six shillings. The total value of the product would, therefore, amount to thirty-six hours of realized labour, and be equal to eighteen shillings. But as the value of labour, or the wages paid to the workman, would be three shillings only, no equivalent would have been paid by the capitalist for the six hours of surplus labour worked by the workman, and realized in the value of the commodity. By selling this commodity at its value for eighteen shillings, the capitalist would, therefore, realize a value of three shillings, for which had paid no equivalent. These three shillings would constitute the surplus value or profit pocketed by him. The capitalist would consequently realize the profit of three shillings, not by selling his commodity at a price over and above its value, but by selling it at its real value.

The value of a commodity is determined by the total quantity of labour contained in it. But part of that quantity of labour is realized in a value for which and equivalent has been paid in the form of wages; part of it is realized in a value for which NO equivalent has been paid. Part of the labour contained in the commodity is paid labour; part is unpaid labour. By selling, therefore, the commodity at its value, that is, as the crystallization of the total quantity of labour bestowed upon it, the capitalist must necessarily sell it at a profit. He sells not only what has cost him an equivalent, but he sells also what has cost him nothing, although it has cost his workman labour. The cost of the commodity to the capitalist and its real cost are different things.

I repeat, therefore, that normal and average profits are made by selling commodities not above, but at their real values.

XI. The Different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed
The surplus value, or that part of the total value of the commodity in which the surplus labour or unpaid labour of the working man is realized, I call profit. The whole of that profit is not pocketed by the employing capitalist. The monopoly of land enables the landlord to take one part of that surplus value, under the name of rent, whether the land is used for agricultural buildings or railways, or for any other productive purpose. On the other hand, the very fact that the possession of the instruments of labour enables the employing capitalist to produce a surplus value, or, what comes to the same, to appropriate to himself a certain amount of unpaid labour, enables the owner of the means of labour, which he lends wholly or partly to the employing capitalist — enables, in one word, the money-lending capitalist to claim for himself under the name of interest another part of that surplus value, so that there remains to the employing capitalist as such only what is called industrial or commercial profit.

By what laws this division of the total amount of surplus value amongst the three categories of people is regulated is a question quite foreign to our subject. This much, however, results from what has been stated.

Rent, interest, and industrial profit are only different names for different parts of the surplus value of the commodity, or the unpaid labour enclosed in it, and they are equally derived from this source and from this source alone. They are not derived from land as such or from capital as such, but land and capital enable their owners to get their respective shares out of the surplus value extracted by the employing capitalist from the labourer. For the labourer himself it is a matter of subordinate importance whether that surplus value, the result of his surplus labour, or unpaid labour, is altogether pocketed by the employing capitalist, or whether the latter is obliged to pay portions of it, under the name of rent and interest, away to third parties. Suppose the employing capitalist to use only his own capital and to be his own landlord, then the whole surplus value would go into his pocket.

It is the employing capitalist who immediately extracts from the labourer this surplus value, whatever part of it he may ultimately be able to keep for himself. Upon this relation, therefore between the employing capitalist and the wages labourer the whole wages system and the whole present system of production hinge. Some of the citizens who took part in our debate were, there, wrong in trying to mince matters, and to treat this fundamental relation between the employing capitalist and the working man as a secondary question, although they were right in stating that, under given circumstances, a rise of prices might affect in very unequal degrees the employing capitalist, the landlord, the moneyed capitalist, and, if you please, the tax-gatherer.

Another consequence follows from what has been stated.

That part of the value of the commodity which represents only the value of the raw materials, the machinery, in one word, the value of the means of production used up, forms no revenue at all, but replaces only capital. But, apart from this, it is false that the other part of the value of the commodity which forms revenue, or may be spent in the form of wages, profits, rent, interest, is constituted by the value of wages, the value of rent, the value of profits, and so forth. We shall, in the first instance, discard wages, and only treat industrial profits, interest, and rent. We have just seen that the surplus value contained in the commodity, or that part of its value in which unpaid labour is realized, resolves itself into different fractions, bearing three different names.

But it would be quite the reverse of the truth to say that its value is composed of, or formed by, the addition of the    independent values of these three constituents.

If one hour of labour realizes itself in a value of sixpence, if the working day of the labourer comprises twelve hours, if half of this time is unpaid labour, that surplus labour will add to the commodity a surplus value of three shillings, that is of value for which no equivalent has been paid. This surplus value of three shillings constitutes the whole fund which the employing capitalist may divide, in whatever proportions, with the landlord and the money-lender. The value of these three shillings constitutes the limit of the value they have to divide amongst them. But it is not the employing capitalist who adds to the value of the commodity an arbitrary value for his profit, to which another value is added for the landlord, and so forth, so that the addition of these arbitrarily fixed values would constitute the total value. You see, therefore, the fallacy of the popular notion, which confounds the decomposition of a given value into three parts, with the formation of that value by the addition of three independent values, thus converting the aggregate value, from which rent, profit, and interest are derived, into an arbitrary magnitude.

If the total profit realized by a capitalist is equal to 100 Pounds, we call this sum, considered as absolute magnitude, the amount of profit. But if we calculate the ratio which those 100 Pounds bear to the capital advanced, we call this relative magnitude, the rate of profit. It is evident that this rate of profit may be expressed in a double way.

Suppose 100 Pounds to be the capital advanced in wages. If the surplus value created is also 100 Pounds — and this would show us that half the working day of the labourer consists of unpaid labour — and if we measured this profit by the value of the capital advanced in wages, we should say that the rate of profit amounted to one hundred percent, because the value advanced would be one hundred and the value realized would be two hundred.

If, on the other hand, we should not only consider the capital advanced in wages, but the total capital advanced, say, for example, 500 Pounds, of which 400 Pounds represented the value of raw materials, machinery, and so forth, we should say that the rate of profit amounted only to twenty percent, because the profit of one hundred would be but the fifth part of the total capital advanced.

The first mode of expressing the rate of profit is the only one which shows you the real ratio between paid and unpaid labour, the real degree of the exploitation (you must allow me this French word) of labour. The other mode of expression is that in common use, and is, indeed, appropriate for certain purposes. At all events, it is very useful for concealing the degree in which the capitalist extracts gratuitous labour from the workman.

In the remarks I have still to make I shall use the word profit for the whole amount of the surplus value extracted by the capitalist without any regard to the division of that surplus value between different parties, and in using the words rate of profit, I shall always measure profits by the value of the capital advanced in wages.
 


Table of Contents |
Next Section |
Marx Engels Archive |
Economics Index





==========

## General relation of Profits, Wages and Prices










Economic Manuscripts: VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT


Value, Price and Profit

XII. General Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices
Deduct from the value of a commodity the value replacing the value of the raw materials and other means of production used upon it, that is to say, deduct the value representing the past labour contained in it, and the remainder of its value will resolve into the quantity of labour added by the working man last employed. If that working man works twelve hours daily, if twelve hours of average labour crystallize themselves in an amount of gold equal to six shillings, this additional value of six shillings is the only value his labour will have created. This given value, determined by the time of his labour, is the only fund from which both he and the capitalist have to draw their respective shares or dividends, the only value to be divided into wages and profits. It is evident that this value itself will not be altered by the variable proportions in which it may be divided amongst the two parties. There will also be nothing changed if in the place of one working man you put the whole working population, twelve million working days, for example, instead of one.

Since the capitalist and workman have only to divide this limited value, that is, the value measured by the total labour of the working man, the more the one gets the less will the other get, and vice versa. Whenever a quantity is given, one part of it will increase inversely as the other decreases. If the wages change, profits will change in an opposite direction. If wages fall, profits will rise; and if wages rise, profits will fall. If the working man, on our former supposition, gets three shillings, equal to one half of the value he has created, or if his whole working day consists half of paid, half of unpaid labour, the rate of profit will be 100 percent, because the capitalist would also get three shillings. If the working man receives only two shillings, or works only one third of the whole day for himself, the capitalist will get four shillings, and the rate of profit will be 200 per cent. If the working man receives four shillings, the capitalist will only receive two, and the rate of profit would sink to 50 percent, but all these variations will not affect the value of the commodity. A general rise of wages would, therefore, result in a fall of the general rate of profit, but not affect values. 

But although the values of commodities, which must ultimately regulate their market prices, are exclusively determined by the total quantities of labour fixed in them, and not by the division of that quantity into paid and unpaid labour, it by no means follows that the values of the single commodities, or lots of commodities, produced during twelve hours, for example, will remain constant. The number or mass of commodities produced in a given time of labour, or by a given quantity of labour, depends upon the productive power of the labour employed, and not upon its extent or length. With one degree of the productive power of spinning labour, for example, a working day of twelve hours may produce twelve pounds of yarn, with a lesser degree of productive power only two pounds. If then twelve hours' average labour were realized in the value of six shillings in the one case, the twelve pounds of yarn would cost six shillings, in the other case the two pounds of yarn would also cost six shillings. One pound of yarn would, therefore, cost sixpence in the one case, and three shillings in the other. The difference of price would result from the difference in the productive powers of labour employed. One hour of labour would be realized in one pound of yarn with the greater productive power, while with the smaller productive power, six hours of labour would be realized in one pound of yarn. The price of a pound of yarn would, in the one instance, be only sixpence, although wages were relatively high and the rate of profit low; it would be three shillings in the other instance, although wages were low and the rate of profit high. This would be so because the price of the pound of yarn is regulated by the total amount of labour worked up in it, and not by the proportional division of that total amount into paid and unpaid labour. The fact I have mentioned before that high-price labour may produce cheap, and low-priced labour may produce dear commodities, loses, therefore, its paradoxical appearance. It is only the expression of the general law that the value of a commodity is regulated by the quantity of labour worked up in it, and the quantity of labour worked up in it depends altogether upon the productive powers of labour employed, and will therefore, vary with every variation in the productivity of labour.


XIII. Main Cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall
Let us now seriously consider the main cases in which a rise of wages is attempted or a reduction of wages resisted.

1. We have seen that the value of the labouring power, or in more popular parlance, the value of labour, is determined by the value of necessaries, or the quantity of labour required to produce them.

If, then, in a given country the value of the daily average necessaries of the labourer represented six hours of labour expressed in three shillings, the labourer would have to work six hours daily to produce an equivalent for this daily maintenance. If the whole working day was twelve hours, the capitalist would pay him the value of his labour by paying him three shillings. Half the working day would be unpaid labour, and the rate of profit would amount to 100 percent. But now suppose that, consequent upon a decrease of productivity, more labour should be wanted to produce, say, the same amount of agricultural produce, so that the price of the average daily necessaries should rise from three to four shillings. In that case the value of labour would rise by one third, or 33 1/3 percent. Eight hours of the working day would be required to produce an equivalent for the daily maintenance of the labourer, according to his old standard of living. The surplus labour would therefore sink from six hours to four, and the rate of profit from 100 to 50 percent. But in insisting upon a rise of wages, the labourer would only insist upon getting the increased value of his labour, like every other seller of a commodity, who, the costs of his commodities having increased, tries to get its increased value paid. If wages did not rise, or not sufficiently rise, to compensate for the increased values of necessaries, the price of labour would sink below the value of labour, and the labourer's standard of life would deteriorate.

But a change might also take place in an opposite direction. By virtue of the increased productivity of labour, the same amount of the average daily necessaries might sink from three to two shillings, or only four hours out of the working day, instead of six, be wanted to reproduce an equivalent for the value of the daily necessaries. The working man would now be able to buy with two shillings as many necessaries as he did before with three shillings. Indeed, the value of labour would have sunk, but diminished value would command the same amount of commodities as before. Then profits would rise from three to four shillings, and the rate of profit from 100 to 200 percent. Although the labourer's absolute standard of life would have remained the same, his relative wages, and therewith his relative social position, as compared with that of the capitalist, would have been lowered. If the working man should resist that reduction of relative wages, he would only try to get some share in the increased productive powers of his own labour, and to maintain his former relative position in the social scale. Thus, after the abolition of the Corn Laws, and in flagrant violation of the most solemn pledges given during the anti-corn law agitation, the English factory lords generally reduced wages ten per cent. The resistance of the workmen was at first baffled, but, consequent upon circumstances I cannot now enter upon, the ten per cent lost were afterwards regained.

2. The values of necessaries, and consequently the value of labour, might remain the same, but a change might occur in their money prices, consequent upon a previous change in the value of money. By the discovery of more fertile mines and so forth, two ounces of gold might, for example, cost no more labour to produce than one ounce did before. The value of gold would then be depreciated by one half, or fifty per cent. As the values of all other commodities would then be expressed in twice their former money prices, so also the same with the value of labour. Twelve hours of labour, formerly expressed in six shillings, would now be expressed in twelve shillings. If the working man's wages should remain three shillings, instead of rising to six shillings, the money price of his labour would only be equal to half the value of his labour, and his standard of life would fearfully deteriorate. This would also happen in a greater or lesser degree if his wages should rise, but not proportionately to the fall in the value of gold. In such a case nothing would have been changed, either in the productive powers of labour, or in supply and demand, or in values.

Nothing would have changed except the money names of those values. To say that in such a case the workman ought not to insist upon a proportionate rise of wages, is to say that he must be content to be paid with names, instead of with things. All past history proves that whenever such a depreciation of money occurs, the capitalists are on the alert to seize this opportunity for defrauding the workman. A very large school of political economists assert that, consequent upon the new discoveries of gold lands, the better working of silver mines, and the cheaper supply of quicksilver, the value of precious metals has again depreciated. This would explain the general and simultaneous attempts on the Continent at a rise of wages.

3. We have till now supposed that the working day has given limits. The working day, however, has, by itself, no constant limits. It is the constant tendency of capital to stretch it to its utmost physically possible length, because in the same degree surplus labour, and consequently the profit resulting therefrom, will be increased. The more capital succeeds in prolonging the working day, the greater the amount of other peoples' labour it will appropriate.

During the seventeenth and even the first two thirds of the eighteenth century a ten hours' working day was the normal working day all over England. During the anti-Jacobin war, which was in fact a war waged by the British barons against the British working masses, capital celebrated its bacchanalia, and prolonged the working day from ten to twelve, fourteen, eighteen hours. Malthus, by no means a man whom you would suspect of a maudlin sentimentalism declared in a pamphlet, published about 1815, that if this sort of thing was to go on the life of the nation would be attacked at its very source. A few years before the general introduction of newly-invented machinery, about 1765, a pamphlet appeared in England under the title, An Essay On Trade. The anonymous author, an avowed enemy of the working classes, declaims on the necessity of expanding the limits of the working day. Amongst other means to this end, he proposes working houses, which, he says, ought to be “Houses of Terror.” And what is the length of the working he prescribes for these “Houses of Terror"? Twelve hours, the very same time which in 1832 was declared by capitalists, political economists, and ministers to be not only the existing but the necessary time of labour for a child under twelve years.

By selling his labouring power, and he must do so under the present system, the working man makes over to the capitalist the consumption of that power, but within certain rational limits. He sells his labouring power in order to maintain it, apart from its natural wear and tear, but not to destroy it. In selling his labouring power at its daily or weekly value, it is understood that in one day or one week that labouring power shall not be submitted to two days' or two weeks' waste or wear and tear. Take a machine worth 1000 Pounds. If it is used up in ten years it will add to the value of the commodities in whose production it assists 100 Pounds yearly. If it is used up in five years it will add 200 Pounds yearly, or the value of its annual wear and tear is in inverse ratio to the quickness with which it is consumed. But this distinguishes the working man from the machine. Machinery does not wear out exactly in the same ratio in which it is used. Man, on the contrary, decays in a greater ratio than would be visible from the mere numerical addition of work.

In their attempts at reducing the working day to its former rational dimensions, or, where they cannot enforce a legal fixation of a normal working day, at checking overwork by a rise of wages, a rise not only in proportion to the surplus time exacted, but in a greater proportion, working men fulfill only a duty to themselves and their race. They only set limits to the tyrannical usurpations of capital. Time is the room of human development. A man who has no free time to dispose of, whose whole lifetime, apart from the mere physical interruptions by sleep, meals, and so forth, is absorbed by his labour for the capitalist, is less than a beast of burden. He is a mere machine for producing Foreign Wealth, broken in body and brutalized in mind. Yet the whole history of modern industry shows that capital, if not checked, will recklessly and ruthlessly work to cast down the whole working class to this utmost state of degradation.

In prolonging the working day the capitalist may pay higher wages and still lower the value of labor, if the rise of wages does not correspond to the greater amount of labour extracted, and the quicker decay of the labouring power thus caused. This may be done in another way. Your middle-class statisticians will tell you, for instance, that the average wages of factory families in Lancashire has risen. They forget that instead of the labour of the man, the head of the family, his wife and perhaps three or four children are now thrown under the Juggernaut wheels of capital, and that the rise of the aggregate wages does not correspond to the aggregate surplus labour extracted from the family.

Even with given limits of the working day, such as they now exist in all branches of industry subjected to the factory laws, a rise of wages may become necessary, if only to keep up the old standard value of labour. By increasing the intensity of labour, a man may be made to expend as much vital force in one hour as he formerly did in two. This has, to a certain degree, been effected in the trades, placed under the Factory Acts, by the acceleration of machinery, and the greater number of working machines which a single individual has now to superintend. If the increase in the intensity of labour or the mass of labour spent in an hour keeps some fair proportion to the decrease in the extent of the working day, the working man will still be the winner. If this limit is overshot, he loses in one form what he has gained in another, and ten hours of labour may then become as ruinous as twelve hours were before. In checking this tendency of capital, by struggling for a rise of wages corresponding to the rising intensity of labour, the working man only resists the depreciation of his labour and the deterioration of his race.

4. All of you know that, from reasons I have not now to explain, capitalistic production moves through certain periodical cycles. It moves through a state of quiescence, growing animation, prosperity, overtrade, crisis, and stagnation. The market prices of commodities, and the market rates of profit, follow these phases, now sinking below their averages, now rising above them.

Considering the whole cycle, you will find that one deviation of the market price is being compensated by the other, and that, taking the average of the cycle, the market prices of commodities are regulated by their values. Well! During the phases of sinking market prices and the phases of crisis and stagnation, the working man, if not thrown out of employment altogether, is sure to have his wages lowered. Not to be defrauded, he must, even with such a fall of market prices, debate with the capitalist in what proportional degree a fall of wages has become necessary. If, during the phases of prosperity, when extra profits are made, he did not battle for a rise of wages, he would, taking the average of one industrial cycle, not even receive his average wages, or the value of his labour. It is the utmost height of folly to demand, that while his wages are necessarily affected by the adverse phases of the cycle, he should exclude himself from compensation during the prosperous phases of the cycle. Generally, the values of all commodities are only realized by the compensation of the continuously changing market prices, springing from the continuous fluctuations of demand and supply. On the basis of the present system labour is only a commodity like others. It must, therefore, pass through the same fluctuations to fetch an average price corresponding to its value.

It would be absurd to treat it on the one hand as a commodity, and to want on the other hand to exempt it from the laws which regulate the prices of commodities. The slave receives a permanent and fixed amount of maintenance; the wage-labourer does not. He must try to get a rise of wages in the one instance, if only to compensate for a fall of wages in the other. If he resigned himself to accept the will, the dictates of the capitalist as a permanent economical law, he would share in all the miseries of the slave, without the security of the slave.

5. In all the cases I have considered, and they form ninety-nine out of a hundred, you have seen that a struggle for a rise of wages follows only in the track of previous changes, and is the necessary offspring of previous changes in the amount of production, the productive powers of labour, the value of labour, the value of money, the extent or the intensity of labour extracted, the fluctuations of market prices, dependent upon the fluctuations of demand and supply, and consistent with the different phases of the industrial cycle; in one word, as reactions of labour against the previous action of capital. By treating the struggle for a rise of wages independently of all these circumstances, by looking only upon the change of wages, and overlooking all other changes from which they emanate, you proceed from a false premise in order to arrive at false conclusions.


XIV. The Struggle Between Capital and Labour and its Results
1. Having shown that the periodical resistance on the part of the working men against a reduction of wages, and their periodical attempts at getting a rise of wages, are inseparable from the wages system, and dictated by the very fact of labour being assimilated to commodities, and therefore subject to the laws, regulating the general movement of prices; having furthermore, shown that a general rise of wages would result in a fall in the general rate of profit, but not affect the average prices of commodities, or their values, the question now ultimately arises, how far, in this incessant struggle between capital and labour, the latter is likely to prove successful.

I might answer by a generalization, and say that, as with all other commodities, so with labour, its market price will, in the long run, adapt itself to its value; that, therefore, despite all the ups and downs, and do what he may, the working man will, on an average, only receive the value of his labour, which resolves into the value of his labouring power, which is determined by the value of the necessaries required for its maintenance and reproduction, which value of necessaries finally is regulated by the quantity of labour wanted to produce them.

But there are some peculiar features which distinguish the value of the labouring power, or the value of labour, from the values of all other commodities. The value of the labouring power is formed by two elements -- the one merely physical, the other historical or social. Its ultimate limit is determined by the physical element, that is to say, to maintain and reproduce itself, to perpetuate its physical existence, the working class must receive the necessaries absolutely indispensable for living and multiplying. The value of those indispensable necessaries forms, therefore, the ultimate limit of the value of labour. On the other hand, the length of the working day is also limited by ultimate, although very elastic boundaries. Its ultimate limit is given by the physical force of the labouring man. If the daily exhaustion of his vital forces exceeds a certain degree, it cannot be exerted anew, day by day.

However, as I said, this limit is very elastic. A quick succession of unhealthy and short-lived generations will keep the labour market as well supplied as a series of vigorous and long-lived generations. Besides this mere physical element, the value of labour is in every country determined by a traditional standard of life. It is not mere physical life, but it is the satisfaction of certain wants springing from the social conditions in which people are placed and reared up. The English standard of life may be reduced to the Irish standard; the standard of life of a German peasant to that of a Livonian peasant. The important part which historical tradition and social habitude play in this respect, you may learn from Mr. Thornton's work on over-population, where he shows that the average wages in different agricultural districts of England still nowadays differ more or less according to the more or less favourable circumstances under which the districts have emerged from the state of serfdom.

This historical or social element, entering into the value of labour, may be expanded, or contracted, or altogether extinguished, so that nothing remains but the physical limit. During the time of the anti-Jacobin war, undertaken, as the incorrigible tax-eater and sinecurist, old George Rose, used to say, to save the comforts of our holy religion from the inroads of the French infidels, the honest English farmers, so tenderly handled in a former chapter of ours, depressed the wages of the agricultural labourers even beneath that mere physical minimum, but made up by Poor Laws the remainder necessary for the physical perpetuation of the race. This was a glorious way to convert the wages labourer into a slave, and Shakespeare's proud yeoman into a pauper.

By comparing the standard wages or values of labour in different countries, and by comparing them in different historical epochs of the same country, you will find that the value of labour itself is not a fixed but a variable magnitude, even supposing the values of all other commodities to remain constant.

A similar comparison would prove that not only the market rates of profit change, but its average rates.

But as to profits, there exists no law which determines their minimum. We cannot say what is the ultimate limit of their decrease. And why cannot we fix that limit? Because, although we can fix the minimum of wages, we cannot fix their maximum.

We can only say that, the limits of the working day being given, the maximum of profit corresponds to the physical minimum of wages; and that wages being given, the maximum of profit corresponds to such a prolongation of the working day as is compatible with the physical forces of the labourer. The maximum of profit is therefore limited by the physical minimum of wages and the physical maximum of the working day. It is evident that between the two limits of the maximum rate of profit an immense scale of variations is possible. The fixation of its actual degree is only settled by the continuous struggle between capital and labour, the capitalist constantly tending to reduce wages to their physical minimum, and to extend the working day to its physical maximum, while the working man constantly presses in the opposite direction.

The matter resolves itself into a question of the respective powers of the combatants.

2. As to the limitation of the working day in England, as in all other countries, it has never been settled except by legislative interference. Without the working men's continuous pressure from without that interference would never have taken place. But at all events, the result was not to be attained by private settlement between the working men and the capitalists. This very necessity of general political action affords the proof that in its merely economical action capital is the stronger side.

As to the limits of the value of labour, its actual settlement always depends upon supply and demand, I mean the demand for labour on the part of capital, and the supply of labour by the working men. In colonial countries the law of supply and demand favours the working man. Hence the relatively high standard of wages in the United States. Capital may there try its utmost. It cannot prevent the labour market from being continuously emptied by the continuous conversion of wages labourers into independent, self-sustaining peasants. The position of a wages labourer is for a very large part of the American people but a probational state, which they are sure to leave within a longer or shorter term. To mend this colonial state of things the paternal British Government accepted for some time what is called the modern colonization theory, which consists in putting an artificial high price upon colonial land, in order to prevent the too quick conversion of the wages labourer into the independent peasant.

But let us now come to old civilized countries, in which capital domineers over the whole process of production. Take, for example, the rise in England of agricultural wages from 1849 to 1859. What was its consequence? The farmers could not, as our friend Weston would have advised them, raise the value of wheat, nor even its market prices. They had, on the contrary, to submit to their fall. But during these eleven years they introduced machinery of all sorts, adopted more scientific methods, converted part of arable land into pasture, increased the size of farms, and with this the scale of production, and by these and other processes diminishing the demand for labour by increasing its productive power, made the agricultural population again relatively redundant. This is the general method in which a reaction, quicker or slower, of capital against a rise of wages takes place in old, settled countries. Ricardo has justly remarked that machinery is in constant competition with labour, and can often be only introduced when the price of labour has reached a certain height, but the appliance of machinery is but one of the many methods for increasing the productive powers of labour. The very same development which makes common labour relatively redundant simplifies, on the other hand, skilled labour, and thus depreciates it.

The same law obtains in another form. With the development of the productive powers of labour the accumulation of capital will be accelerated, even despite a relatively high rate of wages. Hence, one might infer, as Adam Smith, in whose days modern industry was still in its infancy, did infer, that the accelerated accumulation of capital must turn the balance in favour of the working man, by securing a growing demand for his labour. From this same standpoint many contemporary writers have wondered that English capital having grown in that last twenty years so much quicker than English population, wages should not have been more enhanced. But simultaneously with the progress of accumulation there takes place a progressive change in the composition of capital. That part of the aggregate capital which consists of fixed capital, machinery, raw materials, means of production in all possible forms, progressively increases as compared with the other part of capital, which is laid out in wages or in the purchase of labour. This law has been stated in a more or less accurate manner by Mr. Barton, Ricardo, Sismondi, Professor Richard Jones, Professor Ramsey, Cherbuilliez, and others.

If the proportion of these two elements of capital was originally one to one, it will, in the progress of industry, become five to one, and so forth. If of a total capital of 600, 300 is laid out in instruments, raw materials, and so forth, and 300 in wages, the total capital wants only to be doubled to create a demand for 600 working men instead of for 300. But if of a capital of 600, 500 is laid out in machinery, materials, and so forth and 100 only in wages, the same capital must increase from 600 to 3,600 in order to create a demand for 600 workmen instead of 300. In the progress of industry the demand for labour keeps, therefore, no pace with the accumulation of capital. It will still increase, but increase in a constantly diminishing ratio as compared with the increase of capital.

These few hints will suffice to show that the very development of modern industry must progressively turn the scale in favour of the capitalist against the working man, and that consequently the general tendency of capitalistic production is not to raise, but to sink the average standard of wages, or to push the value of labour more or less to its minimum limit. Such being the tendency of things in this system, is this saying that the working class ought to renounce their resistance against the encroachments of capital, and abandon their attempts at making the best of the occasional chances for their temporary improvement? If they did, they would be degraded to one level mass of broken wretches past salvation. I think I have shown that their struggles for the standard of wages are incidents inseparable from the whole wages system, that in 99 cases out of 100 their efforts at raising wages are only efforts at maintaining the given value of labour, and that the necessity of debating their price with the capitalist is inherent to their condition of having to sell themselves as commodities. By cowardly giving way in their everyday conflict with capital, they would certainly disqualify themselves for the initiating of any larger movement.

At the same time, and quite apart from the general servitude involved in the wages system, the working class ought not to exaggerate to themselves the ultimate working of these everyday struggles. They ought not to forget that they are fighting with effects, but not with the causes of those effects; that they are retarding the downward movement, but not changing its direction; that they are applying palliatives, not curing the malady. They ought, therefore, not to be exclusively absorbed in these unavoidable guerilla fights incessantly springing up from the never ceasing encroachments of capital or changes of the market. They ought to understand that, with all the miseries it imposes upon them, the present system simultaneously engenders the material conditions and the social forms necessary for an economical reconstruction of society. Instead of the conservative motto: “A fair day's wage for a fair day's work!” they ought to inscribe on their banner the revolutionary watchword: “Abolition of the wages system!"

After this very long and, I fear, tedious exposition, which I was obliged to enter into to do some justice to the subject matter, I shall conclude by proposing the following resolutions:

Firstly. A general rise in the rate of wages would result in a fall of the general rate of profit, but, broadly speaking, not affect the prices of commodities.

Secondly. The general tendency of capitalist production is not to raise, but to sink the average standard of wages.

Thirdly. Trades Unions work well as centers of resistance against the encroachments of capital. They fail partially from an injudicious use of their power. They fail generally from limiting themselves to a guerilla war against the effects of the existing system, instead of simultaneously trying to change it, instead of using their organized forces as a lever for the final emancipation of the working class that is to say the ultimate abolition of the wages system.
 


Table of Contents |
Marx Engels Archive |
Economics Index





==========

## Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council, the Different Questions






The International Workingmen's Association, Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council



The International Workingmen's Association, 1866
Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council
The Different Questions


Written: by Marx at the end of August 1866;
First published: in Der Vorbote Nos. 10 and 11, October and November 1866 and The International Courier Nos. 6/7, February 20, and Nos. 8/10, March 13, 1867;
Translated: by Barrie Selman;
Transcribed: by director@marx.org, April 1996.

Table of Contents

Organisation of the International Association 
International combination of efforts, by the agency of the association, in the struggle between labour and capital
Limitation of the working day
Juvenile and children's labour (both sexes)
Co-operative labour
Trades' unions. Their past, present and future
Direct and indirect taxation
International credit
Polish question
Armies
Religious question



1.
Organisation of the International Association
Upon the whole, the Provisional Central Council recommend
the plan of organisation as traced in the Provisional Statutes.
Its soundness and facilities of adaptation to different countries without
prejudice to unity of action have been proved by two years' experience.
For the next year we recommend London as the seat of the Central Council,
the Continental situation looking unfavourable for change.
The members of the Central Council will of course be elected by
Congress (5 of the Provisional Statutes) with power to add to their number.
The General Secretary to be chosen by Congress for one
year and to be the only paid officer of the Association. We propose £2
for his weekly salary. [The French and German texts add: "The Standing
Committee, which is in fact an executive of the Central Council, to
be chosen by Congress, the function of any of its member to be defined
by the Central Council."]
The uniform annual contribution of each individual member of
the Association to be one half penny (perhaps one penny). The
cost price of cards of membership (carpets) to be charged extra.
While calling upon the members of the Association to form benefit
societies and connect them by an international link, we leave the initiation
of this question (etablissement des societes de secours mutuels. Appoi
moral et materiel accorde aux orphelins de l'association [foundation
of benefit societies; moral and material assistance to the Association's
orphans. -- Ed.]) to the Swiss who originally proposed it at the
conference of September last.

2.
International combination of efforts, by the agency of the association, in the struggle between labour and capital
(a)
From a general point of view, this question embraces
the whole activity of the International Association which aims at combining
and generalising the till now disconnected efforts for emancipation by
the working classes in different countries.
(b)
To counteract the intrigues of capitalists always
ready, in cases of strikes and lockouts, to misuse the foreign workman
as a tool against the native workman, is one of the particular functions
which our Society has hitherto performed with success. It is one of the
great purposes of the Association to make the workmen of different countries
not only feel but act as brethren and comrades in the army
of emancipation.
(c)
One great "International combination of efforts"
which we suggest is a statistical inquiry into the situation of the
working classes of all countries to be instituted by the working classes
themselves. To act with any success, the materials to be acted upon
must be known. By initiating so great a work, the workmen will prove their
ability to take their own fate into their own hands. We propose therefore:
That in each locality, where branches of our Association exist,
the work be immediately commenced, and evidence collected on the different
points specified in the subjoined scheme of inquiry.
That the Congress invite all workmen of Europe and the United
States of America to collaborate in gathering the elements of the statistics
of the working class; that reports and evidence be forwarded to the Central
Council. That the Central Council elaborate them into a general report,
adding the evidence as an appendix.
That this report together with its appendix be laid before the
next annual Congress, and after having received its sanction, be printed
at the expense of the Association.
General Scheme of Inquiry, which may of course be modified by each Locality

Industry, name of.
Age and sex of the employed.
Number of the employed.
Salaries and wages: (a) apprentices; (b) wages by the day
or piece work; scale paid by middlemen. Weekly, yearly average.
(a) Hours of work in factories. (b) The hours of work with
small employers and in home work, if the business be carried on in those
different modes. (c) Nightwork and daywork.
Meal times and treatment.
Sort of workshop and work: overcrowding, defective ventilation, want of
sunlight, use of gaslight. Cleanliness, etc.
Nature of occupation.
Effect of employment upon the physical condition.
Moral condition. Education.
State of trade: whether season trade, or more or less uniformly distributed
over year, whether greatly fluctuating, whether exposed to foreign competition,
whether destined principally for home or foreign competition, etc. [The
Minute Book of the General Council has the word "consumption" instead of
"competition." -- Ed.]


3.
Limitation of the working day
A preliminary condition, without which all further
attempts at improvement and emancipation must prove abortive, is the limitation
of the working day.
It is needed to restore the health and physical energies of the working
class, that is, the great body of every nation, as well as to secure them
the possibility of intellectual development, sociable intercourse, social
and political action.
We propose 8 hours work as the legal limit of the
working day. This limitation being generally claimed by the workmen of
the United States of America,'40 the vote of the Congress will raise it
to the common platform of the working classes all over the world.
For the information of continental members, whose experience of
factory law is comparatively short-dated, we add that all legal restrictions
will fail and be broken through by Capital if the period of the day
during which the 8 working hours must be taken, be not fixed. The length
of that period ought to be determined by the 8 working hours and the additional
pauses for meals. For instance, if the different interruptions for meals
amount to one hour, the legal period of the day ought to embrace
9 hours, say from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m., or from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., etc. Nightwork
to be but exceptionally permitted, in trades or branches of trades specified
by law. The tendency must be to suppress all nightwork.
This paragraph refers only to adult persons, male or female, the
latter, however, to be rigorously excluded from all nightwork whatever,
and all sort of work hurtful to the delicacy of the sex, or exposing their
bodies to poisonous and otherwise deleterious agencies. By adult persons
we understand all persons having reached or passed the age of 18 years.

4.
Juvenile and children's labour (both sexes)
We consider the tendency of modern industry to make
children and juvenile persons of both sexes co-operate in the great work
of social production, as a progressive, sound and legitimate tendency,
although under capital it was distorted into an abomination. In a rational
state of society every child whatever, from the age of 9 years,
ought to become a productive labourer in the same way that no able-bodied
adult person ought to be exempted from the general law of nature, viz.:
to work in order to be able to eat, and work not only with the brain but
with the hands too.
However, for the present, we have only to deal with the children
and young persons of both sexes divided into three classes, to be
treated differently [a]; the first class to range from
9 to 12; the second, from 13 to 15 years; and the third, to comprise the
ages of 16 and 17 years. We propose that the employment of the first class
in any workshop or housework be legally restricted to two; that
of the second, to four; and that of the third, to six hours.
For the third class, there must be a break of at least one hour for meals
or relaxation.
It may be desirable to begin elementary school instruction before
the age of 9 years; but we deal here only with the most indispensable antidotes
against the tendencies of a social system which degrades the working man
into a mere instrument for the accumulation of capital, and transforms
parents by their necessities into slave-holders, sellers of their own children.
The right of children and juvenile persons must be vindicated. They
are unable to act for themselves. It is, therefore, the duty of society
to act on their behalf.
If the middle and higher classes neglect their duties toward their
offspring, it is their own fault. Sharing the privileges of these classes,
the child is condemned to suffer from their prejudices.
The case of the working class stands quite different. The working
man is no free agent. In too many cases, he is even too ignorant to understand
the true interest of his child, or the normal conditions of human development.
However, the more enlightened part of the working class fully understands
that the future of its class, and, therefore, of mankind, altogether depends
upon the formation of the rising working generation. They know that, before
everything else, the children and juvenile workers must be saved from the
crushing effects of the present system. This can only be effected by converting
social reason into social force, and, under given circumstances,
there exists no other method of doing so, than through general laws,
enforced by the power of the state. In enforcing such laws, the working
class do not fortify governmental power. On the contrary, they transform
that power, now used against them, into their own agency. They effect by
a general act what they would vainly attempt by a multitude of isolated
individual efforts.
Proceeding from this standpoint, we say that no parent and no
employer ought to be allowed to use juvenile labour, except when combined
with education.
By education we understand three things.
Firstly: Mental education.
Secondly: Bodily education, such as is given in schools of gymnastics,
and by military exercise.
Thirdly: Technological training, which imparts the general
principles of all processes of production, and, simultaneously initiates
the child and young person in the practical use and handling of the elementary
instruments of all trades. [The German text calls this "polytechnical training."
-- Ed]

A gradual and progressive course of mental, gymnastic, and technological
training ought to correspond to the classification of the juvenile labourers.
The costs of the technological a schools ought to be partly met by the
sale of their products.
The combination of paid productive labour, mental education bodily
exercise and polytechnic training, will raise the working class far above
the level of the higher and middle classes.
It is self-understood that the employment of all persons from
9 and to 17 years (inclusively) in nightwork and all health-injuring trades
must be strictly prohibited by law.

5.
Co-operative labour
It is the business of the International Working Men's
Association to combine and generalise the spontaneous movements
of the working classes, but not to dictate or impose any doctrinary system
whatever. The Congress should, therefore, proclaim no special system
of co-operation, but limit itself to the enunciation of a few general principles.
(a) We acknowledge the co-operative movement as
one of the transforming forces of the present society based upon class
antagonism. Its great merit is to practically show, that the present pauperising,
and despotic system of the subordination of labour to capital can
be superseded by the republican and beneficent system of the association
of free and equal producers.
(b) Restricted, however, to the dwarfish forms into which
individual wages slaves can elaborate it by their private efforts, the
co-operative system will never transform capitalist society. to convert
social production into one large and harmonious system of free and co-operative
labour, general social changes are wanted, changes of the general
conditions of society, never to be realised save by the transfer of
the organised forces of society, viz., the state power, from capitalists
and landlords to the producers themselves.
(c) We recommend to the working men to embark in
co-operative production rather than in co-operative stores.
The latter touch but the surface of the present economical system, the
former attacks its groundwork.
(d) We recommend to all co-operative societies to
convert one part of their joint income into a fund for propagating their
principles by example as well as by precept, in other words, by promoting
the establishment by teaching and preaching.
(e) In order to prevent co-operative societies from
degenerating into ordinary middle-class joint stock companies (societes
par actions), all workmen employed, whether shareholders or not, ought
to share alike. As a mere temporary expedient, we are willing to allow
shareholders a low rate of interest.

6.
Trades' unions. Their past, present and future
(a) Their past.
Capital is concentrated social force, while the workman has only to
dispose of his working force. The contract between capital and labour
can therefore never be struck on equitable terms, equitable even in the
sense of a society which places the ownership of the material means of
life and labour on one side and the vital productive energies on the opposite
side. The only social power of the workmen is their number. The force of
numbers, however is broken by disunion. The disunion of the workmen is
created and perpetuated by their unavoidable competition among themselves.
Trades' Unions originally sprang up from the spontaneous attempts
of workmen at removing or at least checking that competition, in order
to conquer such terms of contract as might raise them at least above the
condition of mere slaves. The immediate object of Trades' Unions was therefore
confined to everyday necessities, to expediences for the obstruction of
the incessant encroachments of capital, in one word, to questions of wages
and time of labour. This activity of the Trades' Unions is not only legitimate,
it is necessary. It cannot be dispensed with so long as the present system
of production lasts. On the contrary, it must be generalised by the formation
and the combination of Trades' Unions throughout all countries. On the
other hand, unconsciously to themselves, the Trades' Unions were forming
centres of organisation of the working class, as the mediaeval municipalities
and communes did for the middle class. If the Trades' Unions are required
for the guerilla fights between capital and labour, they are still more
important as organised agencies for superseding the very system of wages
labour and capital rule.
(b) Their present.
Too exclusively bent upon the local and immediate struggles with capital,
the Trades' Unions have not yet fully understood their power of acting
against the system of wages slavery itself. They therefore kept too much
aloof from general social and political movements. Of late, however, they
seem to awaken to some sense of their great historical mission, as appears,
for instance, from their participation, in England, in the recent political
movement, from the enlarged views taken of their function in the United
States, and from the following resolution passed at the recent great conference
of Trades' delegates at Sheffield:
"That this Conference, fully appreciating the efforts made by
the International Association to unite in one common bond of brotherhood
the working men of all countries, most earnestly recommend to the various
societies here represented, the advisability of becoming affiliated to
that hody, believing that it is essential to the progress and prosperity
of the entire working community."
(c) Their future.
Apart from their original purposes, they must now learn to act deliberately
as organising centres of the working class in the broad interest of its
complete emancipation. They must aid every social and political
movement tending in that direction. Considering themselves and acting as
the champions and representatives of the whole working class, they cannot
fail to enlist the non-society men into their ranks. They must look carefully
after the interests of the worst paid trades, such as the agricultural
labourers, rendered powerless [French text has: "incapable of organised
resistance"] by exceptional circumstances. They must convince the world
at large [French and German texts read: "convince the broad masses of workers"]
that their efforts, far from being narrow -- and selfish, aim at the emancipation
of the downtrodden millions.

7.
Direct and indirect taxation
(a) No modification of the form of taxation can produce any
important change in the relations of labour and capital.
(b) Nevertheless, having to choose between two systems
of taxation, we recommend the total abolition of indirect taxes, and
the general substitution of direct taxes. [In Marx's rough manuscript,
French and German texts are: "because direct taxes are cheaper to collect
and do not interfere with production".]
Because indirect taxes enhance the prices of commodities, the
tradesmen adding to those prices not only the amount of the indirect taxes,
but the interest and profit upon the capital advanced in their payment
Because indirect taxes conceal from an individual what he is paying
to the state, whereas a direct tax is undisguised, unsophisticated, and
not to be misunderstood by the meanest capacity. Direct taxation prompts
therefore every individual to control the governing powers while indirect
taxation destroys all tendency to self-government.

8.
International credit
Initiative to be left to the French.

9.
Polish question
[The French subtitle reads: "Necessity of annihilating Russian influence
in Europe by implementing the right of nations to self-determination and
restoring Poland on a democratic and social basis." German subtitle reads
similarly.]
(a) Why do the workmen of Europe take up this question?
In the first instance, because the middle-class writers and agitators conspire
to suppress it, although they patronise all sorts of nationalities, on
the Continent, even Ireland. Whence this reticence? Because both, aristocrats
and bourgeois, look upon the dark Asiatic power in the background as a
last resource against the advancing tide of working class ascendancy; That
power can only be effectually put down by the restoration of Poland upon
a democratic basis.
(b) In the present changed state of central Europe,
and especially Germany, it is more than ever necessary to have a democratic
Poland. Without it, Germany will become the outwork of the Holy Alliance,
with it, the co-operator with republican France. The working-class movement
will continuously be interrupted, checked, and retarded, until this great
European question be set at rest.
(c) It is especially the duty of the German working
class to take the initiative in this matter, because Germany is one of
the partitioners of Poland.

10.
Armies
[French and German subtitle reads: "Standing armies; their relation
to production."]
(a) The deleterious influence of large standing
armies upon production, has been sufficiently exposed at middle-class
congresses of all denominations, at peace congresses, economical congresses,
statistical congresses, philanthropical congresses, sociological congresses.
We think it, therefore, quite superfluous to expatiate upon this point.
(b) We propose the general armament of the people
and their general instruction in the use of arms.
(c) We accept as a transitory necessity small standing
armies to form schools for the officers of the militia; every male citizen
to serve for a very limited time in those armies.

11.
Religious question
[French and German subtitle reads: "Religious ideas; their influence
on the social, political and intellectual movement".]
To be left to the initiative of the French.
Notes

a Note from International Publishers:
Instead of this sentence the French and German texts have two sentences
ending the preceding paragraph and beginning a new one: "However, for the
present, we have only to deal with the children and young persons belonging
to the working class.

"We deem it necessary, basing on physiology, to divide children
and young persons of both sexes" and then as in the English text.
 


International Workingmen's Association Index |
Marx-Engels Archive |
Works by Date
 



==========

## Preface to the First German edition of the First Volume of Capital








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - 1867 Preface



Karl MarxCapital Volume One

1867Preface to theFirst German Edition

 
The work, the first volume of which I now submit to
the public, forms the continuation of my Zur Kritik der Politischen
Oekonomie (A Contribution to the Criticism of Political
Economy) published in 1859. The long pause between the first part and the
continuation is due to an illness of many years’ duration that again and
again interrupted my work.

The substance of that earlier work is summarised in the first three
chapters of this volume. This is done not merely for the sake of connexion
and completeness. The presentation of the subject matter is improved. As
far as circumstances in any way permit, many points only hinted at in the
earlier book are here worked out more fully, whilst, conversely, points
worked out fully there are only touched upon in this volume. The sections
on the history of the theories of value and of money are now, of course,
left out altogether. The reader of the earlier work will find, however,
in the notes to the first chapter additional sources of reference relative
to the history of those theories.


Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To understand the
first chapter, especially the section that contains the analysis of commodities,
will, therefore, present the greatest difficulty. That which concerns more
especially the analysis of the substance of value and the magnitude of
value, I have, as much as it was possible, popularised. 
[1] The value-form, whose fully developed shape is the money-form, is very
elementary and simple. Nevertheless, the human mind has for more than 2,000
years sought in vain to get to the bottom of it all, whilst on the other
hand, to the successful analysis of much more composite and complex forms,
there has been at least an approximation. Why? Because the body, as an
organic whole, is more easy of study than are the cells of that body. In
the analysis of economic forms, moreover, neither microscopes nor chemical
reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace both. But in
bourgeois society, the commodity-form of the product of labour — or value-form
of the commodity — is the economic cell-form. To the superficial observer,
the analysis of these forms seems to turn upon minutiae. It does in fact
deal with minutiae, but they are of the same order as those dealt with
in microscopic anatomy.

With the exception of the section on value-form, therefore, this volume
cannot stand accused on the score of difficulty. I presuppose, of course,
a reader who is willing to learn something new and therefore to think for
himself.

The physicist either observes physical phenomena where they occur in
their most typical form and most free from disturbing influence, or, wherever
possible, he makes experiments under conditions that assure the occurrence
of the phenomenon in its normality. In this work I have to examine the
capitalist mode of production, and the conditions of production and exchange
corresponding to that mode. Up to the present time, their classic ground
is England. That is the reason why England is used as the chief illustration
in the development of my theoretical ideas. If, however, the German reader
shrugs his shoulders at the condition of the English industrial and agricultural
labourers, or in optimist fashion comforts himself with the thought that
in Germany things are not nearly so bad; I must plainly tell him, “De te
fabula narratur!” [It is of you that the story is told. – Horace]

Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or lower degree
of development of the social antagonisms that result from the natural laws
of capitalist production. It is a question of these laws themselves, of
these tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevitable results.
The country that is more developed industrially only shows, to the less
developed, the image of its own future.

But apart from this. Where capitalist production is fully naturalised
among the Germans (for instance, in the factories proper) the condition
of things is much worse than in England, because the counterpoise of the
Factory Acts is wanting. In all other spheres, we, like all the rest of
Continental Western Europe, suffer not only from the development of capitalist
production, but also from the incompleteness of that development. Alongside
the modern evils, a whole series of inherited evils oppress us, arising
from the passive survival of antiquated modes of production, with their
inevitable train of social and political anachronisms. We suffer not only
from the living, but from the dead. Le mort saisit le vif!
[The dead holds the living in his grasp. – formula of French common law]

The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental Western
Europe are, in comparison with those of England, wretchedly compiled. But
they raise the veil just enough to let us catch a glimpse of the Medusa
head behind it. We should be appalled at the state of things at home, if,
as in England, our governments and parliaments appointed periodically commissions
of inquiry into economic conditions; if these commissions were armed with
the same plenary powers to get at the truth; if it was possible to find
for this purpose men as competent, as free from partisanship and respect
of persons as are the English factory-inspectors, her medical reporters
on public health, her commissioners of inquiry into the exploitation of
women and children, into housing and food. Perseus wore a magic cap down
over his eyes and ears as a make-believe that there are no monsters.

Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th century, the American
war of independence sounded the tocsin for the European middle class, so
that in the 19th century, the American Civil War sounded it for the European
working class. In England the process of social disintegration is palpable.
When it has reached a certain point, it must react on the Continent. There
it will take a form more brutal or more humane, according to the degree
of development of the working class itself. Apart from higher motives,
therefore, their own most important interests dictate to the classes that
are for the nonce the ruling ones, the removal of all legally removable
hindrances to the free development of the working class. For this reason,
as well as others, I have given so large a space in this volume to the
history, the details, and the results of English factory legislation. One
nation can and should learn from others. And even when a society has got
upon the right track for the discovery of the natural laws of its movement
— and it is the ultimate aim of this work, to lay bare the economic law
of motion of modern society — it can neither clear by bold leaps, nor
remove by legal enactments, the obstacles offered by the successive phases
of its normal development. But it can shorten and lessen the birth-pangs.

To prevent possible misunderstanding, a word. I paint the capitalist and
the landlord in no sense couleur de rose [i.e., seen through rose-tinted glasses]. But here individuals are
dealt with only in so far as they are the personifications of economic
categories, embodiments of particular class-relations and class-interests.
My standpoint, from which the evolution of the economic formation of society
is viewed as a process of natural history, can less than any other make
the individual responsible for relations whose creature he socially remains,
however much he may subjectively raise himself above them.

In the domain of Political Economy, free scientific inquiry meets not
merely the same enemies as in all other domains. The peculiar nature of
the materials it deals with, summons as foes into the field of battle the
most violent, mean and malignant passions of the human breast, the Furies
of private interest. The English Established Church, e.g., will more readily
pardon an attack on 38 of its 39 articles than on 1/39 of its income. Now-a-days
atheism is culpa levis [a relatively slight sin, c.f. mortal sin], as compared with criticism of existing property
relations. Nevertheless, there is an unmistakable advance. I refer, e.g.,
to the Blue book published within the last few weeks: “Correspondence with
Her Majesty’s Missions Abroad, regarding Industrial Questions and Trades’
Unions.” The representatives of the English Crown in foreign countries
there declare in so many words that in Germany, in France, to be brief,
in all the civilised states of the European Continent, radical change in
the existing relations between capital and labour is as evident and inevitable
as in England. At the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean,
Mr. Wade, vice-president of the United States, declared in public meetings
that, after the abolition of slavery, a radical change of the relations
of capital and of property in land is next upon the order of the day. These
are signs of the times, not to be hidden by purple mantles or black cassocks.
They do not signify that tomorrow a miracle will happen. They show that,
within the ruling classes themselves, a foreboding is dawning, that the
present society is no solid crystal, but an organism capable of change,
and is constantly changing.

The second volume of this book will treat of the process of the circulation
of capital (Book II.), and of the varied forms assumed by capital in the
course of its development (Book III.), the third and last volume (Book
IV.), the history of the theory.

Every opinion based on scientific criticism I welcome. As to prejudices
of so-called public opinion, to which I have never made concessions, now
as aforetime the maxim of the great Florentine is mine:


 “Segui il tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti.” 
[Follow your own course, and let people talk – paraphrased from Dante]


Karl Marx
London
July 25, 1867

Footnotes

[1] This is the more necessary, as even the
section of Ferdinand Lassalle’s work against Schulze-Delitzsch, in which
he professes to give “the intellectual quintessence” of my explanations
on these subjects, contains important mistakes. If Ferdinand Lassalle has
borrowed almost literally from my writings, and without any acknowledgement,
all the general theoretical propositions in his economic works, e.g., those
on the historical character of capital, on the connexion between the conditions
of production and the mode of production, &c., &c., even to the
terminology created by me, this may perhaps be due to purposes of propaganda.
I am here, of course, not speaking of his detailed working out and application
of these propositions, with which I have nothing to do.


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Prefaces and Afterwords


Capital Volume One- Index




==========

## Afterword to the Second German Edition of the First Volume of Capital








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - 1875 Afterword




Karl Marx

Capital Volume One



1875
AFTERWARD TO THE
FRENCH EDITION


Mr. J. Roy set himself the task of producing a version
that would be as exact and even literal as possible, and has scrupulously
fulfilled it. But his very scrupulosity has compelled me to modify his
text, with a view to rendering it more intelligible to the reader. These
alterations, introduced from day to day, as the book was published in parts,
were not made with equal care and were bound to result in a lack of harmony
in style.

Having once undertaken this work of revision, I was led to apply
it also to the basic original text (the second German edition), to simplify
some arguments, to complete others, to give additional historical or statistical
material, to add critical suggestions, etc. Hence, whatever the literary
defects of this French edition may be, it possesses a scientific value
independent of the original and should be consulted even by readers familiar
with German.

Below I give the passages in the Afterword to the second German
edition which treat of the development of Political Economy in Germany
and the method employed in the present work.

Karl Marx
London
April 28, 1875



Transcribed by Hinrich Kuhls
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Prefaces and Afterwords


Capital Volume One- Index




==========

## The Secret of Primitive Accumulation








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Twenty-Six




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Part VIII: Primitive Accumulation

Chapter Twenty-Six: The Secret of Primitive Accumulation

 
We have seen how money is changed into capital; how
through capital surplus-value is made, and from
surplus-value more capital. But the accumulation of capital
presupposes surplus-value; surplus-value presupposes
capitalistic production; capitalistic production presupposes
the pre-existence of considerable masses of capital and of
labour power in the hands of producers of commodities. The
whole movement, therefore, seems to turn in a vicious
circle, out of which we can only get by supposing a
primitive accumulation (previous accumulation of Adam Smith)
preceding capitalistic accumulation; an accumulation not the
result of the capitalistic mode of production, but its
starting point.
This primitive accumulation plays in Political
Economy about the same part as original sin in theology.
Adam bit the apple, and thereupon sin fell on the human
race. Its origin is supposed to be explained when it is told
as an anecdote of the past. In times long gone by there were
two sorts of people; one, the diligent, intelligent, and,
above all, frugal elite; the other, lazy rascals, spending
their substance, and more, in riotous living. The legend of
theological original sin tells us certainly how man came to
be condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow; but
the history of economic original sin reveals to us that
there are people to whom this is by no means essential.
Never mind! Thus it came to pass that the former sort
accumulated wealth, and the latter sort had at last nothing
to sell except their own skins. And from this original sin
dates the poverty of the great majority that, despite all
its labour, has up to now nothing to sell but itself, and
the wealth of the few that increases constantly although
they have long ceased to work. Such insipid childishness is
every day preached to us in the defence of property.
M. Thiers, e.g., had the assurance to repeat it with
all the solemnity of a statesman to the French people, once
so spirituel. But as soon as the question of
property crops up, it becomes a sacred duty to proclaim the
intellectual food of the infant as the one thing fit for all
ages and for all stages of development. In actual history it
is notorious that conquest, enslavement, robbery, murder,
briefly force, play the great part. In the tender annals of
Political Economy, the idyllic reigns from time immemorial.
Right and “labour” were from all time the sole means of
enrichment, the present year of course always excepted. As a
matter of fact, the methods of primitive accumulation are
anything but idyllic.
In themselves money and commodities are no more
capital than are the means of production and of subsistence.
They want transforming into capital. But this transformation
itself can only take place under certain circumstances that
centre in this, viz., that two very different kinds of
commodity-possessors must come face to face and into
contact; on the one hand, the owners of money, means of
production, means of subsistence, who are eager to increase
the sum of values they possess, by buying other people’s
labour power; on the other hand, free labourers, the sellers
of their own labour power, and therefore the sellers of
labour. Free labourers, in the double sense that neither
they themselves form part and parcel of the means of
production, as in the case of slaves, bondsmen, &c., nor
do the means of production belong to them, as in the case of
peasant-proprietors; they are, therefore, free from,
unencumbered by, any means of production of their own. With
this polarization of the market for commodities, the
fundamental conditions of capitalist production are given.
The capitalist system presupposes the complete separation
of the labourers from all property in the means by which
they can realize their labour. As soon as capitalist
production is once on its own legs, it not only maintains
this separation, but reproduces it on a continually
extending scale. The process, therefore, that clears the way
for the capitalist system, can be none other than the
process which takes away from the labourer the possession of
his means of production; a process that transforms, on the
one hand, the social means of subsistence and of production
into capital, on the other, the immediate producers into
wage labourers. The so-called primitive accumulation,
therefore, is nothing else than the historical process of
divorcing the producer from the means of production. It
appears as primitive, because it forms the prehistoric
stage of capital and of the mode of production corresponding
with it.
The economic structure of capitalist society has
grown out of the economic structure of feudal society. The
dissolution of the latter set free the elements of the
former.
The immediate producer, the labourer, could only
dispose of his own person after he had ceased to be attached
to the soil and ceased to be the slave, serf, or bondsman
of another. To become a free seller of labour power, who
carries his commodity wherever he finds a market, he must
further have escaped from the regime of the guilds, their
rules for apprentices and journeymen, and the impediments of
their labour regulations. Hence, the historical movement
which changes the producers into wage-workers, appears, on
the one hand, as their emancipation from serfdom and from
the fetters of the guilds, and this side alone exists for
our bourgeois historians. But, on the other hand, these new
freedmen became sellers of themselves only after they had
been robbed of all their own means of production, and of all
the guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal
arrangements. And the history of this, their expropriation,
is written in the annals of mankind in letters of blood and
fire.
The industrial capitalists, these new potentates,
had on their part not only to displace the guild masters of
handicrafts, but also the feudal lords, the possessors of
the sources of wealth. In this respect, their conquest of
social power appears as the fruit of a victorious struggle
both against feudal lordship and its revolting prerogatives,
and against the guilds and the fetters they laid on the free
development of production and the free exploitation of man
by man. The chevaliers d’industrie, however, only succeeded
in supplanting the chevaliers of the sword by making use of
events of which they themselves were wholly innocent. They
have risen by means as vile as those by which the Roman
freedman once on a time made himself the master of his
patronus.
The starting point of the development that gave
rise to the wage labourer as well as to the capitalist, was
the servitude of the labourer. The advance consisted in a
change of form of this servitude, in the transformation of
feudal exploitation into capitalist exploitation. To
understand its march, we need not go back very far. Although
we come across the first beginnings of capitalist production
as early as the 14th or 15th century, sporadically, in
certain towns of the Mediterranean, the capitalistic era
dates from the 16th century. Wherever it appears, the
abolition of serfdom has been long effected, and the highest
development of the middle ages, the existence of sovereign
towns, has been long on the wane.
In the history of primitive accumulation, all
revolutions are epoch-making that act as levers for the
capital class in course of formation; but, above all, those
moments when great masses of men are suddenly and forcibly
torn from their means of subsistence, and hurled as free and
 “unattached” proletarians on the labour-market. The
expropriation of the agricultural producer, of the peasant,
from the soil, is the basis of the whole process. The
history of this expropriation, in different countries,
assumes different aspects, and runs through its various
phases in different orders of succession, and at different
periods. In England alone, which we take as our example, has
it the classic form. [1]
 


Footnotes

1.
In Italy, where capitalistic production developed earliest,
the dissolution of serfdom also took place earlier than
elsewhere. The serf was emancipated in that country before
he had acquired any prescriptive right to the soil. His
emancipation at once transformed him into a free
proletarian, who, moreover, found his master ready
waiting for him in the towns, for the most part handed down
as legacies from the Roman time. When the revolution of the
world-market, about the end of the 15th century, annihilated
Northern Italy’s commercial supremacy, a movement in the
reverse direction set in. The labourers of the towns were
driven en masse into the country, and gave an
impulse, never before seen, to the petite culture,
carried on in the form of gardening.
 


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Seven: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land


Capital Volume One- Index





==========

## Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Twenty-Seven




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Chapter Twenty-Seven: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land

 



In England, serfdom had practically disappeared in the
last part of the 14th century. The immense majority of the
population [1]
consisted then, and to a still larger extent, in the 15th
century, of free peasant proprietors, whatever was the
feudal title under which their right of property was hidden.
In the larger seignorial domains, the old bailiff, himself a
serf, was displaced by the free farmer.  The wage labourers
of agriculture consisted partly of peasants, who utilised
their leisure time by working on the large estates, partly
of an independent special class of wage labourers,
relatively and absolutely few in numbers.  The latter also
were practically at the same time peasant farmers, since,
besides their wages, they had allotted to them arable land
to the extent of 4 or more acres, together with their
cottages. Besides they, with the rest of the peasants,
enjoyed the usufruct of the common land, which gave pasture
to their cattle, furnished them with timber, fire-wood,
turf, &c.  [2] In all countries of Europe, feudal
production is characterised by
division of the soil amongst the greatest possible number of
subfeudatories. The might of the feudal lord, like that of
the sovereign, depended not on the length of his rent roll,
but on the number of his subjects, and the latter depended
on the number of peasant proprietors.  [3] Although, therefore, the English
land, after the Norman Conquest, was distributed in gigantic
baronies, one of which often included some 900 of the old
Anglo-Saxon lordships, it was bestrewn with small peasant
properties, only here and there interspersed with great
seignorial domains. Such conditions, together with the
prosperity of the towns so characteristic of the 15th
century, allowed of that wealth of the people which
Chancellor Fortescue so eloquently paints in his “Laudes
legum Angliae;” but it excluded the possibility of
capitalistic wealth.
The prelude of the revolution that laid the foundation of
the capitalist mode of production, was played in the last
third of the 15th, and the first decade of the 16th century.
A mass of free proletarians was hurled on the labour market
by the breaking-up of the bands of feudal retainers, who, as
Sir James Steuart well says, “everywhere uselessly filled
house and castle.” Although the royal power, itself a
product of bourgeois development, in its strife after
absolute sovereignty forcibly hastened on the dissolution of
these bands of retainers, it was by no means the sole cause
of it. In insolent conflict with king and parliament, the
great feudal lords created an incomparably larger
proletariat by the forcible driving of the peasantry from
the land, to which the latter had the same feudal right as
the lord himself, and by the usurpation of the common lands.
The rapid rise of the Flemish wool manufactures, and the
corresponding rise in the price of wool in England, gave the
direct impulse to these evictions. The old nobility had been
devoured by the great feudal wars. The new nobility was the
child of its time, for which money was the power of all
powers. Transformation of arable land into sheep-walks was,
therefore, its cry. Harrison, in his “Description of
England, prefixed to Holinshed’s Chronicles,” describes how
the expropriation of small peasants is ruining the country.
 “What care our great encroachers?” The dwellings of the
peasants and the cottages of the labourers were razed to the
ground or doomed to decay. “If,” says Harrison, “the old
records of euerie manour be sought... it will soon appear that
in some manour seventeene, eighteene, or twentie
houses are shrunk... that England
was neuer less furnished with people than at the present...
Of cities and townes either utterly decaied or more than a
quarter or half diminished, though some one be a little
increased here or there; of townes pulled downe for
sheepe-walks, and no more but the lordships now standing in
them... I could saie somewhat.” The complaints of these old
chroniclers are always exaggerated, but they reflect
faithfully the impression made on contemporaries by the
revolution in the conditions of production. A comparison of
the writings of Chancellor Fortescue and Thomas More reveals
the gulf between the 15th and 16th century. As Thornton
rightly has it, the English working class was precipitated
without any transition from its golden into its iron age.
Legislation was terrified at this revolution. It did not
yet stand on that height of civilization where the “wealth
of the nation” (i.e., the formation of capital, and the
reckless exploitation and impoverishing of the mass of the
people) figure as the ultima Thule of all
state-craft.  In his history of Henry VII., Bacon says:
 “Inclosures at that time (1489) began to be more frequent,
whereby arable land (which could not be manured without
people and families) was turned into pasture, which was
easily rid by a few herdsmen; and tenancies for years,
lives, and at will (whereupon much of the yeomanry lived)
were turned into demesnes. This bred a decay of people, and
(by consequence) a decay of towns, churches, tithes, and the
like... In remedying of this inconvenience the king’s
wisdom was admirable, and the parliament’s at that time...
they took a course to take away depopulating enclosures, and
depopulating pasturage.” An Act of Henry VII., 1489, cap.
19, forbad the destruction of all “houses of husbandry” to
which at least 20 acres of land belonged. By an Act, 25
Henry VIII., the same law was renewed. It recites, among
other things, that many farms and large flocks of cattle,
especially of sheep, are concentrated in the hands of a few
men, whereby the rent of land has much risen and tillage has
fallen off, churches and houses have been pulled down, and
marvellous numbers of people have been deprived of the means
wherewith to maintain themselves and their families.
The Act, therefore, ordains
the rebuilding of the decayed farmsteads, and fixes a
proportion between corn land and pasture land, &c. An
Act of 1533 recites that some owners possess 24,000 sheep,
and limits the number to be owned to 2,000.
[4] The cry of
the people and the legislation directed, for 150 years after
Henry VII., against the expropriation
of the small farmers and peasants,
were alike fruitless. The secret of their inefficiency
Bacon, without knowing it, reveals to us. “The device of
King Henry VII.,” says Bacon, in his “Essays, Civil and
Moral,” Essay 29, “was profound and admirable, in making
farms and houses of husbandry of a standard; that is,
maintained with such a proportion of land unto them as may
breed a subject to live in convenient plenty, and no servile
condition, and to keep the plough in the hands of the owners
and not mere hirelings.” [5] What the capitalist system
demanded was, on the other hand, a degraded and almost
servile condition of the mass of the people, the
transformation of them into mercenaries, and of their means
of labour into capital. During this transformation period,
legislation also strove to retain the 4 acres of land by the
cottage of the agricultural wage labourer, and forbad him to
take lodgers into his cottage. In the reign of James I.,
1627, Roger Crocker of Front Mill, was condemned for having
built a cottage on the manor of Front Mill without 4 acres
of land attached to the same in perpetuity.  As late as
Charles I.’s reign, 1638, a royal commission was appointed
to enforce the carrying out of the old laws, especially that
referring to the 4 acres of land. Even in
Cromwell’s time, the building of a house within 4 miles of
London was forbidden unless it was endowed with 4 acres of
land.  As late as the first half of the 18th century
complaint is made if the cottage of the agricultural
labourer has not an adjunct of one or two acres of land.
Nowadays he is lucky if it is furnished with a little
garden, or if he may rent, far away from his cottage, a few
roods. “Landlords and farmers,” says Dr. Hunter, “work here
hand in hand. A few acres to the cottage would make the
labourers too independent.” [6]




The process of forcible expropriation
of the people received in the 16th century a new and
frightful impulse from the Reformation, and from the
consequent colossal spoliation of the church property. The
Catholic church was, at the time of the Reformation, feudal
proprietor of a great part of the English land. The
suppression of the monasteries, &c., hurled their
inmates into the proletariat. The estates of the church were
to a large extent given away to rapacious royal favourites,
or sold at a nominal price to speculating farmers and
citizens, who drove out, en masse, the hereditary
sub-tenants and threw their holdings into one.  The legally
guaranteed property of the poorer folk in a part of the
church’s tithes was tacitly confiscated. [7] “Pauper ubique
jacet,” cried Queen Elizabeth, after a journey through
England. In the 43rd year of her reign the nation was
obliged to recognise pauperism officially by the
introduction of a poor-rate. “The authors of this law seem
to have been ashamed to state the grounds of it, for
[contrary to traditional usage] it has no preamble
whatever.” [8]
By the 16th of Charles I., ch. 4, it was declared perpetual,
and in fact only in 1834 did it take a new and harsher form.
[9] These
immediate results of the Reformation were
not its most lasting ones. The
property of the church formed the religious bulwark of the
traditional conditions of landed property. With its fall
these were no longer tenable. [10] 
Even in the last decade of the 17th century, the
yeomanry, the class of independent peasants, were more
numerous than the class of farmers. They had formed the
backbone of Cromwell’s strength, and, even according to the
confession of Macaulay, stood in favourable contrast to the
drunken squires and to their servants, the country clergy,
who had to marry their masters’ cast-off mistresses. About
1750, the yeomanry had disappeared, [11] and so had, in the last decade
of the 18th century, the last trace of the common land of
the agricultural labourer. We leave on one side here the
purely economic causes of the agricultural revolution.  We
deal only with the forcible means employed.
After the restoration of the Stuarts, the landed
proprietors carried, by legal means, an act of usurpation,
effected everywhere on the Continent without any legal
formality. They abolished the feudal tenure of land,
i.e., they got rid of all its obligations to the
State, “indemnified” the State by taxes on the peasantry and
the rest of the mass of the people, vindicated for
themselves the rights of modern private property in estates
to which they had only a feudal title, and, finally, passed
those laws of settlement, which, mutatis mutandis,
had the same effect on the English agricultural
labourer, as the edict of the Tartar Boris Godunof on the
Russian peasantry.



The “glorious Revolution” brought into power, along with
William of Orange, the landlord and
capitalist appropriators of surplus-value.
[12] They inaugurated
the new era by practising on a colossal scale thefts of
state lands, thefts that had been hitherto managed more
modestly. These estates were given away, sold at a
ridiculous figure, or even annexed to private estates by
direct seizure. [13] All this happened without the
slightest observation of legal etiquette. The Crown lands
thus fraudulently appropriated, together with the robbery of
the Church estates, as far as these had not been lost again
during the republican revolution, form the basis of the
today princely domains of the English oligarchy.
[14] The bourgeois
capitalists favoured the operation with the view, among
others, to promoting free trade in land, to extending the
domain of modern agriculture on the large farm-system, and
to increasing their supply of the free agricultural
proletarians ready to hand. Besides, the new landed
aristocracy was the natural ally of the new bankocracy, of
the newly-hatched haute finance, and of the large
manufacturers, then depending on protective duties. The
English bourgeoisie acted for its own interest quite as
wisely as did the Swedish bourgeoisie who, reversing the
process, hand in hand with their economic allies, the
peasantry, helped the kings in the forcible resumption of
the Crown lands from the oligarchy.  This happened since
1604 under Charles X. and Charles XI.


Communal property — always distinct from the State
property just dealt with — was an old Teutonic
institution which lived on under cover of feudalism. We have
seen how the forcible usurpation of this, generally
accompanied by the turning of arable into pasture land,
begins at the end of the 15th and extends into the 16th
century. But, at that time, the process was carried on by
means of individual acts of violence against which
legislation, for a hundred and fifty years, fought in vain.
The advance made by the 18th century shows itself in this,
that the law itself becomes now the
instrument of the theft of the people’s land, although the
large farmers make use of their little independent methods
as well. [15]
The parliamentary form of the robbery is that of Acts for
enclosures of Commons, in other words, decrees by which the
landlords grant themselves the people’s land as private
property, decrees of expropriation of the people. Sir F. M.
Eden refutes his own crafty special pleading, in which he
tries to represent communal property as the private property
of the great landlords who have taken the place of the
feudal lords, when he, himself, demands a “general Act of
Parliament for the enclosure of Commons” (admitting thereby
that a parliamentary coup d’état is
necessary for its transformation into private property), and
moreover calls on the legislature for the indemnification
for the expropriated poor. 
[16]


Whilst the place of the independent yeoman was taken by
tenants at will, small farmers on yearly leases, a servile
rabble dependent on the pleasure of the landlords, the
systematic robbery of the Communal lands helped especially,
next to the theft of the State domains, to swell those large
farms, that were called in the 18th century capital farms
[17] or
merchant farms, [18] and to “set free” the
agricultural population as proletarians for manufacturing
industry.
The 18th century, however, did not yet recognise as fully
as the 19th, the identity between national wealth and the
poverty of the people.  Hence the most vigorous polemic, in
the economic literature of that time, on the “enclosure of
commons.” From the mass of materials that lie before me, I
give a few extracts that will throw a strong light on the
circumstances of the time. “In several parishes of
Hertfordshire,” writes one indignant person, “24 farms,
numbering on the average 50-150 acres, have been melted up
into three farms.” [19] “In Northamptonshire and
Leicestershire the enclosure of common lands has taken place
on a very large scale, and most of the new lordships,
resulting from the enclosure, have
been turned into pasturage, in consequence of which many
lordships have not now 50 acres ploughed yearly, in which
1,500 were ploughed formerly. The ruins of former
dwelling-houses, barns, stables, &c.,” are the sole
traces of the former inhabitants. “An hundred houses and
families have in some open-field villages dwindled to eight
or ten.... The landholders in most parishes that have been
enclosed only 15 or 20 years, are very few in comparison of
the numbers who occupied them in their open-field state. It
is no uncommon thing for 4 or 5 wealthy graziers to engross
a large enclosed lordship which was before in the hands of
20 or 30 farmers, and as many smaller tenants and
proprietors. All these
are hereby thrown out of their livings with their families
and many other families who were chiefly employed and
supported by them.” [20] It was not only the land that
lay waste, but often land cultivated either in common or
held under a definite rent paid to the community, that was
annexed by the neighbouring landlords under pretext of
enclosure. “I have here in view enclosures of open fields
and lands already improved. It is acknowledged by even the
writers in defence of enclosures that these diminished
villages increase the monopolies of farms, raise the prices
of provisions, and produce depopulation ... and even the
enclosure of waste lands (as now carried on) bears hard on
the poor, by depriving them of a part of their subsistence,
and only goes towards increasing farms already too large.”
[21] “When,”
says Dr. Price, “this land gets into the hands of a few
great farmers, the consequence must be that the little
farmers” (earlier designated by him “a multitude of little
proprietors and tenants, who maintain themselves and
families by the produce of the ground they occupy by sheep
kept on a common, by poultry, hogs, &c., and who
therefore have little occasion to purchase any of the means
of subsistence”) “will be converted into a body of men who
earn their subsistence by working for others, and who will
be under a necessity of going to market for all they
want.... There will, perhaps, be more labour, because there
will be more compulsion to it....  Towns and manufactures
will increase, because more will be driven to them in quest
of places and employment. This is the way in which the engrossing of
farms naturally operates. And this is the way in which, for
many years, it has been actually operating in this kingdom.”
[22] He sums up
the effect of the enclosures thus: “Upon the whole, the
circumstances of the lower ranks of
men are altered in almost every respect for the worse. From
little occupiers of land, they are reduced to the state of
day-labourers and hirelings; and, at the same time, their
subsistence in that state has become more difficult.” [23] In fact,
usurpation of the common lands and the revolution in
agriculture accompanying this, told so acutely on the
agricultural labourers that, even according to Eden, between
1765 and 1780, their wages began to fall below the minimum,
and to be supplemented by official poor-law relief. Their
wages, he says, “were not more than enough for the absolute
necessaries of life.” 
Let us hear for a moment a defender of enclosures and an
opponent of Dr. Price. “Not is it a consequence that there
must be depopulation, because men are not seen wasting their
labour in the open field.... If, by converting the little
farmers into a body of men who must work for others, more
labour is produced, it is an advantage which the nation” (to
which, of course, the “converted” ones do not belong)
 “should wish for ... the produce being greater when their
joint labours are employed on one farm, there will be a
surplus for manufactures, and by this means manufactures,
one of the mines of the nation, will increase, in proportion
to the quantity of corn produced.” [24]
The stoical peace of mind with which the political
economist regards the most shameless violation of the
 “sacred rights of property” and the grossest acts of
violence to persons, as soon as they are necessary to lay
the foundations of the capitalistic mode of production, is
shown by Sir F. M. Eden, philanthropist and tory to boot.
The whole series of thefts,
outrages, and popular misery, that accompanied the forcible
expropriation of the people, from the last third of the 15th
to the end of the 18th century, lead him merely to the
comfortable conclusion: “The due proportion between arable
land and pasture had to be established. During the whole of
the 14th and the greater part of the 15th century, there was
one acre of pasture to 2, 3, and even 4 of arable land.
About the middle of the 16th century the proportion was
changed of 2 acres of pasture to 2, later on, of 2 acres of
pasture to one of arable, until at last the just proportion
of 3 acres of pasture to one of arable land was attained.”

In the 19th century, the very memory of the connexion
between the agricultural labourer and the communal property
had, of course, vanished.  To say nothing of more recent
times, have the agricultural population received a farthing
of compensation for the 3,511,770 acres of common land which
between 1801 and 1831 were stolen from them and by
parliamentary devices presented to the landlords by the
landlords?
The last process of wholesale expropriation of the
agricultural population from the soil is, finally, the
so-called clearing of estates, i.e., the sweeping
men off them. All the English methods hitherto considered
culminated in “clearing.” As we saw in the picture of modern
conditions given in a former chapter, where there are no
more independent peasants to get rid of, the “clearing” of
cottages begins; so that the agricultural labourers do not
find on the soil cultivated by them even the spot necessary
for their own housing. But what “clearing of estates” really
and properly signifies, we learn only in the promised land
of modern romance, the Highlands of Scotland. There the
process is distinguished by its systematic character, by the
magnitude of the scale on which it is carried out at one
blow (in Ireland landlords have gone to the length of
sweeping away several villages at once; in Scotland areas as
large as German principalities are dealt with), finally by
the peculiar form of property, under which the embezzled
lands were held.





The Highland Celts were organised in clans, each of which
was the owner of the land on which it was settled. The
representative of the clan, its chief or “great man,” was
only the titular owner of this property, just as the Queen
of England is the titular owner of all the national soil.
When the English government succeeded in suppressing the
intestine wars of these “great men,” and their constant
incursions into the Lowland plains, the chiefs of the clans
by no means gave up their time-honored trade as robbers;
they only changed its form. On their own authority they
transformed their nominal right into a right of private
property, and as this brought them into collision with their
clansmen, resolved to drive them out by open force. “A king
of England might as well claim to
drive his subjects into the sea,” says Professor Newman.
[25] This
revolution, which began in Scotland after the last rising of
the followers of the Pretender, can be followed through its
first phases in the writings of Sir James Steuart
[26] and James
Anderson. [27]
In the 18th century the hunted-out Gaels were forbidden to
emigrate from the country, with a view to driving them by
force to Glasgow and other manufacturing towns. [28] As an example of
the method [29]
obtaining in the 19th century, the “clearing” made by the
Duchess of Sutherland will suffice here. This person, well
instructed in economy, resolved, on entering upon her
government, to effect a radical cure, and to turn the whole
country, whose population had already been, by earlier
processes of the like kind, reduced to 15,000,
into a sheep-walk.  From 1814 to 1820 these
15,000 inhabitants, about 3,000 families, were
systematically hunted and rooted out. All their villages
were destroyed and burnt, all their fields turned into
pasturage. British soldiers enforced this eviction, and came
to blows with the inhabitants. One old woman was burnt to
death in the flames of the hut, which she refused to leave.
Thus this fine lady appropriated 794,000 acres of land that
had from time immemorial belonged
to the clan. She assigned to the expelled inhabitants about
6,000 acres on the sea-shore — 2 acres per family. The
6,000 acres had until this time lain waste, and brought in
no income to their owners. The Duchess, in the nobility of
her heart, actually went so far as to let these at an
average rent of 2s. 6d. per acre to the clansmen, who for
centuries had shed their blood for her family. The whole of
the stolen clanland she divided into 29 great sheep farms,
each inhabited by a single family, for the most part
imported English farm-servants. In the year 1835 the 15,000
Gaels were already replaced by 131,000 sheep. The remnant of
the aborigines flung on the sea-shore tried to live by
catching fish. They became amphibious and lived, as an
English author says, half on land and half on water, and
withal only half on both. [30]

But the brave Gaels must expiate yet more bitterly their
idolatry, romantic and of the mountains, for the “great men”
of the clan. The smell of their fish rose to the noses of
the great men. They scented some profit in it, and let the
sea-shore to the great fishmongers of London. For the second
time the Gaels were hunted out. [31]
But, finally, part of the sheep-walks are turned into
deer preserves. Every one knows that there are no real
forests in England. The deer in the parks of the great are
demurely domestic cattle, fat as London aldermen.  Scotland
is therefore the last refuge of the “noble passion.” “In the
Highlands,” says Somers in 1848, “new forests are springing
up like mushrooms. Here, on one side of Gaick, you have the
new forest of Glenfeshie; and there on the other you have
the new forest of Ardverikie. In the same line you have the
Black Mount, an immense waste also recently erected. From
east to west — from the neighbourhood of Aberdeen to
the crags of Oban — you have now a continuous line of forests; while in other parts of the
Highlands there are the new forests of Loch Archaig,
Glengarry, Glenmoriston, &c.  Sheep were introduced into
glens which had been the seats of communities of small
farmers; and the latter were driven to seek subsistence on
coarser and more sterile tracks of soil. Now deer are
supplanting sheep; and these are
once more dispossessing the small tenants, who will
necessarily be driven down upon still coarser land and to
more grinding penury. Deer-forests [32] and the people cannot co-exist.
One or other of the two must yield. Let the forests be
increased in number and extent during the next quarter of a
century, as they have been in the last, and the Gaels will
perish from their native soil... This movement among the
Highland proprietors is with some a matter of ambition...
with some love of sport... while others, of a more
practical cast, follow the trade in deer with an eye solely
to profit. For it is a fact, that a mountain range laid out
in forest is, in many cases, more profitable to the
proprietor than when let as a sheep-walk. ...
The huntsman who wants a deer-forest limits
his offers by no other calculation than the extent of his
purse.... Sufferings have been inflicted in the Highlands
scarcely less severe than those occasioned by the policy of
the Norman kings. Deer have received extended ranges, while
men have been hunted within a narrower and still narrower
circle....  One after one the liberties of the people have
been cloven down.... And the oppressions are daily on the
increase.... The clearance and dispersion of the people is
pursued by the proprietors as a settled principle, as an
agricultural necessity, just as trees and brushwood are
cleared from the wastes of America or Australia; and the
operation goes on in a quiet, business-like way, &c.”
[33]
The spoliation of the church’s
property, the fraudulent alienation of the State domains,
the robbery of the common lands, the usurpation of feudal
and clan property, and its transformation into modern
private property under circumstances of reckless terrorism,
were just so many idyllic methods of primitive accumulation.
They conquered the field for capitalistic agriculture, made
the soil part and parcel of capital, and created for the
town industries the necessary supply of a “free” and
outlawed proletariat.
 


Footnotes

1. “The petty proprietors who
cultivated their own fields with their own hands, and
enjoyed a modest competence.... then formed a much more
important part of the nation than at present. If we may
trust the best statistical writers of that age, not less
than 160,000 proprietors who, with their families, must have
made up more than a seventh of the whole population, derived
their subsistence from little freehold estates. The average
income of these small landlords... was estimated at between
£60 and £70 a year. It was computed that the
number of persons who tilled their own land was greater than
the number of those who farmed the land of others.”
Macaulay: “History of England,” 10th ed., 1854, I. pp. 333,
334. Even in the last third of the 17th century, 4/5 of the
English people were agricultural. (l. c., p. 413.) I quote
Macaulay, because as systematic falsifier of history he
minimises as much as possible facts of this kind.
2. We must never forget that even the serf was
not only the owner, if but a tribute-paying owner, of the
piece of land attached to his house, but also a co-possessor
of the common land. “Le paysan (in Silesia, under Frederick
II.) est serf.” Nevertheless, these serfs possess common
lands. “On n’a pas pu encore engager les Silésiens au
partage des communes, tandis que dans la Nouvelle Marche, il
n’y a guère de village où ce partage ne soit
exécuté avec le plus grand succès.” [The peasant ... is a serf. ... It has not yet been possible to persuade the Silesians to partition the common lands, whereas in the Neumark there is scarcely a village where the partition has not been implemented with very great success]
(Mirabeau: “De la Monarchie Prussienne.” Londres, 1788, t.
ii, pp. 125, 126.)
3. Japan, with its purely feudal
organisation of landed property and its developed petite
culture, gives a much truer picture of the European
middle ages than all our history books, dictated as these
are, for the most part, by bourgeois prejudices. It is very
convenient to be “liberal” at the expense of the middle
ages.
4. In his “Utopia,” Thomas More says,
that in England “your shepe that were wont to be so meke and
tame, and so smal eaters, now, as I heare saye, be become so
great devourers and so wylde that they eate up, and swallow
downe, the very men themselfes.” “Utopia,” transl. by
Robinson, ed. Arber, Lond., 1869, p. 41.
5. Bacon shows the
connexion between a free, well-to-do peasantry and good
infantry. “This did wonderfully concern the might and
mannerhood of the kingdom to have farms as it were of a
standard sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury,
and did in effect amortise a great part of the lands of the
kingdom unto the hold and occupation of the yeomanry or
middle people, of a condition between gentlemen, and
cottagers and peasants.... For it hath been held by the
general opinion of men of best judgment in the wars.... that
the principal strength of an army consisteth in the infantry
or foot. And to make good infantry it requireth men bred,
not in a servile or indigent fashion, but in some free and
plentiful manner. Therefore, if a state run most to noblemen
and gentlemen, and that the husbandman and ploughmen be but
as their workfolk and labourers, or else mere cottagers
(which are but hous’d beggars), you may have a good cavalry,
but never good stable bands of foot.... And this is to be
seen in France, and Italy, and some other parts abroad,
where in effect all is noblesse or peasantry.... insomuch
that they are inforced to employ mercenary bands of Switzers
and the like, for their battalions of foot; whereby also it
comes to pass that those nations have much people and few
soldiers.” (“The Reign of Henry VII.” Verbatim reprint from
Kennet’s England. Ed. 1719. Lond., 1870, p. 308.)
6. Dr. Hunter, l. c., p.
134. “The quantity of land assigned (in the old laws) would
now be judged too great for labourers, and rather as likely
to convert them into small farmers.” (George Roberts: “The
Social History of the People of the Southern Counties of
England in Past Centuries.” Lond., 1856, pp. 184-185.)
7. “The right of the
poor to share in the tithe, is established by the tenour of
ancient statutes.” (Tuckett, l. c., Vol. II., pg.
804-805.)
8. William Cobbett: “A
History of the Protestant Reformation,” § 471.
9. The “spirit” of
Protestantism may be seen from the following, among other
things. In the south of England certain landed proprietors
and well-to-do farmers put their heads together and
propounded ten questions as to the right interpretation of
the poor-law of Elizabeth. These they laid before a
celebrated jurist of that time, Sergeant Snigge (later a
judge under James I.) for his opinion. “Question 9 —
Some of the more wealthy farmers in the parish have devised
a skilful mode by which all the trouble of executing this
Act (the 43rd of Elizabeth) might be avoided. They have
proposed that we shall erect a prison in the parish, and
then give notice to the neighbourhood, that if any persons
are disposed to farm the poor of this parish, they do give
in sealed proposals, on a certain day, of the lowest price
at which they will take them off our hands; and that they
will be authorised to refuse to any one unless he be shut up
in the aforesaid prison. The proposers of this plan conceive
that there will be found in the adjoining counties, persons,
who, being unwilling to labour and not possessing substance
or credit to take a farm or ship, so as to live without
labour, may be induced to make a very advantageous offer to
the parish. If any of the poor perish under the contractor’s
care, the sin will lie at his door, as the parish will have
done its duty by them. We are, however, apprehensive that
the present Act (43rd of Elizabeth) will not warrant a
prudential measure of this kind; but you are to learn that
the rest of the freeholders of the county, and of the
adjoining county of B, will very readily join in instructing
their members to propose an Act to enable the parish to
contract with a person to lock up and work the poor; and to
declare that if any person shall refuse to be so locked up
and worked, he shall be entitled to no relief. This, it is
hoped, will prevent persons in distress from wanting relief,
and be the means of keeping down parishes.” (R. Blakey: “The
History of Political Literature from the Earliest Times.”
Lond., 1855, Vol. II., pp. 84-85.) In Scotland, the
abolition of serfdom took place some centuries later than in
England. Even in 1698, Fletcher of Saltoun, declared in the
Scotch parliament, “The number of beggars in Scotland is
reckoned at not less than 200,000. The only remedy that I, a
republican on principle, can suggest, is to restore the old
state of serfdom, to make slaves of all those who are unable
to provide for their own subsistence.” Eden, l. c., Book I.,
ch. 1, pp. 60-61, says, “The decrease of villenage seems
necessarily to have been the era of the origin of the poor.
Manufactures and commerce are the two parents of our
national poor.” Eden, like our Scotch republican on
principle, errs only in this: not the abolition of
villenage, but the abolition of the property of the
agricultural labourer in the soil made him a proletarian,
and eventually a pauper. In France, where the expropriation
was effected in another way, the ordonnance of Moulins,
1571, and the Edict of 1656, correspond to the English
poor-laws.
10. Professor Rogers,
although formerly Professor of Political Economy in the
University of Oxford, the hotbed of Protestant orthodoxy, in
his preface to the “History of Agriculture” lays stress on
the fact of the pauperisation of the mass of the people by
the Reformation.
11. “A Letter to Sir
T. C. Bunbury, Bart., on the High Price of Provisions. By a
Suffolk Gentleman.” Ipswich, 1795, p. 4. Even the fanatical
advocate of the system of large farms, the author of the
 “Inquiry into the Connexion between the Present Price of
Provisions,” London, 1773, p. 139, says: “I most lament the
loss of our yeomanry, that set of men who really kept up the
independence of this nation; and sorry I am to see their
lands now in the hands of monopolising lords, tenanted out
to small farmers, who hold their leases on such conditions
as to be little better than vassals ready to attend a
summons on every mischievous occasion.” 
12. On the private
moral character of this bourgeois hero, among other things:
 “The large grant of lands in Ireland to Lady Orkney, in
1695, is a public instance of the king’s affection, and the
lady’s influence... Lady Orkney’s endearing offices are
supposed to have been — fœda labiorum
ministeria.” (In the Sloane Manuscript Collection, at the
British Museum, No. 4224. The Manuscript is entitled: “The
character and behaviour of King William, Sunderland, etc.,
as represented in Original Letters to the Duke of Shrewsbury
from Somers Halifax, Oxford, Secretary Vernon, etc.” It is
full of curiosa.)
13. “The illegal
alienation of the Crown Estates, partly by sale and partly
by gift, is a scandalous chapter in English history... a
gigantic fraud on the nation.” (F. W. Newman, “Lectures on
Political Economy.” London, 1851, pp. 129, 130.) [For
details as to how the present large landed proprietors of
England came into their possessions see “Our Old Nobility.
By Noblesse Oblige.” London, 1879. — F. E.]

14. Read,
e.g., E. Burke’s Pamphlet on the ducal house of
Bedford, whose offshoot was Lord John Russell, the “tomtit
of Liberalism.” 
15. “The farmers
forbid cottagers to keep any living creatures besides
themselves and children, under the pretence that if they
keep any beasts or poultry, they will steal from the
farmers’ barns for their support; they also say, keep the
cottagers poor and you will keep them industrious, &c.,
but the real fact I believe, is that the farmers may have
the whole right of common to themselves.” (“A Political
Inquiry into the Consequences of Enclosing Waste Lands.”
London, 1785, p. 75.)
16. Eden, l. c.,
preface.
17. “Capital Farms.”
Two letters on the Flour Trade and the Dearness of Corn. By
a person in business. London, 1767, pp. 19, 20.
18. “Merchant Farms.”
 “An Enquiry into the Causes of the Present High Price of
Provisions.” London, 1767, p. 11.  Note.— This excellent
work, that was published anonymously, is by the Rev.
Nathaniel Forster.
19. Thomas Wright: “A
Short Address to the Public on the Monopoly of Large Farms,”
1779, pp. 2, 3.
20. Rev. Addington:
 “Inquiry into the Reasons for or against Enclosing Open
Fields,” London, 1772, pp. 37, 43 passim.
21. Dr. R. Price, l.
c., v. ii., p. 155, Forster, Addington, Kent, Price, and
James Anderson, should be read and compared with the
miserable prattle of Sycophant MacCulloch in his catalogue:
 “The Literature of Political Economy,” London, 1845.
22. Price, l. c., p.
147.
23. Price, l. c., p.
159. We are reminded of ancient Rome. “The rich had got
possession of the greater part of the undivided land. They
trusted in the conditions of the time, that these
possessions would not be again taken from them, and bought,
therefore, some of the pieces of land lying near theirs, and
belonging to the poor, with the acquiescence of their
owners, and took some by force, so that they now were
cultivating widely extended domains, instead of isolated
fields. Then they employed slaves in agriculture and
cattle-breeding, because freemen would have been taken from
labour for military service. The possession of slaves
brought them great gain, inasmuch as these, on account of
their immunity from military service, could freely multiply
and have a multitude of children. Thus the powerful men drew
all wealth to themselves, and all the land swarmed with
slaves. The Italians, on the other hand, were always
decreasing in number, destroyed as they were by poverty,
taxes, and military service. Even when times of peace came,
they were doomed to complete inactivity, because the rich
were in possession of the soil, and used slaves instead of
freemen in the tilling of it.” (Appian: “Civil Wars,” I.7.)
This passage refers to the time before the Licinian
rogations. Military service, which hastened to so great an
extent the ruin of the Roman plebeians, was also the chief
means by which, as in a forcing-house, Charlemagne brought
about the transformation of free German peasants into serfs
and bondsmen.
24. “An Inquiry into
the Connexion between the Present Price of Provisions,
&c.,” pp. 124, 129. To the like effect, but with an
opposite tendency: “Working-men are driven from their
cottages and forced into the towns to seek for employment;
but then a larger surplus is obtained, and thus capital is
augmented.” (“The Perils of the Nation,” 2nd ed. London.,
1843, p. 14.)
25. l. c., p. 132.
26. Steuart says: “If
you compare the rent of these lands” (he erroneously
includes in this economic category the tribute of the
taskmen to the clanchief) “with the extent, it appears very
small. If you compare it with the numbers fed upon the farm,
you will find that an estate in the Highlands maintains,
perhaps, ten times as many people as another of the same
value in a good and fertile province.” (l. c., vol. i., ch.
xvi., p. 104.)
27. James Anderson:
 “Observations on the Means of Exciting a Spirit of National
Industry, &c.,” Edinburgh, 1777.
28. In 1860 the people
expropriated by force were exported to Canada under false
pretences. Some fled to the mountains and neighbouring
islands. They were followed by the police, came to blows
with them and escaped.
29. “In the Highlands
of Scotland,” says Buchanan, the commentator on Adam Smith,
1814, “the ancient state of property is daily subverted....
The landlord, without regard to the hereditary tenant (a
category used in error here), now offers his land to the
highest bidder, who, if he is an improver, instantly adopts
a new system of cultivation. The land, formerly overspread
with small tenants or labourers, was peopled in proportion
to its produce, but under the new system of improved
cultivation and increased rents, the largest possible
produce is obtained at the least possible expense: and the
useless hands being, with this view, removed, the population
is reduced, not to what the land will maintain, but to what
it will employ. “The dispossessed tenants either seek a
subsistence in the neighbouring towns,” &c. (David
Buchanan: “Observations on, &c., A. Smith’s Wealth of
Nations.” Edinburgh, 1814, vol. iv., p. 144.) “The Scotch
grandees dispossessed families as they would grub up
coppice-wood, and they treated villages and their people as
Indians harassed with wild beasts do, in their vengeance, a
jungle with tigers.... Man is bartered for a fleece or a
carcase of mutton, nay, held cheaper.... Why, how much worse
is it than the intention of the Moguls, who, when they had
broken into the northern provinces of China, proposed in
council to exterminate the inhabitants, and convert the land
into pasture. This proposal many Highland proprietors have
effected in their own country against their own countrymen.”
(George Ensor: “An Inquiry Concerning the Population of
Nations.” Lond,. 1818, pp. 215, 216.)
30. When the present
Duchess of Sutherland entertained Mrs. Beecher Stowe,
authoress of “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” with great magnificence in
London to show her sympathy for the Negro slaves of the
American republic — a sympathy that she prudently
forgot, with her fellow-aristocrats, during the civil war,
in which every “noble” English heart beat for the
slave-owner — I gave in the New York Tribune
the facts about the Sutherland slaves. (Epitomised in part
by Carey in “The Slave Trade.” Philadelphia, 1853, pp. 203,
204.) My article was reprinted in a Scotch newspaper, and
led to a pretty polemic between the latter and the
sycophants of the Sutherlands.
31. Interesting
details on this fish trade will be found in Mr. David
Urquhart’s Portfolio, new series. — Nassau W. Senior,
in his posthumous work, already quoted, terms “the
proceedings in Sutherlandshire one of the most beneficent
clearings since the memory of man.” (l. c.)
32. The deer-forests
of Scotland contain not a single tree. The sheep are driven
from, and then the deer driven to, the naked hills, and then
it is called a deer-forest. Not even timber-planting and
real forest culture.
33. Robert Somers:
 “Letters from the Highlands: or the Famine of 1847.” London,
1848, pp. 12-28 passim. These letters originally appeared in
The Times. The English economists of course
explained the famine of the Gaels in 1847, by their
over-population. At all events, they “were pressing on their
food-supply.” The “clearing of estates,” or as it is called
in Germany, “Bauernlegen,” occurred in Germany especially
after the 30 years’ war, and led to peasant-revolts as late
as 1790 in Kursachsen. It obtained especially in East
Germany. In most of the Prussian provinces, Frederick II.
for the first time secured right of property for the
peasants. After the conquest of Silesia he forced the
landlords to rebuild the huts, barns, etc., and to provide
the peasants with cattle and implements. He wanted soldiers
for his army and tax-payers for his treasury. For the rest,
the pleasant life that the peasant led under Frederick’s
system of finance and hodge-podge rule of despotism,
bureaucracy and feudalism, may be seen from the following
quotation from his admirer, Mirabeau: “Le lin fait donc une
des grandes richesses du cultivateur dans le Nord de
l’Allemagne. Malheureusement pour l’espèce humaine,
ce n’est qu’une ressource contre la misère et non un
moyen de bien-être.  Les impôts directs, les
corvées, les servitudes de tout genre,
écrasent le cultivateur allemand, qui paie encore des
impôts indirects dans tout ce qu’il achète....
et pour comble de ruine, il n’ose pas vendre ses productions
où et comme il le veut; il n’ose pas acheter ce dont
il a besoin aux marchands qui pourraient le lui livrer au
meilleur prix. Toutes ces causes le ruinent insensiblement,
et il se trouverait hors d’état de payer les
impôts directs à l’échéance sans
la filerie; elle lui offre une ressource, en occupant
utilement sa femme, ses enfants, ses servants, ses valets,
et lui-même; mais quelle pénible vie,
même aidée de ce secours.  En
été, il travaille comme un forçat au
labourage et à la récolte; il se couche
à 9 heures et se lève à deux, pour
suffire aux travaux; en hiver il devrait réparer ses
forces par un plus grand repos; mais il manquera de grains
pour le pain et les semailles, s’il se défait des
denrées qu’il faudrait vendre pour payer les
impôts. Il faut donc filer pour suppléer
à ce vide.... il faut y apporter la plus grande
assiduité.  Aussi le paysan se couche-t-il en hiver
à minuit, une heure, et se lève à cinq
ou six; ou bien il se couche à neuf, et se
lève à deux, et cela tous les jours de la vie
si ce n’est le dimanche. Ces excès de veille et de
travail usent la nature humaine, et de là vient
qu’hommes et femmes vieillissent beaucoup plutôt dans
les campagnes que dans les villes.” [Flax represents one of the greatest sources of wealth for the peasant of North Germany. Unfortunately for the human race, this is only a resource against misery and not a means towards well-being. Direct taxes, forced labour service, obligations of all kinds crush the German peasant, especially as he still has to pay indirect taxes on everything he buys, ... and to complete his ruin he dare not sell his produce where and as he wishes; he dare not buy what he needs from the merhcants who could sell it to him at a cheaper price. He is slowly ruined by all those factors, and when the dirct taxes fall due, he would find himself incapable of paying them without his spinning-wheel; it offers him a last resort, while providing useful occupation for his wife, his children, his maids, his farm-hands, and himself; but what a painful life he leads, even with this extra resource! In summer, he works like a convict with the plough and at harvest; he goes to bed at nine o’clock and rises at two to get through all his work; in winter he ought to be recovering his strength by sleeping longer; but he would run short of corn for his bread and next year’s sowing if he got rid of the products that he needs to sell in order to pay the taxes. He therefore has to spin to fill up this gap ... and indeed he must do so most assiduously. Thus the peasant goes to bed at midnight or one o’clock in winter, and gets up at five or six; or he goes to bed at nine and gets up at two, and this he does every day of his life except Sundays. These excessively short hours of sleep and long hours of work consume a person’s strength and hence it happens that men and women age much more in the country than in the towns] (Mirabeau, l. c., t.III.
pp. 212 sqq.)
Note to the second edition. In April 1866, 18
years after the publication of the work of Robert Somers
quoted above, Professor Leone Levi gave a lecture before the
Society of Arts on the transformation of sheep-walks into
deer-forest, in which he depicts the advance in the
devastation of the Scottish Highlands. He says, with other
things: “Depopulation and transformation into sheep-walks
were the most convenient means for getting an income without
expenditure... A deer-forest in place of a sheep-walk was a
common change in the Highlands. The landowners turned out
the sheep as they once turned out the men from their
estates, and welcomed the new tenants — the wild beasts
and the feathered birds.... One can walk from the Earl of
Dalhousie’s estates in Forfarshire to John O’Groats, without
ever leaving forest land.... In many of these woods the fox,
the wild cat, the marten, the polecat, the weasel and the
Alpine hare are common; whilst the rabbit, the squirrel and
the rat have lately made their way into the country. Immense
tracts of land, much of which is described in the
statistical account of Scotland as having a pasturage in
richness and extent of very superior description, are thus
shut out from all cultivation and improvement, and are
solely devoted to the sport of a few persons for a very
brief period of the year.” The London Economist of
June 2, 1866, says, “Amongst the items of news in a Scotch
paper of last week, we read... ’One of the finest sheep
farms in Sutherlandshire, for which a rent of £1,200 a
year was recently offered, on the expiry of the existing
lease this year, is to be converted into a deer-forest.’
Here we see the modern instincts of feudalism ... operating
pretty much as they did when the Norman Conqueror...
destroyed 36 villages to create the New Forest.... Two
millions of acres... totally laid waste, embracing within
their area some of the most fertile lands of Scotland. The
natural grass of Glen Tilt was among the most nutritive in
the county of Perth. The deer-forest of Ben Aulder was by
far the best grazing ground in the wide district of
Badenoch; a part of the Black Mount forest was the best
pasture for black-faced sheep in Scotland. Some idea of the
ground laid waste for purely sporting purposes in Scotland
may be formed from the fact that it embraced an area larger
than the whole county of Perth. The resources of the forest
of Ben Aulder might give some idea of the loss sustained
from the forced desolations. The ground would pasture
15,000 sheep, and as it was not more than one-thirtieth part
of the old forest ground in Scotland ... it might, &c.,
... All that forest land is as totally unproductive.... It
might thus as well have been submerged under the waters of
the German Ocean.... Such extemporised wildernesses or
deserts ought to be put down by the decided interference of
the Legislature.” 
 


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)


Next: Chapter Twenty-Eight: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing Down of Wages by Acts of Parliament


Capital Volume One - Index




==========

## Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing Down of Wages by Acts of Parliament








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Twenty-Eight




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Chapter Twenty-Eight: Bloody Legislation Against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing Down of Wages by Acts of Parliament

 
The proletariat created by the breaking up of the bands
of feudal retainers and by the forcible expropriation of the
people from the soil, this “free” proletariat could not
possibly be absorbed by the nascent manufactures as fast as
it was thrown upon the world. On the other hand, these men,
suddenly dragged from their wonted mode of life, could not
as suddenly adapt themselves to the discipline of their new
condition. They were turned en masse into beggars,
robbers, vagabonds, partly from inclination, in most cases
from stress of circumstances. Hence at the end of the 15th
and during the whole of the 16th century, throughout Western
Europe a bloody legislation against vagabondage. The fathers
of the present working class were chastised for their
enforced transformation into vagabonds and paupers.
Legislation treated them as “voluntary” criminals, and
assumed that it depended on their own good will to go on
working under the old conditions that no longer existed.
In England this legislation began under Henry VII.
Henry VIII. 1530: Beggars old and unable to work
receive a beggar’s licence. On the other hand, whipping and
imprisonment for sturdy vagabonds. They are to be tied to
the cart-tail and whipped until the blood streams from their
bodies, then to swear an oath to go back to their birthplace
or to where they have lived the last three years and to “put
themselves to labour.” What grim irony! In 27 Henry VIII.
the former statute is repeated, but strengthened with new
clauses. For the second arrest for vagabondage the whipping
is to be repeated and half the ear sliced off; but for the
third relapse the offender is to be executed as a hardened
criminal and enemy of the common weal.
Edward VI.: A statute of the first year of his
reign, 1547, ordains that if anyone refuses to work, he
shall be condemned as a slave to the
person who has denounced him as an
idler. The master shall feed his slave on bread and water,
weak broth and such refuse meat as he thinks fit. He has the
right to force him to do any work, no matter how disgusting,
with whip and chains. If the slave is absent a fortnight, he
is condemned to slavery for life and is to be branded on
forehead or back with the letter S; if he runs away thrice,
he is to be executed as a felon. The master can sell him,
bequeath him, let him out on hire as a slave, just as any
other personal chattel or cattle. If the slaves attempt
anything against the masters, they are also to be executed.
Justices of the peace, on information, are to hunt the
rascals down. If it happens that a vagabond has been idling
about for three days, he is to be taken to his birthplace,
branded with a red-hot iron with the letter V on the breast
and be set to work, in chains, in the
streets or at some other labour.  If the vagabond gives a
false birthplace, he is then to become the slave for life of
this place, of its inhabitants, or its corporation, and to
be branded with an S. All persons have the right to take
away the children of the vagabonds and to keep them as
apprentices, the young men until the 24th year, the girls
until the 20th. If they run away, they are to become up to
this age the slaves of their masters, who can put them in
irons, whip them, &c., if they like. Every master may
put an iron ring round the neck, arms or legs of his slave,
by which to know him more easily and to be more certain of
him. [1] The
last part of this statute provides, that certain poor people
may be employed by a place or by persons, who are willing to
give them food and drink and to find them work. This kind of
parish slaves was kept up in England until far into the 19th
century under the name of “roundsmen.”

Elizabeth, 1572: Unlicensed beggars above 14 years
of age are to be severely flogged and branded on the left
ear unless some one will take them into service for two
years; in case of a repetition of the offence, if they are
over 18, they are to be executed, unless some one will take
them into service for two years; but for the third offence
they are to be executed without mercy as felons. Similar
statutes: 18 Elizabeth, c. 13, and another of 1597.
[2]
James 1: Any one wandering
about and begging is declared a rogue and a vagabond.
Justices of the peace in petty sessions are authorised to
have them publicly whipped and for the first offence to
imprison them for 6 months, for the second for 2 years.
Whilst in prison they are to be whipped as much and as often
as the justices of the peace think fit... Incorrigible and
dangerous rogues are to be branded with an R on the left
shoulder and set to hard labour, and if they are caught
begging again, to be executed without mercy. These statutes,
legally binding until the beginning of the 18th century,
were only repealed by 12 Anne, c. 23.
Similar laws in France, where by the middle of the 17th
century a kingdom of vagabonds (truands) was established in
Paris. Even at the beginning of Louis XVI.’s reign
(Ordinance of July 13th, 1777) every man in good health from
16 to 60 years of age, if without means of subsistence and
not practising a trade, is to be sent to the galleys. Of the
same nature are the statute of Charles V. for the
Netherlands (October, 1537), the first edict of the States
and Towns of Holland (March 10, 1614), the “Plakaat” of the
United Provinces (June 26, 1649), &c.
Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly
expropriated from the soil, driven from their homes, turned
into vagabonds, and then whipped, branded, tortured by laws
grotesquely terrible, into the discipline necessary for the
wage system.
It is not enough that the conditions of labour are
concentrated in a mass, in the shape of capital, at the one
pole of society, while at the
other are grouped masses of men,
who have nothing to sell but their labour-power. Neither is
it enough that they are compelled to sell it voluntarily.
The advance of capitalist production develops a
working class, which by education, tradition, habit, looks
upon the conditions of that mode of production as
self-evident laws of Nature. The organisation of the
capitalist process of production, once fully developed,
breaks down all resistance. The constant generation of a
relative surplus-population keeps the law of supply and
demand of labour, and therefore keeps wages, in a rut that
corresponds with the wants of capital. The dull compulsion
of economic relations completes the subjection of the
labourer to the capitalist. Direct force, outside economic
conditions, is of course still used, but only exceptionally.
In the ordinary run of things, the labourer can be left to
the “natural laws of production,” i.e., to his
dependence on capital, a dependence springing from, and
guaranteed in perpetuity by, the conditions of production
themselves. It is otherwise during the historic genesis
of capitalist production. The bourgeoisie, at its rise,
wants and uses the power of the state to “regulate” wages,
i.e., to force them within the limits suitable for
surplus-value making, to lengthen the working-day and to
keep the labourer himself in the normal degree of
dependence. This is an essential element of the so-called
primitive accumulation.
The class of wage labourers, which arose in the latter
half of the 14th century, formed then and in the following
century only a very small part of the population, well
protected in its position by the independent peasant
proprietary in the country and the guild-organisation in the
town. In country and town master and workmen stood close
together socially. The subordination of labour to capital
was only formal — i.e., the mode of
production itself had as yet no specific capitalistic
character. Variable capital preponderated greatly over
constant. The demand for wage labour grew, therefore,
rapidly with every accumulation of capital, whilst the
supply of wage labour followed but slowly. A large part of
the national product, changed later into a fund of
capitalist accumulation, then still entered into the
consumption-fund of the labourer.

Legislation on wage labour (from the first, aimed at the
exploitation of the labourer and, as it advanced, always
equally hostile to him), [3] 
is started in England by the
Statute of Labourers, of Edward III., 1349. The ordinance
of 1350 in France, issued in the name of King John,
corresponds with it. English and French legislation run
parallel and are identical in
purport. So far as the labour-statutes aim at compulsory
extension of the working-day, I do not return to them, as
this point was treated earlier (Chap. X., Section 5).

The Statute of Labourers was passed at the urgent
instance of the House of Commons. A Tory says naively:

 “Formerly the poor demanded such high wages as to
threaten industry and wealth. Next, their wages are so
low as to threaten industry and wealth equally and
perhaps more, but in another way.” [4]
A tariff of wages was fixed by
law for town and country, for piece-work and day-work. The
agricultural labourers were to hire themselves out by the
year, the town ones “in open market.” It was forbidden,
under pain of imprisonment, to pay higher wages than those
fixed by the statute, but the taking of higher wages was
more severely punished than the giving them. [So also in
Sections 18 and 19 of the Statute of Apprentices of
Elizabeth, ten days’ imprisonment is decreed for him that
pays the higher wages, but twenty-one days for him that
receives them.] A statute of 1360 increased the penalties
and authorised the masters to extort labour at the legal
rate of wages by corporal punishment. All combinations,
contracts, oaths, &c., by which masons and carpenters
reciprocally bound themselves, were declared null and void.
Coalition of the labourers is treated as a heinous crime
from the 14th century to 1825, the year of the repeal of the
laws against Trades’ Unions. The spirit of the Statute of
Labourers of 1349 and of its offshoots comes out clearly in
the fact, that indeed a maximum of wages is dictated by the
State, but on no account a minimum.

In the 16th century, the condition of the labourers had,
as we know, become much worse. The money wage rose, but not
in proportion to the depreciation of money and the
corresponding rise in the prices of commodities. Wages,
therefore, in reality fell. Nevertheless, the laws for
keeping them down remained in force, together with the
ear-clipping and branding of those “whom no one was willing
to take into service.” By the Statute of Apprentices 5
Elizabeth, c. 3, the justices of the peace were empowered to
fix certain wages and to modify them according to the time
of the year and the price of commodities. James I. extended
these regulations of labour also to weavers, spinners, and
all possible categories of workers. [5] George II. extended the laws
against coalitions of labourers to
manufactures. In the manufacturing period par
excellence, the capitalist mode of production had
become sufficiently strong to render legal regulation of
wages as impracticable as it was unnecessary; but the ruling
classes were unwilling in case of necessity to be without
the weapons of the old arsenal. Still, 8 George II. forbade
a higher day’s wage than 2s. 7½d. for journeymen tailors
in and around London, except in cases of general mourning;
still, 13 George III., c. 68, gave the regulation of the
wages of silk-weavers to the justices of the peace; still,
in 1706, it required two judgments of the higher courts to
decide, whether the mandates of justices of the peace as to
wages held good also for non-agricultural labourers; still,
in 1799, an act of Parliament ordered that the wages of the
Scotch miners should continue to be regulated by a statute
of Elizabeth and two Scotch acts of 1661 and 1671. How
completely in the meantime circumstances had changed, is
proved by an occurrence unheard-of before in the English
Lower House. In that place, where for more than 400 years
laws had been made for the maximum, beyond which wages
absolutely must not rise, Whitbread in 1796 proposed a legal
minimum wage for agricultural labourers. Pitt opposed this,
but confessed that the “condition of the poor was cruel.”
Finally, in 1813, the laws for the regulation of wages were
repealed. They were an absurd anomaly, since the capitalist
regulated his factory by his private legislation, and could
by the poor-rates make up the wage of the agricultural
labourer to the indispensable minimum. The provisions of the
labour statutes as to contracts between master and workman,
as to giving notice and the like, which only allow of a
civil action against the contract-breaking master, but on
the contrary permit a criminal action against the
contract-breaking workman, are to this hour (1873) in full
force. The barbarous laws against Trades’ Unions fell in
1825 before the threatening bearing of the proletariat.
Despite this, they fell only in part. Certain beautiful
fragments of the old statute vanished only in 1859. Finally,
the act of Parliament of June 29, 1871, made a pretence of
removing the last traces of this class of
legislation by legal recognition of
Trades’ Unions. But an act of Parliament of the same date
(an act to amend the criminal law relating to violence,
threats, and molestation), re-established, in point of fact,
the former state of things in a new shape. By this
Parliamentary escamotage the means which the labourers could
use in a strike or lock-out were withdrawn from the laws
common to all citizens, and placed under exceptional penal
legislation, the interpretation of which fell to the masters
themselves in their capacity as justices of the peace. Two
years earlier, the same House of Commons and the same Mr.
Gladstone in the well-known straightforward fashion brought
in a bill for the abolition of all exceptional penal
legislation against the working class. But this was never
allowed to go beyond the second reading, and the matter was
thus protracted until at last the “great Liberal party,” by
an alliance with the Tories, found courage to turn against
the very proletariat that had carried it into power. Not
content with this treachery, the “great Liberal party” 
allowed the English judges, ever complaisant in the service
of the ruling classes, to dig up again the earlier laws
against “conspiracy,” and to apply them to coalitions of
labourers. We see that only against its will and under the
pressure of the masses did the English Parliament give up
the laws against Strikes and Trades’ Unions, after it had
itself, for 500 years, held, with shameless egoism, the
position of a permanent Trades’ Union of the capitalists
against the labourers.

During the very first storms of the revolution, the
French bourgeoisie dared to take away from the workers the
right of association but just acquired. By a decree of June
14, 1791, they declared all coalition of the workers as “an
attempt against liberty and the declaration of the rights of
man,” punishable by a fine of 500 livres, together with
deprivation of the rights of an active citizen for one year.
[6] This law
which, by means of State compulsion, confined the struggle
between capital and labour within limits comfortable for
capital, has outlived revolutions and changes of dynasties.
Even the Reign of Terror left it untouched. It was but quite
recently struck out of the Penal Code. Nothing is more
characteristic than the pretext for this bourgeois coup
d’état. “Granting,” says Chapelier, the reporter
of the Select Committee on this law, “that wages ought to be
a little higher than they are, ... that
they ought to be high enough for
him that receives them, to be free from that state of
absolute dependence due to the want of the necessaries of
life, and which is almost that of slavery,” yet the workers
must not be allowed to come to any understanding about their
own interests, nor to act in common and thereby lessen their
 “absolute dependence, which is almost that of slavery;”
because, forsooth, in doing this they injure “the freedom of
their cidevant masters, the present entrepreneurs,” and
because a coalition against the despotism of the quondam
masters of the corporations is — guess what! —
is a restoration of the corporations abolished by the French
constitution.[7]
 

Footnotes
1. The author of the
 “Essay on Trade, etc.,” 1770, says, “In the reign of Edward
VI. indeed the English seem to have set, in good earnest,
about encouraging manufactures and employing the poor. This
we learn from a remarkable statute which runs thus: ‘That
all vagrants shall be branded, &c.’” l. c., p. 5.
2. Thomas More says in
his “Utopia": “Therfore that on covetous and unsatiable
cormaraunte and very plage of his native contrey maye
compasse aboute and inclose many thousand akers of grounde
together within one pale or hedge, the husbandman be thrust
owte of their owne, or els either by coneyne and fraude, or
by violent oppression they be put besydes it, or by wrongs
and iniuries thei be so weried that they be compelled to
sell all: by one meanes, therfore, or by other, either by
hooke or crooke they muste needes departe awaye, poore,
selye, wretched soules, men, women, husbands, wiues,
fatherlesse children, widowes, wofull mothers with their
yonge babes, and their whole household smal in substance,
and muche in numbre, as husbandrye requireth many handes.
Awaye thei trudge, I say, owte of their knowen accustomed
houses, fyndynge no place to reste in. All their housholde
stuffe, which is very little woorthe, thoughe it might well
abide the sale: yet beeynge sodainely thruste owte, they be
constrayned to sell it for a thing of nought. And when they
haue wandered abrode tyll that be spent, what cant they then
els doe but steale, and then iustly pardy be hanged, or els
go about beggyng. And yet then also they be caste in prison
as vagaboundes, because they go aboute and worke not: whom
no man wyl set a worke though thei neuer so willyngly profre
themselues therto.” Of these poor fugitives of whom Thomas
More says that they were forced to thieve, “7,200 great and
petty thieves were put to death,” in the reign of Henry
VIII. (Holinshed, “Description of England,” Vol. 1, p.
186.) In Elizabeth’s time, “rogues were trussed up apace,
and that there was not one year commonly wherein three or
four hundred were not devoured and eaten up by the
gallowes.” (Strype’s “Annals of the Reformation and
Establishment of Religion and other Various Occurrences in
the Church of England during Queen Elizabeth’s Happy Reign.”
Second ed., 1725, Vol. 2.) According to this same Strype, in
Somersetshire, in one year, 40 persons were executed, 35
robbers burnt in the hand, 37 whipped, and 183 discharged as
 “incorrigible vagabonds.” Nevertheless, he is of opinion
that this large number of prisoners does not comprise even a
fifth of the actual criminals, thanks to the negligence of
the justices and the foolish compassion of the people; and
the other counties of England were not better off in this
respect than Somersetshire, while some were even worse.
3. “Whenever the
legislature attempts to regulate the differences between
masters and their workmen, its counsellors are always the
masters,” says A. Smith. “L’esprit des lois, c’est la
propriété,” says Linguet.
4. “Sophisms of Free
Trade.” By a Barrister. Lond., 1850, p. 206. He adds
maliciously: “We were ready enough to interfere for the
employer, can nothing now be done for the employed?” 
5. From a clause of
Statute 2 James I., c. 6, we see that certain clothmakers
took upon themselves to dictate, in their capacity of
justices of the peace, the official tariff of wages in their
own shops. In Germany, especially after the Thirty Years’
War, statutes for keeping down wages were general. “The want
of servants and labourers was very troublesome to the landed
proprietors in the depopulated districts. All villagers were
forbidden to let rooms to single men and women; all the
latter were to be reported to the authorities and cast into
prison if they were unwilling to become servants, even if
they were employed at any other work, such as sowing seeds
for the peasants at a daily wage, or even buying and selling
corn. (Imperial privileges and sanctions for Silesia, I.,
25.) For a whole century in the decrees of the small German
potentates a bitter cry goes up again and again about the
wicked and impertinent rabble that will not reconcile itself
to its hard lot, will not be content with the legal wage;
the individual landed proprietors are forbidden to pay more
than the State had fixed by a tariff. And yet the conditions
of service were at times better after war than 100 years
later; the farm servants of Silesia had, in 1652, meat twice
a week, whilst even in our century, districts are known
where they have it only three times a year. Further, wages
after the war were higher than in the following century.”
(G. Freytag.)
6. Article I. of this
law runs: “L’anéantissement de toute
espèce de corporations du même état et
profession étant l’une des bases fondamentales
de la constitution française, il est défendu
de les rétablir de fait sous quelque prétexte
et sous quelque forme que ce soit.” Article IV. declares,
that if “des citoyens attachés aux mêmes
professions, arts et métiers prenaient des
délibérations, faisaient entre eux des
conventions tendantes à refuser de concert ou
à n’accorder qu’à un prix
déterminé le secours de leur industrie ou de
leurs travaux, les dites délibérations et
conventions... seront déclarées
inconstitutionnelles, attentatoires à la
liberté et à la declaration des droits de
l’homme, &c.;” felony, therefore, as in the old
labour-statutes. [As the abolition of any form of association between citizens of the same estate and profession is one of the foundations of the French constitution, it is forbidden to re-establish them under any pretext or in any form, whatever they might be. ... citizens belonging to the same profession, craft or trade have joint discussions and make joint decisions with the intention of refusing together to perform their trade or insisting together on providing the services of their trade or their labours only at a particular price, then the said deliberations and agreements ... shall be declared unconstitutional, derogatory to liberty and the declaration of the rights of man, etc.] (“Révolutions de Paris,” Paris,
1791, t. III, p. 523.)
7. Buchez et Roux:
 “Histoire Parlementaire,” t. x., p. 195.
 


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Twenty-Nine: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer


Capital Volume One - Index




==========

## Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Twenty-Nine




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Chapter 29: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer

 
Now that we have considered the forcible creation
of a class of outlawed proletarians, the bloody discipline that turned
them into wage labourers, the disgraceful action of the State which employed
the police to accelerate the accumulation of capital by increasing the
degree of exploitation of labour, the question remains: whence came the
capitalists originally? For the expropriation of the agricultural population
creates, directly, none but the greatest landed proprietors. As far, however,
as concerns the genesis of the farmer, we can, so to say, put our hand
on it, because it is a slow process evolving through many centuries. The
serfs, as well as the free small proprietors, held land under very different
tenures, and were therefore emancipated under very different economic conditions.
In England the first form of the farmer is the bailiff, himself a serf.
His position is similar to that of the old Roman villicus, only
in a more limited sphere of action. During the second half of the 14th
century he is replaced by a farmer, whom the landlord provided with seed,
cattle and implements. His condition is not very different from that of
the peasant. Only he exploits more wage labour. Soon he becomes a metayer,
a half-farmer. He advances one part of the agricultural stock, the landlord
the other. The two divide the total product in proportions determined by
contract. This form quickly disappears in England, to give the place to
the farmer proper, who makes his own capital breed by employing wage labourers,
and pays a part of the surplus-product, in money or in kind, to the landlord
as rent. So long, during the 15th century, as the independent peasant and
the farm-labourer working for himself as well as for wages, enriched themselves
by their own labour, the circumstances of the farmer, and his field of production,
were equally mediocre. The agricultural revolution which commenced in the
last third of the 15th century, and continued during almost the whole of
the 16th (excepting, however, its last decade), enriched him just as speedily
as it impoverished the mass of the agricultural people. [1]


 The usurpation of the common lands allowed him to augment greatly
his stock of cattle, almost without cost, whilst they yielded him a richer
supply of manure for the tillage of the soil. To this was added in the
16th century a very important element. At that time the contracts for farms
ran for a long time, often for 99 years. The progressive fall in the value
of the precious metals, and therefore of money, brought the farmers golden
fruit. Apart from all the other circumstances discussed above, it lowered
wages. A portion of the latter was now added to the profits of the farm.
The continuous rise in the price of corn, wool, meat, in a word of all
agricultural produce, swelled the money capital of the farmer without any
action on his part, whilst the rent he paid (being calculated on the old
value of money) diminished in reality. [2] Thus they
grew rich at the expense both of their labourers and their landlords. No
wonder, therefore, that England, at the end of the 16th century, had a
class of capitalist farmers, rich, considering the circumstances of the
time. [3]

 



Footnotes

1. Harrison in his “Description of England,” 
says “although peradventure foure pounds of old rent be improved to fortie,
toward the end of his term, if he have not six or seven yeares rent lieng
by him, fiftie or a hundred pounds, yet will the farmer thinke his gaines
verie small.” 
2. On the influence of the depreciation
of money in the 16th century, on the different classes of society, see
 “A Compendium of Briefe Examination of Certayne Ordinary Complaints of
Divers of our Countrymen in these our Days,” by W. S. Gentleman (London
1581). The dialogue form of this work led people for a long time to ascribe
it to Shakespeare, and even in 1751, it was published under his name. Its
author is William Stafford. In one place the knight reasons as follows:
Knight: You, my neighbor, the husbandman, you Maister Mercer, and
you Goodman Cooper, with other artificers, may save yourselves metely well.
For as much as all things are dearer than they were, so much do you arise
in the pryce of your wares and occupations that ye sell agayne. But we
have nothing to sell whereby we might advance ye price there of, to countervaile
those things that we must buy agayne.” In another place, the knight asks
the doctor: “I pray you, what be those sorts that ye meane. And first, of
those that ye thinke should have no losse thereby? Doctor: I mean
all those that live by buying and selling, for as they buy deare, they sell
thereafter. Knight: What is the next sort that ye say would win
by it? Doctor: Marry, all such as have takings of fearmes in their
owne manurance [cultivation] at the old rent, for where they pay after
the olde rate they sell after the newe — that is, they paye for theire
lande good cheape, and sell all things growing thereof deare. Knight:
What sorte is that which, ye sayde should have greater losse hereby, than
these men had profit? Doctor: It is all noblemen, gentlemen, and
all other that live either by a stinted rent or stypend, or do not manure
[cultivate] the ground, or doe occupy no buying and selling.” 
3. In France, the régisseur, steward,
collector of dues for the feudal lords during the earlier part of the middle
ages, soon became an homme d'affaires, who by extortion, cheating, &c.,
swindled himself into a capitalist. These régisseurs themselves
were sometimes noblemen. E.g., “C'est li compte que messire Jacques
de Thoraine, chevalier chastelain sor Besançon rent és-seigneur
tenant les comptes à Dijon pour monseigneur le duc et comte de Bourgoigne,
des rentes appartenant à la dite chastellenie, depuis xxve jour
de décembre MCCCLIX jusqu'au xxviiie jour de décembre MCCCLX.” 
[This is the account given by M. Jacques de Thoraisse, knight, and Lord of a manor near Besançon, to the lord who administers the accounts at Dijon for his highness the Duke and Count of Burgundy, of the rents appurtenant to the above-mentioned manor, from the 25th day of December 1359 to the 28th day of December 1360]
(Alexis Monteil: “Traité de Matériaux Manuscrits etc.,” pp.
234, 235.) Already it is evident here how in all spheres of social life
the lion's share falls to the middleman. In the economic domain, e.g.,
financiers, stock-exchange speculators, merchants, shopkeepers skim the
cream; in civil matters, the lawyer fleeces his clients; in politics the
representative is of more importance than the voters, the minister than
the sovereign; in religion, God is pushed into the background by the “Mediator,” 
and the latter again is shoved back by the priests, the inevitable middlemen
between the good shepherd and his sheep. In France, as in England, the
great feudal territories were divided into innumerable small homesteads,
but under conditions incomparably more favorable for the people. During
the 14th century arose the farms or terriers. Their number grew
constantly, far beyond 100,000. They paid rents varying from 1/12 to 1/5
of the product in money or in kind. These farms were fiefs, sub-fiefs,
&c., according the value and extent of the domains, many of them only
containing a few acres. But these farmers had rights of jurisdiction in
some degree over the dwellers on the soil; there were four grades. The
oppression of the agricultural population under all these petty tyrants
will be understood. Monteil says that there were once in France 160,000
judges, where today, 4,000 tribunals, including justices of the peace,
suffice.

 


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Thirty: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial Capital


Capital Volume One- Index




==========

## Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial Capital








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Thirty




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Chapter Thirty: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial Capital

 


The expropriation and expulsion of the agricultural
population, intermittent but renewed again and again, supplied, as we saw,
the town industries with a mass of proletarians entirely unconnected with
the corporate guilds and unfettered by them; a fortunate circumstance that
makes old A. Anderson (not to be confounded with James Anderson), in his
 “History of Commerce,” believe in the direct intervention of Providence.
We must still pause a moment on this element of primitive accumulation.
The thinning-out of the independent, self-supporting peasants not only
brought about the crowding together of the industrial proletariat, in the
way that Geoffrey Saint Hilaire explained the condensation of cosmical
matter at one place, by its rarefaction at another. [1]
In spite of the smaller number of its cultivators, the soil brought forth
as much or more produce, after as before, because the revolution in the
conditions of landed property was accompanied by improved methods of culture,
greater co-operation, concentration of the means of production, &c.,
and because not only were the agricultural wage labourers put on the strain
more intensely [2], but the field of production on which
they worked for themselves became more and more contracted. With the setting
free of a part of the agricultural population, therefore, their former
means of nourishment were also set free. They were now transformed into
material elements of variable capital. The peasant, expropriated and cast
adrift, must buy their value in the form of wages, from his new master,
the industrial capitalist. That which holds good of the means of subsistence
holds with the raw materials of industry dependent upon home agriculture.
They were transformed into an element of constant capital. Suppose, e.g.,
a part of the Westphalian peasants, who, at the time of Frederick II, all
span flax, forcibly expropriated and hunted from the soil; and the other
part that remained, turned into day labourers of large farmers. At the same
time arise large establishments for flax-spinning and weaving, in which
the men “set free” now work for wages. The flax looks exactly as before.
Not a fibre of it is changed, but a new social soul has popped into its
body. It forms now a part of the constant capital of the master manufacturer.
Formerly divided among a number of small producers, who cultivated it themselves
and with their families spun it in retail fashion, it is now concentrated
in the hand of one capitalist, who sets others to spin and weave it for
him. The extra labour expended in flax-spinning realised itself formerly
in extra income to numerous peasant families, or maybe, in Frederick II’s
time, in taxes pour le roi de Prusse. It realises itself now in profit
for a few capitalists. The spindles and looms, formerly scattered over
the face of the country, are now crowded together in a few great labour-barracks,
together with the labourers and the raw material. And spindles, looms, raw
material, are now transformed from means of independent existence for the
spinners and weavers, into means for commanding them and sucking out of
them unpaid labour. [3] One does not perceive, when looking
at the large manufactories and the large farms, that they have originated
from the throwing into one of many small centres of production, and have
been built up by the expropriation of many small independent producers.
Nevertheless, the popular intuition was not at fault. In the time of Mirabeau,
the lion of the Revolution, the great manufactories were still called manufactures
réunies, workshops thrown into one, as we speak of fields thrown into one.
Says Mirabeau:
 “We are only paying attention to the grand manufactories,
in which hundreds of men work under a director and which are commonly called
manufactures réunies. Those where a very large number of
labourers work, each separately and on his own account, are hardly considered;
they are placed at an infinite distance from the others. This is a great
error, as the latter alone make a really important object of national prosperity....
The large workshop (manufacture réunie) will enrich prodigiously
one or two entrepreneurs, but the labourers will only be journeymen, paid
more or less, and will not have any share in the success of the undertaking.
In the discrete workshop (manufacture séparée), on the contrary, no one
will become rich, but many labourers will be comfortable; the saving and
the industrious will be able to amass a little capital, to put by a little
for a birth of a child, for an illness, for themselves or their belongings.
The number of saving and industrious labourers will increase, because they
will see in good conduct, in activity, a means of essentially bettering
their condition, and not of obtaining a small rise in wages that can never
be of any importance of the future, and whose sole result is to place men
in the position to live a little better, but only from day to day.... The
large workshops, undertakings of certain private persons who pay labourers
from day to day to work for their gain, may be able to put these private
individuals at their ease, but they will never be an object worth the attention
of governments. Discrete workshops, for the most part combined with cultivation
of small holdings, are the only free ones.” [4] The expropriation
and eviction of a part of the agricultural population not only set free
for industrial capital, the labourers, their means of subsistence, and material
for labour; it also created the home-market.

In fact, the events that transformed the small peasants into wage labourers,
and their means of subsistence and of labour into material elements of capital,
created, at the same time, a home-market for the latter. Formerly, the
peasant family produced the means of subsistence and the raw materials,
which they themselves, for the most part, consumed. These raw materials
and means of subsistence have now become commodities; the large farmer
sells them, he finds his market in manufactures. Yarn, linen, coarse woollen
stuffs — things whose raw materials had been within the reach of every
peasant family, had been spun and woven by it for its own use — were now
transformed into articles of manufacture, to which the country districts
at once served for markets. The many scattered customers, whom stray artisans
until now had found in the numerous small producers working on their own
account, concentrate themselves now into one great market provided for
by industrial capital. [5] Thus, hand in hand with the
expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separation from
their means of production, goes the destruction of rural domestic industry,
the process of separation between manufacture and agriculture. And only
the destruction of rural domestic industry can give the internal market
of a country that extension and consistence which the capitalist mode of
production requires. Still the manufacturing period, properly so called,
does not succeed in carrying out this transformation radically and completely.
It will be remembered that manufacture, properly so called, conquers but
partially the domain of national production, and always rests on the handicrafts
of the town and the domestic industry of the rural districts as its ultimate
basis. If it destroys these in one form, in particular branches, at certain
points, it calls them up again elsewhere, because it needs them for the
preparation of raw material up to a certain point. It produces, therefore,
a new class of small villagers who, while following the cultivation of
the soil as an accessary calling, find their chief occupation in industrial
labour, the products of which they sell to the manufacturers directly, or
through the medium of merchants. This is one, though not the chief, cause
of a phenomenon which, at first, puzzles the student of English history.[6]
From the last third of the 15th century he finds continually complaints,
only interrupted at certain intervals, about the encroachment of capitalist
farming in the country districts, and the progressive destruction of the
peasantry. On the other hand, he always finds this peasantry turning up
again, although in diminished number, and always under worse conditions.
The chief reason is: England is at one time chiefly a cultivator of corn,
at another chiefly a breeder of cattle, in alternate periods, and with these 
the extent of peasant cultivation fluctuates. Modern Industry alone, and 
finally, supplies, in machinery, the lasting basis of capitalistic
agriculture, expropriates radically the enormous majority of the agricultural
population, and completes the separation between agriculture and rural
domestic industry, whose roots — spinning and weaving — it tears up.
[7] It therefore also, for the first time, conquers for
industrial capital the entire home market. [8]

 


Footnotes

1. In his “Notions de Philosophie Naturelle.” 
Paris, 1838.
2. A point that Sir James Steuart emphasises.
3. “Je permettrai,” says the capitalist, “que vous ayez l’honneur de me servir, à condition que vous me donnez le peu qui vous reste pour la peine que je prends de vous commander.” [I will allow you ... to have the honour of serving me, on condition that, in return for the pains I take in commanding you, you give me the little that remains to you] (J. J. Rousseau: “Discours sur l’Economie Politique.”)
4. Mirabeau, l.c., t.III, pp.20-109 passim.
That Mirabeau considers the separate workshops more economical and productive
than the “combined,” and sees in the latter merely artificial exotics under
government cultivation, is explained by the position at that time of a
great part of the continental manufactures.
5. “Twenty pounds of wool converted unobtrusively into yearly clothing of a labourer’s family by its own industry in the intervals
of other works — this makes no show; but bring it to market, send it to
the factory, thence to the broker, thence to the dealer, and you will have
great commercial operations, and nominal capital engaged to the amount
of twenty times its value.... The working-class is thus emersed to support
a wretched factory population, a parastical shop-keeping class, and a fictitious
commercial, monetary, and financial system.” (David Urquhart, l.c., p.120.)
6. Cromwell’s time forms an exception.
So long as the Republic lasted, the mass of the English people of all grades
rose from the degradation into which they had sunk under the Tudors.
7. Tuckett is aware that the modern woollen
industry has sprung, with the introduction of machinery, from manufacture
proper and from the destruction of rural and domestic industries.
 “The plough, the yoke, were ‘the invention of gods, and the occupation
of heroes’; are the loom, the spindle, the distaff, of less noble parentage.
You sever the distaff and the plough, the spindle and the yoke, and you
get factories and poor-houses, credit and panics, two hostile nations,
agriculture and commercial.” (David Urquhart, l.c., p.122.)

But now comes Carey, and cries out upon England, surely not with unreason,
that it is trying to turn every other country into a mere agricultural
nation, whose manufacturer is to be England. He pretends that in this way
Turkey has been ruined, because “the owners and occupants of land have
never been permitted by England to strengthen themselves by the formation
of that natural alliance between the plough and the loom, the hammer and
the harrow.” (“The Slave Trade,” p.125.) According to him, Urquhart himself
is one of the chief agents in the ruin of Turkey, where he had made Free-trade
propaganda in the English interest. The best of it is that Carey, a great
Russophile by the way, wants to prevent the process of separation by that
very system of protection which accelerates it.
8. Philanthropic English economists, like Mill,
Rogers, Goldwin Smith, Fawcett, &c., and liberal manufacturers like
John Bright & Co., ask the English landed proprietors, as God asked
Cain after Abel, Where are our thousands of freeholders gone? But where
do you come from, then? From the destruction of those freeholders.
Why don’t you ask further, where are the independent weavers, spinners,
and artisans gone?



Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Thirty-One: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist


Capital Volume One - Index





==========

## Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Thirty-One




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Chapter Thirty-One: Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist

 



The genesis of the industrial *
capitalist did not proceed in such a gradual way as that of the farmer.
Doubtless many small guild-masters, and yet more independent small artisans,
or even wage labourers, transformed themselves into small capitalists,
and (by gradually extending exploitation of wage labour and corresponding
accumulation) into full-blown capitalists. In the infancy of capitalist
production, things often happened as in the infancy of medieval towns,
where the question, which of the escaped serfs should be master and which
servant, was in great part decided by the earlier or later date of their
flight. The snail’s pace of this method corresponded in no wise with the
commercial requirements of the new world market that the great discoveries
of the end of the 15th century created. But the middle ages had handed
down two distinct forms of capital, which mature in the most different
economic social formations, and which before the era of the capitalist
mode of production, are considered as capital quand même [all the same] —  usurer’s
capital and merchant’s capital.



 “At present, all the wealth of society goes first into the possession
of the capitalist ... he pays the landowner his rent, the labourer his
wages, the tax and tithe gatherer their claims, and keeps a large, indeed
the largest, and a continually augmenting share, of the annual produce
of labour for himself. The capitalist may now be said to be the first owner
of all the wealth of the community, though no law has conferred on him
the right to this property... this change has been effected by the taking
of interest on capital ... and it is not a little curious that all the
law-givers of Europe endeavoured to prevent this by statutes, viz., statutes
against usury.... The power of the capitalist over all the wealth of the
country is a complete change in the right of property, and by
what law, or series of laws, was it effected?” [2]

The author should have remembered that revolutions are not made by laws.



The money capital formed by means of usury and commerce was prevented
from turning into industrial capital, in the country by the feudal constitution,
in the towns by the guild organisation. [3] These fetters
vanished with the dissolution of feudal society, with the expropriation
and partial eviction of the country population. The new manufactures were
established at sea-ports, or at inland points beyond the control of the old
municipalities and their guilds. Hence in England an embittered struggle
of the corporate towns against these new industrial nurseries.


The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation,
enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal population, the beginning
of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of Africa into
a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy
dawn of the era of capitalist production. These idyllic proceedings are
the chief momenta of primitive accumulation. On their heels treads the
commercial war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre. It
begins with the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes giant dimensions
in England’s Anti-Jacobin War, and is still going on in the opium wars
against China, &c.


The different momenta of primitive accumulation distribute themselves
now, more or less in chronological order, particularly over Spain, Portugal,
Holland, France, and England. In England at the end of the 17th century,
they arrive at a systematical combination, embracing the colonies, the
national debt, the modern mode of taxation, and the protectionist system.
These methods depend in part on brute force, e.g., the colonial
system. But, they all employ the power of the State, the concentrated and
organised force of society, to hasten, hot-house fashion, the process of
transformation of the feudal mode of production into the capitalist mode,
and to shorten the transition. Force is the midwife of every old society
pregnant with a new one. It is itself an economic power.




Of the Christian colonial system, W. Howitt, a man who makes a
speciality of Christianity, says:

  “The barbarities and desperate outrages
of the so-called Christian race, throughout every region of the world,
and upon every people they have been able to subdue, are not to be paralleled
by those of any other race, however fierce, however untaught, and
however reckless of mercy and of shame, in any age of the earth.” [4]
The history of the colonial administration of Holland — and Holland was
the head capitalistic nation of the 17th century —

  “is one of the most
extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, massacre, and meanness” 
[5]
 Nothing is more characteristic than their system
of stealing men, to get slaves for Java. The men stealers were trained
for this purpose. The thief, the interpreter, and the seller, were the
chief agents in this trade, native princes the chief sellers. The young
people stolen, were thrown into the secret dungeons of Celebes, until they
were ready for sending to the slave-ships. An official report says:

  “This one town of Macassar, e.g., is full of secret prisons, one more
horrible than the other, crammed with unfortunates, victims of greed and
tyranny fettered in chains, forcibly torn from their families.” 
 To secure Malacca, the Dutch corrupted the Portuguese governor. He let them into
the town in 1641. They hurried at once to his house and assassinated him,
to “abstain” from the payment of £21,875, the price of his treason.
Wherever they set foot, devastation and depopulation followed. Banjuwangi,
a province of Java, in 1750 numbered over 80,000 inhabitants, in 1811 only
18,000. Sweet commerce!


The English East India Company, as is well known, obtained, besides
the political rule in India, the exclusive monopoly of the tea-trade, as
well as of the Chinese trade in general, and of the transport of goods
to and from Europe. But the coasting trade of India and between the islands,
as well as the internal trade of India, were the monopoly of the higher
employés of the company. The monopolies of salt, opium, betel and
other commodities, were inexhaustible mines of wealth. The employés
themselves fixed the price and plundered at will the unhappy Hindus. The
Governor-General took part in this private traffic. His favourites received
contracts under conditions whereby they, cleverer than the alchemists,
made gold out of nothing. Great fortunes sprang up like mushrooms in a
day; primitive accumulation went on without the advance of a shilling.
The trial of Warren Hastings swarms with such cases. Here is an instance.
A contract for opium was given to a certain Sullivan at the moment of his
departure on an official mission to a part of India far removed from the
opium district. Sullivan sold his contract to one Binn for £40,000;
Binn sold it the same day for £60,000, and the ultimate purchaser
who carried out the contract declared that after all he realised an enormous
gain. According to one of the lists laid before Parliament, the Company
and its employés from 1757-1766 got £6,000,000 from the Indians
as gifts. Between 1769 and 1770, the English manufactured a famine by buying
up all the rice and refusing to sell it again, except at fabulous prices.
[6]


The treatment of the aborigines was, naturally, most frightful
in plantation-colonies destined for export trade only, such as the West
Indies, and in rich and well-populated countries, such as Mexico and India,
that were given over to plunder. But even in the colonies properly so called,
the Christian character of primitive accumulation did not belie itself.
Those sober virtuosi of Protestantism, the Puritans of New England, in
1703, by decrees of their assembly set a premium of £40 on every
Indian scalp and every captured red-skin: in 1720 a premium of £100
on every scalp; in 1744, after Massachusetts-Bay had proclaimed a certain
tribe as rebels, the following prices: for a male scalp of 12 years and
upwards £100 (new currency), for a male prisoner £105, for
women and children prisoners £50, for scalps of women and children
£50. Some decades later, the colonial system took its revenge on
the descendants of the pious pilgrim fathers, who had grown seditious in
the meantime. At English instigation and for English pay they were tomahawked
by red-skins. The British Parliament proclaimed bloodhounds and scalping
as “means that God and Nature had given into its hand.” 


The colonial system ripened, like a hot-house, trade and navigation.
The “societies Monopolia” of Luther were powerful levers for concentration
of capital. The colonies secured a market for the budding manufactures,
and, through the monopoly of the market, an increased accumulation. The
treasures captured outside Europe by undisguised looting, enslavement,
and murder, floated back to the mother-country and were there turned into
capital. Holland, which first fully developed the colonial system, in 1648
stood already in the acme of its commercial greatness. It was

  “in almost exclusive possession of the East Indian trade and the commerce between
the south-east and north-west of Europe. Its fisheries, marine, manufactures,
surpassed those of any other country. The total capital of the Republic
was probably more important than that of all the rest of Europe put together.” 
Gülich forgets to add that by 1648, the people of Holland were more
over-worked, poorer and more brutally oppressed than those of
all the rest of Europe put together.


Today industrial supremacy implies commercial supremacy. In the
period of manufacture properly so called, it is, on the other hand, the
commercial supremacy that gives industrial predominance. Hence the preponderant
rôle that the colonial system plays at that time. It was “the strange
God” who perched himself on the altar cheek by jowl with the old Gods of
Europe, and one fine day with a shove and a kick chucked them all of a
heap. It proclaimed surplus-value making as the sole end and aim of humanity.



The system of public credit, i.e., of national debts, whose
origin we discover in Genoa and Venice as early as the Middle Ages, took
possession of Europe generally during the manufacturing period. The colonial
system with its maritime trade and commercial wars served as a forcing-house
for it. Thus it first took root in Holland. National debts, i.e.,
the alienation of the state – whether despotic, constitutional or republican – marked
with its stamp the capitalistic era. The only part of the so-called national
wealth that actually enters into the collective possessions of modern peoples
is their national debt. [7] Hence, as a necessary consequence,
the modern doctrine that a nation becomes the richer the more deeply it
is in debt. Public credit becomes the credo of capital. And with
the rise of national debt-making, want of faith in the national debt takes
the place of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which may not be forgiven.


The public debt becomes one of the most powerful levers of primitive
accumulation. As with the stroke of an enchanter’s wand, it endows barren
money with the power of breeding and thus turns it into capital, without
the necessity of its exposing itself to the troubles and risks inseparable
from its employment in industry or even in usury. The state creditors actually
give nothing away, for the sum lent is transformed into public bonds, easily
negotiable, which go on functioning in their hands just as so much hard
cash would. But further, apart from the class of lazy annuitants thus created,
and from the improvised wealth of the financiers, middlemen between the
government and the nation – as also apart from the tax-farmers, merchants,
private manufacturers, to whom a good part of every national loan renders
the service of a capital fallen from heaven – the national debt has given
rise to joint-stock companies, to dealings in negotiable effects of all
kinds, and to agiotage, in a word to stock-exchange gambling and the modern
bankocracy.


At their birth the great banks, decorated with national titles,
were only associations of private speculators, who placed themselves by
the side of governments, and, thanks to the privileges they
received, were in a position to advance money to the State. Hence the accumulation
of the national debt has no more infallible measure than the successive
rise in the stock of these banks, whose full development dates from the
founding of the Bank of England in 1694. The Bank of England began with
lending its money to the Government at 8%; at the same time it was empowered
by Parliament to coin money out of the same capital, by lending it again
to the public in the form of banknotes. It was allowed to use these notes
for discounting bills, making advances on commodities, and for buying the
precious metals. It was not long ere this credit-money, made by the bank
itself, became. The coin in which the Bank of England made its loans to
the State, and paid, on account of the State, the interest on the public
debt. It was not enough that the bank gave with one hand and took back
more with the other; it remained, even whilst receiving, the eternal creditor
of the nation down to the last shilling advanced. Gradually it became inevitably
the receptacle of the metallic hoard of the country, and the centre of
gravity of all commercial credit. What effect was produced on their contemporaries
by the sudden uprising of this brood of bankocrats, financiers, rentiers,
brokers, stock-jobbers, &c., is proved by the writings of that time,
e.g., by Bolingbroke’s. [8]


With the national debt arose an international credit system, which
often conceals one of the sources of primitive accumulation in this or
that people. Thus the villainies of the Venetian thieving system formed
one of the secret bases of the capital-wealth of Holland to whom Venice
in her decadence lent large sums of money. So also was it with Holland
and England. By the beginning of the 18th century the Dutch manufactures
were far outstripped. Holland had ceased to be the nation preponderant
in commerce and industry. One of its main lines of business, therefore,
from 1701-1776, is the lending out of enormous amounts of capital, especially
to its great rival England. The same thing is going on today between England
and the United States. A great deal of capital, which appears today in
the United States without any certificate of birth, was yesterday, in England,
the capitalised blood of children.


As the national debt finds its support in the public revenue,
which must cover the yearly payments for interest, &c., the modern
system of taxation was the necessary complement of the system of national
loans. The loans enable the government to meet extraordinary expenses, without
the tax-payers feeling it immediately, but they necessitate, as a consequence,
increased taxes. On the other hand, the raising of taxation caused by the
accumulation of debts contracted one after another, compels the government
always to have recourse to new loans for new extraordinary expenses. Modern
fiscality, whose pivot is formed by taxes on the most necessary means of
subsistence (thereby increasing their price), thus contains within itself
the germ of automatic progression. Overtaxation is not an incident, but
rather a principle. In Holland, therefore, where this system was first
inaugurated, the great patriot, DeWitt, has in his “Maxims” extolled it
as the best system for making the wage labourer submissive, frugal, industrious,
and overburdened with labour. The destructive influence that it exercises
on the condition of the wage labourer concerns us less however, here, than
the forcible expropriation, resulting from it, of peasants, artisans, and
in a word, all elements of the lower middle class. On this there are not
two opinions, even among the bourgeois economists. Its expropriating efficacy
is still further heightened by the system of protection, which forms one
of its integral parts.


The great part that the public debt, and the fiscal system corresponding
with it, has played in the capitalisation of wealth and the expropriation
of the masses, has led many writers, like Cobbett, Doubleday and others,
to seek in this, incorrectly, the fundamental cause of the misery of the
modern peoples.



The system of protection was an artificial means of manufacturing
manufacturers, of expropriating independent labourers, of capitalising
the national means of production and subsistence, of forcibly abbreviating
the transition from the medieval to the modern mode of production. The
European states tore one another to pieces about the patent of this invention,
and, once entered into the service of the surplus-value makers, did not
merely lay under contribution in the pursuit of this purpose their own
people, indirectly through protective duties, directly through export premiums.
They also forcibly rooted out, in their dependent countries, all industry,
as, e.g., England did. with the Irish woollen manufacture. On the
continent of Europe, after Colbert’s example, the process was much simplified.
The primitive industrial capital, here, came in part directly out of the
state treasury. “Why,” cries Mirabeau, “why go so far to seek the cause
of the manufacturing glory of Saxony before the war? 180,000,000 of debts
contracted by the sovereigns!” [9]


Colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, commercial
wars, &c., these children of the true manufacturing period, increase
gigantically during the infancy of Modem Industry. The birth of the latter
is heralded by a great slaughter of the innocents. Like the royal navy,
the factories were recruited by means of the press-gang. Blasé as
Sir F. M. Eden is as to the horrors of the expropriation of the agricultural
population from the soil, from the last third of the 15th century to his
own time; with all the self-satisfaction with which he rejoices in this
process, “essential” for establishing capitalistic agriculture and “the
due proportion between arable and pasture land” — he does not show, however,
the same economic insight in respect to the necessity of child-stealing
and child-slavery for the transformation of manufacturing exploitation
into factory exploitation, and the establishment of the “true relation” 
between capital and labour-power. He says:

  “It may, perhaps, be worthy the attention of the public to consider, whether any manufacture, which,
in order to be carried on successfully, requires that cottages and workhouses
should be ransacked for poor children; that they should be employed by
turns during the greater part of the night and robbed of that rest which,
though indispensable to all, is most required by the young; and that numbers
of both sexes, of different ages and dispositions, should be collected
together in such a manner that the contagion of example cannot but lead
to profligacy and debauchery; will add to the sum of individual or national
felicity?” [10]


 “In the counties of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and more particularly
in Lancashire,” says Fielden, “the newly-invented machinery was used in
large factories built on the sides of streams capable of turning the water-wheel.
Thousands of hands were suddenly required in these places, remote from
towns; and Lancashire, in particular, being, till then, comparatively thinly
populated and barren, a population was all that she now wanted. The small
and nimble fingers of little children being by very far the most in request,
the custom instantly sprang up of procuring apprentices from the
different parish workhouses of London, Birmingham, and elsewhere. Many,
many thousands of these little, hapless creatures were sent down into the
north, being from the age of 7 to the age of 13 or 14 years old. The custom
was for the master to clothe his apprentices and to feed and lodge them
in an “apprentice house” near the factory; overseers were appointed to
see to the works, whose interest it was to work the children to the utmost,
because their pay was in proportion to the quantity of work that they could
exact. Cruelty was, of course, the consequence. ... In many of the manufacturing
districts, but particularly, I am afraid, in the guilty county to which
I belong [Lancashire], cruelties the most heart-rending were practised
upon the unoffending and friendless creatures who were thus consigned
to the charge of master-manufacturers; they were harassed to the brink
of death by excess of labour ... were flogged, fettered and tortured in
the most exquisite refinement of cruelty; ... they were in many cases starved
to the bone while flogged to their work and ... even in some instances
... were driven to commit suicide.... The beautiful and romantic valleys
of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Lancashire, secluded from the public
eye, became the dismal solitudes of torture, and of many a murder. The
profits of manufacturers were enormous; but this only whetted the appetite
that it should have satisfied, and therefore the manufacturers had recourse
to an expedient that seemed to secure to them those profits without any
possibility of limit; they began the practice of what is termed “night-working,”
that is, having tired one set of hands, by working them throughout the
day, they had another set ready to go on working throughout the night;
the day-set getting into the beds that the night-set had just quitted,
and in their turn again, the night-set getting into the beds that the day-set
quitted in the morning. It is a common tradition in Lancashire, that the
beds never get cold.” [11]

With the development of capitalist production during the manufacturing
period, the public opinion of Europe had lost the last remnant of shame
and conscience. The nations bragged cynically of every infamy that served
them as a means to capitalistic accumulation. Read, e.g., the naïve
Annals of Commerce of the worthy A. Anderson. Here it is trumpeted forth
as a triumph of English statecraft that at the Peace of Utrecht, England
extorted from the Spaniards by the Asiento Treaty the privilege of being
allowed to ply the negro trade, until then only carried on between Africa
and the English West Indies, between Africa and Spanish America as well.
England thereby acquired the right of supplying Spanish America until 1743
with 4,800 negroes yearly. This threw, at the same time, an
official cloak over British smuggling. Liverpool waxed fat on the slave trade.
This was its method of primitive accumulation. And, even to the present
day, Liverpool “respectability” is the Pindar of the slave trade which
— compare the work of Aikin [1795] already quoted — “has coincided with
that spirit of bold adventure which has characterised the trade of Liverpool
and rapidly carried it to its present state of prosperity; has occasioned
vast employment for shipping and sailors, and greatly augmented the demand
for the manufactures of the country” (p. 339). Liverpool employed in the
slave-trade, in 1730, 15 ships; in 1751, 53; in 1760, 74; in 1770, 96;
and in 1792, 132.


Whilst the cotton industry introduced child-slavery in England,
it gave in the United States a stimulus to the transformation of the earlier,
more or less patriarchal slavery, into a system of commercial exploitation.
In fact, the veiled slavery of the wage workers in Europe needed, for its
pedestal, slavery pure and simple in the new world.[12]




Tantae molis erat, to establish the “eternal laws of Nature” of
the capitalist mode of production, to complete the process of separation
between labourers and conditions of labour, to transform, at one pole,
the social means of production and subsistence into capital, at the opposite
pole, the mass of the population into wage labourers, into “free labouring
poor,” that artificial product of modern society. [13]
If money, according to Augier, [14] “comes into the
world with a congenital blood-stain on one cheek,” capital comes dripping
from head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt. [15]


 



Footnotes

* Industrial here in contradistinction to
agricultural. In the “categoric” sense the farmer is an industrial capitalist
as much as the manufacturer.
2. “The Natural and Artificial Rights
of Property Contrasted.” Lond., 1832, pp. 98-99. Author of the anonymous
work: “Th. Hodgskin.” 
3. Even as late as 1794, the small cloth-makers
of Leeds sent a deputation to Parliament, with a petition for a law to
forbid any merchant from becoming a manufacturer. (Dr. Aikin, l. c.)
4. William Howitt: “Colonisation and
Christianity: A Popular History of the Treatment of the Natives by the
Europeans in all their Colonies.” London, 1838, p. 9. On the treatment
of the slaves there is a good compilation in Charles Comte, “Traité
de la Législation.” 3me éd. Bruxelles, 1837. This subject
one must study in detail, to see what the bourgeoisie makes of itself and
of the labourer, wherever it can, without restraint, model the world after
its own image.
5. Thomas Stamford Raffles, late Lieut-Gov.
of that island: “The History of Java,” Lond., 1817.
6. In the year 1866 more than a million
Hindus died of hunger in the province of Orissa alone. Nevertheless, the
attempt was made to enrich the Indian treasury by the price at which the
necessaries of life were sold to the starving people.
7. William Cobbett remarks that in England
all public institutions are designated “royal”; as compensation for this,
however, there is the “national” debt.
8. “Si les Tartares inondaient l’Europe
aujourd’hui, il faudrait bien des affaires pour leur faire entendre ce
que c’est qu’un financier parmi nous.” [if the Tartars were to flood into Europe today, it would be a difficult job to make them understand what a financier is with us] Montesquieu, “Esprit des lois,” 
t. iv., p. 33, ed. Londres, 1769.
9. Mirabeau, l. c., t. vi., p. 101.
10. Eden, l. c., Vol. I., Book II.,
Ch. 1., p. 421.
11. John Fielden, l. c., pp. 5, 6. On
the earlier infamies of the factory system, cf. Dr. Aikin (1795), l. c.,
p. 219. and Gisborne: “Enquiry into the Duties of Men,” 1795 Vol. II. When
the steam-engine transplanted the factories from the country waterfalls
to the middle of towns, the “abstemious” surplus-value maker found the
child-material ready to his hand, without being forced to seek slaves from
the workhouses. When Sir R. Peel (father of the “minister of plausibility"),
brought in his bill for the protection of children, in 1815, Francis Horner,
lumen of the Billion Committee and intimate friend of Ricardo, said in
the House of Commons: “It is notorious, that with a bankrupt’s effects,
a gang, if he might use the word, of these children had been put up to
sale, and were advertised publicly as part of the property. A most atrocious
instance had been brought before the Court of King’s Bench two years before,
in which a number of these boys, apprenticed by a parish in London to one
manufacturer, had been transferred to another, and had been found by some
benevolent persons in a state of absolute famine. Another case more horrible
had come to his knowledge while on a [Parliamentary] Committee ... that
not many years ago, an agreement had been made between a London parish
and a Lancashire manufacturer, by which it was stipulated, that with every
20 sound children one idiot should be taken.” 
12. In 1790, there were in the English
West Indies ten slaves for one free man, in the French fourteen for one,
in the Dutch twenty-three for one. (Henry Brougham: “An Inquiry into the
Colonial Policy of the European Powers.” Edin. 1803, vol. II., p. 74.)
13. The phrase, “labouring poor,” is
found in English legislation from the moment when the class of wage labourers
becomes noticeable. This term is used in opposition, on the one hand, to
the “idle poor,” beggars, etc., on the other to those labourers, who, pigeons
not yet plucked, are still possessors of their own means of labour. From
the Statute Book it passed into Political Economy, and was handed down
by Culpeper, J. Child, etc., to Adam Smith and Eden. After this, one can
judge of the good faith of the “execrable political cant-monger,” Edmund
Burke, when he called the expression, “labouring poor,” — “execrable political
cant.” This sycophant who, in the pay of the English oligarchy, played
the romantic laudator temporis acti against the French Revolution, just
as, in the pay of the North American Colonies, at the beginning of the
American troubles, he had played the Liberal against the English oligarchy,
was an out and out vulgar bourgeois. “The laws of commerce are the laws
of Nature, and therefore the laws of God.” (E. Burke, l. c., pp. 31, 32.)
No wonder that, true to the laws of God and of Nature, he always sold himself
in the best market. A very good portrait of this Edmund Burke, during his
liberal time, is to be found in the writings of the Rev. Mr. Tucker. Tucker
was a parson and a Tory, but, for the rest, an honourable man and a competent
political economist. In face of the infamous cowardice of character that
reigns today, and believes most devoutly in “the laws of commerce,” it
is our bounden duty again and again to brand the Burkes, who only differ
from their successors in one thing — talent.
14. Marie Angier: “Du Crédit
Public.” Paris, 1842.
15. “Capital is said by a Quarterly
Reviewer to fly turbulence and strife, and to be timid, which is very true;
but this is very incompletely stating the question. Capital eschews no
profit, or very small profit, just as Nature was formerly said to abhor
a vacuum. With adequate profit, capital is very bold. A certain 10 per
cent. will ensure its employment anywhere; 20 per cent. certain will produce
eagerness; 50 per cent., positive audacity; 100 per cent. will make it
ready to trample on all human laws; 300 per cent., and there is not a crime
at which it will scruple, nor a risk it will not run, even to the chance
of its owner being hanged. If turbulence and strife will bring a profit,
it will freely encourage both. Smuggling and the slave-trade have amply
proved all that is here stated.” (T. J. Dunning, l. c., pp. 35, 36.)


 


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Thirty-Two: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation


Capital Volume One- Index





==========

## Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation








Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Thirty Two




Karl Marx. Capital Volume One

Chapter Thirty-Two: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation

 
What does the primitive accumulation of capital, i.e.,
its historical genesis, resolve itself into? In so far as it is not immediate
transformation of slaves and serfs into wage labourers, and therefore a
mere change of form, it only means the expropriation of the immediate producers,
i.e., the dissolution of private property based on the labour of
its owner. Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property,
exists only where the means of labour and the external conditions of labour
belong to private individuals. But according as these private individuals
are labourers or not labourers, private property has a different character.
The numberless shades, that it at first sight presents, correspond to the
intermediate stages lying between these two extremes. The private property
of the labourer in his means of production is the foundation of petty industry,
whether agricultural, manufacturing, or both; petty industry, again, is
an essential condition for the development of social production and of
the free individuality of the labourer himself. Of course, this petty mode
of production exists also under slavery, serfdom, and other states of dependence.
But it flourishes, it lets loose its whole energy, it attains its adequate
classical form, only where the labourer is the private owner of his own
means of labour set in action by himself: the peasant of the land which
he cultivates, the artisan of the tool which he handles as a virtuoso.
This mode of production presupposes parcelling of the soil and scattering
of the other means of production. As it excludes the concentration of these
means of production, so also it excludes cooperation, division of labour
within each separate process of production, the control over, and the productive
application of the forces of Nature by society, and the free development
of the social productive powers. It is compatible only with a system of
production, and a society, moving within narrow and more or less primitive
bounds. To perpetuate it would be, as Pecqueur rightly says, “to decree
universal mediocrity". At a certain stage of development, it brings forth
the material agencies for its own dissolution. From that moment new forces
and new passions spring up in the bosom of society; but the old social
organisation fetters them and keeps them down. It must be annihilated;
it is annihilated. Its annihilation, the transformation of the individualised
and scattered means of production into socially concentrated ones, of the
pigmy property of the many into the huge property of the few, the expropriation
of the great mass of the people from the soil, from the means of subsistence,
and from the means of labour, this fearful and painful expropriation of
the mass of the people forms the prelude to the history of capital. It
comprises a series of forcible methods, of which we have passed in review
only those that have been epoch-making as methods of the primitive accumulation
of capital. The expropriation of the immediate producers was accomplished
with merciless Vandalism, and under the stimulus of passions the most infamous,
the most sordid, the pettiest, the most meanly odious. Self-earned private
property, that is based, so to say, on the fusing together of the isolated,
independent labouring individual with the conditions of his labour, is supplanted
by capitalistic private property, which rests on exploitation of the nominally
free labour of others, i.e., on wage labour. [1]

As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently decomposed
the old society from top to bottom, as soon as the labourers are turned
into proletarians, their means of labour into capital, as soon as the capitalist
mode of production stands on its own feet, then the further socialisation
of labour and further transformation of the land and other means of production
into socially exploited and, therefore, common means of production, as
well as the further expropriation of private proprietors, takes a new form.
That which is now to be expropriated is no longer the labourer working for
himself, but the capitalist exploiting many labourers. This expropriation
is accomplished by the action of the immanent laws of capitalistic production
itself, by the centralisation of capital. One capitalist always kills many.
Hand in hand with this centralisation, or this expropriation of many capitalists
by few, develop, on an ever-extending scale, the cooperative form of the
labour process, the conscious technical application of science, the methodical
cultivation of the soil, the transformation of the instruments of labour
into instruments of labour only usable in common, the economising of all
means of production by their use as means of production of combined, socialised
labour, the entanglement of all peoples in the net of the world market,
and with this, the international character of the capitalistic regime.
Along with the constantly diminishing number of the magnates of capital,
who usurp and monopolise all advantages of this process of transformation,
grows the mass of misery, oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation;
but with this too grows the revolt of the working class, a class always
increasing in numbers, and disciplined, united, organised by the very mechanism
of the process of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital
becomes a fetter upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished
along with, and under it. Centralisation of the means of production and
socialisation of labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible
with their capitalist integument. This integument is burst asunder. The
knell of capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated.


The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist
mode of production, produces capitalist private property. This is the first
negation of individual private property, as founded on the labour of the
proprietor. But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of
a law of Nature, its own negation. It is the negation of negation. This
does not re-establish private property for the producer, but gives him
individual property based on the acquisition of the capitalist era: i.e.,
on cooperation and the possession in common of the land and of the means
of production.


The transformation of scattered private property, arising
from individual labour, into capitalist private property is, naturally,
a process, incomparably more protracted, violent, and difficult, than the
transformation of capitalistic private property, already practically resting
on socialised production, into socialised property. In the former case,
we had the expropriation of the mass of the people by a few usurpers; in
the latter, we have the expropriation of a few usurpers by the mass of
the people. [2]

 



Footnotes

1. “Nous sommes dans une condition tout-à-fait
nouvelle de la societé... nous tendons a séparer toute espèce de
propriété d’avec toute espèce de travail.”  [We are in a situation which is entirely new for society ...  we are striving to separate every kind of property from every kind of labour]  (Sismondi: “Nouveaux
Principes d’Econ. Polit.” t.II, p.434.)
2. The advance of industry, whose involuntary
promoter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers, due
to competition, by their revolutionary combination, due to association.
The development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet
the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates
products. What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces, above all, are its
own grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally
inevitable.... Of all the classes that stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie
today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other
classes perish and disappear in the face of Modern Industry, the proletariat
is its special and essential product.... The lower middle classes, the
small manufacturers, the shopkeepers, the artisan, the peasant, all these
fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence
as fractions of the middle class... they are reactionary, for they try
to roll back the wheel of history. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, “Manifest
der Kommunistischen Partei,” London, 1848, pp. 9, 11.
 


Transcribed by Zodiac
Html Markup by Stephen Baird (1999)



Next: Chapter Thirty-Three: The Modern Theory of Colonisation


Capital Volume One Index




==========

## Marx’s Capital







Economic Manuscripts: Synopsis of Capital



Frederick Engels: Synopsis of Capital


Frederick Engels
Synopsis of Capital


Written: by Engels in 1868;
Transcribed to the Internet in 1993 by Zodiac;
The present html markup was done in early 1999 by Brian Baggins.

Table of Contents:

  Commodities and Money

  The Transformation of Money into Capital

  The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value

  The Production of Relative Surplus-Value


This is a synopsis of Capital, Volume I, written by Engels in 1868. Upon Capital's release, Engels
began constructing a comprehensive summation.


On April 17, 1868, he wrote Marx: "I have a limited time at my
disposal and the summarising of your book requires more work than I thought;
after all, once having taken up the work, I must do it properly...." Engels'
synopsis serves two useful contributions: First, Engels was a far more
rapid writer than Marx, and more readable. Second, Engels could distance himself
from the massive web of ideas without "losing his place in it", and identify
primary points to be made.


Engels could achieve this because he was intimately involved with the production of Capital. Marx forwarded sheets to Engels as they were printed; Engels
sent back his impressions and thoughts.


This text was published in Fortnightly Review. Engels only summarized
the first four chapters of Volume I of Capital.


NOTE: In the first edition, Volume I was divided into six chapters.
Subsequent editions renamed these chapters "parts". The 5th chapter was
broken into two parts; so that a total of seven parts resulted. The four
chapters summarized by Engels therefore correspond to the first four parts
of Capital as found today. Also note Marx made additions and alterations
to the text in subsequent editions. For example, Marx did not dwell in
the 1st chapter/part (Commodities) on value and exchange-value — so Engels'
synopsis doesn't deal with that subject, which is today integral to chapter one.


In the Progress Publishers introduction, we find:


The reviews and the synopsis made by Engels are inestimable aids to
the study of Capital. The contents of Capital are given for
the greater part in Marx's own words.


The centre of gravity, in the synopsis, as well as in the reviews,
lies in the theory of surplus-value, the corner-stone of Marx's
economic doctrine. Engels summarized Marx's theory of surplus-value with
special care, characterizing in detail the historical circumstances in
which the relations of capital exploitation spread, the working class made
its first steps in the struggle and the first skirmishes took place between
labor and capital.


Engels' synopsis that the transition from one category to another
is not a freak of reason but the reflection of the real historic process
of development. Keeping to the order of Marx's exposition, he shows how,
in the course of historic development, capital emerged on the basis of
commodity production, how it subordinated to itself the whole of production,
how simple co-operation was replaced by manufacture and this, in turn,
by machine production.





Reviews of Capital |
Capital Volume One |
1867 Works
Marx-Engels Archive |

 






==========

## From the Preface to the Second Volume of Capital









Economic Manuscripts: Capital: Volume Two



Capital Volume II


Preface to the First Edition

It was no easy task to put the second book of Capital in shape
for publication, and do it in a way that on the one hand would make it
a connected and as far as possible complete work, and on the other would
represent exclusively the work of its author, not of its editor. The great
number of available, mostly fragmentary, texts worked on added to the difficulties
of this task. At best one single manuscript (No. IV) had been revised throughout
and made ready for press. But the greater part had become obsolete through
subsequent revision. The bulk of the material was not finally polished,
in point of language, although in substance it was for the greater part
fully worked out. The language was that in which Marx used to make his
extracts: careless style full of colloquialisms, often containing coarsely
humorous expressions and phrases interspersed with English and French technical
terms or with whole sentences and even pages of English. Thoughts were
jotted down as they developed in the brain of the author. Some parts of
the argument would be fully treated, others of equal importance only indicated.
Factual material for illustration would be collected, but barely arranged,
much less worked out. At conclusions of chapters, in the author’s anxiety
to get to the next, there would often be only a few disjointed sentences
to mark the further development here left incomplete. And finally there
was the well-known handwriting which the author himself was sometimes unable
to decipher.
I have contented myself with reproducing these manuscripts as literally
as possible, changing the style only in places where Marx would have changed
it himself and interpolating explanatory sentences or connecting statements
only where this was absolutely necessary, and where, besides, the meaning
was clear beyond any doubt. Sentences whose interpretation was susceptible
of the slightest doubt were preferably copied word for word. The passages
which I have remodelled or interpolated cover barely ten pages in print
and concern only matters of form.
The mere enumeration of the manuscript material left by Marx for Book
II proves the unparalleled conscientiousness and strict self-criticism
with which he endeavoured to elaborate his great economic discoveries to
the point of utmost completion before he published them. This self-criticism
rarely permitted him to adapt his presentation of the subject, in content
as well as in form, to his ever widening horizon, the result of incessant
study. The above material consists of the following:
First, a manuscript entitled Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie,
containing 1,472 quarto pages in 23 notebooks, written in August 1861 to
June 1863. It is the continuation of a work of the same title, the first
part of which appeared in Berlin, in 1859. It treats, on pages 1-220 (Notebooks
I-V) and again on pages 1,159-1,472 (Notebooks XIX-XXIII), of the subjects
examined in Book I of Capital, from the transformation of money
into capital to the end, and is the first extant draft there of. Pages
973-1,158 (Notebooks XVI-XVIII) deal with capital and profit, rate of profit,
merchant’s capital and money-capital, that is to say with subjects which
later were developed in the manuscript for Book III. The themes treated
in Book II and very many of those which are treated later, in Book III,
are not yet arranged separately. They are treated in passing, to be specific,
in the section which makes up the main body of the manuscript, viz., pages
220-972 (Notebooks VI-XV), entitled “Theories of Surplus-Value.” This section
contains a detailed critical history of the pith and marrow of Political
Economy, the theory of surplus-value and develops parallel with it, in
polemics against predecessors, most of the points later investigated separately
and in their logical connection in the manuscript for Books II and III.
After eliminating the numerous passages covered by Books II and III, I
intend to publish the critical part of this manuscript as Capital,
Book IV. This manuscript, valuable though it is, could be used only very
little in the present edition of Book II.
The manuscript chronologically following next is that of Book III. It
was written, at least the greater part of it, in 1864 and 1865. Only after
this manuscript had been completed in its essential parts did Marx undertake
the elaboration of Book I which was published in 1867. I am now getting
this manuscript of Book III in shape for press.
The following period — after the publication of Book I — is represented
by a collection of four folio manuscripts for Book II, numbered I-IV by
Marx himself. Manuscript I (150 pages), presumably written in 1865 or 1867,
is the first separate, but more or less fragmentary, elaboration of Book
II as now arranged. Here too nothing could be used. Manuscript III is partly
a compilation of quotations and references to the notebooks containing
Marx’s extracts, most of them relating to Part I of Book II, partly elaborations
of particular points, especially a critique of Adam Smith’s propositions
on fixed and circulating capital and the source of profit; furthermore
an exposition of the relation of the rate of surplus-value to the rate
of profit, which belongs in Book III. Little that was new could be garnered
from the references, while the elaborations for volumes II and III were
superseded by subsequent revisions and had also to be discarded for the
greater part.
Manuscript IV is an elaboration, ready for press, of Part I and the
first chapters of Part II of Book II, and has been used where suitable.
Although it was found that this manuscript had been written earlier than
Manuscript II, yet, being far more finished in form, it could be used with
advantage for the corresponding part of this book. All that was needed
was a few addenda from Manuscript II. The latter is the only somewhat complete
elaboration of Book II and dates from the year 1870. The notes for the
final editing, which I shall mention immediately, say explicitly: “The
second elaboration must be used as the basis.”
There was another intermission after 1870, due mainly to Marx’s ill
health. Marx employed this time in his customary way, by studying agronomics,
rural relations in America and, especially, Russia, the money-market and
banking, and finally natural sciences such as geology and physiology. Independent
mathematical studies also figure prominently in the numerous extract notebooks
of this period. In the beginning of 1877 he had recovered sufficiently
to resume his main work. Dating back to the end of March 1877 there are
references and notes from the above-named four manuscripts intended as
the basis of a new elaboration of Book II, the beginning of which is represented
by Manuscript V (56 folio pages). It comprises the first four chapters
and is still little worked out. Essential points are treated in footnotes.
The material is rather collected than sifted, but it is the last complete
presentation of this, the most important section of Part I.
A first attempt to prepare from it a manuscript ready for press was
made in Manuscript VI (after October 1877 and before July 1878),
embracing only 17 quarto pages, the greater part of the first chapter.
A second and last attempt was made in Manuscript VII, “July 2, 1878,” only
7 folio pages.
About this time Marx seems to have realised that be would never be able
to finish the elaboration of the second and third books in a manner satisfactory
to himself unless a complete revolution in his health took place. Indeed,
manuscripts V-VIII show far too frequent traces of an intense struggle
against depressing ill health. The most difficult bit of Part I had been
worked over in Manuscript V. The remainder of Part I and all of Part II,
with the exception of Chapter XVII, presented no great theoretical difficulties.
But Part III, dealing with the reproduction and circulation of social capital,
seemed to him to be very much in need of revision; for Manuscript II had
first treated reproduction without taking into consideration money-circulation,
which is instrumental in effecting it, and then gone over the same question
again, but with money-circulation taken into account. This was to be eliminated
and the whole part to be reconstructed in such a way as to conform to the
author’s enlarged horizon. Thus Manuscript VIII came into existence, a
notebook containing only 70 quarto pages. But the vast amount of matter
Marx was able to compress into this space is clearly demonstrated on comparing
that manuscript with Part III, in print, after leaving out the pieces inserted
from Manuscript II.
This manuscript is likewise merely a preliminary treatment of the subject,
its main object having been to ascertain and develop the points of view
newly acquired in comparison with Manuscript II, with those points ignored
about which there was nothing new to say. An essential portion of Chapter
XVII, Part II, which anyhow is more or less relevant to Part III, was once
more reworked and expanded. The logical sequence is frequently interrupted,
the treatment of the subject gappy in places and very fragmentary, especially
the conclusion. But what Marx intended to say on the subject is said there,
somehow or other.
This is the material for Book II, out of which I was supposed “to make
something,” as Marx remarked to his daughter Eleanor shortly before his
death. I have construed this task in its narrowest meaning. So far as this
was at all possible, I have confined my work to the mere selection of a
text from the available variants. I always based my work on the last available
edited manuscript, comparing this with the preceding ones. Only the first
and third parts offered any real difficulties, i.e., of more than a mere
technical nature, and these were indeed considerable. I have endeavoured
to solve them exclusively in the spirit of the author.
I have translated quotations in the text whenever they are cited in
confirmation of facts or when, as in passages from Adam Smith, the original
is available to everyone who wants to go thoroughly into the matter. This
was impossible only in Chapter X, because there it is precisely the English
text that is criticised. The quotations from Book I are paged according to its second edition, the last one to appear in Marx’s lifetime.
For Book III, only the following materials are available, apart from
the first elaboration in manuscript form of Zur Kritik, from the
above-mentioned parts of Manuscript III, and from a few occasional short
notes scattered through various extract notebooks: The folio manuscript
of 1864-65, referred to previously, which is about as fully worked out
as Manuscript II of Book II; furthermore, a notebook dated 1875: The Relation
of the Rate of Surplus-Value to the Rate of Profit, which treats the subject
mathematically (in equations). The preparation of this Book for publication
is proceeding rapidly. So far as I am able to judge up to now, it will
present mainly technical difficulties, with the exception of a few but
very important sections.

I consider this an opportune place to refute a certain charge which
has been raised against Marx, first in only whispers, sporadically, but
more recently, after his death, proclaimed an established fact by German
Socialists of the Chair and of the State and by their hangers-on. It is
claimed that Marx plagiarised the work of Rodbertus. I have already stated
elsewhere [1]
what was most urgent in this regard, but not until now have I been able
to adduce conclusive proof.
As far as I know this charge was made for the first time in R. Meyer’s
Emancipationskampf des vierten Standes, p. 43:
“It can be proved that Marx has gathered the greater part of his critique from these publications” — meaning the works of Rodbertus dating back to the last half of the thirties.
I may well assume, until further evidence is produced, that the “whole proof” of this assertion consists in Rodbertus having assured Herr Meyer that this was so.
In 1879 Rodbertus himself appears on the scene and writes the following
to J. Zeller (Zeitschrift für die gesammte Staatswissenschaft, Tübingen,
1879, p. 219), with reference to his work Zur Erkenntniss unsrer staatswirtschaftlichen Zustände, 1842:
 “You will find that this” (the line of thought developed in it) “has
been very nicely used ... by Marx, without, however, giving me credit for
it.”
The posthumous publisher of Rodbertus’s works, Th. Kozak, repeats
his insinuation without further ceremony. (Das Kapital von Rodbertus. Berlin, 1884, Introduction, p. XV.)
Finally in the Briefe und Sozialpolitische Aufsätze von Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow, published by R. Meyer in 1881, Rodbertus says point-blank:
“To-day I find I have been robbed by Schäffle and Marx without having my name mentioned.” (Letter No. 60, p..134.)
And in another place, Rodbertus’s claim assumes
a more definite form:
 “In my third social letter I have shown virtually
in the same way as Marx, only more briefly and clearly, what the source of the surplus-value of the capitalist is.” (Letter No. 48, p. 111.)
Marx had never heard anything about any of these charges of plagiarism.
In his copy of the Emancipationskampf only that part had been cut
open which related to the International. The remaining pages were not opened
until I cut them myself after his death. He never looked at the Tübingen Zeitschrift. The Briefe, etc., to R. Meyer likewise remained
unknown to him, and I did not learn of the passage referring to the “robbery”
until Dr. Meyer himself was good enough to call my attention to it in 1884.
However, Marx was familiar with letter No. 48. Dr. Meyer had been so kind
as to present the original to the youngest daughter of Marx. When some
of the mysterious whispering about the secret source of his criticism having
to be sought in Rodbertus reached the ear of Marx, he showed me that letter
with the remark that here he had at last authentic information as to what
Rodbertus himself claimed; if that was all Rodbertus asserted he, Marx,
had no objection, and he could well afford to let Rodbertus enjoy the pleasure
of considering his own version the briefer and clearer one. In fact, Marx
considered the matter settled by this letter of Rodbertus.
He could so all the more since I know for certain that he was not in
the least acquainted with the literary activity of Rodbertus until about
1859, when his own critique of Political Economy had been completed, not
only in its fundamental outlines, but also in its more important details.
Marx began his economic studies in Paris, in 1843, starting with the great
Englishmen and Frenchmen. Of German economists he knew only Rau and List,
and he did not want any more of them. Neither Marx nor I heard a word of
Rodbertus’s existence until we had to criticise, in the Neue Rheinische
Zeitung, 1848, the speeches he made as Berlin Deputy and his actions
as Minister. We were both so ignorant that we had to ask the Rhenish deputies
who this Rodbertus was that had become a Minister so suddenly. But these
deputies too could not tell us anything about the economic writings of
Rodbertus. That on the other hand Marx had known very well already at that
time, without the help of Rodbertus, not only whence but also how

“the surplus-value of the capitalist” came into existence is proved by
his Poverty of Philosophy, 1847, and by his lectures on wage-labour
and capital, delivered in Brussels the same year and published in Nos.
264-69 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, in 1849. It was only in 1859,
through Lassalle, that Marx learned of the existence of a certain economist
named Rodbertus and thereupon Marx looked up the “third social letter”
in the British Museum.
These were the actual circumstances. And now let us see what there is
to the content, of which Marx is charged with “robbing” Rodbertus. Says
Rodbertus:
“In my third social letter I have shown in the same way as Marx,
only more briefly and clearly, what the source of the surplus-value of
the capitalist is.”
This, then, is the crux of the matter: The theory of surplus-value. And indeed, it would be difficult to say what else there is in Marx that Rodbertus might claim as his property. Thus Rodbertus declares here he is the real originator of the theory of surplus-value and that Marx robbed him of it.
And what has the third social letter to say in regard to the origin
of surplus-value? Simply this: That “rent,” his term which lumps together
ground-rent and profit, does not arise from an “addition of value” to the
value of a commodity, but
“from a deduction of value from wages; in other
words, because wages represent only a part of the value of a product,”
and if labour is sufficiently productive
“wages need not be equal to the natural exchange-value of the product of labour in order to leave enough of this value for the replacing of capital (!) and for rent.”
We are not informed however what sort of a “natural exchange-value” of a product it
is that leaves nothing for the “replacing of capital,” consequently, for
the replacement of raw material and the wear and tear of tools.
It is our good fortune to be able to state what impression was produced
on Marx by this stupendous discovery of Rodbertus. In the manuscript Zur
Kritik, notebook X, pp. 445 et seqq. we find a “Digression. Herr Rodbertus.
A New Ground-Rent Theory.” This is the only point of view from which Marx
there looks upon the third social letter. The Rodbertian theory of surplus-value
in general is dismissed with the ironical remark: “Mr. Rodbertus first
analyses the slate of affairs in a country where property in land and property
in capital are not separated and then arrives at the important conclusion
that rent (by which he means the entire surplus-value) is only equal to
the unpaid labour or to the quantity of products in which this labour is
expressed.” 
Capitalistic man has been producing surplus-value for several
hundred years and has gradually arrived at the point of pondering over
its origin. The view first propounded grew directly out of commercial practice:
surplus-value arises out of an addition to the value of the product. This
idea was current among the mercantilists. But James Steuart already realised
that in that case the one would necessarily lose what the other would gain.
Nevertheless, this view persisted for a long time afterwards, especially
among the Socialists. But it was thrust out of classical science by Adam
Smith.
He says in the Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, Ch. VI:
“As soon as stock has accumulated in the hands of particular persons, some of them will naturally employ it in setting to work industrious people, whom they will supply with materials and subsistence, in order to make a profit by the sale of their work, or by what their labour adds to the value of the materials.... The value which the workmen add to the materials, therefore, resolves itself in this case into two parts, of which
the one pays their wages, the other the profits of their employer

upon the whole stock of materials and wages which he advanced.”
And a little further on he says:
“As soon as the land of any country has all become
private property, the landlords, like all other men, love to reap where
they never sowed, and demand a rent even for its natural produce....” The
labourer “...must give up to the landlord a portion of what
his labour either collects or produces. This portion, or, what comes
to the same thing, the price of this portion, constitutes the rent of
land.”

Marx comments on this passage in the above-named manuscript Zur Kritik,
etc., p. 253: “Thus Adam Smith conceives surplus-value — that is, surplus-labour, the excess of labour performed and realised in the commodity over and above the paid labour, the labour which has received its equivalent in the wages
— as the general category, of which profit in the strict sense
and rent of land are merely branches.”
Adam Smith says furthermore (Vol. I, Ch. VIII):
“As soon as land becomes private property, the landlord demands a share of almost all the produce which the labourer can either raise or collect from it. His rent makes the first deduction from the produce of the labour which is employed upon land. It seldom happens that the person who tills the ground has
the wherewithal to maintain himself till he reaps the harvest. His maintenance
is generally advanced to him from the stock of a master, the farmer who
employs him, and who would have no interest to employ him, unless he was
to share in the produce of his labour, or unless his stock was to
be replaced to him with a profit. This profit makes a second deduction
from the produce of the labour which is employed upon land. The produce
of almost all other labour is liable to the like deduction of profit. In
all arts and manufactures the greater part of the workmen stand in need
of a master to advance them the materials of their work, and their wages
and maintenance till it be completed. He shares in the produce
of their labour, or in the value which it adds to the materials upon
which it is bestowed; and in this share consists his profit.”
Marx’s comment (Manuscript, p. 256): “Here therefore Adam Smith in plain
terms describes rent and profit on capital as mere deductions from
the workman’s product or the value of his product, which is equal to the
quantity of labour added by him to the material. This deduction however,
as Adam Smith has himself previously explained, can only consist of that
part of the labour which the workman adds to the materials, over and above
the quantity of labour which only pays his wages, or which only provides
an equivalent for his wages; that is, the surplus-labour, the unpaid part
of his labour.”
Thus even Adam Smith knew “the source of the surplus-value of the capitalist,” and furthermore also of that of the landlord. Marx acknowledged this
as early as 1861, while Rodbertus and the swarming mass of his admirers,
who grew like mushrooms under the warm summer showers of state socialism,
seem to have forgotten all about that.
“Nevertheless,” Marx continues, “he [Adam Smith] does not distinguish
surplus-value as such as a category on its own, distinct from the specific
forms it assumes in profit and rent. This is the source of much error and
inadequacy in his inquiry, and of even more in the work of Ricardo.”
This statement fits Rodbertus to a T. His “rent” is simply the sum of
ground-rent and profit. He builds up an entirely erroneous theory of ground-rent,
and he accepts profit without any examination of it, just as he finds it
among his predecessors.
Marx’s surplus-value, on the contrary, represents the general form
of the sum of values appropriated without any equivalent by the owners
of the means of production, and this form splits into the distinct, converted
forms of profit and ground-rent in accordance with very peculiar laws which
Marx was the first to discover. These laws will be expounded in Book III.
We shall see there that many intermediate links are required to arrive
from an understanding of surplus-value in general at an understanding of
its transformation into profit and ground-rent; in other words at an understanding
of the laws of the distribution of surplus-value within the capitalist
class.
Ricardo goes considerably further than Adam Smith. He bases his conception
of surplus-value on a new theory of value contained in embryo in Adam Smith,
but generally forgotten when it comes to applying it. This theory of value
became the starting-point of all subsequent economic science. From the
determination of the value of commodities by the quantity of labour embodied
in them he derives the distribution, between the labourers and capitalists,
of the quantity of value added by labour to the raw materials, and the
division of this value into wages and profit (i.e., here surplus-value).
He shows that the value of the commodities remains the same no matter what
may be the proportion of these two parts, a law which he holds has but
few exceptions. He even establishes a few fundamental laws, although couched
in too general terms, on the mutual relations of wages and surplus-value
(taken in the form of profit) (Marx, Das Kapital, Buch I, Kap. XV,
A), and shows that ground-rent is a surplus over and above profit, which
under certain circumstances does not accrue.
In none of these points did Rodbertus go beyond Ricardo. He either remained
wholly unfamiliar with the internal contradictions of the Ricardian theory
which caused the downfall of that school, or they only misled him into
raising utopian demands (his Zur Erkenntnis, etc., p. 130) instead
of inducing him to find economic solutions.
But the Ricardian theory of value and surplus-value did not have to
wait for Rodbertus’s Zur Erkenntnis in order to be utilised for
socialist purposes. On page 609 of the first volume (Das Kapital,
2nd ed.) we find the following quotation, “The possessors of surplus-produce or capital,” taken from a pamphlet entitled The Source and Remedy of the National Difficulties. A Letter to Lord John Russell, London, 1821. In this pamphlet of 40 pages, the importance of which should have been
noted if only on account of the one expression “surplus-produce or capital,” and which Marx saved from falling into oblivion, we read the following
statements:
“...whatever may be due to the capitalist” (from the standpoint of the capitalist) “he can only receive the surplus-labour of the labourer; for the labourer must live” (p. 23).
But how the labourer lives and hence how much the surplus-labour appropriated by the capitalist can amount to are very relative things.
“... if capital does not decrease in value
as it increases in amount, the capitalists will exact from the labourers
the produce of every hour’s labour beyond what it is possible for the labourer
to subsist on the capitalist may ... eventually say to the labourer, ‘You
shan’t eat bread ... because it is possible to subsist on beet root and
potatoes.’ And to this point have we come!” (Pp. 23-24.) “Why, if the
labourer can be brought to feed on potatoes instead of bread, it is indisputably
true that more can be exacted from his labour; that is to say, if when
he fed on bread, he was obliged to retain for the maintenance of
himself and family the labour of Monday and Tuesday, he will, on
potatoes, require only the half of Monday; and the remaining half of Monday and the whole of Tuesday are available either
for the service of the state or the capitalist.” (p. 26.) “It is admitted that the interest paid to the capitalists, whether in the nature of rents, interests on money, or profits of trade, is paid out of the labour
of others.” (p. 23.)
Here we have exactly the same idea of “rent” as Rodbertus
has, except that “interest” is used instead of “rent.”
Marx makes the following comment (manuscript Zur Kritik, p. 852): “This little known pamphlet — published at a time when the ‘incredible
cobbler’ MacCulloch began to be talked about — represents an essential
advance over Ricardo. It directly designates surplus-value, or ‘profit’

in the language of Ricardo (often also surplus-produce), or interest, as
the author of this pamphlet calls it, as surplus-labour, the labour which
the labourer performs gratuitously, which he performs in excess of that
quantity of labour by which the value of his labour-power is replaced,
i.e., an equivalent of his wages is produced. It was no more important
to reduce value to labour than to reduce surplus-value, represented by a surplus-produce, to surplus-labour. This has already been stated by Adam Smith and forms a main factor in Ricardo’s analysis. But they did not say so nor fix it anywhere in absolute form.” We read furthermore, on page 859 of the manuscript: “Moreover, the author is a prisoner of the economic categories as they have come down to him. Just
as the confounding of surplus-value and profit misleads Ricardo into unpleasant
contradictions, so this author fares no better by baptising surplus-value
with the name of ‘interest of capital.’ True, he advances beyond Ricardo
by having been the first to reduce all surplus-value to surplus-labour.
Furthermore, while calling surplus-value ‘interest of capital,’ he emphasises
at the same time that by this term he means the general form of surplus-labour
as distinguished from its special forms: rent, interest on money, and profit
of enterprise. And yet he picks the name of one of these special forms,
interest, for the general form. And this sufficed to cause his relapse
into economic slang.”
This last passage fits Rodbertus like a glove. He, too, is a prisoner
of the economic categories as they have come down to him. He, too, applies
to surplus-value the name of one of its converted sub-forms, rent, and
makes it quite indefinite at that. The result of these two mistakes is
that he relapses into economic slang, that he does not follow up his advance
over Ricardo critically, and that instead he is misled into using his unfinished
theory, even before it got rid of its egg-shell, as the basis for a utopia
with which, as always, he comes too late. The pamphlet appeared in 1821
and anticipated completely Rodbertus’s “rent” of 1842.
Our pamphlet is but the farthest outpost of an entire literature which
in the twenties turned the Ricardian theory of value and surplus-value
against capitalist production in the interest of the proletariat, fought
the bourgeoisie with its own weapons. The entire communism of Owen, so
far as it engages in polemics on economic questions, is based on Ricardo.
Apart from him, there are still numerous other writers, some of whom Marx
quoted as early as 1847 against Proudhon (Misère de la Philosophie,
p. 49), such as Edmonds, Thompson, Hodgskin, etc., etc., “and four more
pages of etceteras.” I select the following at random from among this multitude
of writings: An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth,
Most Conducive to Human Happiness, by William Thompson; a new edition, London, 1850. This work, written in 1822, first appeared in 1824. Here likewise the wealth appropriated by the non-producing classes is described everywhere as a deduction from the product of the labourer and rather strong
words are used. The author says:
“The constant effort of what has been
called society, has been to deceive and induce, to terrify and compel,
the productive labourer to work for the smallest possible portion of the
produce of his own labour” (P. 28). “Why not give him the whole absolute
produce of his labour?” (P. 32.) “This amount of compensation, exacted
by capitalists from the productive labourers, under the name of rent or
profits, is claimed for the use of land or other articles... For all the
physical materials on which, or by means of which, his productive powers
can be made available, being in the hands of others with interests opposed
to his, and their consent being a necessary preliminary to any exertion
on his part, is he not, and must he not always remain, at the mercy of
these capitalists for whatever portion of the fruits of his own labour

they may think proper to leave at his disposal in compensation for his
toils?” (p. 125.) “... in proportion to the amount of products
withheld, whether called profits, or taxes, or theft” (p. 126), etc.
I must admit that I do not write these lines without a certain mortification.
I will not make so much of the fact that the anti-capitalist literature
of England of the twenties and thirties is so totally unknown in Germany,
in spite of Marx’s direct references to it even in his Poverty of Philosophy,
and his repeated quotations from it, as for instance the pamphlet of 1821,
Ravenstone, Hodgskin, etc., in Volume I of Capital. But it is proof
of the grave deterioration of official Political Economy that not only
the Literatus vulgaris, who clings desperately to the coattails
of Rodbertus and “really has not learned anything,” but also the officially
and ceremoniously installed professor, who “boasts of his erudition,” has
forgotten his classical Political Economy to such an extent that he seriously
charges Marx with having purloined things from Rodbertus which may be found
even in Adam Smith and Ricardo.
But what is there new in Marx’s utterances on surplus-value? How is
it that Marx’s theory of surplus-value struck home like a thunderbolt out
of a clear sky, and that in all civilised countries, while the theories
of all his socialist predecessors, Rodbertus included, vanished without
having produced any effect?
The history of chemistry offers an illustration which explains this.
We know that late in the past century the phlogistic theory still prevailed.
It assumed that combustion consisted essentially in this: that a certain
hypothetical substance, an absolute combustible named phlogiston, separated
from the burning body. This theory sufficed to explain most of the chemical
phenomena then known, although it had to be considerably strained in some
cases. But in 1774 Priestley produced a certain kind of air
“which he found to be so pure, or so free from phlogiston, that common air seemed adulterated in comparison with it.”
He called it “dephlogisticated air.” Shortly after him Scheele obtained the same kind of air in Sweden and demonstrated its existence in the atmosphere. He also found that this kind of air disappeared whenever some body was burned in it or in ordinary air and therefore he called it “fire-air.”
“From these facts he drew the conclusion that the
combination arising from the union of phlogiston with one of the components
of the atmosphere” (that is to say, from combustion) “was nothing but fire
or heat which escaped through the glass.” [2]
Priestley and Scheele had produced oxygen without knowing what they
had laid their hands on. They “remained prisoners of the” phlogistic “categories
as they came down to them.” The element which was destined to upset all
phlogistic views and to revolutionise chemistry remained barren in their
hands. But Priestley had immediately communicated his discovery to Lavoisier
in Paris, and Lavoisier, by means of this discovery, now analysed the entire
phlogistic chemistry and came to the conclusion that this new kind of air
was a new chemical element, and that combustion was not a case of the mysterious
phlogiston departing from the burning body, but of this new element combining with that body. Thus he was the first to place all chemistry,
which in its phlogistic form had stood on its head, squarely on its feet.
And although he did not produce oxygen simultaneously and independently
of the other two, as he claimed later on, he nevertheless is the real discoverer

of oxygen vis-à-vis the others who had only produced it without
knowing what they had produced.
Marx stands in the same relation to his predecessors in the theory of
surplus-value as Lavoisier stood to Priestley and Scheele. The existence of that part of the value of products which we now call surplus-value
had been ascertained long before Marx. It had also been stated with more
or less precision what it consisted of, namely, of the product of the labour
for which its appropriator had not given any equivalent. But one did not
get any further. Some — the classical bourgeois economists — investigated
at most the proportion in which the product of labour was divided between
the labourer and the owner of the means of production. Others — the Socialists

— found that this division was unjust and looked for utopian means of
abolishing this injustice. They all remained prisoners of the economic
categories as they had come down to them.
Now Marx appeared upon the scene. And he took a view directly opposite
to that of all his predecessors. What they had regarded as a solution, he considered but a problem. He saw that he had to deal neither
with dephlogisticated air nor with fire-air, but with oxygen — that here
it was not simply a matter of stating an economic fact or of pointing out
the conflict between this fact and eternal justice and true morality, but
of explaining a fact which was destined to revolutionise all economics,
and which offered to him who knew how to use it the key to an understanding
of all capitalist production. With this fact as his starting-point he examined
all the economic categories which he found at hand, just as Lavoisier proceeding
from oxygen had examined the categories of phlogistic chemistry which he
found at hand. In order to understand what surplus-value was, Marx had
to find out what value was. He had to criticise above all the Ricardian
theory of value. Hence he analysed labour’s value-producing property and
was the first to ascertain what labour it was that produced value,
and why and how it did so. He found that value was nothing but congealed
labour of this kind, and this is a point which Rodbertus never grasped
to his dying day. Marx then investigated the relation of commodities to
money and demonstrated how and why, thanks to the property of value immanent
in commodities, commodities and commodity-exchange must engender the opposition
of commodity and money. His theory of money, founded on this basis, is
the first exhaustive one and has been tacitly accepted everywhere. He analysed
the transformation of money into capital and demonstrated that this transformation
is based on the purchase and sale of labour-power. By substituting labour-power,
the value-producing property, for labour he solved with one stroke one
of the difficulties which brought about the downfall of the Ricardian school,
viz., the impossibility of harmonising the mutual exchange of capital and
labour with the Ricardian law that value is determined by labour. By establishing
the distinction of capital into constant and variable he was enabled to
trace the real course of the process of the formation of surplus-value
in its minutest details and thus to explain it, a feat which none of his
predecessors had accomplished. Consequently he established a distinction
inside of capital itself with which neither Rodbertus nor the bourgeois
economists knew in the least what to do, but which furnishes the key for
the solution of the most complicated economic problems, as is strikingly
proved again by Book II and will be proved still more by Book III. He analysed
surplus-value further and found its two forms, absolute and relative surplus-value.
And he showed that they had played a different, and each time a decisive
role, in the historical development of capitalist production. On
the basis of this surplus-value he developed the first rational theory
of wages we have, and for the first time drew up an outline of the history
of capitalist accumulation and an exposition of its historical tendency.
And Rodbertus? After he has read all that, he — like the tendentious
economist he always is — regards it as “an assault on society,” finds
that he himself has said much more briefly and clearly what surplus-value
evolves from, and finally declares that all this does indeed apply to “the
present form of capital,” that is to say to capital as it exists historically,
but not to the “conception of capital,” namely the utopian idea which Herr
Rodbertus has of capital. Just like old Priestly, who swore by phlogiston
to the end of his days and refused to have anything to do with oxygen.
The only thing is that Priestly had actually produced oxygen first, while
Rodbertus had merely rediscovered a commonplace in his surplus-value, or
rather his “rent,” and that Marx, unlike Lavoisier, disdained to claim
that he was the first to discover the fact of the existence of surplus-value.
The other economic feats performed by Rodbertus are on about the same
plane. His elaboration of surplus-value into a utopia has already been
unintentionally criticised by Marx in his Poverty of Philosophy.
What else may be said about it I have said in my preface to the German
edition of that work. Rodbertus’s explanation of commercial crises as outgrowths
of the underconsumption of the working-class may already be found in Sismondi’s
Nouveaux Principes de l’Économie Politique, Book IV, Ch. IV. [3]
However, Sismondi always had the world-market in mind, while Rodbertus’s
horizon does not extend beyond the Prussian border. His speculations as
to whether wages are derived from capital or income belong to the domain
of scholasticism and are definitely settled in Part III of this second
book of Capital. His theory of rent has remained his exclusive property
and may rest in peace until the manuscript of Marx criticising it is published.
Finally his suggestions for the emancipation of the old Prussian landed
property from the oppression of capital are also entirely utopian;
for they evade the only practical question raised in this connection, viz.:
How can the old Prussian landed junker have a yearly income of, say, 20,000
marks and a yearly expenditure of, say, 30,000 marks, without running into
debt?
The Ricardian school suffered shipwreck about the year 1830 on the rock
of surplus-value. And what this school could not solve remained still more
insoluble for its successor, Vulgar Economy. The two points which caused
its failure were these:
1. Labour is the measure of value. However, living labour in its exchange
with capital has a lower value than materialised labour for which it is
exchanged. Wages, the value of a definite quantity of living labour, are
always less than the value of the product begotten by this same quantity
of living labour or in which this quantity is embodied. The question is
indeed insoluble, if put in this form. It has been correctly formulated
by Marx and thereby been answered. It is not labour which has a value.
As an activity which creates values it can no more have any special value
than gravity can have any special weight, heat any special temperature,
electricity any special strength of current. It is not labour which is
bought and sold as a commodity, but labour-power. As soon as labour-power
becomes a commodity, its value is determined by the labour embodied in
this commodity as a social product. This value is equal to the labour socially
necessary for the production and reproduction of this commodity. Hence
the purchase and sale of labour-power on the basis of its value thus defined
does not at all contradict the economic law of value.
2. According to the Ricardian law of value, two capitals employing equal
quantities of equally paid living labour all other conditions being equal,
produce commodities of equal value and likewise surplus-value, or profit,
of equal quantity in equal periods of time. But if they employ unequal
quantities of living labour, they cannot produce equal surplus-values,
or, as the Ricardians say, equal profits. Now in reality the opposite takes
place. In actual fact, equal capitals, regardless of how much or how little
living labour is employed by them, produce equal average profits in equal
times. Here there is therefore a contradiction of the law of value which
had been noticed by Ricardo himself, but which his school also was unable
to reconcile. Rodbertus likewise could not but note this contradiction.
But instead of resolving it, he made it one of the starting-points of his
utopia. (Zur Erkenntnis, p. 131.) Marx had resolved this contradiction
already in the manuscript of his Zur Kritik. According to the plan
of Capital, this solution will be provided in Book III. Months will
pass before that will be published. Hence those economists who claim to
have discovered in Rodbertus the secret source and a superior predecessor
of Marx have now an opportunity to demonstrate what the economics of a
Rodbertus can accomplish. If they can show in which way an equal average
rate of profit can and must come about, not only without a violation of
the law of value, but on the very basis of it, I am willing to discuss
the matter further with them. In the meantime they had better make haste.
The brilliant investigations of the present Book II and their entirely
new results in fields hitherto almost untrod are merely introductory to
the contents of Book III, which develops the final conclusions of Marx’s
analysis of the process of social reproduction on a capitalist basis. When
this Book III appears, little mention will be made of the economist called
Rodbertus.
The second and third books of Capital were to be dedicated as
Marx had stated repeatedly, to his wife.

Frederick Engels
London, on Marx’s birthday, May 5, 1885

Preface to the Second Edition
The present second edition is, in the main, a faithful reprint of the
first. Typographical errors have been corrected, a few stylistic blemishes
eliminated, and a few short paragraphs that contain only repetitions struck
out.
The third book, which presented quite unforeseen difficulties, is now
also nearly ready in manuscript. If my health holds out it will be ready
for press this autumn. 

F. Engels
London, 15 July 1893
 

Notes

1. In the Preface to Marx’s The Poverty of Philosophy, translated by E. Bernstein and K. Kautsky, Stuttgart, 1885.

2. Roscoe and Schorlemmer, Ausführiches Lehrbuch der Chemie, Braunschweig, 1877, I, pp. 13, 18.

3. “Thus the home market becomes ever more constricted by the concentration of riches in the hands of a small number of proprietors,
and industry is forced more and more to seek its outlets in foreign markets,
where still greater revolutions await it” (i.e. the crisis of 1817, which
Sismondi goes on to describe). 1819 edition, I, p. 336.
 


Chapter 1 |
Table of Contents




==========

## Address to the National Labour Union of the United States






The International Workingmen's Association, Address to the National Labor Union of the United States



The International Workingmen's Association
Address to the National Labor Union of the United States


Written: by Marx in English, May 12th, 1869;
First published: as a leaflet, Address to the National Labour Union of the United States in 1869;
From: the minutes of the General Council meeting, May 11, 1869, as taken by George Eccarius.

"Citizen Marx then rose and said that most members would have seen
a letter from Professor Goldwin Smith in the Bee-Hive [of May 8,
1869] respecting the impression made in America by the speech of Senator
Sumner, and he, Citizen Marx, had thought it was a proper occassion for
the Council to appeal to the workingmen of America to put a stop to these
menaces of the Republican party.

"With this intention, he had drawn up an address to the National Labor
Union of the Untied States which, if approved of by the Council, should
be adopted and sent to America. He then reads as follows...

*

Fellow Workmen:
In the initiatory program of our Association we stated:
"It was not the wisdom of the ruling classes, but the heroic resistance
to their criminal folly by the working classes of England, that saved the
west of Europe from plunging headlong into an infamous crusade for the
perpetuation and propagation of slavery on the other side of the Atlantic."

Your turn has now come to stop a war the clearest result of which would
be, for an indefinite period, to hurl back the ascendant movement of the
working class on both sides of the Atlantic.
We need hardly tell you that there exist European powers anxiously
bent upon hurrying the United States into a war with England. A glance
at commercial statistics will show that the Russian export of raw produce,
and Russia has nothing else to export, was rapidly giving way before American
competition when the civil war suddenly turned the scales. To convert the
American plowshares into swords would just now rescue from impending bankruptcy
that despotic power which your republican statesmen have, in their wisdom,
chosen for their confidential adviser. But quite apart from the particular
interests of this or that government, is it not the general interest of
our common oppressors to turn our fast-growing international cooperation
into an internecine war?
In a congratulatory address to Mr. Lincoln on his reelection as
president, we expressed our conviction that the American Civil War would
prove of as great import to the advancement of the working class as the
American War of Independence had proved to that of the middle class. And,
in point of fact, the victorious termination of the antislavery war has
opened a new epoch in the annals of the working class. In the States themselves,
an independent working-class movement, looked upon with an evil eye by
your old parties and their professional politicians, has since that date
sprung into life. To fructify it wants years of peace. To crush it, a war
between the Untied States and England is wanted.
The next palpable effect of the Civil War was, of course, to deteriorate
the position of the American workman. In the United States, as in Europe,
the monster incubus of a national debt was shifted from hand to hand, to
settle down on the shoulders of the working class. The prices of necessaries,
says one of your statesmen, have since 1860 risen 78 per cent, while the
wages of unskilled labor rose 50 per cent, those of skilled labor 60 per
cent only. "Pauperism," he complains, "grows now in America faster than
population." Moreover, the suffering of the working of the working classes
set off as a foil the newfangled luxury of financial aristocrats, shoddy
aristocrats, and similar vermin bred by wars. Yet, for all this, the Civil
War did compensate by freeing the slave and the consequent moral impetus
it gave to your own class movement. A second war, not hallowed by a sublime
purpose and a great social necessity, but of the Old World's type, would
forge chains for the free lborer instead of tearing asunder those of the
slave. The accumulated misery left in its track would afford your capitalists
at once the motive and the means of divorce the working class from its
bold nd just aspirations by the soulless sword of a standing army.
On you, then, depends the glorious task to prove to the world
that now at last the working classes are bestriding the scene of history
no longer as servile retiners but as independent actors, conscious of their
own responsibility, and able to command peace where their would-be masters
shout war.
*

After being read, the minutes continue:
"Citizen Ogder took objection to the word vermin. Citizen Lucraft preferred
it and Citizen Marx stated that no other word could be substituted without
altering the context.... It was agreed that all the Council members should
sign it and that their occupation should be stated."

So the document was signed thusly:


In the name of the General Council of the International Working Men's
Association
BRITISH NATIONALITY: R. Applegarth, carpenter; M. J. Boon, engineer; J. Buckley, painter; J. Hales, elastic web weaver; Harriet Law; B. Lucraft, chair maker; J. Milner, tailor; G. Ogder,  shoemaker; J. Ross, bootcloser; B. Shaw, painter; Cowell Stepney; J. Warren, trunk maker; J. Weston, handrail maker. FRENCH NATIONALITY: E. Puont, instrument maker; Jules Johannard, lithographer; Paul Lafargue. GERMAN NATIONALITY: G. Eccarious, tailor; W. Limburg, shoemaker; Karl Marx.
 SWISS NATIONALITY: H. Jung, watchmaker; A. Muller, watchmaker. BELGIAN NATIONALITY: M. Bernard, painter. DANISH NATIONALITY: J. Cohn, cigar maker. POLISH NATIONALITY: Zabicki, compositor.
B. Lucraft, Chairman, Cowell Stepney, Treasurer, J. George Eccarius, General Secretary

 


International Workingmen's Association Index |
Documents




==========

## Preface to Second Edition of The Peasant War in Germany




The Peasant War in Germany: Preface








The Peasant War in Germany by Frederick Engels

Preface to the Second Edition (1870)
This work was written in London in the summer of 1850, under the vivid impression of the counter-revolution that had just been completed. It appeared in 1850 in the fifth and sixth issues of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, a political economic review edited by Karl Marx in Hamburg. My political friends in Germany desire to see it in book form, and I hereby fulfil that desire, since, unfortunately, it still has the interest of timeliness.
The work does not pretend to present independently collected material. Quite the contrary, all the material relating to the peasant revolts and to Thomas Muenzer has been taken from Zimmermann[1] whose book, although showing gaps here and there, is still the best presentation of the facts. Moreover, old Zimmermann enjoyed his subject. The same revolutionary instinct which makes him here the advocate of the oppressed classes, made him later one of the best in the extreme left wing of Frankfurt.
If, nevertheless, the Zimmermann representation lacks internal coherence; if it does not succeed in showing the religious and political controversies of that epoch as a reflection of the class struggles that were taking place simultaneously; if it sees in the class struggles only oppressors and oppressed, good and evil, and the final victory of evil; if its insight into social conditions which determined both the outbreak and the outcome of the struggle is extremely poor, it was the fault of the time in which that book came into existence. Nevertheless, for its time, and among the German idealistic works on history, it stands out as written in a very realistic vein.
This book, while giving the historic course of the struggle only in its outlines, undertakes to explain the origin of the peasant wars, the attitude of the various parties which appear in the war, the political and religious theories through which those parties strove to make clear to themselves their position; and finally, the result of the struggle as determined by the historical-social conditions of life, to show the political constitution of Germany of that time, the revolt against it; and to prove that the political and religious theories were not the causes, but the result of that stage in the development of agriculture, industry, land and waterways, commerce and finance, which then existed in Germany. This, the only materialistic conception of history, originates, not from myself but from Marx, and can be found in his works on the French Revolution of 1848–9, published in the same review, and in his Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.
The parallel between the German Revolutions of 1525 and of 1848–9 was too obvious to be left entirely without attention. However, together with an identity of events in both cases, as for instance, the suppression of one local revolt after the other by the army of the princes, together with a sometimes comic similitude in the behaviour of the city middle-class, the difference is quite clear.
“Who profited by the Revolution of 1525? The princes. Who profited by the Revolution of 1848? The big princes, Austria and Prussia. Behind the princes of 1525 there stood the lower middle-class of the cities, held chained by means of taxation. Behind the big princes of 1850, there stood the modern big bourgeoisie, quickly subjugating them by means of the State debt. Behind the big bourgeoisie stand the proletarians.”
I am sorry to state that in this paragraph too much honour was given to the German bourgeoisie. True, it had the opportunity of “quickly subjugating” the monarchy by means of the State debt. Never did it avail itself of this opportunity.
Austria fell as a boon into the lap of the bourgeoisie after the war of 1866, but the bourgeoisie does not understand how to govern. It is powerless and inefficient in everything. Only one thing is it capable of doing: to storm against the workers as soon as they begin to stir. It remains at the helm only because the Hungarians need it.
And in Prussia? True, the State debt has increased by leaps and bounds. The deficit has become a permanent feature. The State expenditures keep growing, year in and year out. The bourgeoisie have a majority in the Chamber. No taxes can be increased and no debts incurred without their consent. But where is their power in the State? It was only a couple of months ago, when a deficit was looming, that again they found themselves in the most favourable position. They could have gained considerable concessions by persevering. What was their reaction? They considered it a sufficient concession when the Government allowed them to lay at its feet nine millions, not for one year alone, but to be collected indefinitely every year.
I do not want to blame the “national liberals” of the Chamber more than is their due. I know they have been forsaken by those who stand behind them, by the mass of the bourgeoisie. This mass does not wish to govern. 1848 is still in its bones.
Why the German bourgeoisie has developed this remarkable trait, will be discussed later.
In general, however, the above quotation has proved perfectly true. Beginning from 1850, the small States were in constant retreat, serving only as levers for Prussian and Austrian intrigues. Austria and Prussia were engaged in ever-stronger struggles for supremacy. Finally, the fearful clash of 1866 took place. Austria, retaining all its provinces, subjugated, directly and indirectly, the entire north of Prussia, while leaving the fate of the three southern States in the air.
In all these grand activities of the States, only the following are of particular importance for the German working class:
First, that universal suffrage has given the workers the power to be directly represented in the legislative assemblies.
Second, that Prussia has set a good example by swallowing three crowns by the grace of God. That after this operation her own crown is maintained by the grace of God as pure as she claims it to be, not even the national liberals believe any more.
Third, that there is only one serious enemy of the Revolution in Germany at the present time – the Prussian government.
Fourth, that the Austro-Germans will now be compelled to ask themselves what they wish to be, Germans or Austrians; whom they wish to adhere to, to Germany or her extraordinary transleithanian appendages. It has been obvious for a long time that they will have to give up one or the other. Still, this has been continually glossed over by the petty-bourgeois democracy.
As to other important controversies concerning 1866 which were threshed out between the “national-liberals” and the people’s party ad nauseam, coming years will show that the two standpoints fought so bitterly simply because they were the opposite poles of the same stupidity.
In the social conditions of Germany, the year 1866 has changed almost nothing. A few bourgeois reforms: uniform measures and weights, freedom of movement, freedom of trade, etc. – all within limits befitting bureaucracy, do not even come up to that of which other western European countries have been in possession for a long while, and leave the main evil, the system of bureaucratic concessions, unshaken. As to the proletariat, the freedom of movement, and of citizenship, the abolition of passports and other such legislation is made illusory by the current police practice.
What is much more important than the grand manoeuvres of the State in 1866 is the growth of German industry and commerce, of the railways, the telegraph, and ocean steamship navigation since 1848. This progress may be lagging behind that of England or even France, but it is unheard of for Germany, and has done more in twenty years than would have been previously possible in a century. Germany has been drawn, earnestly and irrevocably, into world commerce. Capital invested in industry has multiplied rapidly. The position of the bourgeoisie has improved accordingly. The surest sign of industrial prosperity – speculation – has blossomed richly, princes and dukes being chained to its triumphal chariot. German capital is now constructing Russian and Rumanian railways, whereas, only fifteen years ago, the German railways went a-begging to English entrepreneurs. How, then, is it possible that the bourgeoisie has not conquered political power, that it behaves in so cowardly a manner toward the government?
It is the misfortune of the German bourgeoisie to have come too late – quite in accordance with the beloved German tradition. The period of its ascendancy coincides with the time when the bourgeoisie of the other western European countries is politically on the downward path. In England, the bourgeoisie could place its real representative, Bright, into the government only by extending the franchise which in the long run is bound to put an end to its very domination. In France, the bourgeoisie, which for two years only, 1849–50, had held power as a class under the republican régime, was able to continue its social existence only by transferring its power to Louis Bonaparte and the army. Under present conditions of enormously increased interdependence of the three most progressive European countries, it is no more possible for the German bourgeoisie extensively to utilize its political power while the same class has outlived itself in England and France. It is a peculiarity of the bourgeoisie, distinguishing it from all other classes, that a point is being reached in its development after which every increase in its power, that is, every enlargement of its capital, only tends to make it more and more incapable of retaining political dominance. “Behind the big bourgeoisie stand the proletarians.” In the degree as the bourgeoisie develops its industry, its commerce, and its means of communication, it also produces the proletariat. At a certain point, which must not necessarily appear simultaneously and on the same stage of development everywhere, it begins to note that this, its second self, has outgrown it. From then on, it loses the power for exclusive political dominance. It looks for allies with whom to share its authority, or to whom to cede all power, as circumstances may demand.
In Germany, this turning point came for the bourgeoisie as early as 1848. The bourgeoisie became frightened, not so much by the German, as by the French proletariat. The battle of June, 1848, in Paris, showed the bourgeoisie what could be expected. The German proletariat was restless enough to prove to the bourgeoisie that the seed of revolution had been sown also in German soil. From that day, the edge of bourgeois political action was broken. The bourgeoisie looked around for allies. It sold itself to them regardless of price, and there it remains.
These allies are all of a reactionary turn. It is the king’s power, with his army and his bureaucracy; it is the big feudal nobility; it is the smaller junker; it is even the clergy. The bourgeoisie has made so many compacts and unions with all of them to save its dear skin, that now it has nothing more to barter. And the more the proletariat developed, the more it began to feel as a class and to act as one, the feebler became the bourgeoisie. When the astonishingly bad strategy of the Prussians triumphed over the astonishingly worse strategy of the Austrians at Sadowa, it was difficult to say who gave a deeper sigh of relief, the Prussian bourgeois, who was a partner to the defeat at Sadowa, or his Austrian colleague.
Our upper middle-class of 1870 acted in the same fashion as did the moderate middle-class of 1525. As to the small bourgeoisie, the master artisans and merchants, they remain unchanged. They hope to climb up to the big bourgeoisie, and they are fearful lest they be pushed down into the ranks of the proletariat. Between fear and hope, they will in times of struggle seek to save their precious skin and to join the victors when the struggle is over. Such is their nature.
The social and political activities of the proletariat have kept pace with the rapid growth of industry since 1848. The role of the German workers, as expressed in their trade unions, their associations, political organisations and public meetings, at elections, and in the so-called Reichstag, is alone a sufficient indication of the transformation which came over Germany in the last twenty years. It is to the credit of the German workers that they alone have managed to send workers and workers’ representatives into the Parliament – a feat which neither the French nor the English had hitherto accomplished.
Still, even the proletariat shows some resemblance to 1525. The class of the population which entirely and permanently depends on wages is now, as then, a minority of the German people. This class is also compelled to seek allies. The latter can be found only among the petty bourgeoisie, the low grade proletariat of the cities, the small peasants, and the wage-workers of the land.
The petty bourgeoisie has been mentioned above. This class is entirely unreliable except when a victory has been won. Then its noise in the beer saloons is without limit. Nevertheless, there are good elements among it, who, of their own accord, follow the workers.
The lumpenproletariat, this scum of the decaying elements of all classes, which establishes headquarters in all the big cities, is the worst of all possible allies. It is an absolutely venal, an absolutely brazen crew. If the French workers, in the course of the Revolution, inscribed on the houses: Mort aux voleurs! (Death to the thieves!) and even shot down many, they did it, not out of enthusiasm for property, but because they rightly considered it necessary to hold that band at arm’s length. Every leader of the workers who utilises these gutter-proletarians as guards or supports, proves himself by this action alone a traitor to the movement.
The small peasants (bigger peasants belong to the bourgeoisie) are not homogeneous. They are either in serfdom bound to their lords and masters, and inasmuch as the bourgeoisie has failed to do its duty in freeing those people from serfdom, it will not be difficult to convince them that salvation, for them, can be expected only from the working class; or they are tenants, whose situation is almost equal to that of the Irish. Rents are so high that even in times of normal crops the peasant and his family can hardly eke out a bare existence; when the crops are bad, he virtually starves. When he is unable to pay his rent, he is entirely at the mercy of the landlord. The bourgeoisie thinks of relief only under compulsion. Where, then, should the tenants look for relief outside of the workers?
There is another group of peasants, those who own a small piece of land. In most cases they are so burdened with mortgages that their dependence upon the usurer is equal to the dependence of the tenant upon the landlord. What they earn is practically a meager wage, which, since good and bad crops alternate, is highly uncertain. These people cannot have the least hope of getting anything out of the bourgeoisie, because it is the bourgeoisie, the capitalist usurers, that squeeze the life-blood out of them. Still, the peasants cling to their property, though in reality it does not belong to them, but to the usurers. It will be necessary to make it clear to these people that only when a government of the people will have transformed all mortgages into a debt to the State, and thereby lowered the rent, will they be able to free themselves from the usurer. This, however, can be accomplished only by the working class.
Wherever middle and large land ownership prevails, the wage-workers of the land form the most numerous class. This is the case throughout the entire north and east of Germany, and it is here that the industrial workers of the city find their most numerous and natural allies. In the same way as the capitalist is opposed to the industrial worker, the large landowner or large tenant is opposed to the wage-workers of the land. The measures that help the one must also help the other. The industrial workers can free themselves only by turning the capital of the bourgeoisie, that is, the raw materials, machines and tools, the foodstuffs necessary for production, into social property, their own property, to be used by them in common. Similarly, the wage-workers of the land can be freed from their hideous misery only when the main object of their work, the land itself, will be withdrawn from the private property of the large peasants and still larger feudal masters, and transformed into social property to be cultivated by an association of land workers on common basis. And here we come to the famous decision of the International Socialist Congress in Basle: That it is in the interest of society to transform property on land into common national property. This decision was made primarily for those countries where there is large land ownership, with large agricultural enterprises, with one master and many wage-workers in every estate. It is these conditions that still prevail in Germany, and next to England, the decision was most timely for Germany. The agricultural proletariat, the wage-workers of the land, is the class from which the bulk of the armies of the princes is being recruited. It is the class which, thanks to universal suffrage, sends into Parliament the great mass of feudal masters and Junkers. However, it is also the class nearest to the industrial workers of the city. It shares their conditions of living, and it is still deeper steeped in misery than the city workers. This class, powerless because split and scattered, but possessing hidden power which is so well known to the government and nobility that they purposely allow the schools to deteriorate in order that the rural population should remain unenlightened, must be called to life and drawn into the movement. This is the most urgent task of the German labour movement. From the day when the mass of the workers of the land have learned to understand their own interests, a reactionary, feudal, bureaucratic or bourgeois government in Germany becomes an impossibility.

 

Contents | Addendum to the Preface | Marx/Engels Archive
Last updated on 15 July 2020




==========

## Supplement to the Preface of 1870 for the Third Edition of 1875




The Peasant War in Germany: Addendum 








The Peasant War in Germany by Frederick Engels

Addendum to the Preface
THE preceding lines were written over four years ago, but they are valid also at present. What was true after Sadowa and the partition of Germany is being confirmed also after Sedan and the erection of the Holy German Empire of Prussian nationality. Little indeed are the “world-shaking” activities of the States in the realm of so-called big politics in a position to change the trend of historic development.
What these grand activities of the States are in a position to accomplish is to hasten the tempo of historic movement. In this respect, the originators of the above-mentioned “world-shaking” events have made involuntary successes which to themselves appear highly undesirable, but which, however, they must take into the bargain, for better or worse.
Already the war of 1866 had shaken the old Prussia to its foundations. After 1848 it was difficult to bring the rebellious industrial element of the western provinces, bourgeois as well as proletarian, under the old discipline. Still, somehow, this was accomplished, and the interests of the Junkers of the eastern provinces, together with those of the army, again became dominant in the State. In 1866 almost all the northwest of Germany became Prussian. Besides the incurable moral injury to the Prussian crown, by the fact that it had swallowed up three other crowns by the grace of God, the centre of gravity of the monarchy had moved considerably westward. The four million Rhinelanders and Westphalians were reinforced, first, by four million Germans annexed through the North German Alliance directly, and then by six million annexed indirectly. In 1870, however, eight million southwest Germans were added, so that, in the “new monarchy,” the fourteen and a half million old Prussians (all the six East Elbian provinces, among them, two million Poles) were opposed by twenty-five million who had long outgrown the old Prussian junker feudalism. So it happened that the very victories of the Prussian army displaced the entire foundation of the Prussian State edifice; the junker dominance became ever more intolerable, even for the government itself. At the same time, however, the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the workers, made inevitable by the impetuous growth of industry, relegated to the background the struggle between Junkers and bourgeoisie, so that the inner social foundations of the old State suffered a complete transformation. Ever since 1840, the condition making possible the existence of the slowly rotting monarchy was the struggle between nobility and bourgeoisie, wherein the monarchy retained equilibrium. From the moment, however, when it was no more a question of protecting the nobility against the onslaught of the bourgeoisie, but of protecting all propertied classes against the onslaught of the working-class, the absolute monarchy had to turn to that form of state which was expressly devised for this specific purpose – the Bonapartist monarchy. This change of Prussia towards Bonapartism I have discussed in another place (Woknungsfrage). What I did not stress there, and what is very important in this connection, is that this change was the greatest progress made by Prussia after 1848, which only shows how backward Prussia was in point of modern development. It is a fact that the Prussian State still was a semi-feudal State, whereas Bonapartism is, at all events, a modern form of state which presupposes the abolition of feudalism. Thus Prussia must decide to do away with its numerous remnants of feudalism, to sacrifice its junkerdom as such. This, naturally, is being done in the mildest possible form, and under the tune of the favourite melody, “Always slowly forward.” An example of such “reform” work is the notorious organisation of districts, which, removing the feudal privileges of the individual junker in relation to his estate, restores them as special privileges of the big landowners in relation to the entire district. The substance remains, it being only translated from the feudal into the bourgeois dialect. The old Prussian junker is forcibly being transformed into something akin to the English squire. He need not have offered so much resistance, because the one is just as foolish as the other.
Thus it was the peculiar feat of Prussia not only to culminate, by the end of this century, her bourgeois revolution begun in 1808–13 and continued in 1848, but to culminate it in the present form of Bonapartism. If everything goes well, and the world remains nice and quiet, and we all become old enough, we can still perhaps live to see – about 1900 – the government of Prussia actually relinquishing all feudal institutions, and Prussia finally reaching a point where France stood in 1792.
Speaking positively, the abolition of feudalism means the introduction of bourgeois conditions. In the measure as the privileges of the nobility fall, legislation becomes more and more bourgeois. Here, again, we meet with the chief point at issue, the attitude of the German bourgeoisie towards the government. We have seen that the government is compelled to introduce these slow and petty reforms, but in its relation to the bourgeoisie, the government portrays these small concessions as sacrifices in favour of the bourgeoisie, as concessions yielded by the crown with difficulty and pain, and for which the bourgeoisie must, in return, yield something to the government. The bourgeoisie, on the other hand, though quite aware of this state of affairs, allows itself to be fooled. This is the source of the tacit agreement which is the basis of all Reichstag and Chamber debates. On the one hand, the government reforms the laws at a snail pace tempo in the interests of the bourgeoisie; it removes the impediments to industry emanating from the multiplicity of small states; it creates unity of coinage, of measures and weights; it gives freedom of trade, etc.; it grants the freedom of movement; it puts the working power of Germany at the unlimited disposal of capital; it creates favourable conditions for trade and speculation. On the other hand, the bourgeoisie leaves in the hands of the government all actual political power; it votes taxes, loans and recruits; it helps to frame all new reform laws in a way that the old police power over undesirable individuals shall remain in full force. The bourgeoisie buys its gradual social emancipation for the price of immediate renunciation of its own political power. Naturally, the motive which makes such agreement acceptable to the bourgeoisie is not the fear of the government but the fear of the proletariat.
Miserable as the bourgeoisie appears in the political realm, it cannot be denied that as far as industry and commerce are concerned, the bourgeoisie fulfils its historic duty. The growth of industry and commerce mentioned already in the introduction to the second edition has been going on with even greater vigour. What has taken place in the Rhenish-Westphalian industrial region since 1869, is unprecedented for Germany, and it reminds one of the rapid growth in the English manufacturing districts at the beginning of this century. The same thing will happen in Saxony and Upper Silesia, in Berlin, Hanover, and the southern States. At last we have world trade, a really big industry, and a really modern bourgeoisie. But we have also had a real crisis, and we have a truly mighty proletariat. For the future historian of Germany, the battle roar of 1859–64 on the field of Spicheren, Mars la Tour, Sedan, and the rest, will be of much less importance than the unpretentious, quiet, and constantly forward-moving development of the German proletariat. Immediately after 1870, the German workers stood before a grave trial – the Bonapartist war provocation and its natural sequence, the general national enthusiasm in Germany. The German workers did not allow themselves to be illusioned for a moment. Not a trace of national chauvinism made itself manifest among them. In the midst of a mania for victory, they remained cool, demanding “equitable peace with the French Republic and no annexations,” and not even the state of siege was in a position to silence them. No glory of battle, no phraseology of German “imperial magnificence” attracted them. Their sole aim remained the liberation of the entire European proletariat. We may say with full assurance that in no country have the workers stood such a difficult test with such splendid results.
The state of siege of wartime was followed by trials for treason, lèse majesté, and contempt of officers and by ever increasing police atrocities practised in peace time. The Volksstaat had three or four editors in prison simultaneously; the other papers, in the same ratio. Every known party speaker had to face court at least once a year, and was usually convicted. Deportations, confiscations, suppressions of meetings rapidly followed one another, but all to no avail. The place of every prisoner or deportee was immediately filled by another. For one suppressed gathering, two others were substituted, wearing out arbitrary police power in one locality after the other by endurance and strict conformity to the law. Persecution defeated its own purpose. Far from breaking the workers’ party or even bending it, it attracted ever new recruits, and strengthened the organisation. In their struggle against the authorities and the individual bourgeois, the workers manifested an intellectual and moral superiority. Particularly in their conflicts with the employers of labour did they show that they, the workers, were now the educated class, while the capitalists were dupes. In their fights, a sense of humour prevailed, showing how sure they were of their cause, and how superior they felt. A struggle thus conducted on historically prepared soil must yield great results. The success of the January (1874) elections stood out, unique in the history of the modern labour movement, and the astonishment aroused by them throughout Europe was perfectly deserved.
The German workers have two important advantages compared with the rest of Europe. First, they belong to the most theoretical people of Europe; second, they have retained that sense of theory which the so-called “educated” people of Germany have totally lost. Without German philosophy, particularly that of Hegel, German scientific Socialism (the only scientific Socialism extant) would never have come into existence. Without a sense for theory, scientific Socialism would have never become blood and tissue of the workers. What an enormous advantage this is, may be seen on the one hand from the indifference of the English labour movement towards all theory, which is one of the reasons why it moves so slowly in spite of the splendid organisation of the individual unions; on the other hand, from the mischief and confusion created by Proudhonism in its original form among the Frenchmen and Belgians, and in its caricature form, as presented by Bakunin, among the Spaniards and Italians.
The second advantage is that, chronologically speaking, the Germans were the last to appear in the labour movement. In the same manner as German theoretical Socialism will never forget that it rests on the shoulders of Saint Simon, Fourier and Owen, the three who, in spite of their fantastic notions and Utopianism, belonged to the most significant heads of all time and whose genius anticipated numerous things the correctness of which can now be proved in a scientific way, so the practical German labour movement must never forget that it has developed on the shoulders of the English and French movements, that it had utilised their experience, acquired at a heavy price, and that for this reason it was in a position to avoid their mistakes which in their time were unavoidable. Without the English trade unions and the French political workers’ struggles preceding the German labour movement, without the mighty impulse given by the Paris Commune, where would we now be?
It must be said to the credit of the German workers that they have utilised the advantages of their situation with rare understanding. For the first time in the history of the labour movement the struggle is being so conducted that its three sides, the theoretical, the political and the practical economical (opposition to the capitalists), form one harmonious and well-planned entity. In this concentric attack, as it were, lies the strength and invincibility of the German movement.
It is due to this advantageous situation on the one hand, to the insular peculiarities of the British, and to the cruel suppression of the French movements on the other, that for the present moment the German workers form the vanguard of the proletarian struggle. How long events will allow them to occupy this post of honour cannot be foreseen. But as long as they are placed in it, let us hope that they will discharge their duties in the proper manner. It is the specific duty of the leaders to gain an ever clearer understanding of the theoretical problems, to free themselves more and more from the influence of traditional phrases inherited from the old conception of the world, and constantly to keep in mind that Socialism, having become a science, demands the same treatment as every other science – it must be studied. The task of the leaders will be to bring understanding, thus acquired and clarified, to the working masses, to spread it with increased enthusiasm, to close the ranks of the party organisations and of the labour unions with ever greater energy. The votes cast in favour of the Socialists last January may represent considerable strength, but they still are far from being the majority of the German working class; and encouraging as may be the successes of the propaganda among the rural population, more remains to be done in this field. The slogan is not to flinch in the struggle. The task is to wrest from the enemy’s hands one seat after the other, one electoral district after the other. In the first place, however, it is necessary to retain a real international spirit which permits of no chauvinism, which joyfully greets each new step of the proletarian movement, no matter in which nation it is made. If the German workers proceed in this way, they may not march exactly at the head of the movement – it is not in the interest of the movement that the workers of one country should march at the head of all – but they will occupy an honourable place on the battle line, and they will stand armed for battle when other unexpected grave trials or momentous events will demand heightened courage, heightened determination, and the will to act.



 


FREDERICK ENGELS
London, July 1, 1874.




 

Contents | Chapter 1 | Marx/Engels Archive
Last updated on 15 July 2020




==========

## The General Council of the International to the Russian Section in Geneva









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Confidential Communication






The International Workingmen's Association, Confidential Communication on Bakunin



The International Workingmen’s Association, 1870
Confidential Communication on Bakunin


Written: March 28, 1870, (in German) by Marx as the IWMA’s corresponding secretary for Germany, and sent confidentially to Dr. Ludwig Kugelmann – who was then to circulate it to leaders in the German Social-Democratic Workers’ party.


The Russian Bakunin (although I have known him
since 1843, I pass over everything that is not absolutely necessary for
an understanding of the following) had a meeting with Marx in London shortly
after the founding of the International. Marx received him in the International,
for which Bakunin promised to work to the best of his ability. Bakunin
went to Italy, received there the Provisional Statutes and the Address
to the Working Classes, which Marx sent him, replied “very enthusiastically,” 
and did nothing. After years during which one heard nothing from him, he
emerged again in Switzerland, There, he joined not the International but
the Ligue de la Paix et de la Liberté [The League of Peace and Liberty, founded 1867 – members included Victor Hugo and Giuseppe Garibaldi]. After
the congress of this Peace League (Geneva 1867), Bakunin gets himself elected
to its executive committee, but in it he finds opponents who not
only do not allow him any “dictatorial” influence but also watch him as
a “Russian suspect.” Shortly after the Brussels Congress of the International
(September 1868), the Peace League held its congress in bern. This time,
B. appeared as a firebrand and – it is to be remarked in passing – denounced
the Occidental bourgeoisie in the same tone that the Muscovite optimists
use to attack Western civilization in order to minimize their own barbarism.
He proposed a series of resolutions which, absurd in themselves, were designed
to instill fear in the bourgeoisie cretins and to allow Herr Bakunin to
leave the Peace League and to enter the International with eclat. It suffices
to say that the program he proposed at the Bern Congress contained such
absurdities as “equality” of “classes,” “abolition of the right of inheritance as the beginning of the social revolution,” etc. – senseless prattle,
a garland of hollow notions which pretended to be chilling; in short, an
insipid improvization designed to achieve a certain monetary effect. Bakunin’s
friends in Paris (where a Russian [Grigory Vyrubov] is co-publisher of
the Revue Positiviste) and in London publicly announced his withdrawl
from the Peace League as an evenement [event] and proclaimed his
grotesque program – this olla podrida [spiced-up stew] of polished
commonplaces – as something strangely fearsome and original.
In the meantime, B. joined the Branche Romande [Romanish Branch] of
the International (in Geneva). It took him years before he decided on this
step. But it was only a few days before Herr Bakunin decided to overthrow
the International and transform it into his instrument.
Behind the back of the London General Council – which was informed
only after everything was seemingly ready – he established the so-called
Alliance des Democrates Socialistes. The program of this Alliance
was none other than the one B. had proposed at the Bern Peace [League]
Congress. Thus, from the outset, the Alliance showed itself to be a propaganda
organization of specifically Bakuninist private mysticism, and B. himself,
one of the most ignorant of men in the field of social theory, suddenly
figures here as a sect founder. However, the theoretical program of this
Alliance was pure farce. Its serious side lay in its practical organization.
For this Alliance was to be an international one, with its central
committee in Geneva, that is, under Bakunin’s personal direction. At the
same time it was to be an “integral” part of the International Working
Men’s Association. Its branches were to be represented at the “next Congress"
of the International (in Basel) on the one hand, and to have its own separate
sessions alongside the former on the other hand, etc., etc.
The human material chiefly at Bakunin’s disposal consisted of
the then-majority of the Federal Romanish Committee of he International
in Geneva. J. Ph. Becker, whose propaganda zeal occassionally runs away
with his head, was pushed forward. In Italy and Spain, Bakunin had some
allies.
The General Council in London had been thoroughly informed. But
it quietly let Bakunin go on until the moment when he was forced by J.
Ph. Becker to submit the statutes (and program) of the Alliance of Socialist
Democracy to the General Council for approval. Thereupon followed a far-reaching
decision – entirely “judicial” and “objective,” yet in its “basic considerations” 
full of irony – which concluded as follows:


The General Council does not admit the Alliance as a branch of the
International.

All paragraphs of the statutes of the Alliance which deal with the relationship
of the International are declared null and void.


In the basic considerations it was demonstrated clearly and strikingly
that the Alliance is nothing but a machine for the disorganization of the
International.
This came as an unexpected blow. Bakunin had already transformed
L’Égalite, the central organ of the French-speaking members of the
International in Switzerland, into his organ; in addition, he founded
in Locle a little private journal – Progres. Progres still
plays that role under the editorship of fanatical Bakunin follower, Guillaume.
After several weeks of reflection.the Central Committee of the
Alliance – under the signature of Perron, a Genevan – finally sent a
reply to the General Council. In it, the Alliance, out of zeal for the
cause, offered to sacrifice its independent organization, but only on one
condition, namely, a declaration by the General Council that it recognizes
the Alliance’s “radical” principles.
The General Council replied:
It is not its function to sit in theoretical judgment on the programs
of the various sections. Its only task is to see to it that the latter
are not in direct contradiction with its Statutes and their spirit.
Hence the General Council must insist that the absurd phrase “equality
of the classes” be stricken out and replaced by the phrase “abolition of
classes” (which was done). For the rest, the members of the Alliance can
join the International, after the dissolution of its own independent
international organization and after a list of the various branches
has been supplied to the General Council (which, let it be noted, was never
done).

With this, the incident was closed. The Alliance dissolved itself nominally,
but factually continued under the leadership of Bakunin, who at
the same time dominated the Geneva Comite Romand Federal of the
International. Added to its lists of organs there was the Federacion
in Barcelona (and after the Basel Congress, also the Eguaglianza
in Naples).
Bakunin then sought to achieve his aim – to transform the International
into his private instrument – by other means. Through the Geneva Romanish
Committee of the General Council he proposed that the “question of inheritance"
be put on the agenda of the Basel Congress. The General Council agreed,
in order to be able to hit Bakunin on the head directly. Bakunin’s plan
was this: When the Basel Congress accepts the “principles” (?) he proposed
in Bern, he will show the world that he has not gone over to the International,
but the International has gone over to him. The simple consequence: The
London General Council (whose opposition to the rehashing of the St.-Simonist
vieillerie [rubbish] was known to Bakunin) must resign and the Basel Congress would move the General Council to Geneva; that is, the
International would fall under the dictatorship of Bakunin.
Bakunin put his full conspiracy into motion, in order to assure
himself of a majority in the Basel Congress. Even fake mandates were not
lacking, such as those of Herr Guillaume for Locle, etc. Bakunin himself
importuned mandates from Naples and Lyon. All sorts of calumnies against
the General Council were spread. Some were told that it was dominated by
the element bourgeois and others that it was the seat of communisme
autoritaire.
The result of the Basel Congress is known. Bakunin’s proposal
did not go through, and the General Council remained in London.
The anger of this defeat – Bakunin had perhaps tied up a hoped-for
success with private speculations in “his heart’s spirit and feeling” –
was aired in irritated utterances in L’Égalité and Progres.
These papers in the meantime assumed more and more the form of official
oracles. Now one and now the other of the Swiss sections [of the International]
was put under excommunication because, despite Bakunin’s express instructions,
it participated in political movements, etc. Finally the long restrained
fury against the General Council broke into the open. Progres and
L’Égalité sneered, attacked, declared that the General Council did
not fulfill its duties, for example, in connection with the quarterly bulletins;
the General Council must rid itself of direct control over England and
establish a separate central committee to occupy itself with English affairs;
the resolutions of the General Council in regard to the Fenian prisoners
were an infringement of its functions, since it is not supposed to concern
itself with the local political questions. Furthermore, Progres
and L’Égalité took the side of Schweitzer, and the General Council
was categorically challenged to declare itself officially and publicly
on the Liebknecht-Schweitzer question. The journal Le Travail (in
Paris), into which Schweitzer’s Paris friends smuggled articles favorably
to him, was praised for this by Progress and L’Égalité, the
latter demanding that Le Travail make common cause against the General
Council.
Hence the time has come for taking decisive steps. The enclosed
is an exact copy of the General Council’s circular to the Romanish Central
Committee in Geneva. The document [written in French] is too long to translate
into German.

CIRCULAR TO THE SWISS ROMANISH FEDERAL COUNCIL
composed around January 1, 1870
In its extraordinary session of January 1, 1870, the General
Council resolved:

1. We read in L’Égalité of December 11, 1869:

 “It is certain that the General Council is neglecting
extremely important matters. We remind the General Council of
its obligations under Article I of the Regulations: The
General Council is obliged to carry out the decisions of the
Congress.... We could put enough questions to the General
Council for its replies to make up quite a lengthy document.
They will come later.... Meanwhile... etc.” 

The General Council does not know of any article, either in the
Statutes or in the Rules, which obliges it to enter into
correspondence or into polemics with L’Égalité or to provide
 “answers” to “questions” from any newspapers.

Only the Swiss Romanish Federal Council represents the branch
societies in the General Council. When the Federal Council directs
questions or reprimands to us, and does it by the only legitimate
means – that is, through its secretary – the General Council will
always be ready to reply. But the Romanish Federal Council has the
right neither to abdicate its functions to L’Égalité and
Progres not to permit them to be usurped by these newspapers.

Generally, speaking, the General Council’s correspondence with
national and local committees cannot be published without doing
great harm to the general interests of the International.

Hence if other organs of the International were to follow the
example of Progres and L’Égalité, the General Council would be
faced with the alternative of either discrediting itself publicly
by its silence or violating its obligations by replying publicly.

L’Égalité joined Progres (a paper which has not hitherto
declared itself an organ of the International, and which is also
note sent to the General Council) to demand explanations from the
General Council. that is almost a League of Public Welfare!
[The latter was a feudal association from 1464 France, founded to
oppose policies of Louis XI.] 

2. Assuming that the questions put by L’Égalité come from the
Romanish Federal Council, we are going to answer them, but only on
condition that such questions are never put to us again in such a
manner. 

3. The Question of a Bulletin.

In the Resolutions of the Geneva Congress, which are inserted in
the Rules, it is laid down that the national committees shall send
the General Council document dealing with the proletarian
movement and that the General Council shall thereupon publish them
as bulletins in the different languages as often as its means
permit. (“As often as its means permit, the General Council shall
publish a report, etc.”)

The General Council’s obligation was thus made dependent on
conditions which have never been fulfilled. Even the statistical
inquiry provided for in the Rules, decided on by conservative
general congresses, and requested by the General Council year after
year, has never been made. As for means, the General Council would
long ago have ceased to exist without the regional contributions
from England and the personal sacrifices of its members.

Thus the Rule adopted by the Geneva Congress has remained a dead
letter.

In regard to the Basel Congress, it did not discuss fulfillment of
these existing Rules, but only the opportunity of issuing a
bulletin in good time, and it did not make any resolutions on
this. (See German account, published in Basel under the eyes of
the congress.)

For the rest, the General Council believes that the basic purpose
of the bulletin is at the moment perfectly fulfilled by the various
organs of the International published in various languages and
exchanged among them. It would be absurd to do by expensive
reports what is being done already without cost. Moreover, a
bulletin which published what is not printed in the organs of the
International would only help our enemies to see behind the scenes. 

4. The Question of the Separation of the General Council from the
Federal Council of England.

Long before the founding of L’Égalité, this proposal used to be
made repeatedly in the General Council by two of its English
members. It was always rejected almost unanimously.

Although revolutionary initiative will probably come from France,
England alone can serve as the lever for a serious economic
revolution. It is the only country where there are no longer any
peasants and where landed property is concentrated in a few hands.
It is the only country where the capitalist form – that is,
labor combined on a large scale under capitalist entrepreneurs –
has taken over practically the whole of production. It is the only
country where the great majority of the population consists of
wage laborers. It is the only country where the class struggle
and organization of the working class by the trade unions have
attained a certain degree of maturity and universality. It is the
only country where, thanks to its domination of the world market,
ever revolution in economic relationships must directly affect the
whole world. While on the one hand landlordism and capitalism have
their classic seat in this country, the material conditions for
their destruction are on the other hand the most mature here.
The General Council is now in the fortunate position of having its
hand directly on this great lever of proletarian revolution, what
folly, yea, one might almost say what crime, it would be to let
this lever fall into purely English hands!

The English have at their disposal all necessary material
preconditions for a social revolution. What they lack is the
spirit of generalization and revolutionary passion. Only the
General Council can provide them with this, and thus accelerate a
truly revolutionary movement here and, in consequence,
everywhere. The great successes we have already achieved in this
respect are attested by the most intelligent and most eminent
newspapers of the ruling classes, such as, for example, the Pall
Mall Gazette, the Saturday Review, the Spectator, and the
Fortnightly Review, not to mention the so-called radicals in the
House of Commons and the House of Lords who until recently still
exerted a great influence on the leaders of the English workers.
They accuse us publicly of having poisoned and practically stifled
the “English spirit” of the working class and of having driven it
to revolutionary socialism.

The only way of bringing about this change is to do what the
General Council of the International Association is doing. As the
General Council, we are able to initiate measures (for example, the
founding of the Land and Labor League) which later, after their
execution, appear to the public as spontaneous movements of the
English working class.

If a Federal Council were to be established outside the General
Council, what would be the immediate effects? The Federal Council
would find itself placed between the General Council of the
International and the General Council of the Trade Unions, and
would have no authority. Furthermore, the General Council of the
International would have its great lever taken out of its hands.
If we preferred noisy quackery to serious action behind the scenes,
we would perhaps commit the mistake of replying publicly to
L’Égalité’s question why “the General Council permits such a
burdensome accumulation of functions".

England should not simply be compared to other countries. It must
be considered as the metropolis of capital. 

5. The Question of the General Council’s Resolution on the Irish
Amnesty.

While England is the bulwark of landlordism and capitalism, Ireland
is the only point where the great blow against official England can
really be struck.

First, Ireland is the bulwark of English landlordism. If it fell
in Ireland, it would also fall in England. In Ireland this is a
hundred times easier, because the economic struggle there is
concentrated exclusively in landed property, because the struggle
there is at the same time a national one, and because the people
there are more revolutionary and more embittered than in England.
In Ireland, landlordism is maintained solely by the English army.
The moment the forced union between the two countries ends, a
social revolution will break out in Ireland, even if in outmoded
form. English landlordism would not only lose a substantial source
of its wealth, but also its greatest moral force – that of
representing the domination of England over Ireland. On the
other hand, by maintaining the power of their landlords in Ireland,
the English proletariat makes them invulnerable in England itself.

Second, the English bourgeoisie has not only exploited the Irish
misery to keep down the working class in England by forced
immigration of poor Irishmen, it has also divided the proletariat
into two hostile camps. The revolutionary ardor of the Celtic
worker does not go well with the solid but slow nature of the
Anglo-Saxon worker. On the contrary, in all the big industrial
centres in England, there is a profound antagonism between the
Irish and English proletarians. The average English worker hates
the Irish worker as a competitor who lowers wages and the standard
of life. He feels national and religious antipathies for him.

He regards him practically in the same way the the poor whites in the
southern states of North America regard the black slaves. This
antagonism between the proletarians in England is artificially
nourished and kept alive by the bourgeoisie. It knows that this
split is the true secret of maintaining its power.

This antagonism is reproduced also on the other side of the
Atlantic. The Irish, driven from their native soil by the oxen and
the sheep, reassemble in North America, where they constitute a
conspicuous and ever-growing section of the population. Their only
thought, their only passion, is hatred for England. The English
and American governments (that is, the classes they represent)
nourish these passions in order to perpetuate the covert struggle
between the United States and England, and thereby prevent a
sincere and serious alliance between the working classes on both
sides of the Atlantic, and, consequently, their emancipation.

Furthermore, Ireland is the only pretext the English Government has
for maintaining a large standing army, which in case of necessity,
as has happened before, can be loosed against the English workers
after getting its military training in Ireland.

Finally, England today is seeing a repetition of what happened on a
gigantic scale in ancient Rome. A nation that enslaves another
forges its own chains.

The position of the International on the Irish Question is thus
clear. Its first task is to hasten the social revolution in
England. To this end, the decisive blow must be struck in Ireland.

The General Council’s resolution on the Irish amnesty serves only
as an introduction to other resolutions which will affirm that,
apart from ordinary international justice, it is a precondition for
the emancipation of the English working class to transform the
present forced union (that is, the enslavement of Ireland) into an
equal and free confederation, if possible, or complete separation,
if need be.

For the rest, the naive doctrines of L’Égalité and Progres
about the connection, or rather the nonexistence of any connection, between
the social and political movements have never, to the best of our knowledge,
been recognized by any of our International congresses. They run counter
to our Statutes, which state: “That the economical emancipation of the
working classes is therefore the great end to which every political movement
ought to be subordinate as a means.” The words “as a means” were left out
in the French translation made in 1864 by the Paris Committee. When questioned
by the General Council, the Paris Committee excused itself by the difficulties
of its political position. There are other mutilations of the original
text of the Statutes. The first clause of the Statutes reads as follows:
 “... The struggle for the emancipation of the working classes means...
a struggle... for equal rights nd duties, and the abolition of all class
rule.” The Paris translation speaks of “equal rights and duties;” that
is, it reproduces general phrases found virtually in all democratic manifestoes
of the hundred years and differently interpreted by different classes,
but omits the concrete demand: The abolition of all class rule.
Further, in the second clause of the Statutes one reads: “That the economical
subjection of the man of labor to the monopolizer of the means of labor
– that is, the sources of life,” etc. The Paris translation substitutes
the word “capital” for “the means of labor – that is, the sources of life,” 
although the latter expression included the land as well as the other means
of labor. The original and authentic text was restored in the French translation
published as a pamphlet in Brussels by La Rive Gauche in 1866. 6.
The Question of Liebknecht-Schweitzer. L’Égalité writes: “Both of
these groups belong to the International.” This is false. The Eisenach
group (which Proges and L’Égalité would like to transform
into Citizen Liebknecht’s group) belongs to the International. The Schweitzer
group does not belong to it. Schweitzer even explained at length in his
newspaper, Social-Demokrat, why the Lassallean organization could
not join the International without destroying itself. He spoke the truth
without realizing it. His artificial, sectarian organization stands in
opposition to the historical and spontaneous organization of the working
class. Progres and L’Égalité have summoned the General Council
to declare publicly its “opinion” on the personal differences between Liebknecht
and Schweitzer. Since Citizen Johann Phillip Becker (who is slandered as
much as Liebknecht in Schweitzer’s paper) is a member of L’Égalité’s
editorial board, it seems truly strange that its editors are not better
informed about the facts. The should have known Liebknecht, in the Demokratisches
Wochenblatt, publicly invited Schweitzer to accept the General Council
as arbiter over their differences, and that Schweitzer has no less publicly
refused to recognize the authority of the General Council. For its part,
the General Council has left no stone unturned to put an end to this scandal.
It instructed its secretary for Germany to enter into correspondence with
Schweitzer; this has been done for two years, but all efforts by the Council
have broken down in the face of Schweitzer’s firm resolve to preserve his
autocratic power, together with his sectarian organization, at all costs.
It is up to the General Council to determine the favorable moment when
its public intervention in this conflict will do more good than harm. 7.
Since L’Égalité’s accusations are public and could be considered
as emanating from the Romanish Federal Council in Geneva, the General Council
is to communication this reply to all committees corresponding with it.
By Order of the General CouncilThe French Committee (despite the fact that
Bakunin has intrigued mightily in Lyon and Marseilles and has won over
a few young hotheads), as well as the Conseil General Belge (Brussels),
have declared themselves in entire agreement with the General Council
rescript.
The copy for Geneva (because the secretary for Switzerland, Jung,
was very busy) has been somewhat delayed. hence it crossed an official
statement which Perret, the secretary of the Geneva Romanish Central Committee,
sent to the General Council.
For the crisis broke out in Geneva before the arrival of our letter
there. Some of the editors of L’Égalité rebelled against the Bakuninist-dictated
direction. Bakunin and his followers (among them six Egalite editors)
wanted to force the Geneva Committee to dismiss the recalcitrants. But
the Geneva Committee had long been tired of Bakunin’s despotism and was
reluctant to be dragged in against the General Council, in opposition to
the German Swiss Committee. Hence it endorsed the Egalite editors
who had displeased Bakunin. Whereupon the six other editors submitted their
resignation from the editorial board, hoping thereby to bring the paper
to a standstill.
In reply to our communication the Geneva Central Committee stated
that Egalite’s attack took place against its wishes, that is had
never approved the policy it preached, that the paper would henceforth
be edited under strict supervision, etc.
Thereupon Bakunin withdrew from Geneva to Tessin. Now he has control
– at least as afar as Switzerland is concerned – only over Progres
(Locle).
Soon thereafter, Herzen died. Bakunin, who from the time when
he began to pose as the leader of the European labor movement slandered
his old friend and patron Herzen, upon the latter’s death immediately began
to trumpet his eulogies. Why? Because Herzen, despite his personal wealth,
received from the pseudo socialist Pan-Slavic party, which was friendly
to him, 25,000 francs annually for propaganda. Through his loud eulogies,
Bakunin managed to have this money directed to him and thereby entered
into “Herzen’s inheritance” – malgre sa haine de l’heritage [despite
his hatred of the right of inheritance] – pecuniarily and morally sine
beneficio inventarii [without legal permission of the estate].
At the same time, a young Russian refugee colony settled in Geneva,
consisting of students, who were really honest and who showed their honesty
by adopting opposition to Pan-Slavism as the main point of their program.
They are publishing a journal, La Voix du Peuple, in Geneva.
About two weeks ago they applied to London, sending in their program
and asking approval for the establishment of a Russian branch. The approval
was granted.
In a separate letter to Marx, they requested him to represent
them provisionally in the General Council. This, too, was accepted. At
the same time they indicated – and seemed thereby to want to apologize
to Marx – that their next step must be to tear off Bakunin’s mask publicly,
because that man speaks two entirely different languages, one in Russia
and another in Europe.
Thus the game of this highly dangerous intrigant – at least on
the terrain of the International – will soon be played out.
 


Conflict with Bakunin
International Workingmen’s Association Index |
Marx-Engels Archive |
Works by Date
 



==========

## Introduction by Engels







The Civil War in France



Frederick Engels: The Civil War in France



Introduction


 

 Written by Karl Marx as an address to the General Council of the International, with the aim of distributing to workers of all countries a clear understanding of the character and world-wide significance of the heroic struggle of the Communards and their historical experience to learn from. The book was widely circulated by 1872 it was translated into several languages and published throughout Europe and the United States.

The first address was delivered on July 23rd, 1870, five days after the beginning of the Franco-Prussian War. The second address, delivered on September 9, 1870, gave a historical overview of the events a week after the army of Bonaparte was defeated. The third address, delivered on May 30, 1871, two days after the defeat of the Paris Commune – detailed the significance and the underlining causes of the first workers government ever created.

Publication Information:  The Civil War in France  was originally published by Marx as only the third address (here comprising Chapters 3 through 6) separated into four chapters. In 1891, on the 20th anniversary of the Paris Commune, Engels put together a new collection of the work. Engels decided to include the first two addresses that Marx made to the International (Chapters 1 and 2) – in this way providing additional historical background to the Civil War; Marx’s account of the Franco-Prussian War (July to September, 1870). In this publication, basic titles have been provided for each chapter in brackets, to give the unfamiliar reader a basic guide to the historical events each chapter discusses. Also, Engels 1891 introduction has been separated into two parts: an introduction (below) and a postscript. 
 


1891 Introduction by Frederick Engels
On the 20th Anniversary of the Paris Commune

[Historical Background & Overview of the Civil War]

 

Thanks to the economic and political development of France since [the French Revolution of]
1789, for 50 years the position of Paris has been such that no revolutions
could break out there without assuming a proletarian character, that is
to say, the proletariat, which had bought victory with its blood,
would advance its own demands after victory. These demands were more or less
unclear and even confused, corresponding to the state of evolution reached
by the workers of Paris at the particular period, but in the last resort
they all amounted to the abolition of the class antagonism between capitalist
and workers. It is true that no one knew how this was to be brought about.
But the demand itself, however indefinite it still was in its formulation,
contained a threat to the existing order of society; the workers who put
it forward were still armed; therefore the disarming of the workers was
the first commandment for the bourgeois at the helm of the state. Hence,
after every revolution won by the workers, a new struggle, ending with
the defeat of the workers.

This happened for the first time in 1848. The liberal bourgeoisie
of the parliamentary opposition held banquets for securing reform of the
franchise, which was to ensure supremacy for their party. Forced more and
more, in their struggle with the government, to appeal to the people, they
had to allow the radical and republican strata of the bourgeoisie and petty
bourgeoisie gradually to take the lead. But behind these stood the revolutionary
workers, and since 1830,[A] these had acquired far more political independence
than the bourgeoisie, and even the republicans, suspected. At the moment
of the crisis between the government and the opposition, the workers opened
battle on the streets; [King] Louis Philippe vanished, and with him the franchise
reform; and in its place arose the republic, and indeed one which the victorious
workers themselves designated as a “social” republic. No one, however,
was clear as to what this social republic was to imply; not even the workers
themselves. But they now had arms in their hands, and were a power in the
state. Therefore, as soon as the bourgeois republicans in control felt
something like firm ground under their feet, their first aim was to disarm
the workers. This took place by driving them into the insurrection of June
1848 by direct breach of faith, by open defiance and the attempt to banish
the unemployed to a distant province. The government had taken care to
have an overwhelming superiority of force. After five days’ heroic struggle,
the workers were defeated. And then followed a blood-bath of the defenceless
prisoners, the likes of which as not been seen since the days of the civil
wars which ushered in the downfall of the Roman republic. It was the first
time that the bourgeoisie showed to what insane cruelties of revenge it
will be goaded the moment the proletariat dares to take its stand against
them as a separate class, with its own interests and demands. And yet 1848
was only child’s play compared with their frenzy in 1871.

Punishment followed hard at heel. If the proletariat was not yet
able to rule France, the bourgeoisie could no longer do so. At least not
at that period, when the greater part of it was still monarchically inclined,
and it was divided into three dynastic parties [Legitimists, Orleanists and Bonapartists] and a fourth republican
party. Its internal dissensions allowed the adventurer Louis Bonaparte
to take possession of all the commanding points – army, police, administrative
machinery – and, on December 2, 1851,[B] to explode the last stronghold of the bourgeoisie, the National Assembly. The Second Empire opened the exploitation
of France by a gang of political and financial adventurers, but at the
same time also an industrial development such as had never been possible
under the narrow-minded and timorous system of Louis Philippe, with its
exclusive domination by only a small section of the big bourgeoisie. Louis
Bonaparte took the political power from the capitalists under the pretext
of protecting them, the bourgeoisie, from the workers, and on the other
hand the workers from them; but in return his rule encouraged speculation
and industrial activity – in a word the rise and enrichment of the whole
bourgeoisie to an extent hitherto unknown. To an even greater extent, it
is true, corruption and mass robbery developed, clustering around the imperial
court, and drawing their heavy percentages from this enrichment.

But the Second Empire was the appeal to the French chauvinism,
the demand for the restoration of the frontiers of the First Empire, which
had been lost in 1814, or at least those of the First Republic.[C] A French
empire within the frontiers of the old monarchy and, in fact, within the
even more amputated frontiers of 1815 – such a thing was impossible for
any long duration of time. Hence the necessity for brief wars and extension
of frontiers. But no extension of frontiers was so dazzling to the imagination
of the French chauvinists as the extension to the German left bank of the
Rhine. One square mile on the Rhine was more to them than ten in the Alps
or anywhere else. Given the Second Empire, the demand for the restoration
to France of the left bank of the Rhine, either all at once or piecemeal,
was merely a question of time. The time came with the Austro-Prussian War
of 1866; cheated of the anticipated “territorial compensation” by Bismarck,
and by his own over-cunning, hesitating policy, there was now nothing left
for Napoleon but war, which broke out in 1870 and drove him first to Sedan,
and then to Wilhelmshohe [prison].

The inevitable result was the Paris Revolution of September 4,
1870. The empire collapsed like a house of cards, and the republic was
again proclaimed. But the enemy was standing at the gates [of Paris]; the armies of
the empire were either hopelessly beleaguered in Metz or held captive in
Germany. In this emergency the people allowed the Paris Deputies to the
former legislative body to constitute themselves into a “Government of
National Defence.”  This was the more readily conceded, since, for the purpose
of defence, all Parisians capable of bearing arms had enrolled in the National
Guard and were armed, so that now the workers constituted a great majority.
But almost at once the antagonism between the almost completely bourgeois
government and the armed proletariat broke into open conflict. On October
31, workers’ battalions stormed the town hall, and captured some members
of the government. Treachery, the government’s direct breach of its undertakings,
and the interventions of some petty-bourgeois battalions set them free
again, and in order not to occasion the outbreak of civil war inside a
city which was already beleaguered by a foreign power, the former government
was left in office.

At last on January 28, 1871, Paris, almost starving, capitulated
but with honors unprecedented in the history of war. The forts were surrendered,
the outer wall disarmed, the weapons of the regiments of the line and of
the Mobile Guard were handed over, and they themselves considered prisoners
of war. But the National Guard kept its weapons and guns, and only entered
into an armistice with the victors, who themselves did not dare enter Paris
in triumph. They only dared to occupy a tiny corner of Paris, which, into
the bargain, consisted partly of public parks, and even this they only occupied
for a few days! And during this time they, who had maintained their encirclement
of Paris for 131 days, were themselves encircled by the armed workers of
Paris, who kept a sharp watch that no “Prussian” should overstep the narrow
bounds of the corner ceded to the foreign conquerors. Such was the respect
which the Paris workers inspired in the army before which all the armies
of the empire had laid down their arms; and the Prussian Junkers,
who had come to take revenge at the very centre of the revolution, were
compelled to stand by respectfully, and salute just precisely this armed
revolution!

During the war the Paris workers had confined themselves to demanding
the vigorous prosecution of the fight. But now, when peace had come after
the capitulation of Paris,[D] now, Thiers, the new head of government, was
compelled to realize that the supremacy of the propertied classes – large
landowners and capitalists – was in constant danger so long as the workers
of Paris had arms in their hands. His first action was to attempt to disarm
them. On March 18, he sent troops of the line with orders to rob the National
Guard of the artillery belonging to it, which had been constructed during
the siege of Paris and had been paid for by public subscription. The attempt failed;
Paris mobilized as one man in defence of the guns, and war between Paris
and the French government sitting at Versailles was declared. On March
26 the Paris Commune was elected and on March 28 it was proclaimed. The
Central Committee of the National Guard, which up to then had carried on
the government, handed in its resignation to the National Guard, after
it had first decreed the abolition of the scandalous Paris “Morality Police.” 
On March 30 the Commune abolished conscription and the standing army, and
declared that the National Guard, in which all citizens capable of bearing
arms were to be enrolled, was to be the sole armed force. It remitted all
payments of rent for dwelling houses from October 1870 until April, the
amounts already paid to be reckoned to a future rental period, and stopped
all sales of articles pledged in the municipal pawnshops. On the same day
the foreigners elected to the Commune were confirmed in office, because
 “the flag of the Commune is the flag of the World Republic.” 
On April 1 it was decided that the highest salary received by
any employee of the Commune, and therefore also by its members themselves,
might not exceed 6,000 francs. On the following day the Commune decreed
the separation of the Church from the State, and the abolition of all state
payments for religious purposes as well as the transformation of all Church
property into national property; as a result of which, on April 8, a decree
excluding from the schools all religious symbols, pictures, dogmas, prayers
– in a word, “all that belongs to the sphere of the individual’s conscience” 
– was ordered to be excluded from the schools, and this decree was gradually
applied. On the 5th,  in reply to the shooting, day after day, of the Commune’s fighters captured by the Versailles troops,
a decree was issued for imprisonment of hostages, but it was never carried
into effect. On the 6th, the guillotine was brought out by the 137th battalion
of the National Guard, and publicly burnt, amid great popular rejoicing.
On the 12th, the Commune decided that the Victory Column on the Place Vendôme,
which had been cast from guns captured by Napoleon after the war of 1809,
should be demolished as a symbol of chauvinism and incitement to national
hatred. This decree was carried out on May 16. On April 16 the Commune
ordered a statistical tabulation of factories which had been closed down
by the manufacturers, and the working out of plans for the carrying on
of these factories by workers formerly employed in them, who were to be
organized in co-operative societies, and also plans for the organization
of these co-operatives in one great union. On the 20th the Commune abolished
night work for bakers, and also the workers’ registration cards, which
since the Second Empire had been run as a monopoly by police nominees –
exploiters of the first rank; the issuing of these registration cards was
transferred to the mayors of the 20 arrondissements of Paris. On
April 30, the Commune ordered the closing of the pawnshops, on the ground
that they were a private exploitation of labor, and were in contradiction
with the right of the workers to their instruments of labor and to credit.
On May 5 it ordered the demolition of the Chapel of Atonement, which had
been built in expiation of the execution of Louis XVI.
Thus, from March 18 onwards the class character of the Paris movement,
which had previously been pushed into the background by the fight against
the foreign invaders, emerged sharply and clearly. As almost without exception,
workers, or recognized representatives of the workers, sat in the Commune,
its decision bore a decidedly proletarian character. Either they decreed
reforms which the republican bourgeoisie had failed to pass solely out of
cowardice, but which provided a necessary basis for the free activity of
the working class – such as the realization of the principle that in
relation to the state, religion is a purely private matter – or they
promulgated decrees which were in the direct interests of the working class
and to some extent cut deeply into the old order of society. In a beleaguered
city, however, it was possible at most to make a start in the realization
of all these measures. And from the beginning of May onwards all their
energies were taken up by the fight against the ever-growing armies assembled
by the Versailles government.
On April 7, the Versailles troops had captured the Seine crossing
at Neuilly, on the western front of Paris; on the other hand, in an attack
on the southern front on the 11th they were repulsed with heavy losses
by General Eudes. Paris was continually bombarded and, moreover, by the
very people who had stigmatized as a sacrilege the bombardment of the same
city by the Prussians. These same people now begged the Prussian government
for the hasty return of the French soldiers taken prisoner at Sedan and
Metz, in order that they might recapture Paris for them. From the beginning
of May the gradual arrival of these troops gave the Versailles forces a
decided ascendancy. This already became evident when, on April 23, Thiers
broke off the negotiations for the exchange, proposed by Commune, of the
Archbishop of Paris [Georges Darboy] and a whole number of other priests held hostages in
Paris, for only one man, Blanqui, who had twice been elected to the Commune
but was a prisoner in Clairvaux. And even more from the changed language
of Thiers; previously procrastinating and equivocal, he now suddenly became
insolent, threatening, brutal. The Versailles forces took the redoubt of
Moulin Saquet on the southern front, on May 3; on the 9th, Fort Issy, which
had been completely reduced to ruins by gunfire; and on the 14th, Fort
Vanves. On the western front they advanced gradually, capturing the numerous
villages and buildings which extended up to the city wall, until they reached
the main wall itself; on the 21st, thanks to treachery and the carelessness
of the National Guards stationed there, they succeeded in forcing their
way into the city. The Prussians who held the northern and eastern forts
allowed the Versailles troops to advance across the land north of the city,
which was forbidden ground to them under the armistice, and thus to march
forward and attack on a long front, which the Parisians naturally thought
covered by the armistice, and therefore held only with weak forces. As
a result of this, only a weak resistance was put up in the western half
of Paris, in the luxury city proper; it grew stronger and more tenacious
the nearer the incoming troops approached the eastern half, the real working
class city.
It was only after eight days’ fighting that the last defender
of the Commune were overwhelmed on the heights of Belleville and Menilmontant;
and then the massacre of defenceless men, women, and children, which had
been raging all through the week on an increasing scale, reached its zenith.
The breechloaders could no longer kill fast enough; the vanquished workers
were shot down in hundred by mitrailleuse fire [over 30,000 citizens of Paris were massacred]. The “Wall of the Federals” [aka Wall of the Communards] at the Pere Lachaise cemetery, where the final mass murder was consummated,
is still standing today, a mute but eloquent testimony to the savagery
of which the ruling class is capable as soon as the working class dares
to come out for its rights. Then came the mass arrests [38,000 workers arrested]; when the slaughter
of them all proved to be impossible, the shooting of victims arbitrarily
selected from the prisoners’ ranks, and the removal of the rest to great
camps where they awaited trial by courts-martial. The Prussian troops surrounding
the northern half of Paris had orders not to allow any fugitives to pass;
but the officers often shut their eyes when the soldiers paid more obedience
to the dictates of humanity than to those of the General Staff; particularly,
honor is due to the Saxon army corps, which behaved very humanely and let
through many workers who were obviously fighters for the Commune.

Frederick Engels


London, on the 20th anniversary

of the Paris Commune, March 18, 1891.

 

Chapter 1: [The Beginning of the Franco-Prussian War]
For Reference see while reading:  Timeline of the Civil War 

 


A.
The revolution of July 1830 in France.


B.
The coup d’etat, by Louis Bonaparte on December 2, 1851, which marked the beginning of the Bonapartist regime of the Second Empire.


C.
The first republic was proclaimed in 1792 and was replaced by the First Empire of Napoleon I (1804-14), which expanded the borders of France as far east as to include most of Northern Italy and stopped short of Denmark. Further, Napoleon established a series of satellite states that stretched throughout central and Eastern Europe, up through Poland.  His attempt to spread his empire into Russia was met with bitter failure, by the hand of the extremely courageous and the bold resistance of the Russian land and peasantry. 


D.
The preliminary peace treaty between France and Germany signed at Versailles on February 26, 1871 by Thiers and Jules Favre, on the one hand, and Bismarck, on the other.  According to the terms of this treaty, France ceded Alsace and East Lorraine to Germany and paid it indemnities to the sum of 5 billion francs.  The final peace treaty was signed in Frankfort-on-Main on May 10, 1871.



Table of Contents: The Civil War in France

 






==========

## First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association on the Franco-Prussian War







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The First Address[1]
  July 23, 1870 
[The Beginning of the Franco-Prussian War] 

 
In the Inaugural Address of the International Working Men’s
  Association, of November 1864, we said: 
“If the emancipation of the working classes requires
  their fraternal concurrence, how are they to fulfill that great mission with
  a foreign policy in pursuit of criminal designs, playing upon national
  prejudices, and squandering in piratical wars the people’s blood and
  treasure?” 
We defined the foreign policy aimed at by the International in these
  words: 
“Vindicate the simple laws of morals and justice,
  which ought to govern the relations of private individuals, as the laws
  paramount of the intercourse of nations.” 
No wonder that Louis Bonaparte, who usurped power by exploiting the war of
  classes in France, and perpetuated it by periodical wars abroad, should, from
  the first, have treated the International as a dangerous foe. On the eve of
  the plebiscite[A] he
  ordered a raid on the members of the Administrative Committee of the
  International Working Men’s Association throughout France, at Paris,
  Lyons, Rouen, Marseilles, Brest, etc., on the pretext that the International
  was a secret society dabbling in a complot for his assassination, a
  pretext soon after exposed in its full absurdity by his own judges. What was
  the real crime of the French branches of the International? They told the
  French people publicly and emphatically that voting the plebiscite was voting
  despotism at home and war abroad. It has been, in fact, their work that in
  all the great towns, in all the industrial centres of France, the working
  class rose like one man to reject the plebiscite. Unfortunately, the balance
  was turned by the heavy ignorance of the rural districts. The stock
  exchanges, the cabinets, the ruling classes, and the press of Europe
  celebrated the plebiscite as a signal victory of the French emperor over the
  French working class; and it was the signal for the assassination, not of an
  individual, but of nations. 
The war plot of July [19] 1870[B] is but an amended edition of the coup
  d’etat of December 1851. At first view, the thing seemed so absurd
  that France would not believe in its real good earnest. It rather believed
  the deputy denouncing the ministerial war talk as a mere stock-jobbing trick.
  When, on July 15, war was at last officially announced to the Corps
  Legislatif, the whole Opposition refused to vote the preliminary
  subsidies – even Thiers
  branded it as “detestable”; all the independent journals of Paris
  condemned it, and, wonderful to relate, the provincial press joined in almost
  unanimously. 
Meanwhile, the Paris members of the International had again set to work.
  In the Reveil of July 12, they published their manifesto “to
  the Workmen of all Nations,” from which we extract the following few
  passages: 
“Once more,” they say, “on the pretext of
  European equilibrium, of national honor, the peace of the world is menaced by
  political ambitions. French, German, Spanish workmen! Let our voices unite in
  one cry of reprobation against war! 
[...] 
“War for a question of preponderance or a dynasty
  can, in the eyes of workmen, be nothing but a criminal absurdity. In answer
  to the warlike proclamations of those who exempt themselves from the blood
  tax, and find in public misfortunes a source of fresh speculations, we
  protest, we who want peace, labor, and liberty! 
[...] 
“Brothers in Germany! Our division would only result
  in the complete triumph of the despotism on both sides of the Rhine... 
“Workmen of all countries! Whatever may for the
  present become of our common efforts, we, the members of the International
  Working Men’s Association, who know of no frontiers, we send you, as a
  pledge of indissoluble solidarity, the good wishes and the salutations of the
  workmen of France.” 
This manifesto of our Paris section was followed by numerous similar
  French addresses, of which we can here only quote the declaration of
  Neuilly-sur-Seine, published in the Marseillaise of July 22: 
“The war, is it just? No! The war, is it national?
  No! It is merely dynastic. In the name of humanity, or democracy, and the
  true interests of France, we adhere completely and energetically to the
  protestation of the International against the war.” 
These protestations expressed the true sentiments of the French working
  people, as was soon shown by a curious incident. The Band of the
  10th of December, first organized under the presidency of Louis
  Bonaparte, having been masqueraded into blouses [i.e., to appear as common workers] and let loose on
  the streets of Paris, there to perform the contortions of war fever, the real
  workmen of the Faubourgs [suburbs, workers’
  districts] came forward with public peace demonstrations so
  overwhelming that Pietri, the Prefect of Police, thought it prudent to stop
  at once all further street politics, on the plea that the real Paris people
  had given sufficient vent to their pent-up patriotism and exuberant war
  enthusiasm. 
Whatever may be the incidents of Louis Bonaparte’s war with Prussia,
  the death-knell of the Second Empire has already sounded at Paris. It will
  end, as it began, by a parody. But let us not forget that it is the
  governments and the ruling classes of Europe who enabled Louis Bonaparte to
  play during 18 years the ferocious farce of the Restored Empire. 
On the German side, the war is a war of defence; but who put Germany to
  the necessity of defending herself? Who enabled Louis Bonaparte to wage war
  upon her? Prussia! It was Bismarck who conspired with that very same Louis
  Bonaparte for the purpose of crushing popular opposition at home, and
  annexing Germany to the Hohenzollern dynasty. If the battle of Sadowa had
  been lost instead of being won, French battalions would have overrun Germany
  as the allies of Prussia. After her victory, did Prussia dream one moment of
  opposing a free Germany to an enslaved France? Just the contrary. While
  carefully preserving all the native beauties of her old system, she
  super-added all the tricks of the Second Empire, its real despotism, and its
  mock democratism, its political shams and its financial jobs, its high-flown
  talk and its low legerdemains. The Bonapartist regime, which till
  then only flourished on one side of the Rhine, had now got its counterfeit on
  the other. From such a state of things, what else could result but war? 
If the German working class allows the present war to lose its strictly
  defensive character and to degenerate into a war against the French people,
  victory of defeat will prove alike disastrous. All the miseries that befell
  Germany after her wars of independence will revive with accumulated
  intensity. 
The principles of the International are, however, too widely spread and
  too firmly rooted amongst the German working class to apprehend such a sad
  consummation. The voices of the French workmen had re-echoed from Germany. A
  mass meeting of workmen, held at Brunswick on July 16, expressed its full
  concurrence with the Paris manifesto, spurned the idea of national antagonism
  to France, and wound up its resolutions with these words: 
“We are the enemies of all wars, but above all of
  dynastic wars. ... With deep sorrow and grief we are forced to undergo a
  defensive war as an unavoidable evil; but we call, at the same time, upon the
  whole German working class to render the recurrence of such an immense social
  misfortune impossible by vindicating for the peoples themselves the power to
  decide on peace and war, and making them masters of their own
  destinies.” 
At Chemnitz, a meeting of delegates, representing 50,000 Saxon workmen,
  adopted unanimously a resolution to this effect: 
“In the name of German Democracy, and especially of
  the workmen forming the Democratic Socialist Party, we declare the present
  war to be exclusively dynastic.... We are happy to grasp the fraternal hand
  stretched out to us by the workmen of France.... Mindful of the watchword of
  the International Working Men’s Association: Proletarians of all
  countries, unite, we shall never forget that the workmen of all countries are
  our friends and the despots of all countries our enemies.” 
The Berlin branch of the International has also replied to the Paris
  manifesto: 
“We,” they say, “join with heart and hand
  your protestation.... Solemnly, we promise that neither the sound of the
  trumpets, nor the roar of the cannon, neither victory nor defeat, shall
  divert us from our common work for the union of the children of toil of all
  countries.” 
Be it so! 
In the background of this suicidal strike looms the dark figure of Russia.
  It is an ominous sign that the signal for the present war should have been
  given at the moment when the Moscovite government had just finished its
  strategic lines of railway and was already massing troops in the direction of
  the Prut.[C] Whatever
  sympathy the Germans may justly claim in a war of defense against Bonapartist
  aggression, they would forfeit at once by allowing the Prussian government to
  call for, or accept the help of, the Cossack. Let them
  remember that after their war of independence against the first Napoleon,
  Germany lay for generations prostrate at the feet of the tsar. 
The English working class stretch the hand of fellowship to the French and
  German working people. They feel deeply convinced that whatever turn the
  impending horrid war may take, the alliance of the working classes of all
  countries will ultimately kill war. The very fact that while official France
  and Germany are rushing into a fratricidal feud, the workmen of France and
  Germany send each other messages of peace and goodwill; this great fact,
  unparalleled in the history of the past, opens the vista of a brighter
  future. It proves that in contrast to old society, with its economical
  miseries and its political delirium, a new society is springing up, whose
  International rule will be Peace, because its national ruler will be
  everywhere the same – Labour! The pioneer of that new society is the
  International Working Men’s Association. 
 
Chapter 2: [Prussian Occupation of
  France] 
 

[A] A plebiscite is a direct vote by an electorate of a
  nation to decide a question of national importance, such as governmental
  policy. Conducted by Napoleon III in May 1870 the questions were so worded
  that it was impossible to express disapproval of the policy of the Second
  Empire without declaring opposition to all democratic reforms for the working
  class. The sections of the First International in France argued that their
  members should not participate in the vote. On the eve of the plebiscite
  members of the Paris Federation were arrested on a charge of conspiring
  against Napoleon III. This pretext was further used by the government to
  launch a campaign of persecution of the members of the International
  throughout France. At the trial of the Paris Federation members (June 22 to
  July 5, 1870), the charge of conspiracy was clearly exposed as without any
  basis. Nevertheless a number of the International’s members were
  sentenced to imprisonment based solely on their socialistic beliefs. The
  working class of France responded to these political persecutions with mass
  protests. 
[B] The date when Napoleon III declared war on Prussia. 
[C] The river Prut, rising in the southwestern Ukraine and
  flowing southeast, forming part of the border between Roumania (within an
  autonomous part of Austria-Hungary) and Russia (later to join the river
  Danube). Length:  853 kilometers. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association on the Franco-Prussian War







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Second Address[2]
  September 9, 1870 
[Prussian Occupation of France] 

 
In our first manifesto of the 23rd of July, we
  said: 
 
“The death-knell of the Second Empire has already
  sounded at Paris. It will end, as it began, by a parody. But let us not
  forget that it is the governments and the ruling classes of Europe who
  enabled Louis Bonaparte to play during 18 years the ferocious farce of the
  Restored Empire.” 
Thus, even before war operations had actually set in, we treated the
  Bonapartist bubble as a thing of the past. 
If we were not mistaken as to the vitality of the Second Empire, we were
  not wrong in our apprehension lest the German war should “lose its
  strictly defensive character and degenerate into a war against the French
  people.” The war of defense ended, in point of fact, with the surrender
  of Louis Bonaparte, the Sedan
  capitulation, and the proclamation of the republic at Paris. But long
  before these events, the very moment that the utter rottenness of the
  imperialist arms became evident, the Prussian military camarilla had
  resolved upon conquest. There lay an ugly obstacle in their way –
  [Prussian] King William’s own proclamations at the commencement of the
  war. 
In a speech from the throne to the North German Diet, he had solemnly
  declared to make war upon the emperor of the French and not upon the French
  nation, where he said: 
“The Emperor Napoleon having made by land and sea an
  attack on the German nation, which desired and still desires to live in peace
  with the French people, I have assumed the command of the German armies to
  repel his aggression, and I have been led by military events to cross the
  frontiers of France.” 
Not content to assert the defensive character of the war by the statement
  that he only assumed the command of the German armies “to repel
  aggression", he added that he was only “led by military events”
  to cross the frontiers of France. A defensive war does, of course, not
  exclude offensive operations, dictated by military events. 
Thus, the pious king stood pledged before France and the world to a
  strictly defensive war. How to release him from his solemn pledge? The stage
  managers had to exhibit him as reluctantly yielding to the irresistible
  behest of the German nation. They at once gave the cue to the liberal German
  middle class, with its professors, its capitalists, its aldermen, and its
  penmen. That middle class, which, in its struggles for civil liberty, had,
  from 1846 to 1870, been exhibiting an unexampled spectacle of irresolution,
  incapacity and cowardice, felt, of course, highly delighted to bestride the
  European scene as the roaring lion of German patriotism. It re-vindicated its
  civic independence by affecting to force upon the Prussian government the
  secret designs of that same government. It does penance for its
  long-continued, and almost religious, faith in Louis Bonaparte’s
  infallibility, but shouting for the dismemberment of the French republic. Let
  us, for a moment, listen to the special pleadings of those stout-hearted
  patriots! 
They dare not pretend that the people of Alsace and Lorraine pant for the
  German embrace; quite the contrary. To punish their French patriotism,
  Strasbourg, a town with an independent citadel commanding it, has for six
  days been wantonly and fiendishly bombarded by “German” explosive
  shells, setting it on fire, and killing great numbers of its defenceless
  inhabitants! Yet, the soil of those provinces once upon a time belonged to
  the whilom German empire.[A] Hence, it seems, the soil and the human beings grown
  on it must be confiscated as imprescriptible German property. If the map of
  Europe is to be re-made in the antiquary’s vein, let us by no means
  forget that the Elector of Brandenburg, for his Prussian dominions, was the
  vassal of the Polish republic.[B] 
The more knowing patriots, however, require Alsace and the German-speaking
  Lorraine as a “material guarantee” against French aggression. As
  this contemptible plea has bewildered many weak-minded people, we are bound
  to enter more fully upon it. 
There is no doubt that the general configuration of Alsace, as compared
  with the opposite bank of the Rhine, and the presence of a large fortified
  town like Strasbourg, about halfway between Basle and Germersheim, very much
  favour a French invasion of South Germany, while they offer peculiar
  difficulties to an invasion of France from South Germany. There is, further,
  no doubt that the addition of Alsace and German-speaking Lorraine would give
  South Germany a much stronger frontier, inasmuch as she would then be the
  master of the crest of the Vosges mountains in its whole length, and of the
  fortresses which cover its northern passes. If Metz were annexed as well,
  France would certainly for the moment be deprived of her two principal bases
  of operation against Germany, but that would not prevent her from
  concentrating a fresh one at Nancy or Verdun. While Germany owns Coblenz,
  Mayence [i.e., Mainz], Germersheim, Rastatt, and Ulm, all bases of operation against
  France, and plentifully made use of in this war, with what show of fair play
  can she begrudge France Strasbourg and Metz, the only two fortresses of any
  importance she has on that side? Moreover, Strasbourg endangers South Germany
  only while South Germany is a separate power from North Germany. From 1792 to
  1795, South Germany was never invaded from that direction, because Prussia
  was a party to the war against the French Revolution; but as soon as Prussia
  made a peace of her own[C] in 1795, and left the South to shift for itself, the
  invasions of South Germany with Strasbourg as a base began and continued till
  1809. The fact is, a united Germany can always render Strasbourg and
  any French army in Alsace innocuous by concentrating all her troops, as was
  done in the present war, between Saarlouis and Landau, and advancing, or
  accepting battle, on the line of road between Mayence and Metz. While the
  mass of the German troops is stationed there, any French army advancing from
  Strasbourg into South Germany would be outflanked, and have its communication
  threatened. If the present campaign has proved anything, it is the facility
  of invading France from Germany. 
But, in good faith, is it not altogether an absurdity and an anachronism
  to make military considerations the principle by which the boundaries of
  nations are to be fixed? If this rule were to prevail, Austria would still be
  entitled to Venetia and the line of the Minicio, and France to the line of
  the Rhine, in order to protect Paris, which lies certainly more open to an
  attack from the northeast than Berlin does from the southwest. If limits are
  to be fixed by military interests, there will be no end to claims, because
  every military line is necessarily faulty, and may be improved by annexing
  some more outlying territory; and, moreover, they can never be fixed finally
  and fairly, because they always must be imposed by the conqueror upon the
  conquered, and consequently carry within them the seed of fresh wars. 
Such is the lesson of all history. 
Thus with nations as with individuals. To deprive them of the power of
  offence, you must deprive them of the means of defence. You must not only
  garrote, but murder. If every conqueror took “material guarantees" for
  breaking the sinews of a nation, the first Napoleon did so by the Tilsit
  Treaty, and the way he executed it against Prussia and the rest of
  Germany. Yet, a few years later, his gigantic power split like a rotten reed
  upon the German people. What are the “material guarantees”
  Prussia, in her wildest dreams, can or dare imposes upon France, compared to
  the “material guarantees” the first Napoleon had wrenched from
  herself? The result will not prove the less disastrous. History will measure
  its retribution, not by the intensity of the square miles conquered from
  France, but by the intensity of the crime of reviving, in the second half of
  the 19th century, the policy of conquest! 
But, say the mouthpieces of Teutonic [German] patriotism, you must not
  confound Germans with Frenchmen. What we want is not glory, but
  safety. The Germans are an essentially peaceful people. In their sober
  guardianship, conquest itself changes from a condition of future war into a
  pledge of perpetual peace. Of course, it is not Germans that invaded France
  in 1792, for the sublime purpose of bayonetting the revolution of the 18th
  century. It is not Germans that befouled their hands by the subjugation of
  Italy, the oppressions of Hungary, and the dismemberment of Poland. Their
  present military system, which divides the whole able-bodied male population
  into two parts – one standing army on service, and another standing
  army on furlough, both equally bound in passive obedience to rulers by divine
  right – such a military system is, of course, “a material
  guarantee,” for keeping the peace and the ultimate goal of civilizing
  tendencies! In Germany, as everywhere else, the sycophants of the powers that
  be poison the popular mind by the incense of mendacious self-praise. 
Indignant as they pretend to be at the sight of French fortresses in Metz
  and Strasbourg, those German patriots see no harm in the vast system of
  Moscovite fortifications at Warsaw, Modlin, and Ivangorod [All strongholds of the Russian Empire] . While gloating
  at the terrors of imperialist invasion, they blink at the infamy of
  autocratic tutelage. 
As in 1865, promises were exchanged between Gorchakov and Bismarck. As
  Louis Bonaparte flattered himself that the War of 1866, resulting in the
  common exhaustion of Austria and Prussia, would make him the supreme arbiter
  of Germany, so Alexander [II of Russia] flattered himself that the War of
  1870, resulting in the common exhaustion of Germany and France, would make
  him the supreme arbiter of the Western continent. As the Second Empire
  thought the North German Confederation incompatible with its existence, so
  autocratic Russia must think herself endangered by a German empire under
  Prussian leadership. Such is the law of the old political system. Within its
  pale the gain of one state is the loss of the other. The tsar’s
  paramount influence over Europe roots in his traditional hold on Germany. At
  a moment when in Russia herself volcanic social agencies threaten to shake
  the very base of autocracy, could the tsar afford to bear with such a loss of
  foreign prestige? Already the Moscovite journals repeat the language of the
  Bonapartist journals of the War of 1866. Do the Teuton patriots really
  believe that liberty and peace will be guaranteed to Germany by forcing
  France into the arms of Russia? If the fortune of her arms, the arrogance of
  success, and dynastic intrigue lead Germany to a dismemberment of French
  territory, there will then only remain two courses open to her. She must at all risks become the avowed tool of
  Russian aggrandizement, or, after some short respite, make again ready for
  another “defensive” war, not one of those new-fangled
  “localized” wars, but a war of races – a war with
  the Slavonic and Roman races.[D]

The German working class have resolutely supported the war, which it was
  not in their power to prevent, as a war for German independence and the
  liberation of France and Europe from that pestilential incubus, the Second
  Empire. It was the German workmen who, together with the rural laborers,
  furnished the sinews and muscles of heroic hosts, leaving behind their
  half-starved families. Decimated by the battles abroad, they will be once
  more decimated by misery at home. In their turn, they are now coming forward
  to ask for “guarantees” – guarantees that their immense
  sacrifices have not been bought in vain, that they have conquered liberty,
  that the victory over the imperialist armies will not, as in 1815, be turned
  into the defeat of the German people[E]; and, as the first of these guarantees, they claim an
  honorable peace for France, and the recognition of the French
  republic. 
The Central Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workmen’s
  Party issued, on September 5, a manifesto, energetically insisting upon these
  guarantees. 
 
“We,” they say, “protest against the
  annexation of Alsace and Lorraine. And we are conscious of speaking in the
  name of the German working class. In the common interest of France and
  Germany, in the interest of western civilization against eastern barbarism,
  the German workmen will not patiently tolerate the annexation of Alsace and
  Lorraine.... We shall faithfully stand by our fellow workmen in all countries
  for the common international cause of the proletariat!” 
Unfortunately, we cannot feel sanguine of their immediate success. If the
  French workmen amidst peace failed to stop the aggressor, are the German
  workmen more likely to stop the victor amidst the clamour of arms? The German
  workmen’s manifesto demands the extradition of Louis Bonaparte as a
  common felon to the French republic. Their rulers are, on the contrary,
  already trying hard to restore him to the Tuileries[F] as the best man to ruin France. However
  that may be, history will prove that the German working class are not made of
  the same malleable stuff as the German middle class. They will do their duty.
  
Like them, we hail the advent of the republic in France, but at the same
  time we labor under misgivings which we hope will prove groundless. That
  republic has not subverted the throne, but only taken its place, become
  vacant. It has been proclaimed, not as a social conquest, but as a national
  measure of defence. It is in the hands of a Provisional Government composed
  partly of notorious Orleanists, partly
  of middle class republicans, upon some of whom the insurrection of June
  1848 has left its indelible stigma. The division of labor amongst the
  members of that government looks awkward. The Orleanists have seized the
  strongholds of the army and the police, while to the professed republicans
  have fallen the talking departments. Some of their acts go far to show that
  they have inherited from the empire, not only ruins, but also its dread of
  the working class. If eventual impossibilities are, in wild phraseology,
  promised in the name of the republic, is it not with a view to prepare the
  cry for a “possible” government? Is the republic, by some of its
  middle class undertakers, not intended to serve as a mere stop-gap and bridge
  over an Orleanist restoration? 
The French working class moves, therefore, under circumstances of extreme
  difficulty. Any attempt at upsetting the new government in the present
  crisis, when the enemy is almost knocking at the doors of Paris, would be a
  desperate folly. The French workmen must perform their duties as citizens;
  but, at the same time, they must not allow themselves to be swayed by the
  national souvenirs of 1792, as the French peasant allowed themselves
  to be deluded by the national souvenirs of the First Empire. They
  have not to recapitulate the past, but to build up the future. Let them
  calmly and resolutely improve the opportunities of republican liberty, for
  the work of their own class organization. It will gift them with fresh
  herculean powers for the regeneration of France, and our common task –
  the emancipation of labor. Upon their energies and wisdom hinges the fate of
  the republic. 
The English workmen have already taken measures to overcome, by a
  wholesome pressure from without, the reluctance of their government to
  recognize the French republic.[G] The present dilatoriness of the British government is
  probably intended to atone for the Anti-Jacobin war [1792] and the former
  indecent haste in sanctioning the coup d’etat.[H] The English workmen call also upon their
  government to oppose by all its power the dismemberment of France, which a
  part of the English press is shameless enough to howl for. It is the same
  press that for 20 years deified Louis Bonaparte as the providence of Europe,
  that frantically cheered on the slaveholders’ rebellion.[I] Now, as then, it drudges
  for the slaveholder. 
Let the sections of the International Working Men’s Association in
  every country stir the working classes to action. If they forsake their duty,
  if they remain passive, the present tremendous war will be but the harbinger
  of still deadlier international feuds, and lead in every nation to a renewed
  triumph over the workman by the lords of the sword, of the soil, and of
  capital. 
Vive la Republique!
 
Chapter 3: [France Capitulates & the
  Government of Thiers] 
 

[A] The Holy Roman Empire of the German nation, founded in
  the 10th century and constituting a union of feudal principalities and free
  towns which recognized the supreme of authority of an emperor. 
[B] In 1618 the Electorate of Brandenburg united with the
  Prussian Dutchy (East Prussia), which had been formed early in the 16th
  century out of the Teutonic Order possessions and which was still a feudal
  vessel of the Kingdom of Poland. The Elector of Brandenburg, a Prussian Duke
  at the same time, remained a Polish vassal until 1657 when, taking advantage
  of Poland’s difficulties in the war against Sweden, he secured
  sovereign rights to Prussian possessions. 
[C] The Treaty of Basle concluded by Prussia, a member of
  the first anti-French coalition of the European states, with the French
  Republic on April 5, 1795. 
[D] Marx’s clear assessment of Germany’s
  historical position took some time to completely fulfill itself, but when it
  did Germany’s war on races occurred in full force. 
[E] Marx refers here to the triumph of feudal reaction in
  Germany after the downfall of Napoleon. The feudalist unity of Germany was
  restored, the feudal-monarchist system was established in the German states,
  which retained all the privileges of the nobility and intensified the
  semi-feudal exploitation of the peasantry. 
[F] The Tuileries Palace in Paris, a residence of
  Napoleon III. 
[G] Campaigns by English workers to secure recognition of
  the French Republic proclaimed on Sept. 4, 1870. On Sept. 5 a series of
  meetings and demonstrations began in London and other big cities, at which
  resolutions and petitions were passed demanding that the British Government
  immediately recognize the French Republic. The General Council of the First
  International took a direct part in the organization of this movement. 
[H] Marx is alluding to England’s active part in
  forming a coalition of feudal monarchies which started a war against
  revolutionary France in 1792, and also to the fact that the English oligarchy
  was the first in Europe to recognize the Bonapartist regime in France,
  established as a result of the coup d’etat, by Louis Bonaparte on
  December 2, 1851. 
[I] During the American Civil War (1861-65) between the
  industrial North and the slave-owning South, the English bourgeois press took
  the side of the South. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## I







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[France Capitulates & the Government of Thiers] 

 
In September 4, 1870, when the working men of Paris proclaimed the
  republic, which was almost instantaneously acclaimed throughout France,
  without a single voice of dissent, a cabal of place-hunting barristers, with
  Thiers for their statesman, and Trochu for their general, took hold of the
  Hotel de Ville. At that time they were imbued with so fanatical a faith in
  the mission of Paris to represent France in all epochs of historical crisis
  that, to legitimate their usurped titles as governors of France, they thought
  it quite sufficient to produce their lapsed mandates as representatives of
  Paris. 
In our second address on the late war, five days
  after the rise of these men, we told you who they were. Yet, in the turmoil
  of surprise, with the real leaders of the working class still shut up in
  Bonapartist prisons and the Prussians already marching on Paris, Paris bore
  with their assumption of power, on the express condition that it was to be
  wielded for the single purpose of national defence. Paris, however, was not
  to be defended without arming its working class, organizing them into an
  effective force, and training their ranks by the war itself. But Paris armed
  was the revolution armed. A victory of Paris over the Prussian aggressor
  would have been a victory of the French workmen over the French capitalist
  and his state parasites. In this conflict between national duty and class
  interest, the Government of National Defence did not hesitate one moment to
  turn into a Government of National Defection. 
The first step they took was to send Thiers on a roving tour to all the
  courts of Europe, there to beg mediation by offering the barter of the
  republic for a king. Four months after the commencement of the siege [of
  Paris], when they thought the opportune moment came for breaking the first
  word of capitulation, Trochu, in the presence of Jules Favre, and others of
  his colleagues, addressed the assembled mayors of Paris in these terms: 
“The first question put to me by my colleagues on the
  very evening of the 4th of September was this: Paris, can it, with any chance
  of success, stand a siege by the Prussian army? I did not hesitate to answer
  in the negative. Some of my colleagues here present will warrant the truth of
  my words and the persistence of my opinion. I told them, in these very terms,
  that, under the existing state of things, the attempt of Paris to hold out a
  siege by the Prussian army would be a folly. Without doubt, I added, it would
  be an heroic folly; but that would be all.... The events [managed by himself]
  have not given the lie to my prevision.” 
This nice little speech of Trochu was afterwards published by M. Carbon,
  one of the mayors present. 
Thus, on the very evening of the proclamation of the republic,
  Trochu’s “plan” was known to his colleagues to be the
  capitulation of Paris. If national defence has been more than a pretext for
  the personal government of Thiers, Favre, and Co., the upstarts of September
  4 would have abdicated on the 5th – would have initiated the Paris
  people into Trochu’s “plan,” and called upon them to
  surrender at once, or to take their own fate into their own hands. Instead of
  this, the infamous impostors resolved upon curing the heroic folly of Paris
  by a regimen of famine and broken heads, and to dupe her in the meanwhile by
  ranting manifestos, holding forth that Trochu, “the governor of Paris,
  will never capitulate", and Jules Favre, the foreign minister, will
  “not cede an inch of our territory, nor a stone of our
  fortresses.” 
In a letter to Gambetta, the very same Jules Favre avows that what they
  were “defending” against were not the Prussian soldiers, but the
  working men of Paris. During the whole continuance of the siege, the
  Bonapartist cut-throats, whom Trochu had wisely entrusted with the command of
  the Paris army, exchanged, in their intimate correspondence, ribald jokes at
  the well-understood mockery of defence. (See, for instance, the
  correspondence of Alphonse Simon Guiod, supreme commander of the artillery of
  the Army of Defence of Paris and Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor, to
  Suzanne, general of division of artillery, a correspondence published by the
  Journal
  officiel of the Commune.) The mask of the true heroism was at last
  dropped on January
  28, 1871. With the true heroism of utter self-debasement, the Government
  of National Defence, in their capitulation, came out as the government of
  France by Bismarck’s prisoners – a part so base that Louis
  Bonaparte himself had, at Sedan, shrunk from accepting it. After the events
  of March 18 on their wild flight to Versailles, the capitulards left
  in the hands of Paris the documentary evidence of their treason, to destroy
  which, as the Commune says in its manifesto to the provinces, “those
  men would not recoil from battering Paris into a heap of ruins washed by a
  sea of blood." 
To be eagerly bent upon such a consummation, some of the leading members
  of the Government of Defence had, besides, most peculiar reasons of their
  own. 
Shortly after the conclusion of the armistice, M. Milliere, one of the
  representatives of Paris to the National Assembly, now shot by express orders
  of Jules Favre, published a series of authentic legal documents in proof that
  Jules Favre, living in concubinage with the wife of a drunken resident at
  Algiers, had, by a most daring concoction of forgeries, spread over many
  years, contrived to grasp, in the name of the children of his adultery, a
  large succession, which made him a rich man, and that, in a lawsuit
  undertaken by the legitimate heirs, he only escaped exposure by the
  connivance of the Bonapartist tribunals. As these dry legal documents were
  not to be got rid of by any amount of rhetorical horse-power, Jules Favre,
  for the first time in his life, held his tongue, quietly awaiting the
  outbreak of the civil war, in order, then, frantically to denounce the people
  of Paris as a band of escaped convicts in utter revolt against family,
  religion, order, and property. This same forger had hardly got into power,
  after September 4, when he sympathetically let loose upon society Pic and
  Taillefer, convicted, even under the empire, of forgery in the scandalous
  affair of “Etendard.”
  One of these men, Taillefer, having dared to return to Paris under the
  Commune, was at once reinstated in prison; and then Jules Favre exclaimed,
  from the tribune of the National Assembly, that Paris was setting free all
  her jailbirds! 
Ernest Picard, the Joe Miller of the Government of National Defence, who
  appointed himself Finance Minister of the republic after having in vain
  striven to become home minister of the empire, is the brother of one Arthur
  Picard, an individual expelled from the Paris Bourse as a blackleg
  (see report of the Prefecture of Police, dated July 13, 1867), and convicted,
  on his own confession, of theft of 300,000 francs, while manager of one of
  the branches of the Societe Generale,[A] Rue Palestro, No.5 (see report of the
  Prefecture of Police, dated December 11, 1868). This Arthur Picard was made
  by Ernest Picard the editor of his paper, l’Electeur
  Libre. While the common run of stockjobbers were led astray by the
  official lies of this finance office paper, Arthur was running backwards and
  forwards between the finance office and the Bourse, there to
  discount the disasters of the French army. The whole financial correspondence
  of that worthy pair of brothers fell into the hands of the Commune. 
Jules Ferry, a penniless barrister before September 4, contrived, as mayor
  of Paris during the siege, to job a fortune out of famine. The day on which
  he would have to give an account of his maladministration would be the day of
  his conviction. 
These men, then, could find in the ruins of Paris only their
  tickets-of-leave[1]; they
  were the very men Bismarck wanted. With the help of some shuffling of cards,
  Thiers, hitherto the secret prompter of the government, now appeared at its
  head, with the tickets-of-leave men for his ministers. 
Theirs, that monstrous gnome, has charmed the French bourgeoisie for
  almost half a century, because he is the most consummate intellectual
  expression of their own class corruption. Before he became a statesman, he
  had already proved his lying powers as an historian. The chronicle of his
  public life is the record of the misfortunes of France. Banded, before 1830,
  with the republicans, he slipped into office under Louis Philippe by
  betraying his protector Lafitte, ingratiating himself with the king by
  exciting mob riots against the clergy, during which the church of Saint
  Germain l’Auxerrois and the Archbishop’s palace were plundered,
  and by acting the minister-spy upon, and the jail-accoucheur of the
  Duchess de Berry.[B] The
  massacre of the republicans in the Rue Transnonian, and the subsequent
  infamous laws of September against the press and the right of association,
  were his work.[C]
  Reappearing as the chief of the cabinet in March 1840, he astonished France
  with his plan for fortifying France.[D] To the republicans, who denounced this plan as a
  sinister plot against the liberty of Paris, he replied from the tribune of
  the Chamber of Deputies: 
“What! To fancy that any works of fortification could
  ever endanger liberty! And first of all you calumniate any possible
  government in supposing that it could some day attempt to maintain itself by
  bombarding the capital; [...] but that the government would be a hundred
  times more impossible after its victory than before.” 
Indeed, no government would ever have dared to bombard Paris from the
  forts, save that government which had previously surrendered these forts to
  the Prussians. 
When King Bomba [Ferdinand II of Spain] tried his hand at Palermo, in
  January 1848, Thiers, then long since out of office, again rose in the
  Chamber of Deputies: 
“You know, gentlemen, what is happening at Palermo.
  You, all of you, shake with horror [in the parliamentary sense] on hearing
  that during 48 hours a large town has been bombarded – by whom? Was it
  a foreign enemy exercising the rights of war? No, gentlemen, it was by its
  own government. And why? Because the unfortunate town demanded its rights.
  Well, then, for the demand of its rights it has got 48 hours of
  bombardment.... Allow me to appeal to the opinion of Europe. It is doing a
  service to mankind to arise, and to make reverberate, from what is perhaps
  the greatest tribune in Europe, some words [indeed words] of indignation
  against such acts.... When the Regent Espartero, who had rendered services to
  his country [which M. Thiers never did] intended bombarding Barcelona, in
  order to suppress its insurrection, there arose from all parts of the world a
  general outcry of indignation.” 
Eighteen months afterwards, M. Thiers was amongst the fiercest defenders
  of the bombardment of Rome by a French army.[E] In fact, the fault of King Bomba seems to have
  consisted in this only – that he limited his bombardment to 48 hours.
  
A few days before the February Revolution, fretting at the long exile from
  place and pelf to which Guizot had condemned him, and sniffing in the air the
  scent of an approaching popular commotion, Thiers, in that pseudo-heroic
  style which won him the nickname Mirabeau-mouche [Mirabeau the fly],
  declared, to the Chamber of Deputies: 
“I am of the party of revolution, not only in France,
  but in Europe. I wish the government of the revolution to remain in the hands
  of moderate men... but if that government should fall into the hand of ardent
  minds, even into those of radicals, I shall, for all that, not desert my
  cause. I shall always be of the party of the revolution.” 
The February Revolution came. Instead of displacing the Guizot Cabinet by
  the Thiers Cabinet, as the little man had dreamt, it superseded Louis
  Philippe by the republic. On the first day of the popular victory, he
  carefully hid himself, forgetting that the contempt of the working men
  screened him from their hatred. Still, with his legendary courage, he
  continued to shy the public stage, until the June [1848] massacres had
  cleared it for his sort of action. Then he became the leading mind of the
  “Party of Order”[F] and its parliamentary republic, that anonymous
  interregnum, in which all the rival factions of the ruling class conspired
  together to crush the people, and conspired against each other to restore to
  each of them its own monarchy. Then, as now, Thiers denounced the republicans
  as the only obstacle to the consolidation of the republic; then, as now, he
  spoke to the republic as the hangman spoke to Don Carlos: “I shall
  assassinate thee, but for thy own good.” Now, as then, he will have to
  exclaim on the day after his victory: L’Empire est fait
  – the empire is consummated. 
Despite his hypocritical homilies about the necessary liberties and his
  personal grudge against Louis Bonaparte, who had made a dupe of him, and
  kicked out parliamentarism – and, outside of its factitious atmosphere,
  the little man is conscious of withering into nothingness – he had a
  hand in all the infamies of the Second Empire, from the occupation of Rome by
  French troops to the war with Prussia, which he incited by his fierce
  invective against German unity – not as a cloak of Prussian despotism,
  but as an encroachment upon the vested right of France in German disunion.
  Fond of brandishing, with his dwarfish arms in the face of Europe, the sword
  of the first Napoleon, whose historical shoeblack he had become, his foreign
  policy always culminated in the utter humiliation of France – from the
  London convention[G] of
  1840 to the Paris capitulation of 1871, and the present civil war, where he
  hounds on the prisoners of Sedan and Metz[H] against Paris by special permission of Bismarck. 
Despite his versatility of talent and shiftiness of purpose, this man has
  his whole lifetime been wedded to the most fossil routine. It is self-evident
  that to him the deeper undercurrents of modern society remained forever
  hidden; but even the most palpable changes on its surface were abhorrent to a
  brain (all the vitality of which) had fled to the tongue. Thus, he never
  tired of denouncing as a sacrilege any deviation from the old French
  protective system. 
When a minister of Louis Philippe, he railed at railways as a wild
  chimera; and when in opposition under Louis Bonaparte, he branded as a
  profanation every attempt to reform the rotten French army system. Never in
  his long political career has he been guilty of a single – even the
  smallest – measure of any practical use. Thiers was consistent only in
  his greed for wealth and his hatred of the men that produce it. Having
  entered his first ministry, under Louis Philippe, poor as Job, he left it a
  millionaire. His last ministry under the same king (of March 1, 1840) exposed
  him to public taunts of peculation in the Chamber of Deputies, to which he
  was content to reply by tears – a commodity he deals in as freely as
  Jules Favre, or any other crocodile. At Bordeaux, his first measure for
  saving France from impending financial ruin was to endow himself with three
  millions a year, the first and the last word of the “Economical
  Republic,” the vista of which he had opened to his Paris electors in
  1869. One of his former colleagues of the Chamber of Deputies of 1830,
  himself a capitalist and, nevertheless, a devoted member of the Paris
  Commune, M. Beslay, lately addressed Thiers thus in a public placard: 
“The enslavement of labor by capital has always been
  the cornerstone of your policy, and from the very day you saw the Republic of
  Labor installed at the Hotel de Ville, you have never ceased to cry out to
  France: ‘These are criminals!’” 
A master in small state roguery, a virtuoso in perjury and treason, a
  craftsman in all the petty strategems, cunning devices, and base perfidies of
  parliamentary warfare; never scrupling, when out of office, to fan a
  revolution, and to stifle it in blood when at the helm of the state; with
  class prejudices standing him in the place of ideas, and vanity in the place
  of a heart; his private life as infamous as his public life is odious –
  even now, when playing the part of a French Sulla, he cannot help setting off
  the abomination of his deeds by the ridicule of his ostentation. 
The capitulation of Paris, by surrendering to Prussia not only Paris, but
  all France, closed the long-continued intrigues of treason with the enemy,
  which the usurpers of September 4 had begun, as Trochu himself said, on the
  very same day. On the other hand, it initiated the civil war they were now to
  wage, with the assistance of Prussia, against the republic and Paris. The
  trap was laid in the very terms of the capitulation. At that time, above
  one-third of the territory was in the hands of the enemy, the capital was cut
  off from the provinces, all communications were disorganized. To elect, under
  such circumstances, a real representation of France was impossible, unless
  ample time were given for preparation. In view of this, the capitulation
  stipulated that a National Assembly must be elected within eight days; so
  that in many parts of France the news of the impending election arrived on
  its eve only. This assembly, moreover, was, by an express clause of the
  capitulation, to be elected for the sole purpose of deciding on peace or war,
  and, eventually, to conclude a treaty of peace. The population could not but
  feel that the terms of the armistice rendered the continuation of the war
  impossible, and that for sanctioning the peace imposed by Bismarck, the worst
  men in France were the best. But not content with these precautions, Thiers
  even before the secret of the armistice had been broached to Paris, set out
  for an electioneering tour through the provinces, there to galvanize back
  into life the Legitimist party, which now, along with the Orleanists, had to
  take the place of the then impossible Bonapartists. He was not afraid of
  them. Impossible as a government of modern France, and, therefore,
  contemptible as rivals, what party were more eligible as tools of
  counter-revolution than the party whose action, in the words of Thiers
  himself (Chamber of Deputies, January 5, 1833), “Had always been
  confined to the three resources of foreign invasion, civil war, and
  anarchy”? They verily believed in the advent of their long-expected
  retrospective millennium. There were the heels of foreign invasion trampling
  upon France; there was the downfall of an empire, and the captivity of
  Bonaparte; and there they were themselves. The wheel of history had evidently
  rolled back to stop at the “Chambers introuvable” of 1816.[I] In the assemblies of the
  republic, 1848 to 1851, they had been represented by their educated and
  trained parliamentary champions; it was the rank-and-file of the party which
  now rushed in – all the Pourceaugnacs of France. [a
  character in one of Molière’s comedies, typifying the dull-witted,
  narrow-minded petty landed gentry.] 
As soon as this Assembly of “Rurals"[J] had met at Bordeaux, Thiers made it clear to them
  that the peace preliminaries must be assented to at once, without even the
  honors of a parliamentary debate, as the only conditions on which Prussia
  would permit them to open the war against the republic and Paris, its
  stronghold. The counter-revolution had, in fact, no time to lose. The Second
  Empire had more than doubled the national debt, and plunged all the large
  towns into heavy municipal debts. The war had fearfully swelled the
  liabilities, and mercilessly ravaged the resources of the nation. To complete
  the ruin, the Prussian Shylock was there with his bond for the keep of half a
  million of his soldiers on French soil, his indemnity for five milliards[K], and interest at 5 per
  cent on the unpaid instalments thereof. Who was to pay this bill? It was only
  by the violent overthrow of the republic that the appropriators of wealth
  could hope to shift onto the shoulders of its producers the cost of a war
  which they, the appropriators, had themselves originated. Thus, the immense
  ruin of France spurred on these patriotic representatives of land and
  capital, under the very eyes and patronage of the invader, to graft upon the
  foreign war a civil war – a slaveholders’ rebellion. 
There stood in the way of this conspiracy one great obstacle –
  Paris. To disarm Paris was the first condition of success. Paris was
  therefore summoned by Thiers to surrender its arms. Then Paris was
  exasperated by the frantic anti-republican demonstrations of the
  “Rural” Assembly and by Thiers’ own equivocations about the
  legal status of the republic; by the threat to decapitate and decapitalize
  Paris; the appointment of Orleanist ambassadors; Dufaure’s laws on
  over-due commercial bills and house rents[L], inflicting ruin on the commerce and industry of
  Paris; Pouyer-Quertier’s tax of two centimes upon every copy of every
  imaginable publication; the sentences of death against Blanqui and Flourens;
  the suppression of the republican journals; the transfer of the National
  Assembly to Versailles; the renewal of the state of siege declared by
  Palikao, and expired on September 4; the appointment of Vinoy, the
  Décembriseur[M], as governor of Paris – of Valentin, the
  imperialist gendarme, as its prefect of police – and of
  D’Aurelles de Paladine, the Jesuit general, as the commander-in-chief
  of its National Guard. 
And now we have to address a question to M. Thiers and the men of national
  defence, his under-strappers. It is known that, through the agency of M.
  Pouyer-Quertier, his finance ministers, Thiers had contracted a loan of two
  milliards. Now, is it true or not – 
1. That the business was so managed that a consideration
  of several hundred millions was secured for the private benefit of Thiers,
  Jules Favre, Ernest Picard, Pouyer-Quertier, and Jules Simon? and – 
2. That no money was to be paid down until after the
  “pacification” of Paris?[N] 
At all events, there must have been something very pressing in the matter,
  for Thiers and Jules Favre, in the name of the majority of the Bordeaux
  Assembly, unblushingly solicited the immediate occupation of Paris by
  Prussian troops. Such, however, was not the game of Bismarck, as he
  sneeringly, and in public, told the admiring Frankfort philistines on his
  return to Germany. 
 
Chapter 4: [Paris Workers’
  Revolution
  & Thiers’ Reactionary Massacres] 
 

(1) In England common criminals are often discharged on
  parole after serving the greater part of their term, and are placed under
  police surveillance. On such discharge they receive a certificate called
  ticket-of-leave, their possessor is being referred to as ticket-of-leave-men.
  

[A] Société Générale du Credit Mobilier – A
  large French joint-stock bank founded in 1852. Its main source of income was
  speculation in securities. The bank was closely linked with the government
  circles of the Second Empire. In 1867 it went bankrupt and was liquidated in
  1871. 
[B] On February 14 and 15, 1831 the Paris mob plundered
  the church of St. Germain l’ Auxerroisand Archbishop Quélen’s
  palace in protest against the Legitimist demonstration during the Requiem
  mass for the Duke de Barry. Thiers, who was present among the rioting crowd
  while it was committing excesses in the church and in the Archbishop’s
  palace, persuaded the French National Guards not to interfere. 
In 1832, by the order of Thiers, who was at that time
  minister of the Interior, the Duchesse de Berry (mother of the Comte de
  Chambord) – the Legitimist pretender to the French throne – was
  arrested and subjected to a humiliating medical examination aimed at giving
  publicity to her secret marriage and in this way ruling her political career.
  
[C] An allusion to the ignominious role of Thiers, then
  Minister of the Interior, in suppressing the people’s insurrection in
  Paris against the July monarchy on April 13-14, 1834. The insurrection was
  put down with savage brutality by the military who, for example, massacred
  the inhabitants of one of the houses on Rue Transnonain. 
September Laws  – reactionary laws
  against the press introduced by the French Government in September 1835. They
  provided for imprisonment and large fines for publications criticizing the
  existing social and political system. 
[D] In January 1841, Thiers submitted to the Chamber of
  Deputies a plan for building a range of military fortifications around Paris.
  Revolutionary-democratic sections saw this move as a preparatory step for the
  crushing of popular demonstrations. The plan provided for the building of
  particularly strong fortifications in the vicinity of the workers districts.
  
[E] In April 1849 France, in conjunction with Austria and
  Naples, organized an intervention campaign against the republic of Rome in
  order to crush it and restore the pope’s temporal power. French troops
  severely bombarded Rome. Despite heroic resistance, the Republic was crushed
  and Rome occupied by French troops. 
[F] Party of Order – A party of the
  influential conservative bourgeoisie founded in 1848. It was a coalition of
  the two French monarchist factions – the Legitimists and Orleanists;
  from 1849 until the coup d’etat of December 2, 1851, it held the
  leading position in the Legislative Assembly of the Second Republic. 
[G] On July 15, 1840, England, Russia, Prussia, Austria
  and Turkey signed the London Convention, without the participation of France,
  on rendering aid to the Turkish Sultan against the Egyptian ruler Mohammed
  Ali, who had the support of France. As a result, a threat of war arose
  between France and the coalition of European powers, but King Louis Philippe
  did not dare begin hostilities and abandoned his support of Mohammed Ali. 
[H] In order to suppress the Paris Commune Thiers appealed
  to Bismarck for permission to supplement the Versailles Army with French
  prisoners of war, most of whom had been serving in the armies that
  surrendered at Sedan and Metz. 
[I] Chamber of Deputies in France in 1815 and 1816 (during
  the early years of the Restoration), which consisted of extreme
  reactionaries. 
[J] Landlord Chamber, the Assembly of
  “Rurals” – A nickname of the National Assembly of
  1871, which met in Bordeaux and was largely made up of reactionary
  monarchists, provincial landlords, officials, rentiers and traders
  “elected” in rural districts. There were about 430 monarchists
  among the Assembly’s 630 deputies. 
[K] The preliminary peace treaty between France and
  Germany signed at Versailles on February 26, 1871 by Thiers and Jules Favre,
  on the one hand, and Bismarck, on the other. According to the terms of this
  treaty, France ceded Alsace and East Lorraine to Germany and paid it
  indemnities to the sum of 5 billion francs. The final peace treaty was signed
  in Frankfort-on-Main on May 10, 1871. 
[L] On March 10, 1871, the National Assembly passed a law
  on the deferred payment of overdue bills; under this law the payment of debts
  on obligations concluded between August 13 and November 12, 1870 could be
  deferred. Thus, law led to the bankruptcy of many petty bourgeoisie. 
[M] Décembriseur – a participant in the Bonapartist
  coup d’etat of December 2, 1851 and supporter of acts in the spirit of
  this coup. 
[N] According to the newspapers, the internal loan, which
  the Thiers government wanted to float, gave Thiers and members of his
  government over 300 million francs “commission.” On June 20,
  1871, after the suppression of the Paris Commune, the law on the loan was
  passed. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## II







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[Paris Workers’ Revolution
  & Thiers’ Reactionary Massacres] 

 
Armed Paris was the only serious obstacle in the way of the
  counter-revolutionary conspiracy. Paris was, therefore, to be disarmed. 
On this point, the Bordeaux Assembly [National Assembly] was sincerity
  itself. If the roaring rant of its Rurals had not been audible enough, the
  surrender of Paris by Thiers to the tender mercies of the triumvirate of
  Vinoy the Decembriseur, Valentin the Bonapartist gendarme,
  and Aurelles de Paladine the Jesuit general, would have cut off even the last
  subterfuge of doubt. 
But while insultingly exhibiting the true purpose of the disarmament of
  Paris, the conspirators asked her to lay down her arms on a pretext which was
  the most glaring, the most barefaced of lies. The artillery of the Paris
  National Guard, said Thiers, belonged to the state, and to the state it must
  be returned. The fact was this: From the very day of the capitulation, by
  which Bismarck’s prisoners had signed the surrender of France, but
  reserved to themselves a numerous bodyguard for the express purpose of cowing
  Paris, Paris stood on the watch. The National Guard reorganized themselves
  and entrusted their supreme control to a Central Committee elected by their
  whole body, save some fragments of the old Bonapartist formations. On the eve
  of the entrance of the Prussians into Paris, the Central Committee took
  measures for the removal to Montmartre, Belleville, and La Villette, of the
  cannon and mitrailleuses treacherously abandoned by the
  capitulards in and about the very quarters the Prussians were to
  occupy. That artillery had been furnished by the subscriptions of the
  National Guard. As their private property, it was officially recognized in
  the capitulation of January 28, and on that very title exempted from the
  general surrender, into the hands of the conqueror, or arms belonging to the
  government. And Thiers was so utterly destitute of even the flimsiest pretext
  for initiating the war against Paris, that he had to resort to the flagrant
  lie of the artillery of the National Guard being state property! 
The seizure of her artillery was evidently but to serve as the preliminary
  to the general disarmament of Paris, and, therefore, of the Revolution of
  September 4. But that revolution had become the legal status of France. The
  republic, its work, was recognized by the conqueror in the terms of the
  capitulation. After the capitulation, it was acknowledged by all foreign
  powers, and in its name, the National Assembly had been summoned. The Paris
  working men’s revolution of September 4 was the only legal title of the
  National Assembly seated at Bordeaux, and of its executive. Without it, the
  National Assembly would at once have to give way to the Corps
  Legislatif elected in 1869 by universal suffrage under French, not under
  Prussian, rule, and forcibly dispersed by the arm of the revolution. Thiers
  and his ticket-of-leave men would have had to capitulate for safe conducts
  signed by Louis Bonaparte, to save them from a voyage to Cayenne[A]. The National Assembly,
  with its power of attorney to settle the terms of peace with Prussia, was but
  an incident of that revolution, the true embodiment of which was still armed
  Paris, which had initiated it, undergone for it a five-months’ siege,
  with its horrors of famine, and made her prolonged resistance, despite
  Trochu’s plan, the basis of an obstinate war of defence in the
  provinces. And Paris was now either to lay down her arms at the insulting
  behest of the rebellious slaveholders of Bordeaux, and acknowledge that her
  Revolution of September 4 meant nothing but a simple transfer of power from
  Louis Bonaparte to his royal rivals; or she had to stand forward as the
  self-sacrificing champion of France, whose salvation from ruin and whose
  regeneration were impossible without the revolutionary overthrow of the
  political and social conditions that had engendered the Second Empire, and
  under its fostering care, matured into utter rottenness. Paris, emaciated by
  a five-months’ famine, did not hesitate one moment. She heroically
  resolved to run all the hazards of a resistance against French conspirators,
  even with Prussian cannon frowning upon her from her own forts. Still, in its
  abhorrence of the civil war into which Paris was to be goaded, the Central
  Committee continued to persist in a merely defensive attitude, despite the
  provocations of the Assembly, the usurpations of the Executive, and the
  menacing concentration of troops in and around Paris. 
Thiers opened the civil war by sending Vinoy, at the head of a multitude
  of sergents-de-ville, and some regiments of the line, upon a
  nocturnal expedition against Montmartre, there to seize, by surprise, the
  artillery of the National Guard. It is well known how this attempt broke down
  before the resistance of the National Guard and the fraternization of the
  line with the people. Aurelles de Paldine had printed beforehand his bulletin
  of victory, and Thiers held ready the placards announcing his measures of
  coup d’etat. Now these had to be replaced by Thiers’ appeals,
  imparting his magnanimous resolve to leave the National Guard in the
  possession of their arms, with which, he said, he felt sure they would rally
  round the government against the rebels. Out of 300,000 National guards, only
  300 responded to this summons to rally around little Thiers against
  themselves. The glorious working men’s Revolution of March 18 took
  undisputed sway of Paris. The Central Committee was its provisional
  government. Europe seemed, for a moment, to doubt whether its recent
  sensational performances of state and war had any reality in them, or whether
  they were the dreams of a long bygone past. 
From March 18 to the entrance of the Versailles troops into Paris, the
  proletarian revolution remained so free from the acts of violence in which
  the revolutions – and still more the counter-revolutions – of the
  “better classes” abound, that no facts were left to its opponents
  to cry out about, but the executions of Generals Lecomte and Clement Thomas,
  and the affair of the Place Vendome. 
One of the Bonapartist officers engaged in the nocturnal attempt against
  Montmartre, General Lecomte, had four times ordered the 81st line regiment to
  fire at an unarmed gathering in the Place Pigalle, and on their refusal
  fiercely insulted them. Instead of shooting women and children, his own men
  shot him. The inveterate habits acquired by the soldiery under the training
  of the enemies of the working class are, of course, not likely to change the
  very moment these soldiers change sides. The same men executed Clement
  Thomas. 
“General” Clement Thomas, a malcontent
  ex-quartermaster-sergeant, had, in the latter times of Louis Philippe’s
  reign, enlisted at the office of the republican newspaper Le
  National, there to serve in the double capacity of responsible
  man-of-straw (gerant responsable) and of duelling bully to that very
  combative journal. After the February Revolution, the men of the
  National having got into power, they metamorphosed this old
  quarter-master-sergeant into a general on the eve of the butchery of June
  – of which he, like Jules Favre, was one of the sinister plotters, and
  became one of the most dastardly executioners. Then he and his generalship
  disappeared for a long time, to again rise to the surface on November 1,
  1870. The day before, the Government of National Defence, caught at the Hotel
  de Ville, had solemnly pledged their parole to Blanqui, Flourens, and other
  representatives of the working class, to abdicate their usurped power into
  the hands of a commune to be freely elected by Paris.[B] Instead of keeping their word, they let
  loose on Paris the Bretons of Trochu, who now replaced the Corsicans of
  Bonaparte.[C] General
  Tamisier alone, refusing to sully his name by such a breach of faith,
  resigned the commandership-in-chief of the National Guard, and in his place
  Clement Thomas for once became again a general. During the whole of his
  tenure of command, he made war, not upon the Prussians, but upon the Paris
  National Guard. He prevented their general armament, pitted the bourgeois
  battalions against the working men’s battalions, weeded out officers
  hostile to Trochu’s “plan,” and disbanded, under the stigma
  of cowardice, the very same proletarian battalions whose heroism has now
  astonished their most inveterate enemies. Clement Thomas felt quite proud of
  having reconquered his June pre-eminence as the personal enemy of the working
  class of Paris. Only a few days before March 18, he laid before the War
  Minister, Leflo, a plan of his own for “finishing off la fine
  fleur [the cream] of the Paris canaille.” After Vinoy’s
  rout, he must needs appear upon the scene of action in the quality of an
  amateur spy. The Central Committee and the Paris working men were as much
  responsible for the killing of Clement Thomas and Lecomte as the Princess of
  Wales for the fate of the people crushed to death on the day of her entrance
  into London. 
The massacre of unarmed citizens in Place Vendome is a myth which M.
  Thiers and the Rurals persistently ignored in the Assembly, entrusting its
  propagation exclusively to the servants’ hall of European journalism.
  “The men of order,” the reactionists of Paris, trembled at the
  victory of March 18. To them, it was the signal of popular retribution at
  last arriving. The ghosts of the victims assassinated at their hands from the
  days of June 1848, down to January 22, 1871,[D] arose before their faces. Their panic was their only
  punishment. Even the sergents-de-ville, instead of being disarmed
  and locked up, as ought to have been done, had the gates of Paris flung open
  wide for their safe retreat to Versailles. The men of order were left not
  only unharmed, but allowed to rally and quietly seize more than one
  stronghold in the very centre of Paris. This indulgence of the Central
  Committee – this magnanimity of the armed working men – so
  strangely at variance with the habits of the “Party of Order,”
  the latter misinterpreted as mere symptoms of conscious weakness. Hence their
  silly plan to try, under the cloak of an unarmed demonstration, what Vinoy
  had failed to perform with his cannon and mitrailleuses. On March
  22, a riotous mob of swells started from the quarters of luxury, all the
  petits creves in their ranks, and at their head the notorious
  familiars of the empire – the Heeckeren, Coetlogon, Henri de Pene, etc.
  Under the cowardly pretence of a pacific demonstration, this rabble, secretly
  armed with the weapons of the bravo [i.e. hired
  assassin], fell into marching order, ill-treated and disarmed the
  detached patrols and sentries of the National Guard they met with on their
  progress, and, on debouching from the Rue de la Paix, with the cry of
  “Down with the Central Committee! Down with the assassins! The National
  Assembly forever!” attempted to break through the line drawn up there,
  and thus to carry by surprise the headquarters of the National Guard in the
  Place Vendome. In reply to their pistol-shots, the regular
  sommations (the French equivalent of the English Riot Act)[E] were made, and, proving
  ineffective, fire was commanded by the general [Bergeret] of the National
  Guard. One volley dispersed into wild flight the silly coxcombs, who expected
  that the mere exhibition of their “respectability” would have the
  same effect upon the Revolution of Paris as Joshua’s trumpets upon the
  walls of Jericho. The runaways left behind them two National Guards killed,
  nine severely wounded (among them a member of the Central Committee
  [Maljournal]), and the whole scene of their exploit strewn with revolvers,
  daggers, and sword-canes, in evidence of the “unarmed” character
  of their “pacific” demonstration. When, on June 13, 1849, the
  National Guard made a really pacific demonstration in protest against the
  felonious assault of French troops upon Rome, Changarnier, then general of
  the Party of Order, was acclaimed by the National Assembly, and especially by
  M. Thiers, as the savior of society, for having launched his troops from all
  sides upon these unarmed men, to shoot and sabre them down, and to trample
  them under their horses’ feet. Paris, then was placed under a state of
  siege. Dufaure hurried through the Assembly new laws of repression. New
  arrests, new proscriptions – a new reign of terror set in. But the
  lower orders manage these things otherwise. The Central Committee of 1871
  simply ignored the heroes of the “pacific demonstration"; so much so,
  that only two days later, they were enabled to muster under Admiral Saisset,
  for that armed demonstration, crowned by the famous stampede to
  Versailles. In their reluctance to continue the civil war opened by
  Thiers’ burglarious attempt on Montmartre, the Central Committee made
  themselves, this time, guilty of a decisive mistake in not at once marching
  upon Versailles, then completely helpless, and thus putting an end to the
  conspiracies of Thiers and his Rurals. Instead of this, the Party of Order
  was again allowed to try its strength at the ballot box, on March 26, the day
  of the election of the Commune. Then, in the mairies of Paris, they
  exchanged bland words of conciliation with their too generous conquerors,
  muttering in their hearts solemn vows to exterminate them in due time. 
Now, look at the reverse of the medal. Thiers opened his second campaign
  against Paris in the beginning of April. The first batch of Parisian
  prisoners brought into Versailles was subjected to revolting atrocities,
  while Ernest Picard, with his hands in his trousers’ pockets, strolled
  about jeering them, and while Mesdames Thiers and Favre, in the midst of
  their ladies of honor (?) applauded, from the balcony, the outrages of the
  Versailles mob. The captured soldiers of the line were massacred in cold
  blood; our brave friend, General Duval, the iron-founder, was shot without
  any form of trial. Galifet, the kept man of his wife, so notorious for her
  shameless exhibitions at the orgies of the Second Empire, boasted in a
  proclamation of having commanded the murder of a small troop of National
  Guards, with their captain and lieutenant, surprised and disarmed by his
  Chasseurs. Vinoy, the runaway, was appointed by Thiers, Grand Cross of the
  Legion of Honor, for his general order to shoot down every soldier of the
  line taken in the ranks of the Federals. Desmaret, the Gendarme, was
  decorated for the treacherous butcher-like chopping in pieces of the
  high-souled and chivalrous Flourens, who had saved the heads of the
  Government of Defence on October 31, 1870.[F] “The encouraging particulars” of his
  assassination were triumphantly expatiated upon by Thiers in the National
  Assembly. With the elated vanity of a parliamentary Tom Thumb permitted to
  play the part of a Tamerlane, he denied the rebels the right of neutrality
  for ambulances. Nothing more horrid than that monkey allowed for a time to
  give full fling to his tigerish instincts, as foreseen by
  Voltaire.[Candide, Ch. 22](See news articles)
  
After the decree of the Commune of April 7, ordering reprisals and
  declaring it to be the duty “to protect Paris against the cannibal
  exploits of the Versailles banditti, and to demand an eye for an eye, a tooth
  for a tooth,” [G]
  Thiers did not stop the barbarous treatment of prisoners, moreover, insulting
  them in his bulletins as follows: “Never have more degraded
  countenances of a degraded democracy met the afflicted gazes of honest
  men” – honest, like Thiers himself and his ministerial
  ticket-of-leave men. Still, the shooting of prisoners was suspended for a
  time. Hardly, however, had Thiers and his Decembrist generals [of the December 2, 1851 coup by Louis Bonaparte]
  become aware that the Communal decree of reprisals was but an empty threat,
  that even their gendarme spies caught in Paris under the disguise of National
  Guards, that even sergents-de-ville, taken with incendiary shells
  upon them, were spared – when the wholesale shooting of prisoners was
  resumed and carried on uninterruptedly to the end. Houses to which National
  Guards had fled were surrounded by gendarmes, inundated with petroleum (which
  here occurs for the first time in this war), and then set fire to, the
  charred corpses being afterwards brought out by the ambulance of the Press at
  the Ternes. Four National Guards having surrendered to a troop of mounted
  Chasseurs at Belle Epine, on April 25, were afterwards shot down, one after
  another, by the captain, a worthy man of Gallifet’s. One of his four
  victims, left for dead, Scheffer, crawled back to the Parisian outposts, and
  deposed to this fact before a commission of the Commune. When Tolain
  interpellated the War Minister upon the report of this commission, the Rurals
  drowned his voice and forbade Leflo to answer. It would be an insult to their
  “glorious” army to speak of its deeds. The flippant tone in which
  Thiers’ bulletin announced the bayoneting of the Federals, surprised
  asleep at Moulin Saquet, and the wholesale fusillades at Clamart shocked the
  nerves even of the not over-sensitive London Times. But it would be
  ludicrous today to attempt recounting the merely preliminary atrocities
  committed by the bombarders of Paris and the fomenters of a
  slaveholders’ rebellion protected by foreign invasion. Amidst all these
  horrors, Thiers, forgetful of his parliamentary laments on the terrible
  responsibility weighing down his dwarfish shoulders, boasts in his bulletins
  that l’Assemblee siege paisiblement (the Assembly continues
  meeting in peace), and proves by his constant carousals, now with Decembrist
  generals, now with German princes, that his digestion is not troubled in the
  least, not even by the ghosts of Lecomte and Clement Thomas. 
 
Chapter 5: [The Paris Commune] 
 

[A] A town in French Guiana (Northern South America),
  penal settlement and place of exile. 
[B] On October 31, 1870, upon the receipt of news that the
  Government of National Defense had decided to start negotiations with the
  Prussians, the Paris workers and revolutionary sections of the National Guard
  rose up in revolt. They seized the town hall and set up their revolutionary
  government – the Committee of Public Safety, headed by Blanqui. Under
  pressure from the workers the Government of National Defense promised to
  resign and schedule national elections to the Commune for November 1. The
  government then, with the aid of some loyal battalions of the National Guard,
  seized the town hall by force of arms and re-established its domination. 
[C] Bretons  – Breton Mobile Guard which
  Trochu used as gendarmes to put down the revolutionary movement in Paris.
Corsicans – constituted a considerable part of the gendarmes
  corps during the Second Empire. 
[D] On January 22, 1871, the Paris proletariat and the
  National Guards held a revolutionary demonstration initiated by the
  Blanquists. They demanded the overthrow of the government and the
  establishment of a Commune. By order of the Government of National Defense,
  the Breton Mobile Guard, which was defending the town hall, opened fire on
  the demonstrators. After massacring the workers, the government began
  preparations to surrender Paris to the Germans. 
[E] Sommations (a preliminary demand to disburse) –
  under the laws of most bourgeois states, this demand is repeated three times,
  following which the armed police are entitled to resort to force. The
  Riot Act  was introduced in England in 1715. It prohibited “rebel
  gatherings” of more than 12 people in a group, giving the authorities
  the right to use force if the crowd did not disperse within an hour after the
  reading out of the sommations three times. 
[F] On October 31, Flourens prevented the members of the
  Government of National Defense from being shot, as had been demanded by one
  of the insurrectionists. 
[G] A reference to the decree on hostages adopted by the
  Commune on April 5, 1871. (Marx gives the date of its publication in the
  English press.) Under this decree, all persons found guilty of being in
  contact with Versailles were declared hostages. By this decree the Commune
  sought to prevent Communards from being shot by the Versaillists. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## III







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[The Paris Commune] 

 
On the dawn of March 18, Paris arose to the thunder-burst of “Vive
  la Commune!” What is the Commune, that sphinx so tantalizing to the
  bourgeois mind? 
“The proletarians of Paris,” said the Central
  Committee in its manifesto of March 18, “amidst the failures and
  treasons of the ruling classes, have understood that the hour has struck for
  them to save the situation by taking into their own hands the direction of
  public affairs.... They have understood that it is their imperious duty, and
  their absolute right, to render themselves masters of their own destinies, by
  seizing upon the governmental power.” 
But the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state
  machinery, and wield it for its own purposes. 
The centralized state power, with its ubiquitous organs of standing army,
  police, bureaucracy, clergy, and judicature – organs wrought after the
  plan of a systematic and hierarchic division of labor – originates from
  the days of absolute monarchy, serving nascent middle class society as a
  mighty weapon in its struggle against feudalism. Still, its development
  remained clogged by all manner of medieval rubbish, seignorial rights, local
  privileges, municipal and guild monopolies, and provincial constitutions. The
  gigantic broom of the French Revolution of the 18th century swept away all
  these relics of bygone times, thus clearing simultaneously the social soil of
  its last hinderances to the superstructure of the modern state edifice raised
  under the First Empire, itself the offspring of the coalition wars of old
  semi-feudal Europe against modern France. 
During the subsequent regimes, the government, placed under parliamentary
  control – that is, under the direct control of the propertied classes
  – became not only a hotbed of huge national debts and crushing taxes;
  with its irresistible allurements of place, pelf, and patronage, it became
  not only the bone of contention between the rival factions and adventurers of
  the ruling classes; but its political character changed simultaneously with
  the economic changes of society. At the same pace at which the progress of
  modern industry developed, widened, intensified the class antagonism between
  capital and labor, the state power assumed more and more the character of the
  national power of capital over labor, of a public force organized for social
  enslavement, of an engine of class despotism. 
After every revolution marking a progressive phase in the class struggle,
  the purely repressive character of the state power stands out in bolder and
  bolder relief. The Revolution of 1830, resulting in the transfer of
  government from the landlords to the capitalists, transferred it from the
  more remote to the more direct antagonists of the working men. The bourgeois
  republicans, who, in the name of the February Revolution, took the state
  power, used it for the June [1848] massacres, in order to convince the
  working class that “social” republic means the republic
  entrusting their social subjection, and in order to convince the royalist
  bulk of the bourgeois and landlord class that they might safely leave the
  cares and emoluments of government to the bourgeois
  “republicans.” 
However, after their one heroic exploit of June, the bourgeois republicans
  had, from the front, to fall back to the rear of the “Party of
  Order” – a combination formed by all the rival fractions and
  factions of the appropriating classes. The proper form of their joint-stock
  government was the parliamentary republic, with Louis Bonaparte for its
  president. Theirs was a regime of avowed class terrorism and deliberate
  insult towards the “vile multitude.” 
If the parliamentary republic, as M. Thiers said, “divided them [the
  different fractions of the ruling class] least", it opened an abyss between
  that class and the whole body of society outside their spare ranks. The
  restraints by which their own divisions had under former regimes still
  checked the state power, were removed by their union; and in view of the
  threatening upheaval of the proletariat, they now used that state power
  mercilessly and ostentatiously as the national war engine of capital against
  labor. 
In their uninterrupted crusade against the producing masses, they were,
  however, bound not only to invest the executive with continually increased
  powers of repression, but at the same time to divest their own parliamentary
  stronghold – the National Assembly – one by one, of all its own
  means of defence against the Executive. The Executive, in the person of Louis
  Bonaparte, turned them out. The natural offspring of the “Party of
  Order” republic was the Second Empire. 
The empire, with the coup d’etat for its birth certificate,
  universal suffrage for its sanction, and the sword for its sceptre, professed
  to rest upon the peasantry, the large mass of producers not directly involved
  in the struggle of capital and labor. It professed to save the working class
  by breaking down parliamentarism, and, with it, the undisguised subserviency
  of government to the propertied classes. It professed to save the propertied
  classes by upholding their economic supremacy over the working class; and,
  finally, it professed to unite all classes by reviving for all the chimera of
  national glory. 
In reality, it was the only form of government possible at a time when the
  bourgeoisie had already lost, and the working class had not yet acquired, the
  faculty of ruling the nation. It was acclaimed throughout the world as the
  savior of society. Under its sway, bourgeois society, freed from political
  cares, attained a development unexpected even by itself. Its industry and
  commerce expanded to colossal dimensions; financial swindling celebrated
  cosmopolitan orgies; the misery of the masses was set off by a shameless
  display of gorgeous, meretricious and debased luxury. The state power,
  apparently soaring high above society and the very hotbed of all its
  corruptions. Its own rottenness, and the rottenness of the society it had
  saved, were laid bare by the bayonet of Prussia, herself eagerly bent upon
  transferring the supreme seat of that regime from Paris to Berlin.
  Imperialism is, at the same time, the most prostitute and the ultimate form
  of the state power which nascent middle class society had commenced to
  elaborate as a means of its own emancipation from feudalism, and which
  full-grown bourgeois society had finally transformed into a means for the
  enslavement of labor by capital. 
The direct antithesis to the empire was the Commune. The cry of
  “social republic,” with which the February Revolution was ushered
  in by the Paris proletariat, did but express a vague aspiration after a
  republic that was not only to supercede the monarchical form of class rule,
  but class rule itself. The Commune was the positive form of that republic.
  
Paris, the central seat of the old governmental power, and, at the same
  time, the social stronghold of the French working class, had risen in arms
  against the attempt of Thiers and the Rurals to restore and perpetuate that
  old governmental power bequeathed to them by the empire. Paris could resist
  only because, in consequence of the siege, it had got rid of the army, and
  replaced it by a National Guard, the bulk of which consisted of working men.
  This fact was now to be transformed into an institution. The first decree of
  the Commune, therefore, was the suppression of the standing army, and the
  substitution for it of the armed people. 
The Commune was formed of the municipal councillors, chosen by universal
  suffrage in the various wards of the town, responsible and revocable at short
  terms. The majority of its members were naturally working men, or
  acknowledged representatives of the working class. The Commune was to be a
  working, not a parliamentary body, executive and legislative at the same
  time. 
Instead of continuing to be the agent of the Central Government, the
  police was at once stripped of its political attributes, and turned into the
  responsible, and at all times revocable, agent of the Commune. So were the
  officials of all other branches of the administration. From the members of
  the Commune downwards, the public service had to be done at
  workman’s wage. The vested interests and the representation
  allowances of the high dignitaries of state disappeared along with the high
  dignitaries themselves. Public functions ceased to be the private property of
  the tools of the Central Government. Not only municipal administration, but
  the whole initiative hitherto exercised by the state was laid into the hands
  of the Commune. 
Having once got rid of the standing army and the police – the
  physical force elements of the old government – the Commune was anxious
  to break the spiritual force of repression, the “parson-power", by the
  disestablishment and disendowment of all churches as proprietary bodies. The
  priests were sent back to the recesses of private life, there to feed upon
  the alms of the faithful in imitation of their predecessors, the apostles.
  
The whole of the educational institutions were opened to the people
  gratuitously, and at the same time cleared of all interference of church and
  state. Thus, not only was education made accessible to all, but science
  itself freed from the fetters which class prejudice and governmental force
  had imposed upon it. 
The judicial functionaries were to be divested of that sham independence which had but served to mask their abject
  subserviency to all succeeding governments to which, in turn, they had taken,
  and broken, the oaths of allegiance. Like the rest of public servants,
  magistrates and judges were to be elective, responsible, and revocable. 
The Paris Commune was, of course, to serve as a model to all the great
  industrial centres of France. The communal regime once established in Paris
  and the secondary centres, the old centralized government would in the
  provinces, too, have to give way to the self-government of the producers. 
In a rough sketch of national organization, which the Commune had no time
  to develop, it states clearly that the Commune was to be the political form
  of even the smallest country hamlet, and that in the rural districts the
  standing army was to be replaced by a national militia, with an extremely
  short term of service. The rural communities of every district were to
  administer their common affairs by an assembly of delegates in the central
  town, and these district assemblies were again to send deputies to the
  National Delegation in Paris, each delegate to be at any time revocable and
  bound by the mandat imperatif (formal instructions) of his
  constituents. The few but important functions which would still remain for a
  central government were not to be suppressed, as has been intentionally
  misstated, but were to be discharged by Communal and thereafter responsible
  agents. 
The unity of the nation was not to be broken, but, on the contrary, to be
  organized by Communal Constitution, and to become a reality by the
  destruction of the state power which claimed to be the embodiment of that
  unity independent of, and superior to, the nation itself, from which it was
  but a parasitic excresence. 
While the merely repressive organs of the old governmental power were to
  be amputated, its legitimate functions were to be wrested from an authority
  usurping pre-eminence over society itself, and restored to the responsible
  agents of society. Instead of deciding once in three
  or six years which member of the ruling class was to misrepresent the people
  in Parliament, universal suffrage was to serve the people, constituted in
  Communes, as individual suffrage serves every other employer in the search
  for the workmen and managers in his business. And it is well-known that
  companies, like individuals, in matters of real business generally know how
  to put the right man in the right place, and, if they for once make a
  mistake, to redress it promptly. On the other hand, nothing could be more
  foreign to the spirit of the Commune than to supercede universal suffrage by
  hierarchical investiture.[A] 
It is generally the fate of completely new historical creations to be
  mistaken for the counterparts of older, and even defunct, forms of social
  life, to which they may bear a certain likeness. Thus, this new Commune,
  which breaks with the modern state power, has been mistaken for a
  reproduction of the medieval Communes, which first preceded, and afterward
  became the substratum of, that very state power. The Communal Constitution
  has been mistaken for an attempt to break up into the federation of small
  states, as dreamt of by Montesquieu and the Girondins,[B] that unity of great nations which, if
  originally brought about by political force, has now become a powerful
  coefficient of social production. The antagonism of the Commune against the
  state power has been mistaken for an exaggerated form of the ancient struggle
  against over-centralization. Peculiar historical circumstances may have
  prevented the classical development, as in France, of the bourgeois form of
  government, and may have allowed, as in England, to complete the great
  central state organs by corrupt vestries, jobbing councillors, and ferocious
  poor-law guardians in the towns, and virtually hereditary magistrates in the
  counties. 
The Communal Constitution would have restored to the social body all the
  forces hitherto absorbed by the state parasite feeding upon, and clogging the
  free movement of, society. By this one act, it would have initiated the
  regeneration of France. 
The provincial French middle class saw in the Commune an attempt to
  restore the sway their order had held over the country under Louis Philippe,
  and which, under Louis Napoleon, was supplanted by the pretended rule of the
  country over the towns. In reality, the Communal Constitution brought the
  rural producers under the intellectual lead of the central towns of their
  districts, and there secured to them, in the working men, the natural
  trustees of their interests. The very existence of the Commune involved, as a
  matter of course, local municipal liberty, but no longer as a check upon the
  now superseded state power. It could only enter into the head of a Bismarck
  – who, when not engaged on his intrigues of blood and iron, always
  likes to resume his old trade, so befitting his mental calibre, of
  contributor to Kladderadatsch (the Berlin Punch)[C] – it could only
  enter into such a head to ascribe to the Paris Commune aspirations after the
  caricature of the old French municipal organization of 1791, the Prussian
  municipal constitution which degrades the town governments to mere secondary
  wheels in the police machinery of the Prussian state. The Commune made that
  catchword of bourgeois revolutions – cheap government – a reality
  by destroying the two greatest sources of expenditure: the standing army and
  state functionarism. Its very existence presupposed the non-existence of
  monarchy, which, in Europe at least, is the normal incumbrance and
  indispensable cloak of class rule. It supplied the republic with the basis of
  really democratic institutions. But neither cheap government nor the
  “true republic” was its ultimate aim; they were its mere
  concomitants. 
The multiplicity of interpretations to which the Commune has been
  subjected, and the multiplicity of interests which construed it in their
  favor, show that it was a thoroughly expansive political form, while all the
  previous forms of government had been emphatically repressive. Its true
  secret was this: 
It was essentially a working class government, the product
  of the struggle of the producing against the appropriating class, the
  political form at last discovered under which to work out the economical
  emancipation of labor. 
Except on this last condition, the Communal Constitution would have been
  an impossibility and a delusion. The political rule of the producer cannot
  co-exist with the perpetuation of his social slavery. The Commune was
  therefore to serve as a lever for uprooting the economical foundation upon
  which rests the existence of classes, and therefore of class rule. With labor
  emancipated, every man becomes a working man, and productive labor ceases to
  be a class attribute. 
It is a strange fact. In spite of all the tall talk and all the immense
  literature, for the last 60 years, about emancipation of labor, no sooner do
  the working men anywhere take the subject into their own hands with a will,
  than uprises at once all the apologetic phraseology of the mouthpieces of
  present society with its two poles of capital and wages-slavery (the landlord
  now is but the sleeping partner of the capitalist), as if the capitalist
  society was still in its purest state of virgin innocence, with its
  antagonisms still undeveloped, with its delusions still unexploded, with its
  prostitute realities not yet laid bare. The Commune, they exclaim, intends to
  abolish property, the basis of all civilization! 
Yes, gentlemen, the Commune intended to abolish that class property which
  makes the labor of the many the wealth of the few. It aimed at the
  expropriation of the expropriators. It wanted to make individual property a
  truth by transforming the means of production, land, and capital, now chiefly
  the means of enslaving and exploiting labor, into mere instruments of free
  and associated labor. But this is communism, “impossible”
  communism! Why, those members of the ruling classes who are intelligent
  enough to perceive the impossibility of continuing the present system –
  and they are many – have become the obtrusive and full-mouthed apostles
  of co-operative production. If co-operative production is not to remain a
  sham and a snare; if it is to supersede the capitalist system; if united
  co-operative societies are to regulate national production upon common plan,
  thus taking it under their own control, and putting an end to the constant
  anarchy and periodical convulsions which are the fatality of capitalist
  production – what else, gentlemen, would it be but communism,
  “possible” communism? 
The working class did not expect miracles from the Commune. They have no
  ready-made utopias to introduce par décret du peuple. They know that
  in order to work out their own emancipation, and along with it that higher
  form to which present society is irresistably tending by its own economical
  agencies, they will have to pass through long struggles, through a series of
  historic processes, transforming circumstances and men. They have no ideals
  to realize, but to set free the elements of the new society with which old
  collapsing bourgeois society itself is pregnant. In the full consciousness of
  their historic mission, and with the heroic resolve to act up to it, the
  working class can afford to smile at the coarse invective of the
  gentlemen’s gentlemen with pen and inkhorn, and at the didactic
  patronage of well-wishing bourgeois-doctrinaires, pouring forth their
  ignorant platitudes and sectarian crotchets in the oracular tone of
  scientific infallibility. 
When the Paris Commune took the management of the revolution in its own
  hands; when plain working men for the first time dared to infringe upon the
  governmental privilege of their “natural superiors,” and, under
  circumstances of unexampled difficulty, performed it at salaries the highest
  of which barely amounted to one-fifth of what, according to high scientific
  authority,(1) is the
  minimum required for a secretary to a certain metropolitan school-board
  – the old world writhed in convulsions of rage at the sight of the Red
  Flag, the symbol of the Republic of Labor, floating over the Hôtel de Ville.
  
And yet, this was the first revolution in which the working class was
  openly acknowledged as the only class capable of social initiative, even by
  the great bulk of the Paris middle class – shopkeepers, tradesmen,
  merchants – the wealthy capitalist alone excepted. The Commune had
  saved them by a sagacious settlement of that ever recurring cause of dispute
  among the middle class themselves – the debtor and creditor
  accounts.[D] The same
  portion of the middle class, after they had assisted in putting down the
  working men’s insurrection of June 1848, had been at once
  unceremoniously sacrificed to their creditors[E] by the then Constituent Assembly. But this was not
  their only motive for now rallying around the working class. They felt there
  was but one alternative – the Commune, or the empire – under
  whatever name it might reappear. The empire had ruined them economically by
  the havoc it made of public wealth, by the wholesale financial swindling it
  fostered, by the props it lent to the artificially accelerated centralization
  of capital, and the concomitant expropriation of their own ranks. It had
  suppressed them politically, it had shocked them morally by its orgies, it
  had insulted their Voltairianism by handing over the education of their
  children to the fréres Ignorantins,[F] it had revolted their national feeling as Frenchmen
  by precipitating them headlong into a war which left only one equivalent for
  the ruins it made – the disappearance of the empire. In fact, after the
  exodus from Paris of the high Bonapartist and capitalist bohème, the
  true middle class Party of Order came out in the shape of the “Union
  Republicaine,”[G]
  enrolling themselves under the colors of the Commune and defending it against
  the wilful misconstructions of Thiers. Whether the gratitude of this great
  body of the middle class will stand the present severe trial, time must show.
  
The Commune was perfectly right in telling the peasants that “its
  victory was their only hope.” Of all the lies hatched at Versailles and
  re-echoed by the glorious European penny-a-liner, one of the most tremendous
  was that the Rurals represented the French peasantry. Think only of the love
  of the French peasant for the men to whom, after 1815, he had to pay the
  milliard indemnity.[H]
  In the eyes of the French peasant, the very existence of a great landed
  proprietor is in itself an encroachment on his conquests of 1789. The
  bourgeois, in 1848, had burdened his plot of land with the additional tax of
  45 cents in the franc; but then he did so in the name of the revolution;
  while now he had fomented a civil war against revolution, to shift on to the
  peasant’s shoulders the chief load of the 5 milliards of indemnity to
  be paid to the Prussian. The Commune, on the other hand, in one of its first
  proclamations, declared that the true originators of the war would be made to
  pay its cost. The Commune would have delivered the peasant of the blood tax
  – would have given him a cheap government – transformed his
  present blood-suckers, the notary, advocate, executor, and other judicial
  vampires, into salaried communal agents, elected by, and responsible to,
  himself. It would have freed him of the tyranny of the garde
  champêtre, the gendarme, and the prefect; would have put enlightenment
  by the schoolmaster in the place of stultification by the priest. And the
  French peasant is, above all, a man of reckoning. He would find it extremely
  reasonable that the pay of the priest, instead of being extorted by the
  tax-gatherer, should only depend upon the spontaneous action of the
  parishioners’ religious instinct. Such were the great immediate boons
  which the rule of the Commune – and that rule alone – held out to
  the French peasantry. It is, therefore, quite superfluous here to expatiate
  upon the more complicated but vital problems which the Commune alone was
  able, and at the same time compelled, to solve in favor of the peasant
  – viz., the hypothecary debt, lying like an incubus upon his parcel of
  soil, the prolétariat foncier (the rural proletariat), daily growing
  upon it, and his expropriation from it enforced, at a more and more rapid
  rate, by the very development of modern agriculture and the competition of
  capitalist farming. 
The French peasant had elected Louis Bonaparte president of the Republic;
  but the Party of Order created the empire. What the French peasant really
  wants he commenced to show in 1849 and 1850, by opposing his maire
  to the government’s prefect, his school-master to the
  government’s priest, and himself to the government’s gendarme.
  All the laws made by the Party of Order in January and February 1850 were
  avowed measures of repression against the peasant. The peasant was a
  Bonapartist, because the Great Revolution, with all its benefits to him, was,
  in his eyes, personified in Napoleon. This delusion, rapidly breaking down
  under the Second Empire (and in its very nature hostile to the Rurals), this
  prejudice of the past, how could it have withstood the appeal of the Commune
  to the living interests and urgent wants of the peasantry? 
The Rurals – this was, in fact, their chief apprehension –
  knew that three months’ free communication of Communal Paris with the
  provinces would bring about a general rising of the peasants, and hence their
  anxiety to establish a police blockade around Paris, so as to stop the spread
  of the rinderpest [cattle pest – contagious
  disease]. 
If the Commune was thus the true representative of all the healthy
  elements of French society, and therefore the truly national government, it
  was, at the same time, as a working men’s government, as the bold
  champion of the emancipation of labor, emphatically international. Within
  sight of that Prussian army, that had annexed to Germany two French
  provinces, the Commune annexed to France the working people all over the
  world. 
The Second Empire had been the jubilee of cosmopolitan blackleggism, the
  rakes of all countries rushing in at its call for a share in its orgies and
  in the plunder of the French people. Even at this moment, the right hand of
  Thiers is Ganessco, the foul Wallachian, and his left hand is Markovsky, the
  Russian spy. The Commune admitted all foreigners to the honor of dying for an
  immortal cause. Between the foreign war lost by their treason, and the civil
  war fomented by their conspiracy with the foreign invader, the bourgeoisie
  had found the time to display their patriotism by organizing police hunts
  upon the Germans in France. The Commune made a German working man [Leo
  Frankel] its Minister of Labor. Thiers, the bourgeoisie, the Second Empire,
  had continually deluded Poland by loud professions of sympathy, while in
  reality betraying her to, and doing the dirty work of, Russia. The Commune
  honored the heroic sons of Poland [J. Dabrowski and W. Wróblewski] by placing
  them at the head of the defenders of Paris. And, to broadly mark the new era
  of history it was conscious of initiating, under the eyes of the conquering
  Prussians on one side, and the Bonapartist army, led by Bonapartist generals,
  on the other, the Commune pulled down that colossal symbol of martial glory,
  the Vendôme Column.[I]

The great social measure of the Commune was its own working existence. Its
  special measures could but betoken the tendency of a government of the people
  by the people. Such were the abolition of the nightwork of journeymen bakers;
  the prohibition, under penalty, of the employers’ practice to reduce
  wages by levying upon their workpeople fines under manifold pretexts –
  a process in which the employer combines in his own person the parts of
  legislator, judge, and executor, and filches the money to boot. Another
  measure of this class was the surrender to associations of workmen, under
  reserve of compensation, of all closed workshops and factories, no matter
  whether the respective capitalists had absconded or preferred to strike work.
  
The financial measures of the Commune, remarkable for their sagacity and
  moderation, could only be such as were compatible with the state of a
  besieged town. Considering the colossal robberies committed upon the city of
  Paris by the great financial companies and contractors, under the protection
  of Haussman,[J] the
  Commune would have had an incomparably better title to confiscate their
  property than Louis Napoleon had against the Orleans family. The Hohenzollern
  and the English oligarchs, who both have derived a good deal of their estates
  from church plunders, were, of course, greatly shocked at the Commune
  clearing but 8,000F out of secularization. 
While the Versailles government, as soon as it had recovered some spirit
  and strength, used the most violent means against the Commune; while it put
  down the free expression of opinion all over France, even to the forbidding
  of meetings of delegates from the large towns; while it subjected Versailles
  and the rest of France to an espionage far surpassing that of the Second
  Empire; while it burned by its gendarme inquisitors all papers printed at
  Paris, and sifted all correspondence from and to Paris; while in the National
  Assembly the most timid attempts to put in a word for Paris were howled down
  in a manner unknown even to the Chambre introuvable of 1816; with
  the savage warfare of Versailles outside, and its attempts at corruption and
  conspiracy inside Paris – would the Commune not have shamefully
  betrayed its trust by affecting to keep all the decencies and appearances of
  liberalism as in a time of profound peace? Had the government of the Commune
  been akin to that of M. Thiers, there would have been no more occasion to
  suppress Party of Order papers at Paris that there was to suppress Communal
  papers at Versailles. 
It was irritating indeed to the Rurals that at the very same time they
  declared the return to the church to be the only means of salvation for
  France, the infidel Commune unearthed the peculiar mysteries of the Picpus
  nunnery, and of the Church of St. Laurent.[K] It was a satire upon M. Thiers that, while he
  showered grand crosses upon the Bonapartist generals in acknowledgment of
  their mastery in losing battles, signing capitulations, and turning
  cigarettes at Wilhelmshöhe,[L] the Commune dismissed and arrested its generals
  whenever they were suspected of neglecting their duties. The expulsion from,
  and arrest by, the Commune of one of its members [Blanchet] who had slipped
  in under a false name, and had undergone at Lyons six days’
  imprisonment for simple bankruptcy, was it not a deliberate insult hurled at
  the forger, Jules Favre, then still the foreign minister of France, still
  selling France to Bismarck, and still dictating his orders to that paragon
  government of Belgium? But indeed the Commune did not pretend to
  infallibility, the invariable attribute of all governments of the old stamp.
  It published its doings and sayings, it initiated the public into all its
  shortcomings. 
In every revolution there intrude, at the side of its true agents, men of
  different stamp; some of them survivors of and devotees to past revolutions,
  without insight into the present movement, but preserving popular influence
  by their known honesty and courage, or by the sheer force of tradition;
  others mere brawlers who, by dint of repeating year after year the same set
  of stereotyped declarations against the government of the day, have sneaked
  into the reputation of revolutionists of the first water. After March 18,
  some such men did also turn up, and in some cases contrived to play
  pre-eminent parts. As far as their power went, they hampered the real action
  of the working class, exactly as men of that sort have hampered the full
  development of every previous revolution. They are an unavoidable evil: with
  time they are shaken off; but time was not allowed to the Commune. 
Wonderful, indeed, was the change the Commune had wrought in Paris! No
  longer any trace of the meretricious Paris of the Second Empire! No longer
  was Paris the rendezvous of British landlords, Irish absentees,[M] American ex-slaveholders
  and shoddy men, Russian ex-serfowners, and Wallachian boyards. No more
  corpses at the morgue, no nocturnal burglaries, scarcely any robberies; in
  fact, for the first time since the days of February 1848, the streets of
  Paris were safe, and that without any police of any kind. 
“We,” said a member of the Commune, “hear
  no longer of assassination, theft, and personal assault; it seems indeed as
  if the police had dragged along with it to Versailles all its Conservative
  friends.” 
The cocottes [‘chickens’ – prostitutes] had refound the scent of their protectors –
  the absconding men of family, religion, and, above all, of property. In their
  stead, the real women of Paris showed again at the surface – heroic,
  noble, and devoted, like the women of antiquity. Working, thinking fighting,
  bleeding Paris – almost forgetful, in its incubation of a new society,
  of the Cannibals at its gates – radiant in the enthusiasm of its
  historic initiative! 
Opposed to this new world at Paris, behold the old world at Versailles
  – that assembly of the ghouls of all defunct regimes, Legitimists and
  Orleanists, eager to feed upon the carcass of the nation – with a tail
  of antediluvian republicans, sanctioning, by their presence in the Assembly,
  the slaveholders’ rebellion, relying for the maintenance of their
  parliamentary republic upon the vanity of the senile mountebank at its head,
  and caricaturing 1789 by holding their ghastly meetings in the Jeu de
  Paume.(2) There it
  was, this Assembly, the representative of everything dead in France, propped
  up to the semblance of life by nothing but the swords of the generals of
  Louis Bonaparte. Paris all truth, Versailles all lie; and that lie vented
  through the mouth of Thiers. 
Thiers tells a deputation of the mayors of the Seine-et-Oise –
  “You may rely upon my word, which I have never broken!” 
He tells the Assembly itself that “it was the most freely elected
  and most liberal Assembly France ever possessed"; he tells his motley
  soldiery that it was “the admiration of the world, and the finest army
  France ever possessed”; he tells the provinces that the bombardment of Paris
  by him was a myth: “If some cannon-shots have been fired, it was not
  the deed of the army of Versailles, but of some insurgents trying to make
  believe that they are fighting, while they dare not show their faces.”
  He again tells the provinces that “the artillery of Versailles does not
  bombard Paris, but only cannonades it". He tells the Archbishop of Paris that
  the pretended executions and reprisals (!) attributed to the Versailles
  troops were all moonshine. He tells Paris that he was only anxious “to
  free it from the hideous tyrants who oppress it,” and that, in fact,
  the Paris of the Commune was “but a handful of criminals.” 
The Paris of M. Thiers was not the real Paris of the “vile
  multitude,” but a phantom Paris, the Paris of the
  francs-fileurs,[N] the Paris of the Boulevards, male and female –
  the rich, the capitalist, the gilded, the idle Paris, now thronging with its
  lackeys, its blacklegs, its literary bonhome, and its
  cocottes at Versailles, Saint-Denis, Rueil, and Saint-Germain;
  considering the civil war but an agreeable diversion, eyeing the battle going
  on through telescopes, counting the rounds of cannon, swearing by their own
  honor and that of their prostitutes, that the performance was far better got
  up than it used to be at the Porte St. Martin. The men who fell were really
  dead; the cries of the wounded were cries in good earnest; and, besides, the
  whole thing was so intensely historical. 
This is the Paris of M. Thiers, as the emigration of Coblenz was the
  France of M. de Calonne.[O] 
 
Chapter 6: [The Fall of Paris] 
 

Authors Notes 
(1) Professor Huxley. [Note to the German addition of
  1871.] 
(2) The tennis court where the National Assembly of 1789
  adopted its famous decisions. [Note to the German addition of 1871.] 

Editorial Notes 
[A] A top-down system of appointing officials in bourgeois
  systems, where high-up officials appoint many or all lower officials. 
[B] The party of the influential bourgeoisie during the
  French revolution at the end of the 18th century. (The name is derived from
  the Department of Gironde.) It came out against the Jacobin government and
  the revolutionary masses which supported it, under the banner of defending
  the departments’ right to autonomy and federation. 
[C] Satirical/humorous liberal weekly papers. 
[D] A reference to the Paris Commune’s decree of
  April 16, 1871, providing for payment of all debts in installments over three
  years and abolition of interest on them. 
[E] On Aug. 22, 1848, the Constituent Assembly rejected
  the bill on “amiable agreements” (“concordats á
  l’ amiable ”) aimed to introduce the deferred payment of
  debts. As a result of this measure, a considerable section of the
  petty-bourgeoisie were utterly ruined and found themselves completely
  dependent on the creditors of the richest bourgeoisie. 
[F] (Ignorant Brothers) – a nickname for a religious
  order, founded in Rheims in 1680, whose members pledged themselves to educate
  children of the poor. The pupils received a predominantly religious education
  and barely any knowledge otherwise. 
[G] This refers to the Alliance républicaine des
  Départements  – a political association of petty-bourgeois
  representatives from the various departments of France, who lived in Paris;
  calling on the people to fight against the Versailles government and the
  monarchist National Assembly and to support the Commune throughout the
  country. 
[H] The law of April 27, 1825 on the payment of
  compensation to the former emigres for the landed states confiscated from
  them during the preceding French Revolution. 
[I] The Vendôme Column was erected between 1806 and 1810
  in Paris in honor of the victories of Napoleonic France; it was made out of
  the bronze captured from enemy guns and was crowned by a statue of Napoleon.
  On May 16, 1871, by order of the Paris Commune, the Vendôme Column was pulled
  down. 
[J] During the Second Empire, Baron Haussmann was Prefect
  of the Department of the Seine (the City of Paris). He introduced a number of
  changes in the layout of the city for the purpose of crushing workers’
  revolts. 
[K] In the Picpus nunnery cases of the nuns being
  incarcerated in cells for many years were exposed and instruments of torture
  were found; in the church of St. Laurent a secret cemetery was found
  attesting to the murders that had been committed there. These facts were
  finally exposed by the Commune’s newspaper Mot d’Ordre
  on May 5, 1871, and also in the pamphlet Les Crimes des congreégations
  religieuses. 
[L] The chief occupation of the French prisoners of war in
  Wilhelmshöhe (those captured after the Battle of Sedan) was making cigars for
  their own use. 
[M] Rich landowners who hardly ever visited their estates,
  but instead had their land managed by agents or leased it to petty-bourgeois
  who, in their turn, sub-leased the land at high rents. 
[N] (litterly rendered: “free absconder”)
  – the nickname given to the Paris bourgeois who fled from the city
  during the siege. The name carried brazen historical irony as a result of its
  resemblance to the word “francs-tireurs ” (“free
  sharpshooters”) – French guerrillas who actively fought against
  the Prussians. 
[O] A city in Germany; during the French Revolution at the
  end of the 18th-century it was the center where the landlord monarchist
  emigres made preparations for intervention against revolutionary France.
  Coblenz was the seat of the emigre government headed by the rabid reactionary
  de Calonne, a former minister of Louis XVI. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## IV







The Civil War in France



Karl Marx: The Civil War in France


The Third Address
  May, 1871 
[The Fall of Paris] 

 
The first attempt of the slaveholders’ conspiracy to put down Paris
  by getting the Prussians to occupy it was frustrated by Bismarck’s
  refusal. 
The second attempt, that of March 18, ended in the rout of the army and
  the flight to Versailles of the government, which ordered the whole
  administration to break up and follow in its track. 
By the semblance of peace negotiations with Paris, Thiers found the time
  to prepare for war against it. But where to find an army? The remnants of the
  line regiments were weak in number and unsafe in character. His urgent appeal
  to the provinces to succour Versailles, by their National Guards and
  volunteers, met with a flat refusal. Brittany alone furnished a handful of
  Chouans[A]
  fighting under a white flag, every one of them wearing on his breast the
  heart of Jesus in white cloth, and shouting “Vive le Roi!” (Long
  live the King!) 
Thiers was, therefore, compelled to collect, in hot haste, a motley crew,
  composed of sailors, marines, Pontifical Zouaves, Valentin’s gendarmes,
  and Pietri’s sergents-de-ville and mouchards. This
  army, however, would have been ridiculously ineffective without the
  instalments of imperialist war prisoners, which Bismarck granted in numbers
  just sufficient to keep the civil war a-going, and keep the Versailles
  government in abject dependence on Prussia. During the war itself, the
  Versailles police had to look after the Versailles army, while the gendarmes
  had to drag it on by exposing themselves at all posts of danger. The forts
  which fell were not taken, but bought. The heroism of the Federals convinced
  Thiers that the resistance of Paris was not to be broken by his own strategic
  genius and the bayonets at his disposal. 
Meanwhile, his relations with the provinces became more and more
  difficult. Not one single address of approval came in to gladden Thiers and
  his Rurals. Quite the contrary. Deputations and addresses demanding, in a
  tone anything but respectful, conciliation with Paris on the basis of the
  unequivocal recognition of the republic, the acknowledgment of the Communal
  liberties, and the dissolution of the National Assembly, whose mandate was
  extinct, poured in from all sides, and in such numbers that Dufaure,
  Thiers’ Minister of Justice, in his circular of April 23 to the public
  prosecutors, commanded them to treat “the cry of conciliation” as
  a crime! In regard, however, of the hopeless prospect held out by his
  campaign, Thiers resolved to shift his tactics by ordering, all over the
  country, municipal elections to take place on April 30, on the basis of the
  new municipal law dictated by himself to the National Assembly. What with the
  intrigues of his prefects, what with police intimidation, he felt quite
  sanguine of imparting, by the verdict of the provinces, to the National
  Assembly that moral power it had never possessed, and of getting at last from
  the provinces the physical force required for the conquest of Paris. 
His bandit-warfare against Paris, exalted in his own bulletins, and the
  attempts of his ministers at the establishment, throughout France, of a reign
  of terror, Thiers was from the beginning anxious to accompany with a little
  by-play of conciliation, which had to serve more than one purpose. It was to
  dupe the provinces, to inveigle the middle class elements in Paris, and above
  all, to afford the professed republicans in the National Assembly the
  opportunity of hiding their treason against Paris behind their faith in
  Thiers. 
On March 21, when still without an army, he had declared to the Assembly:
  “Come what may, I will not send an army to Paris.” 
On March 27, he rose again: “I have found the republic an
  accomplished fact, and I am firmly resolved to maintain it.” 
In reality, he put down the revolution at Lyons and Marseilles[B] in the name of the
  republic, while the roars of his Rurals drowned the very mention of his name
  at Versailles. After this exploit, he toned down the “accomplished
  fact” into a hypothetical fact. The Orleans princes, whom he had
  cautiously warned off Bordeaux, were now, in flagrant breach of the law,
  permitted to intrigue at Dreux. The concessions held out by Thiers in his
  interminable interviews with the delegates from Paris and the provinces,
  although constantly varied in tone and color, according to time and
  circumstances, did in fact never come to more than the prospective
  restriction of revenge to the “handful of criminals implicated in the
  murder of Lecomte and Clement Thomas,” on the well-understood premise
  that Paris and France were unreservedly to accept M. Thiers himself as the
  best of possible Republics, as he, in 1830, had done with Louis Philippe, and
  in 1849 under Louis Bonaparte’s presidency. While out of office, he
  made a fortune by pleading for the Paris capitalists, and made political
  capital by pleading against the laws he had himself originated. He now
  hurried through the National Assembly not only a set of repressive laws which
  were, after the fall of Paris, to extirpate the last remnants of republican
  liberty in France; he foreshadowed the fate of Paris by abridging what was
  for him the too slow procedure of courts-martial,[C] and by a new-fangled, Draconic code of
  deportation. The Revolution of 1848, abolishing the penalty of death for
  political crimes, had replaced it by deportation. Louis Bonaparte did not
  dare, at least not in theory, to re-establish the regime of the guillotine.
  The Rural Assembly, not yet bold enough even to hint that the Parisians were
  not rebels, but assassins, had therefore to confine its prospective vengeance
  against Paris to Dufaure’s new code of deportation. Under all these
  circumstances, Thiers himself could not have gone on with his comedy of
  conciliation, had it not, as he intended it to do, drawn forth shrieks of
  rage from the Rurals, whose ruminating mind did neither understand the play,
  nor its necessities of hypocrisy, tergiversation, and procrastination. 
In sight of the impending municipal elections of April 30, Thiers enacted
  one of his great conciliation scenes on April 27. Amidst a flood of sentiment
  rhetoric, he exclaimed from the tribune of the Assembly: 
“There exists no conspiracy against the republic but
  that of Paris, which compels us to shed French blood. I repeat it again and
  again. Let those impious arms fall from the hands which hold them, and
  chastisement will be arrested at once by an act of peace excluding only the
  small number of criminals.” 
To the violent interruption of the Rurals, he replied: 
“Gentlemen, tell me, I implore you, am I wrong? Do
  you really regret that I could have stated the truth that the criminals are
  only a handful? Is it not fortunate in the midst of our misfortunes that
  those who have been capable to shed the blood of Clement Thomas and General
  Lecomte are but rare exceptions?” 
France, however, turned a deaf ear to what Thiers flattered himself to be
  a parliamentary siren’s song. Out of 700,000 municipal councillors
  returned by the 35,000 communes still left to France, the united Legitimists,
  Orleanists, and Bonapartists did not carry 8,000. 
The supplementary elections which followed were still more decidedly
  hostile. 
Thus, instead of getting from the provinces the badly-needed physical
  force, the National Assembly lost even its last claim to moral force, that of
  being the expression of the universal suffrage of the country. To complete
  the discomfiture, the newly-chosen municipal councils of all the cities of
  France openly threatened the usurping Assembly at Versailles with a counter
  assembly at Bordeaux. 
Then the long-expected moment of decisive action had at last come for
  Bismarck. He peremptorily summoned Thiers to send to Frankfort
  plenipotentiaries for the definitive settlement of peace. In humble obedience
  to the call of his master, Thiers hastened to despatch his trusty Jules
  Favre, backed by Pouyer-Quertier. Pouyer-Quertier, an “eminent”
  Rouen cotton-spinner, a fervent and even servile partisan of the Second
  Empire, had never found any fault with it save its commercial treaty with
  England,[D] prejudicial
  to his own shop-interest. Hardly installed at Bordeaux as Thiers’
  Minister of Finance, he denounced that “unholy” treaty, hinted at
  its near abrogation, and had even the effrontery to try, although in vain
  (having counted without Bismarck), the immediate enforcement of the old
  protective duties against Alsace, where, he said, no previous international
  treaties stood in the way. This man who considered counter-revolution as a
  means to put down wages at Rouen, and the surrender of French provinces as a
  means to bring up the price of his wares in France, was he not the
  one predestined to be picked out by Thiers as the helpmate of Jules
  Favre in his last and crowning treason? 
On the arrival at Frankfurt of this exquisite pair of plenipotentiaries,
  bully Bismarck at once met them with the imperious alternative: Either the
  restoration of the empire or the unconditional acceptance of my own peace
  terms! These terms included a shortening of the intervals in which war
  indemnity was to be paid and the continued occupation of the Paris forts by
  Prussian troops until Bismarck should feel satisfied with the state of things
  in France; Prussia thus being recognized as the supreme arbiter in internal
  French politics! In return for this, he offered to let loose for the
  extermination of Paris the Bonapartist army, and to lend them the direct
  assistance of Emperor William’s troops. He pledged his good faith by
  making payment of the first installment of the indemnity dependent on the
  “pacification” of Paris. Such bait was, of course, eagerly
  swallowed by Thiers and his plenipotentiaries. They signed the treaty of
  peace on May 10 and had it endorsed by the Versailles Assembly on the 18th.
  
In the interval between the conclusion of peace and the arrival of the
  Bonapartist prisoners, Thiers felt the more bound to resume his comedy of
  conciliation, as his republican tools stood in sore need of a pretext for
  blinking their eyes at the preparations for the carnage of Paris. As late as
  May 18, he replied to a deputation of middle-class conciliators – 
“Whenever the insurgents will make up their minds for
  capitulation, the gates of Paris shall be flung wide open during a week for
  all except the murderers of Generals Clement Thomas and Lecomte.” 
A few days afterwards, when violently interpellated on these promises by
  the Rurals, he refused to enter into any explanations; not, however, without
  giving them this significant hint: 
“I tell you there are impatient men amongst you, men
  who are in too great a hurry. They must have another eight days; at the end
  of these eight days there will be no more danger, and the task will be
  proportionate to their courage and to their capacities.” 
As soon as MacMahon was able to assure him, that he could shortly enter
  Paris, Thiers declared to the Assembly that 
“he would enter Paris with the laws in his
  hands, and demand a full expiation from the wretches who had sacrificed the
  lives of soldiers and destroyed public monuments.” 
As the moment of decision drew near, he said – to the Assembly,
  “I shall be pitiless!” – to Paris, that it was doomed; and
  to his Bonapartist bandits, that they had state licence to wreak vengeance
  upon Paris to their hearts’ content. 
At last, when treachery had opened the gates of Paris to General Douai, on
  May 21, Thiers, on the 22nd, revealed to the Rurals the “goal” of
  his conciliation comedy, which they had so obstinately persisted in not
  understanding. 
“I told you a few days ago that we were approaching
  our goal; today I come to tell you the goal is
  reached. The victory of order, justice, and civilization is at last
  won!” 
So it was. The civilization and justice of bourgeois order comes out in
  its lurid light whenever the slaves and drudges of that order rise against
  their masters. Then this civilization and justice stand forth as undisguised
  savagery and lawless revenge. Each new crisis in the class struggle between
  the appropriator and the producer brings out this fact more glaringly. Even
  the atrocities of the bourgeois in June 1848 vanish before the infamy of
  1871. The self-sacrificing heroism with which the population of Paris –
  men, women, and children – fought for eight days after the entrance of
  the Versaillese, reflects as much the grandeur of their cause, as the
  infernal deeds of the soldiery reflect the innate spirit of that
  civilization, indeed, the great problem of which is how to get rid of the
  heaps of corpses it made after the battle was over! 
To find a parallel for the conduct of Thiers and his bloodhounds we must
  go back to the times of Sulla and the two Triumvirates of Rome.[E] The same wholesale
  slaughter in cold blood; the same disregard, in massacre, of age and sex, the
  same system of torturing prisoners; the same proscriptions, but this time of
  a whole class; the same savage hunt after concealed leaders, lest one might
  escape; the same denunciations of political and private enemies; the same
  indifference for the butchery of entire strangers to the feud. 
There is but this difference: that the Romans had no
  mitrailleuses for the despatch, in the lump, of the proscribed, and
  that they had not “the law in their hands,” nor on their lips the
  cry of “civilization.” 
And after those horrors look upon the other still more hideous face of the
  bourgeois civilization as described by its own press! 
“With stray shots,” writes the Paris
  correspondent of a London Tory paper, “still ringing in the distance,
  and unintended wounded wretches dying amid the tombstones of Pere la Chaise
  – with 6,000 terror-stricken insurgents wandering in an agony of
  despair in the labyrinth of the catacombs, and wretches hurried through the
  streets to be shot down in scores by the mitrailleuse – it is
  revolting to see the cafes filled with the votaries of absinthe, billiards,
  and dominoes; female profligacy perambulating the boulevards, and the sound
  of revelry disturbing the night from the cabinets particuliers of
  fashionable restaurants.” 
M. Edouard Herve writes in the Journal de Paris, a Versaillist
  journal pressed by the Commune: 
“The way in which the population of Paris [!]
  manifested its satisfaction yesterday was rather more than frivolous, and we
  fear it will grow worse as time progresses. Paris has now a fete day
  appearance, which is sadly out of place; and, unless we are to be called the
  Parisiens de la decadence, this sort of thing must come to an
  end.” 
And then he quotes the passage from Tacitus: 
“Yet, on the morrow of that horrible struggle, even
  before it was completely over, Rome – degraded and corrupt –
  began once more to wallow in the voluptuous slough which was destroying its
  body and pulling its soul – alibi proelia et vulnera, alibi balnea
  popinoeque [here fights and wounds, there baths and restaurants].”
  
M. Herve only forgets to say that the “population of Paris” he
  speaks of is but the population of the Paris of M. Thiers – the
  francs-fileurs returning in throngs from Versailles, Saint-Denis,
  Rueil, and Saint Germain – the Paris of the “Decline.” 
In all its bloody triumphs over the self-sacrificing champions of a new
  and better society, that nefarious civilization, based upon the enslavement
  of labor, drowns the moans of its victims in a hue-and-cry of calumny,
  reverberated by a world-wide echo. The serene working men’s Paris of
  the Commune is suddenly changed into a pandemonium by the bloodhounds of
  “order.” 
And what does this tremendous change prove to the bourgeois mind of all
  countries? Why, that the Commune has conspired against civilization! The
  Paris people die enthusiastically for the Commune in numbers unequally in any
  battle known to history. What does that prove? Why, that the Commune was not
  the people’s own government but the usurpation of a handful of
  criminals! The women of Paris joyfully give up their lives at the barricades
  and on the place of execution. What does this prove? Why, that the demon of
  the Commune has changed them into Megaera and Hecates! 
The moderation of the Commune during the two months of undisputed sway is
  equalled only by the heroism of its defence. 
What does that prove? Why, that for months the Commune carefully hid,
  under a mask of moderation and humanity, the bloodthirstiness of its fiendish
  instincts to be let loose in the hour of its agony! 
The working men’s Paris, in the act of its heroic self-holocaust,
  involved in its flames buildings and monuments. While tearing to pieces the
  living body of the proletariat, its rulers must no longer expect to return
  triumphantly into the intact architecture of their abodes. The government of
  Versailles cries, “Incendiarism!” and whispers this cue to all
  its agents, down to the remotest hamlet, to hunt up its enemies everywhere as
  suspect of professional incendiarism. The bourgeoisie of the whole world,
  which looks complacently upon the wholesale massacre after the battle, is
  convulsed by horror at the desecration of brick and mortar! 
When governments give state licences to their navies to “kill,
  burn, and destroy,” is that licence for incendiarism? When the
  British troops wantonly set fire to the Capitol at Washington and to the
  summer palace of the Chinese emperor,[F] was that incendiarism? When the Prussians not for
  military reasons, but out of the mere spite of revenge, burned down, by the
  help of petroleum, towns like Chateaudun and innumerable villages, was that
  incendiarism? When Thiers, during six weeks, bombarded Paris, under the
  pretext that he wanted to set fire to those houses only in which there were
  people, was that incendiarism? – In war, fire is an arm as legitimate
  as any. Buildings held by the enemy are shelled to set them on fire. If their
  defenders have to retire, they themselves light the flames to prevent the
  attack from making use of the buildings. To be burned down has always been
  the inevitable fate of all buildings situated in the front of battle of all
  the regular armies of the world. 
But in the war of the enslaved against their enslavers, the only
  justifiable war in history, this is by no means to hold good! The Commune
  used fire strictly as a means of defence. They used it to stop up to the
  Versailles troops those long, straight avenues which Haussman had expressly
  opened to artillery-fire; they used it to cover their retreat, in the same
  way as the Versaillese, in their advance, used their shells which destroyed
  at least as many buildings as the fire of the Commune. It is a matter of
  dispute, even now, which buildings were set fire to by the defence, and which
  by the attack. And the defence resorted to fire only then when the Versailles
  troops had already commenced their wholesale murdering of prisoners. 
Besides, the Commune had, long before, given full public notice that if
  driven to extremities, they would bury themselves under the ruins of Paris,
  and make Paris a second Moscow, as the Government of National Defence, but
  only as a cloak for its treason, had promised to do. For this purpose Trochu
  had found them the petroleum. The Commune knew that its opponents cared
  nothing for the lives of the Paris people, but cared much for their own Paris
  buildings. And Thiers, on the other hand, had given them notice that he would
  be implacable in his vengeance. No sooner had he got his army ready on one
  side, and the Prussians shutting the trap on the other, than he proclaimed:
  “I shall be pitiless! The expiation will be complete, and justice will
  be stern!” If the acts of the Paris working men were vandalism, it was
  the vandalism of defence in despair, not the vandalism of triumph, like that
  which the Christians perpetrated upon the really priceless art treasures of
  heathen antiquity; and even that vandalism has been justified by the
  historian as an unavoidable and comparatively trifling concomitant to the
  titanic struggle between a new society arising and an old one breaking down.
  It was still less the vandalism of Haussman, razing historic Paris to make
  place for the Paris of the sightseer! 
But the execution by the Commune of the 64 hostages, with the Archbishop
  of Paris at their head! The bourgeoisie and its army, in June 1848,
  re-established a custom which had long disappeared from the practice of war
  – the shooting of their defenceless prisoners. This brutal custom has
  since been more or less strictly adhered to by the suppressors of all popular
  commotions in Europe and India; thus proving that it constitutes a real
  “progress of civilization”! 
On the other hand, the Prussians in France, had re-established the
  practice of taking hostages – innocent men, who, with their lives, were
  to answer to them for the acts of others. When Thiers, as we have seen, from
  the very beginning of the conflict, enforced the human practice of shooting
  down the Communal prisoners, the Commune, to protect their lives, was obliged
  to resort to the Prussian practice of securing hostages. The lives of the
  hostages have been forfeited over and over again by the continued shooting of
  prisoners on the part of the Versaillese. How could they be spared any longer
  after the carnage with which MacMahon’s praetorians[G] celebrated their entrance
  into Paris? 
Was even the last check upon the unscrupulous ferocity of bourgeois
  governments – the taking of hostages – to be made a mere sham of?
  
The real murderer of Archbishop Darboy is Thiers. The Commune again and
  again had offered to exchange the archbishop, and ever so many priests in the
  bargain, against the single Blanqui, then in the hands of Thiers. Thiers
  obstinately refused. He knew that with Blanqui he would give the Commune a
  head; while the archbishop would serve his purpose best in the shape of a
  corpse. 
Thiers acted upon the precedent of Cavaignac. How, in June 1848, did not
  Cavaignac and his men of order raise shouts of horror by stigmatizing the
  insurgents as the assassins of Archbishop Affre! They knew perfectly well
  that the archbishop had been shot by the soldiers of
  order. M. Jacquemet, the archbishop’s vicar-general, present on the
  spot, had immediately afterwards handed them in his evidence to that effect.
  
All the chorus of calumny, which the Party of Order never fail, in their
  orgies of blood, to raise against their victims, only proves that the
  bourgeois of our days considers himself the legitimate successor to the baron
  of old, who thought every weapon in his own hand fair against the plebeian,
  while in the hands of the plebeian a weapon of any kind constituted in itself
  a crime. 
The conspiracy of the ruling class to break down the revolution by a civil
  war carried on under the patronage of the foreign invader – a
  conspiracy which we have traced from the very 4th of September down to the
  entrance of MacMahon’s praetorians through the gate of St. Cloud
  – culminated in the carnage of Paris. Bismarck gloats over the ruins of
  Paris, in which he saw perhaps the first installment of that general
  destruction of great cities he had prayed for when still a simple Rural in
  the Prussian Chambre introuvable of 1849.[H] He gloats over the cadavers of the Paris
  proletariat. For him, this is not only the extermination of revolution, but
  the extinction of France, now decapitated in reality, and by the French
  government itself. With the shallowness characteristic of all successful
  statesmen, he sees but the surface of this tremendous historic event.
  Whenever before has history exhibited the spectacle of a conqueror crowning
  his victory by turning into, not only the gendarme, but the hired bravo of
  the conquered government? There existed no war between Prussia and the
  Commune of Paris. On the contrary, the Commune had accepted the peace
  preliminaries, and Prussia had announced her neutrality. Prussia was,
  therefore, no belligerent. She acted the part of a bravo, a cowardly bravo,
  because incurring no danger; a hired bravo, because stipulating beforehand
  the payment of her blood-money of 500 millions on the fall of Paris. And
  thus, at last, came out the true character of the war, ordained by
  Providence, as a chastisement of godless and debauched France by pious and
  moral Germany! And this unparalleled breach of the law of nations, even as
  understood by the old-world lawyers, instead of arousing the
  “civilized” governments of Europe to declare the felonious
  Prussian government, the mere tool of the St. Petersburg Cabinet, an outlaw
  amongst nations, only incites them to consider whether the few victims who
  escape the double cordon around Paris are not to be given up to the hangman
  of Versailles! 
That, after the most tremendous war of modern times, the conquering and
  the conquered hosts should fraternize for the common massacre of the
  proletariat – this unparalleled event does indicate, not, as Bismarck
  thinks, the final repression of a new society up heaving, but the crumbling
  into dust of bourgeois society. The highest heroic effort of which old
  society is still capable is national war; and this is now proved to be a mere
  governmental humbug, intended to defer the struggle of classes, and to be
  thrown aside as soon as that class struggle bursts out into civil war. Class
  rule is no longer able to disguise itself in a national uniform; the national
  governments are one as against the proletariat! 
After Whit-Sunday, 1871, there can be neither peace nor truce possible
  between the working men of France and the appropriators of their produce. The
  iron hand of a mercenary soldiery may keep for a time both classes tied down
  in common oppression. But the battle must break out again and again in
  ever-growing dimensions, and there can be no doubt as to who will be the
  victor in the end – the appropriating few, or the immense working
  majority. And the French working class is only the advanced guard of the
  modern proletariat. 
While the European governments thus testify, before Paris, to the
  international character of class rule, they cry down the International Working
  Men’s Association – the international counter-organization of
  labor against the cosmopolitan conspiracy of capital – as the head
  fountain of all these disasters. Thiers denounced it as the despot of labor,
  pretending to be its liberator. Picard ordered that all communications
  between the French Internationals and those abroad be cut off; Count Jaubert,
  Thiers’ mummified accomplice of 1835, declares it the great problem of
  all civilized governments to weed it out. The Rurals roar against it, and the
  whole European press joins the chorus. An honorable French writer [Robinet],
  completely foreign to our Association, speaks as follows:
“The members of the Central Committee of the National
  Guard, as well as the greater part of the members of the Commune, are the
  most active, intelligent, and energetic minds of the International Working
  Men’s Association... men who are thoroughly honest, sincere,
  intelligent, devoted, pure, and fanatical in the good sense of the
  word.” 
The police-tinged bourgeois mind naturally figures to itself the
  International Working Men’s Association as acting in the manner of a
  secret conspiracy, its central body ordering, from time to time, explosions
  in different countries. Our Association is, in fact, nothing but the
  international bond between the most advanced working men in the various
  countries of the civilized world. Wherever, in whatever shape, and under
  whatever conditions the class struggle obtains any consistency, it is but
  natural that members of our Association, should stand in the foreground. The
  soil out of which it grows is modern society itself. It cannot be stamped out
  by any amount of carnage. To stamp it out, the governments would have to
  stamp out the despotism of capital over labor – the condition of their
  own parasitical existence. 
Working men’s Paris, with its Commune, will be forever celebrated as
  the glorious harbinger of a new society. Its martyrs are enshrined in the
  great heart of the working class. Its exterminators history has already
  nailed to that eternal pillory from which all the prayers of their priest
  will not avail to redeem them. 

The General Council
M. J. Boon, Fred. Bradnick, G. H. Buttery, Caihil,
  Delayhaye, William Hales, A. Hermann, Kolb, Fred. Lessner, Lochner, T. P.
  Macdonnell, George Milner, Thomas Mottershead, Ch. Mills, Charles Murray,
  Pfander, Roach, Rochat, Ruhl, Sadler, A. Ser- Railler, Cowell Stepney, Alf.
  Taylor, William Townshend.
Corresponding Secretaries:
Eugene Dupont, For France Zevy Maurice, For Hungary Karl
  Marx, For Germany And Anton Zabicki, For Poland Holland James Cohen, For
  Denmark Fred. Engels, For Belgium And J.G. Eccarius, For The United Spain
  States Hermann Jung, For Switzerland P. Giovacchini, For Italy
Hermann Jung, Chairman John Weston, Treasurer George
  Harris, Financial Secretary J. George Eccarius, General Secretary
Office: 256 High Holborn Road, London, W.C., May 30, 1871
 
Postscript by Engels 
 

[A] This name was given to the Versailles soldiers of
  royalist sympathies recruited in Brittany, by analogy with those who took
  part in the counter-revolutionary royalist insurrection in North-Western
  France during the French Revolution at the end of the 18th century. 
[B] Under the impact of the proletarian revolution in
  Paris which led to the establishment of the Commune, revolutionary mass
  actions of a similar nature took place in Lyons and Marseilles. However,
  these were brutally crushed by French government troops. 
[C] Under the law concerning the procedure of military
  courts, submitted by Dufaure to the National Assembly, it was ruled that
  cases were to be investigated and sentences carried out within 48 hours. 
[D] This trade treaty between England and France was
  concluded on January 23, 1860. Under its terms France was to abandon her
  prohibitive Customs policy and replace it by introducing new import duties.
  As result of the influx of English goods to France, competition in the home
  market dramatically increased, causing dissatisfaction among some French
  manufacturers. 
[E] This refers to the reign of terror and bloody
  repression in Ancient Rome at the various stages of the crisis of the
  slave-owning Roman Republic in the first century B.C.E. – Sulla’s
  dictatorship (in 82-79 B.C.E.), and the first and second triumvirates:
  Pompey, Caesar, Crassus (60-53) and Octavian, Antonius, Lepidus (43-36
  B.C.E.) respectively. 
[F] In August 1814, during the war between Britain and the
  United States, British troops seized Washington and burned the Capitol, the
  White House and other public buildings to the ground. In October 1860, during
  the war waged by Britain and France against China (the first of the Opium
  Wars), British and French troops pillaged and burned down the summer palace
  of the Chinese emperors near Beijing, a treasure-house of Chinese art and
  architecture. 
[G] In ancient Rome the privileged life-guards of the
  general or emperor; they constantly took part in internal disturbances. Later
  the word “praetorians” became the symbol of the mercenary,
  tyrannical nature of the militarists. 
[H] This is what Marx called the Prussian Assembly by
  analogy with the French Chambre introuvable. The
  Assembly elected in January and February 1849 consisted of two chambers: the
  first was a privileged aristocratic “chamber of the gentry"; the
  composition of the second was determined by two-stage elections in which only
  the so-called “independent” Prussians took part. Elected to the
  second chamber, Bismarck became one of the leaders of the extremely
  reactionary Junker group. 

Table of Contents: The Civil War in
  France 
 






==========

## Apropos of Working-Class Political Action







Apropos Of Working-Class Political Action



International Workingmen's Association 1871
Apropos Of Working-Class Political Action
Reporter's record of the speech made at the London Conference of theInternational Working Men's Association, September 21, 1871


Spoken: in French September 21, 1871;
First Published in full: The Communist International No. 29, 1934;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume 2 (1973), Progress Publishers;
Transcription/Markup: Brian Baggins;
Copyleft: Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.


Complete abstention from political action is impossible. The abstentionist press participates in politics every day. It is only a question of how one does it, and of what politics one engages in. For the rest, to us abstention is impossible. The working-class party functions as a political party in most countries by now, and it is not for us to ruin it by preaching abstention. Living experience, the political oppression of the existing governments compels the workers to occupy themselves with politics whether they like it or not, be it for political or for social goals. To preach abstention to them is to throw them into the embrace of bourgeois politics. The morning after the Paris Commune, which has made proletarian political action an order of the day, abstention is entirely out of the question.

We want the abolition of classes. What is the means of achieving it? The only means is political domination of the proletariat. For all this, now that it is acknowledged by one and all, we are told not to meddle with politics. The abstentionists say they are revolutionaries, even revolutionaries par excellence. Yet revolution is a supreme political act and those who want revolution must also want the means of achieving it, that is, political action, which prepares the ground for revolution and provides the workers with the revolutionary training without which they are sure to become the dupes of the Favres and Pyats the morning after the battle. However, our politics must be working-class politics. The workers' party must never be the tagtail of any bourgeois party; it must be independent and have its goal and its own policy.

The political freedoms, the right of assembly and association, and the freedom of the press — those are our weapons. Are we to sit back and abstain while somebody tries to rob us of them? It is said that a political act on our part implies that we accept the exiting state of affairs. On the contrary, so long as this state of affairs offers us the means of protesting against it, our use of these means does not signify that we recognise the prevailing order.


International Workingmen's Association Index
Resolution on Working Class Political Action |
Speeches by Marx
Marx/Engels Internet Archive





==========

## I






The International Workingmen's Association, Fictitious Splits in the
  International




The International Workingmen's Association, 1872
Fictitious Splits in the International

Written: by Marx and Engels
between January and March 5, 1872
Adopted by the General Council as a private circular;
Published: in Geneva 1872 as a French pamphlet called
Les Pretendues Scissions dans l'Internationale.
Source: Progress Publisher translation;
Transcribed: by director@marx.org in December
1993.
The pamphlet marks the opening of Marx and Engels'
preparations for confrontation with Bakuninist forces at upcoming IWMA congress
at the Hague (September 1872). 

Part I
Part II
Part III
Part IV
Part V
Part VI
Part VII

Footnotes
Until now, the General Council has completely refrained from any
interference in the International's internal squabbles and has never replied
publicly to the overt attacks launched against it during more than two years by
some members of the Associations. 
But if the persistent efforts of certain meddlers to deliberately maintain
confusion between the International and a society [the International Alliance
of Socialist Democracy] which has been hostile to it since its inception
allowed the General Council to maintain this reserve, the support which
European reaction finds in the scandals provoked by that society at a time when
the International is undergoing the most serious trial since its foundation
obliges it to present a historical review of all these intrigues. 
 
I.
After the fall of the Paris Commune, the General Council's first
act was to publish its Address on the Civil War in France, in which it came out
in support of all the Commune's acts which, at the moment, served the
bourgeoisie, the press, and all the governments of Europe as an excuse to heap
the most vile slander on the vanquished Parisians. Within the working class
itself, some still failed to realize that their cause was lost. The Council
came to understand the fact, among other things, by the resignation of two of
its members, Citizens Odger and Lucraft, who repudiated all support of the
Address. It may be said that the unity of views among the working class
regarding the Paris events dates from the publication of the Address in all the
civilized countries.
On the other hand, the International found a very powerful means of
propaganda in the bourgeois press and particularly in the leading English
newspapers, which the Address forced to engage in a polemic kept going by the
General Council's replies.
The arrival in London of numerous refugees from the Commune made it
necessary for the General Council to constitute itself as a relief committee
and function as such for more than eight months, besides carrying on its
regular duties. It goes without saying that the vanquished and exiles from the
Commune had nothing to hope for from the bourgeoisie. As for the working class,
the appeals for aid came at a difficult moment. Switzerland and Belgium had
already received their contingent of refugees whom they had either to support
or send on to London. The funds collected in Germany, Austria, and Spain were
sent to Switzerland. In England, the big fight for the nine-hour working day,
the decisive battle of which was fought at Newcastle, had exhausted both the
workers' individual contributions and the funds set up by the trade unions,
which could be used, incidentally, according to the rules, only for labor
conflicts. Meanwhile, by working diligently and sending out letters, the
Council managed to accumulate, bit by bit, the money which it distributed
weekly. The American workers responded more generously to its appeal. It is
unfortunate that the Council could not avail itself of the millions which the
terrified bourgeoisie believed the International to have amassed in its
safes!
After May 1871, some of the Commune’s refugees were asked to join the
Council, in which, as a result of the war, the French side was no longer
represented. Among these new members were some old Internationalists and a
minority composed of men known for their revolutionary energy whose election
was an act of homage to the Paris Commune.
Along with these preoccupations, the Council had to prepare for the
Conference of Delegates that it had just called.
The violent measures taken by the Bonapartist government against the
International had prevented the holding of the Congress at Paris, which had
been provided for by a resolution of the Basel Congress. Using the right
conferred upon it by Article 4 of the Rules, the General Council, in its
circular of July 12, 1870, convened the Congress at Mainz. In letters addressed
at the same time to the various federations, it proposed that the General
Council should transfer its seat from England to another country and asked that
delegates be provided with definite mandates to that effect. The federations
unanimously insisted that it should remain in London. The Franco-Prussian War,
which began a few days latter, made it necessary to abandon any plans for
convening the Congress. It was then that the federations which we consulted
authorized us to fix the date of the next Congress as may be dictated by the
political situation.
As soon as the political situation permitted, the General Council called a
private Conference, acting on the precedents of the 1865 Conference and the
private administrative meetings of each Congress. A public Congress was
impossible and could only have resulted in the continental delegates being
denounced at a moment when European reaction was celebrating its orgies; when
Jules Favre was demanding from all governments, even the British, the
extradition of refugees as common criminals; when Dufaure was proposing to the
Rural Assembly a law banning the International, a hypocritical counterfeit of
which was later presented by Malou to the Belgians; when in Switzerland a
Commune refugee was put under preventive arrest while awaiting the federal
government's decision on the extradition order; when hunting down members of
the International was the ostensible basis for an alliance between Beust and
Bismarck, whose anti-International clause Victor Emmanuel was quite eager to
adopt; when the Spanish Government, putting itself entirely at the disposal of
the butchers of Versailles, was forcing the Madrid Federal Council to seek
refuge in Portugal; at a time, lastly, when the International's prime duty was
to strengthen its organization and to accept the gauntlet thrown down by the
governments.
All sections in regular contact with the General Council were invited in
good time to the Conference, which, even though it was not to be a public
meeting, nevertheless faced serious difficulties. In view of the internal
situation, France was, of course, unable to elect any delegates. In Italy, the
only organized section at the time was that of Naples; but just as it was about
to nominate a delegate it was broken up by the army. In Austria and Hungary,
the most active members were imprisoned. In Germany, some of the more
well-known members were prosecuted for the crime of high treason, others landed
in jail, and the party's funds were spent on aid to their families. The
Americans, though they sent the Conference a detailed memorandum on the
situation of the International there, employed the delegation's money for
maintaining the refugees. All federations, in fact, recognized the necessity of
substituting the private Conference for a public Congress.
After meeting in London from September 17 to 23, 1871, the Conference
authorized the General Council to publish its resolutions; to codify the
Administrative Regulations and publish them with the General Rules, as reviewed
and corrected, in three languages; to carry out the resolution to replace
membership cards with stamps; to reorganize the International in England; and,
lastly, to provide the necessary money for these various purposes.
Following the publication of the Conference proceedings, the reactionary
press of Paris and Moscow, of London and New York, denounced the resolution on
working-class policy as containing such dangerous designs — the
Times accused it &ldquo;of coolly calculated
audacity&rdquo;— that it would outlaw the International with all
possible speed. On the other hand, the resolution that dealt a blow at the
fraudulent sectarian sections gave the international police a long-awaited
excuse to start a noisy campaign ostensibly for the unrestricted autonomy of
the workers whom it professed to protect against the despicable despotism of
the General Council and the Conference. The working class felt itself so
&ldquo;heavily oppressed&rdquo;, indeed, that the General Council
received from Europe, America, Australia, and even the East Indies reports
about the admission of new members and the formation of new sections.
 
II.
The denunciations in the bourgeois press, like the lamentations
of the international police, found a sympathetic echo even in our Association.
Some intrigues, directed ostensibly against the General Council but in reality
against the Association, were hatched in its midst. At the bottom of these
intrigues was the inevitable International Alliance of Socialist Democracy,
fathered by the Russian Michael Bakunin. On his return from Siberia, the latter
began to write in Herzen's Kolokol, preaching the idea of Pan-Slavism
and racial war, conceived out of his long experience. Later, during his stay in
Switzerland, he was nominated to head the steering committee of the League of
Peace and Freedom, founded in opposition to the International. When this
bourgeois society's affairs went from bad to worse, its president, Mr. G. Vogt,
acting on Bakunin's advice, proposed to the International's Congress which met
at Brussels in September 1868, that it make an alliance with the League. The
Congress unanimously proposed two alternatives: either the League should follow
the same goal as the International, in which case it would have no reason for
existing; or else its goal should be different, in which case an alliance would
be impossible. At the League's congress, held in Bern a few days later, Bakunin
made an about-face. He proposed a makeshift program whose scientific value may
be judged by this single phrase: &ldquo;economic and social equalization of
classes&rdquo;. Backed by an insignificant minority, he broke with the
League in order to join the International, determined to replace the
International's General Rules by the makeshift program, which had been rejected
by the League, and to replace the General Council by his personal dictatorship.
To this end, he created a special instrument, the International Alliance of
Socialist Democracy, intended to become an International within the
International.
Bakunin found the necessary elements for the formation of this society in
the relationships he had formed during his stay in Italy, and in a small group
of Russian emigrants, serving him as emissaries and recruiting officers among
members of the International in Switzerland, France, and Spain. Yet it was only
after repeated refusals of the Belgian and Paris federal councils to recognize
the Alliance that he decided to submit for the General Council's approval his
new society's rules, which were nothing but a faithful reproduction of the
&ldquo;misunderstood&ldquo; Bern program. The Council replied with the
following circular dated December 22, 1868.
The International Working Men's Association and
Bakunin's International Alliance of Socialist Democracy
approved by IWMA General Council December 22,
1868
[written in French]
Just about a month ago, a certain
number of citizens formed in Geneva the Central Initiating Committee of a new
international society named the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy,
stating that it was their &ldquospecial mission to study political and
philosophical questions on the basis of the grand principles of... equality,
etc." the program and rules printed by this Initiating Committee were only
communicated to the General Council of the International Working Men's
Association at its meeting on December 15. According to these documents, the
said International Alliance is &ldquoestablished entirely within the...
International Working Men's Association", at the same time as it is established
entirely outside of the Association.
Besides the General Council of the
International Association, elected at the Geneva, Lausanne, and Brussels
workingmen's congresses, there is to be, in line with the initiating rules,
another Central Council in Geneva, which is self-appointed. Besides the local
groups of the International Association, there are to be local groups of the
International Alliance, which &ldquothrough their... national bureaus",
operating outside the national bureaus of the International Association,
&ldquowill ask the Central Bureau of the Alliance to admit them into the
International Working Men’s Association"; the Alliance Central Committee
thereby takes upon itself the right of admittance to the International
Association. Lastly, the General Congress of the International Association will
have its parallel in the General Congress of the International Alliance, for,
as the initiating rules say, &ldquoAt the annual Working Men's Congress,
the delegation of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy, as a branch of the
International Working Men's Association, will hold public meetings in a
separate building."
Considering,
That the presence of a second
international body operating within and outside the International Working Men's
Association will be the most infallible means of its disorganization;
That every other group of
individuals, anywhere at all, will have the right to imitate the Geneva
initiating group and, under more or less plausible excuses, to bring into the
International Working Men's Association other international associations with
other "special missions";
That the International Working Men's
Association will thereby soon become a plaything for intriguers of every race
and nationality;
That the Rules of the International
Working Men's Association anyway admit only local and national branches into
the Association (see Article 1 and Article 6 of the Rules);
That sections of the International
Association are forbidden to give themselves rules or administrative
regulations contrary to the General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the
International Association (see Article 12 of the Administrative
Regulations);
That the Rules and Administrative
Regulations of the International Association can only be revised by the General
Congress in the event of two-thirds of the delegates present voting in favor of
such a revision (see Article 13 of the Administrative Regulations).
The General Council of the
International Working Men's Association unanimously agreed at its meeting of
December 22, 1868, that:
1. All
articles of the Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy,
defining its relations with the International Working Men's Association, are
declared null and void;
2.The
International Alliance of Socialist Democracy may not be admitted as a branch
of the International Working Men's Association;
3.These
resolutions be published in all countries where the International Working Men's
Association exists.
G. Odger, Chairman of the
meeting
R. Shaw, General Secretary
By order of the General Council
of the International Working Men's Association
A few months later, the Alliance again appealed to the General
Council and asked whether, yes or no, it accepted its
principles. If yes, the Alliance was ready to dissolve itself into the
International's sections. It received a reply in the following circular of
March 9, 1869. 
Letter of the General Council to The Alliance of Socialist Democracy
March 9, 1869
[written in French and English
issued to all International section]
Citizens:
According to Article I of its
Statutes, the International Working Men's Association admits "all working men's
societies aiming at the same end, viz., the protection, advancement, and
complete emancipation of the working classes".
Since the various sections of
workingmen in the same country, and the working classes in different countries,
are placed under different circumstances and have attained to different degrees
of development, it seems almost necessary that the theoretical notions which
reflect the real movement should also diverge.
The community of action, however,
called into life by the the International Working Men's Association, the
exchange of ideas facilitated by the public organs of different national
section, and the direct debates at the General Congresses are sure by and by to
engender a common theoretical program.
Consequently, it belongs not to the
function of the General Council to subject the program of the Alliance to a
critical examination. We have not to inquire whether, yes or no, it be a true
scientific expression of the working-class movement. All we have to ask is
whether its general tendency does not run against the general tendency of the
International Working Men's Association, viz., the complete emancipation of the
working class?
One phrase in your program lies open
to this objection. It occurs [in] Article 2:
"Elle (l'Alliance) veut vant tout
l'egalisation politique, economique, et sociale des classes."
["The Alliance wants above all
political, economic, and social equalization... of classes."]
The "egalisation des classes",
literally interpreted, comes to the "harmony of capital and labor" ("l'harmonie
du capital et du travail") so persistently preached by the bourgeois
socialists. It is not the logically impossible "equalization of classes", but
the historically necessary, superseding "abolition of classes" (abolition des
classes), this true secret of the proletarian movement, which forms the great
aim of the International Working Men's Association.
Considering, however, the context in
which that phrase "egalisation des classes" occurs, it seems to be a mere slip
of the pen, and the General Council feels confident that you will be anxious to
remove from your program an expression which offers such a dangerous
misunderstanding.
It suits the principles of the
International Working Men's Association to let every section freely shape its
own theoretical program, except the single case of an infringement upon its
general tendency. There exists, therefore, no obstacle to the transformation of
the sections of the Alliance into sections of the International Working Men's
Association.
The dissolution of the Alliance and
the entrance of its sections into the International Working Men's Association
once settled, it would, according to our Regulations, become necessary to
inform the General Council of the residence and the numerical strength of each
new section.
Having accepted these conditions, the Alliance was admitted to
the International by the General Council, misled by certain signatures affixed
to Bakunin's program, and supposing it recognized by the Romance Federal
Committee in Geneva, which on the contrary had always refused to have any
dealings with it. Thus it had achieved its immediate goal: to be represented at
the Basel Congress. Despite the dishonest means employed by his supporters,
means used solely on this occassion in an International Congress, Bakunin was
deceived in his expectation of seeing the Congress transfer the seat of the
General Council to Geneva and give an official sanction to the old St. Simon
rubbish, the immediate abolition of hereditary rights which he had made the
practical point of departure of socialism. This was the signal for the open and
incessant war which the Alliance waged not only against the General Council,
but also against all International sections that refused to adopt this
sectarian clique's program and particularly the doctrine of total abstention
from politics.
Even before the Basel Congress, when Nechayev came to Geneva, Bakunin got
together with him and founded, in Russia, a secret society among students.
Always hiding his true identity under the name of various "revolutionary
committees", he sought autocratic powers based on all the tricks and
mystifications of the time of Cagliostro. The main means of propaganda used by
this society consisted in compromising innocent people in the eyes of the
Russian police by sending them communications from Geneva in yellow envelopes
stamped in Russian on the outside "secret revolutionary committee". The
published accounts of the Nechayev trial bear witness to the infamous abuse of
the International's name.
The Alliance commenced at this time a public polemic directed against the
General Council, first in the Locle Progres, then in the Geneva
Egalite, the official newspaper of the romance Federation, where
several members of the Alliance had followed Bakunin. The General Council,
which had scorned the attacks published in Progres, Bakunin's personal
organ, could not ignore those from Egalite, which it was bound to
believe were approved by the romance Federal Committee. It, therefore,
pubblished the circular of January 1, 1870.
“We read in the
Egalite of December 11, 1869: 
‘It is certain that the
General Council is neglecting extremely important matters. We remind it of its
obligations under Article I of the Regulations: The General Council is
commissioned to carry the resolutions of the Congress into effect,
etc. We could put enough questions ot the General Council for its replies to
make up quite a long report. They will come later... Meanwhile, etc. ...'
“The General Council does not
know of any article, either in the Rules, or the Regulations, which would
oblige it to enter into correspondence or into polemic with the
Egalite or to provide 'replies to questions' from newspapers. The
Federal Committee of Geneva alone represents the branches of Romance
Switzerland via-a-vis the General Council. When the Romance Federal Committee
addresses requests of reprimands to us through the only legitmiate channel,
that is to say through its secretary, the General Council will always be ready
to reply. But the Romance Federal Committee has no right either to abdicate its
functions in favour of the Egalite and Progres, or to let
these newspapers usurp its functions. Generally speaking, the General Council's
administrative correspondence with national and local committees cannot be
published without greatly prejudicing the Association's general interests.
Consequently, if the other organs of the International were to follow the
example of the Progres and the Egalite, the General Council
would be faced with the alternative of either discrediting itself publicly by
its silence or violating its obligations by replying publicly. The
Egalite joins the Progres in inviting the
Travail (Paris paper) to denounce, on its part, the General Council.
That is almost a League of Public Welfare.”
Meanwhile, before having read this circular, the Romance Federal
Committee had already expelled supporters of the Alliance from the editorial
board of L'Egalite.
The January 1, 1870, circular, like those of December 22, 1868, and March 9,
1869, was approved by all International societies.
It goes without saying that none of the conditions accepted by the Alliance
have ever been fulfilled. Its sham sections have remained a mystery to the
General Council. Bakunin sought to retain under his personal direction the few
groups scattered in Spain and Italy and the Naples section which he had
detached from the International. In the other Italian towns, he corresponded
with small cliques composed not of workers but of lawyers, journalists, and
other bourgeois doctrinaires. At Barcelona, some of his friends maintained his
influence. In some towns in the South of France, the Alliance made an effort to
found separatist sections under the direction of Albert Richard and Gaspard
Blanc, of Lyon, about whom we shall have more to say later. In a word, the
International within the International continued to operate.
The big blow — the attempt to take over the leadership of French
Switzerland — was to have been executed by the Alliance at the
Chaux-de-Fonds Congress, opened on April 4, 1870.
The battle began over the right to admit the Alliance delegates, which was
contested by the delegates of the Geneva Federation and the Chaux-de-Fonds
sections.
Although, on their own calculation, the Alliance supporters represented no
more than a fifth of the Federation members, they succeeded, thanks to
repetition of the Basel maneuvers, in procuring a fictitious majority of one or
two votes, a majority which, in the words of their own organ (see
Solidarite of May 7, 1870), represented no more than 15
sections, while in Geneva alone there were 30! On this vote, the
French-Switzerland Congress split into two groups which continued their
meetings independently. The Alliance supporters, considering themselves the
legal representatives of the whole of the Federation, transferred the Federal
Committee's seat to Chaux-de-Fonds and founded at Neuchatel their official
organ, Solidarite, edited by Citizen Guillaume. This young writer had
the special job of decrying the Geneva “factory workers”, those
odious “bourgeois”, of waging war of L'Egalite, the
Federation newspaper, and of preaching total abstention from politics. The
authors of the most important articles on this theme were Bastelica in
Marseilles and Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc in Lyon, the two big pillars of
the Alliance.
On their return, the Geneva delegates convened their sections in a general
assembly which, despite opposition from Bakunin and his friends, approved their
actions at the Chaux-de-Fonds Congress. A little later, Bakunin and the more
active of his accomplices were expelled from the old Romance Federation.
Hardly had the Congress closed when the new Chaux-de-Fonds Committee called
for the intervention of the General Council in a latter signed by F. Robert,
secretary, and by Henri Chevalley, president, who was denounced two months
later as a thief by the Committee's organ, Solidarite, on July 9.
After examining the case of both sides, the General Council decided on June 28,
1870, to keep the Geneva Federal Committee in its old functions and invite the
new Chaux-de-Fonds Federal Committee to take a local name. In the face of this
decision which foiled its plans, the Chaux-de-Fonds Committee denounced the
General Council's authoritarianism, forgetting that it had been the
first to ask for its intervention. The trouble that the persistent attempts of
the Chaux-de-Fonds Committee to usurp the name of the Romance Federal Committee
caused the Swiss Federation, obliged the General Council to suspend all
official relations with the former.
Louis Bonaparte had just surrendered his army at Sedan. From all sides arose
protests from International members against the war’s continuation. In
its address of September 9, the General Council, denouncing Prussia’s
plans of conquest, indicated the danger of her triumph for the proletarian
cause and warned the German workers that they would themselves be the first
victims. In England, the General Council organized meetings which condemned the
pro-Prussian tendencies of the court. In Germany, the International workers
organized demonstrations demanding recognition of the Republic and “an
honorable peace for France”....
Meanwhile, his bellicose nature gave the hotheaded Guillaume (of Neuchatel)
the brilliant idea of publishing an anonymous manifesto as a
supplement, and under cover, of the official newspaper Solidarite,
calling for the formation of a Swiss volunteer corps to fight the Prussians,
something which he had doubtless always been prevented from doing by his
abstentionist convictions.
Then came the Lyon uprising. Bakunin rushed there and, supported by Albert
Richard, Gaspard Blanc, and Bastelica, installed himself on September 28 in the
town hall — where he refrained from posting a guard, however,
lest it be viewed as a political act. He was driven out in shame by some of the
National Guard at the moment when, after a difficult accouchement, his decree
on the abolition of the state had just seen the light of day.
In October 1870, the General Council, in the absence of its French members,
coopted Citizen Paul Robin, a refugee from Brest, one of the best-known
supporters of the Alliance, and, what is more, the instigator of several
attacks on the General Council in L’Egalite, where, since that
moment, he has acted constantly as official correspondent of the Chaux-de-Fonds
Committee. On March 14, 1871, he suggested the calling of a private Conference
of the International to sift out the Swiss trouble. Foreseeing that important
events were in the making in Paris, the Council flatly refused. Robin returned
to the question on several occassions and even suggested that the Council take
a definite decision on the conflict. On July 25, the General Council decided
that this affair would be one of the questions for the Conference due to be
convened in September 1871.
On August 10, the Alliance, hardly eager to see its activities looked into
by a Conference, declared itself dissolved as from August 6. But, on September
15, it reappeared and requested admission to the Council under the name of the
Atheist Socialist Section. According to Administrative Resolution No. V. of the
Basel Congress, the Council could not admit it without consulting the Geneva
Federal Committee, which was exhausted after its two years of struggle against
the sectarian sections. Moreover, the Council had already told the Young
Men’s Christian Association that the International did not recognize
theological sections.
On August 6, the date of the dissolution of the Alliance, the Chaux-de-Fonds
Federal Committee renewed its request to enter into official relations with the
Council and said that it would continue to ignore the June 28 resignation and
to regard itself, in relation to Geneva, as the Romance Federal Committee, and
that it was “up to the General Congress to judge this affair”. On
September 4, the same Committee challenged the Conference’s competence,
even though it had been the first to call for its convocation. The Conference
could have replied by questioning the competence of the Paris Federal
Committee, which the Chaux-de-Fonds Committee had, before the siege of Paris,
asked to deliberate on the Swiss conflict. But it confined itself to the
General Council decision of June 28, 1870 (see the reasons given in
L'Egalite of Geneva, October 21, 1871).
 
III.
The presence, in Switzerland, of some of the outlawed French who
had found refuge there put some life back into the Alliance.
The Geneva members of the International did all they could for the
emigrants. They came to their aid right from the beginning, initiated a wide
campaign, and prevented the Swiss authorities from serving an extradition order
on the refugees as demanded by the Versailles government. Several risked grave
danger by going to France to help the refugees reach the frontier. Imagine the
surprise of the Geneva workers when they saw several of the ringleaders, such
as B. Malon [1], immediately come to an
understanding with the Alliance people and with the help of N. Zhukovsky,
ex-secretary of the Alliance, try to found at Geneva, outside the Romance
Federation, the new “Socialist Revolutionary Propaganda and Action
Section”. In the first article of its rules, it “pledges allegiance
to the General Rules of the International Working Men's Association, while
reserving for itself the complete freedom of action and initiative to which it
is entitled as a logical consequence of the principle of autonomy and
federation recognized by the Rules and Congresses of the Association.”
In other words, it reserves for itself full freedom to continue the work of
the Alliance.
In a letter from Malon of October 20, 1871, this new section for the third
time asked the General Council for admission to the International. Confirming
to Resolution V of the Basel Congress, the Council consulted the Geneva Federal
Committee, which vigorously protested against the Council's recognizing this
new “seedbed of intrigues and dissentions”. The Council acted, in
fact, in a rather “authoritarian” manner, so as not to bind the
whole Federation to the will of B. Malon and N. Zhukovsky, the Alliance's
ex-secretary.
Solidarite having gone out of business, the new Alliance supporters
founded the Revolution Sociale under the supreme management of Madame
Andre Leo, who had just said at the Lausanne Peace Congress that Raoul Rigault
and Ferre were the two sinister figures of the Commune who, up till then (up
till the execution of the hostages), had not stopped calling for bloody
measures, albeit in vain.
From its very first issue, the newspaper hastened to put itself on the same
level as Figaro, Gaulois, Paris-Journal, and other
disreputable sheets which have been throwing mud at the General Council. It
thought the moment opportune to fan the flames of national hatred, even within
the International. It called the General Council a German Committee led by a
Bismarckian brain. [2]
After having definitely established that certain General Council members
could not boast of being “Gauls first and foremost”, the
Revolution Sociale could find nothing better than to take up the
second slogan put in circulation by the European police and to denounce the
Council's “authoritarianism”.
What, then, were the facts on which this childish rubbish rested? The
General Council had let the Alliance die a natural death and, in agreement with
the Geneva Federal Committee, had prevented it from being resurrected.
Moreover, it had suggested to the Chaux-de-Fonds Committee that it take a name
which would permit it to live in peace with the great majority of International
members in French Switzerland.
Apart from these “authoritarian” acts, what use did the General
Council make, between October 1869 and October 1871 of the fairly extensive
powers that the Basel Congress had conferred upon it?
1. On February 8, 1870, the Paris
“Society of Positivist Proletarians” applied to the General Council
for admission. The Council replied that the principles of the Positivists, the
part of the society’s special rules concerning capital, were in flagrant
contradiction with the preamble of the General Rules; that the society had,
therefore, to drop them and join the International not as
“Positivists” but as “proletarians”, while remaining
free to reconcile their theoretical ideas with the Association's general
principles. Realizing the justness of this decision, the section joined the
International.
2. At Lyon, there was a split between
the 1865 Section and a recently-formed section in which, amid honest workers,
the Alliance was represented by Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc. As had been
done in similar cases, the judgment of a court of arbitration, formed in
Switzerland, was turned down. On February 15, 1870, the recently formed
section, besides asking the General Council to resolve the conflict by virtue
of Resolution VII of the Basel Congress, sent it a ready-made resolution
excluding and branding the members of the 1865 Section, which was to be signed
and sent back by return mail. The Council condemned this unprecedented
procedure and demanded that the necessary documents be produced. In reply to
the same request, the 1865 Section said that the accusatory documents against
Albert Richard, which had been submitted to the court of arbitration, were in
Bakunin's possession and that he refused to give them up. Consequently, it
could not completely satisfy the desires of the General Council. The Council's
decision on the affair, dated March 8, met with no objection from either
side.
3. The French section in London, which
had admitted people of a more than dubious character, had been gradually
transformed into a concern virtually controlled by Mr. Felix Pyat. He used it
to organize damaging demonstrations calling for the assassination of Louis
Bonaparte, etc., and to spread his absurd manifestos in France under cover of
the International. The General Council confined itself to declaring, in the
Association’s organs, that Mr. Pyat was not a member of the International
and it could not be responsible for his actions. The French branch then
declared that it no longer recognized either the General Council or the
Congresses; it plastered the walls of London with handbills proclaiming that,
with the exception of itself, the International was an anti-revolutionary
society. The arrest of French members of the International on the eve of the
plebiscite, on the pretext of a conspiracy — plotted in reality by the
police and to which Pyat’s manifestos gave an air of credibility —
forced the General Council to publish in La Marseillaise and
Reveil its resolution of May 10, 1870, declaring that the so-called
French branch had not belonged to the International for over two years, and
that its agitation was the work of police agents. The need for this
demarche was proved by the declaration of the Paris Federal Committee,
published in the same newspapers, and by that of the Paris members of the
International during their trial, both declarations referring to the
Council’s resolution. The French branch disappeared at the outbreak of
the war, but, like the Alliance in Switzerland, it was to reappear in London
with new allies and under other names.
During the last days of the Conference, a French section of 1871, about 35
members strong, was formed in London among the Commune refugees. The first
“authoritarian” act of the General Council was to publicly denounce
the secretary of this section, Gustave Durand, as a French police spy. The
documents in our possession prove the intention of the police first to assist
Durand to attend the Conference and then to secure for him membership in the
General Council. Since the rules of the new section directed its members not to
accept any delegation to the General Council other than from its section,
Citizen Theisz and Bastelica withdrew from the Council.
On October 17, the section delegated to the Council two of its members,
holding imperative mandates; one was none other than Mr. Chautard, ex-member of
the artillery committee. The Council refused to admit them prior to an
examination of the rules of the 1871 Section. [3]
Suffice it to recall here the principal point of the debate to which these
rules gave rise. Article 2 states:
“To be admitted as member of the section, a person must
provide information as to his means of sustenance, present guarantees of
morality, etc.”
In its resolution of October 17, 1871, the Council proposed
deleting the words “provide information as to his means of
sustenance”.
“In dubious cases,” said the Council, “a
section may well take information about means of sustenance as a
‘guarantee of morality’, while in other cases, like those of
refugees, workers on strike, etc., absence of means of sustenance may well be a
guarantee of morality. But to ask candidates to provide information as to their
means of sustenance as a general condition to be admitted to the International
would be a bourgeois innovation contrary to the spirit and letter of the
General Rules.”
The section replied:
“The General Rules make the sections responsible for
the morality of their members and, as a consequence, recognize their right to
demand such guarantees as they deem necessary.”
To this, the General Council replied, November 7:
“On this argument, a section of the International
founded by teetotalers could include in its own rules this type of
article: To be admitted as a member of the section, a person must swear to
abstain from all alcoholic drinks. In other words, the most absurd and most
incongruous conditions of admittance into the International could be imposed by
sections’ rules, always on the pretext that they intend, in this way, to
be assured of the morality of their members....
‘The means of sustenance of strikers’, adds the
French Section of 1871, ‘consist of the strike fund’. This might be
answered by saying, first, that this ‘fund’ is often
fictitious....
Moreover, official English questionnaires have proved that
the majority of English workers... are forced — by strikes or
unemployment, by insufficient wages or terms of payment, as well as many other
causes — to resort incessantly to pawnshops or to borrowing money. These
are means of sustenance about which one cannot demand information without
interfering in an unqualified manner in a person's private life. There are thus
two alternatives:
— either the section is only to seek guarantees of
morality through means of sustenance, in which case the General Council's
proposal serves the purpose....
— Or the section, in Article 2 of its rules,
intentionally says that the members have to provide information as to their
means of sustenance as a condition of admission, over and above the guarantees
of morality, in which case the Council affirms that it is a bourgeois
innovation contrary to the spirit and letter of the General Rules.”
Article 11 of their rules states:
“One or several delegates shall be sent to the General
Council.”
The Council asked for this article to be deleted
“because the International’s General Rules do not
recognize any right of the sections to send delegates to the General
Council.’
“The General Rules,” it added, “recognize
only two ways of election for General Council members: either their election by
the Congress, or their co-option by the General Council....”
It is quite true that the different sections in London had been
invited to send delegates to the General Council, which, so as not to violate
the General Rules, has always proceeded in the following manner: It has first
determined the number of delegates to be sent by each section, reserving itself
the right to accept or refuse them depending on whether it considered them able
to fulfill the general functions assigned to them. These delegates became
members of the General Council not by virtue that the Rules accord the Council
to co-opt new members. Having operated up to the decision taken by the last
Conference both as the International Association's General Council and as the
Central Council for England, the London Council thought it expedient to admit,
besides the members that it co-opted directly, also members nominated initially
by their respective sections. It would be a serious mistake to identify the
General Council’s electoral procedure with the of the Paris Federal
Council, which was not even a national Council nominated by a national Congress
like, for example, the Brussels Federal Council or that of Madrid. The Paris
Federal Council was only a delegation of the Paris sections.... The General
Council’s electoral procedure if defined in the General Rules... and its
member would not know how to accept any other imperative mandate than that of
the Rules and General Regulations.... If we take into consideration the article
that precedes it, Article 11 means nothing else but a complete change of the
General Council’s composition, turning it, contrary to Article 3 of the
General Rules, into a delegation of the London sections, in which the influence
of local groups would be substituted for that of the whole International
Working Men's Association. Lastly, the General Council, whose first duty is to
carry out the Congress resolutions (see Article 1 of the Geneva Congress’
Administrative Regulations), said that it
“Considers that the ideas expressed by the French
section of 1871 about a radical change to be made in the articles of the
General Rules concerning the constitution of the General Council have no
bearing on the question....”
Moreover, the Council declared that it would admit two delegates
from the section on the same conditions as those of the other London
sections.
The 1871 Section, far form being satisfied with this reply, published on
December 14 a “declaration’ signed by all its members, including
the new secretary, who was shortly expelled as a scoundrel from the refugee
society. According to this declaration, the General Council, by refusing to
usurp the legislative functions, was accused of “a gross distortion of
the social idea”.
Here are some sample of the good faith displayed in the drawing up of this
document:
The London Conference approved the conduct of the German workers during the
[Franco-Prussian] war. It was apparent that this resolution, proposed by a
Swiss delegate [Outine], seconded by a Belgian delegate, and approved
unanimously, referred only to the German members of the International, who paid
and are still paying for their anti-chauvinist behavior during the war by
imprisonment. Furthermore, in order to avoid any possible misinterpretation,
the Secretary of the General Council for France [Serraillier] had just
explained the true sense of the resolution in a letter published by the
journals Qui Vive!, Constitution, Radical,
Emancipation, Europe, etc. Nonetheless, eight days later, on
November 23, 1871, 15 members of the ‘French Section of 1871’
inserted in Qui Vive! a “protest” full of abuse against
the German workers and denouncing the Conference resolution as irrefutable
proof of the General Council’s “pan-Germanic idea”. On the
other hand, the entire feudal, liberal, and police press of Germany seized
avidly upon this incident to demonstrate to the German workers how their
international dreams had come to naught. In the end, the November 29 protest
was endorsed by the entire 1871 Section in its December 14 declaration.
To show “the dangerous slope of authoritarianism down
which the General Council [was] slipping”, the declaration cited
“the publication by the very same General Council of an official edition
of the General Rules as revised by it.”
One glance at the new edition of the Rules is enough to see that
each new article has, in the appendix, reference to the original sources
establishing its authenticity! As for the words “official edition”,
the 1st Congress of the International decided that “the official and
obligatory text of the Rules and Regulation” would be published by the
General Council (see “Working Congress of the International Working Men's
Association held at Geneva from September 3 to 8, 1866”, page 27,
note).
Naturally enough, the 1871 Section was in continuous contact with the
dissident of Geneva and Neuchatel. One Chalain, a member who has shown more
energy in attacking the General Council than he had ever shown in defending the
Commune, was unexpectedly rehabilitated by B. Malon, who had earlier leveled
very grave charges against him in a letter in to a Council member. The French
Section of 1871, however, had scarcely launched its declaration when civil war
exploded in its ranks. First Theisz, Avrial, and Camelinat withdrew.
Thereafter, the section broke up into several small groups, one of which was
led by Mr. Pierre Vesinier, expelled by the General Council for his slander
against Varlin and others, and then expelled for the International by the
Belgian Commission appoint by the Brussels Congress of 1868. Another of these
groups was founded by B. Landeck, who had been relieved by the sudden flight of
police prefect Pierri, on September 4, of his obligation, “scrupulously
fulfilled, not to engage any more in political affairs, nor in the
International in France” (see Third Trial of the International Working
Men’s Association in Paris, 1870”, p.4).
On the other hand, the mass of French refugees in London have formed a
section which is in complete harmony with the General Council.
 
IV.
The men of the Alliance, hidden behind the Neuchatel Federal
Committee and determined to make another effort on a vaster scale to
disorganize the International, convened a Congress of their sections at
Sonvillier on November 12, 1871. Back in July, two letters from maitre
Guillaume to his friend Robin had threatened the General Council with an
identical campaign if it did not agree to recognize them to be in the right
"vis-a-vis the Geneva bandits".
The Sonvillier Congress was composed of 16 delegates claiming to represent
nine section in all, including the new "Socialist Revolutionary Propaganda and
Action Section" in Geneva.
The Sixteen made their debut by publishing the anarchist decree declaring
the Romance Federation dissolved, and the latter retaliated by restoring to the
Alliance members their “autonomy” by driving them out of all
sections. However, the Council had to recognize that a stroke of good sense
brought them to accept the same Jura Federation, which the London Conference
had given them.
The Congress of Sixteen then proceeded to “reorganize” the
International by attacking the Conference and the General Council in a
“Circular to All Federations of the International Working Men's
Association”.
Those responsible for the circular accused the General Council primarily of
having called a Conference instead of a Congress in 1871. The preceding
explanations show that these attacks were made directly against the
International as a whole, which had unanimously agreed to convene a Conference,
at which, incidentally, the Alliance was conveniently represented by Citizens
Robin and Bastelica.
The General Council has had its delegates at every Congress; at the Basel
Congress, for example, it had six. The Sixteen claim that “the majority
of the Conference was fraudulently assured in advance by the admission of six
General Council delegates with a deciding vote”.
In actual fact, among the General Council delegates at the Conference, the
French refugees were none other than the representatives of the Paris Commune,
while its English and Swiss members could take part in the sessions only on
rare occassions, as is attested to by the minutes, which will be submitted
before the next Congress. One Council delegate had a mandate from a national
federation. According to a letter addressed to the Conference, the mandate of
another [Marx] was withheld because of the news of his death in the papers.
That left one delegate. Thus, the Belgians alone outnumbered the Council by
6-to-1.
The international police, who in the person of Gustave Durand were kept out,
complained bitterly about the violation of the General Rules by the convening
of a “secret” conference. They were not conversant enough with our
General Regulations to know that the administrative sittings of the Congress
have to be in private.
Their complaints, nonetheless, found a sympathetic echo with the Sonvillier
Sixteen, who cried out:
“And on top of it all, a decision of this Conference
declares that the General Council will itself fix the time and place of the
next Congress or of the Conference to replace it; thus we are threatened with
the suppression of the General Congresses, these great public sessions of the
International.”
The Sixteen refused to see that this decision was affirmed
before the various governments only to show that, despite all the repressive
measures, the International was firmly resolved to hold its general meetings
one way or another.
At the general assembly of the Geneva sections, held on December 2, 1871,
which gave a bad reception to Citizens Malon and Lefrancais, the latter put
forward a proposal confirming the decrees passed by the Sonvillier Sixteen and
censuring the General Council, as well as disavowing the Conference. The
Conference had resolved that
“the Conference resolutions which are not due to be
published shall be communicated to the federal councils of the various
countries by the corresponding secretaries of the General Council.”
This resolution, which was in complete conformity with the
General Rules and Regulations, was fraudulently revised by B. Malon and his
friends to read as follows:
“Some Conference resolutions shall be communicated only
to the federal councils and to the corresponding secretaries.”
They further accused the General Council of having
“violated the principle of sincerity” in refusing to hand over to
the police, by means of “publicity”, the resolutions which were
aimed exclusively at reorganizing the International in the countries were it is
proscribed.
Citizens Malon and Lefrancais complain further that
“the Conference aimed a blow at freedom of thought and
its expression... in conferring upon the General Council the right to denounce
and disavow any publicity organ of the sections or federations that discussed
either the principles on which the Association rests, or the respective
interests of the sections and federations, or finally the general interests of
the Association as a whole (see L'Egalite of October 21)”
What, then had L'Egalite of October 21 published? It
had published a resolution in which the Conference
“gives warning that henceforth the General Council will
be bound to publicly denounce and disavow all newspapers calling themselves
organs of the International which, following the precedents of Progres
and Solidarite, discuss in their columns, before the middle-class
public, questions exclusively reserved for the local or federal committees and
the General Council, or for the private and administrative sittings of the
Federal or General Congresses.”
To appreciate properly the spiteful lamentations of B. Malon, we
must bear in mind that this resolution puts an end, once and for all, to the
the attempts of some journalists who wished to substitute themselves for the
main committees of the International and to play therein the role that the
journalists’ bohemia is playing in the bourgeois world. As a result of
one such attempt, the Geneva Federal Committee had seen some members of the
Alliance edit L'Egalite, the official organ of the Romance Federation,
in a manner completely hostile to the latter.
Incidentally, the general Council had no need of the London Conference to
“publicly denounce and disavow” the improper use of the press, for
the Basel Congress had decided (Resolution II) that:
“All newspapers countenancing attacks on the
Association must be immediately sent by the sections to the General
Council.”
“It is evident,” says the Romance Federal
Committee in its December 20, 1871, declaration (L'Egalite, December
24), “that this article was adopted not in order that the General Council
might keep in its files newspapers which attack the Association, but to enable
it to reply, and to nullify in case of need, the pernicious effect of slander
and malevolent denigrations. It is also evident that this article refers in
general to all newspapers, and that if we do not want to leave the attacks of
the bourgeois papers without retaliation, it is all the more necessary to
disavow, through our main representative body — i.e., the General Council
— those newspapers whose attacks against us are made under cover of the
name of our Association.”
Let us not in passing that the Times, that Leviathan of
the capitalist press, Progres (of Lyon), a publication of the liberal
bourgeoisie, and the Journal de Geneve, an ultra-reactionary paper,
have brought the same charges against the Conference and used virtually the
same terms as Citizens Malon and Lefrancais.
After having challenged the convocation of the Conference and, later, its
composition and its allegedly secret character, the Sixteen’s circular
challenged the Conference resolutions.
Stating first that the Basel Congress had surrendered its rights
“having authorized the General Council to grant or refuse admission to,
or to suspend, the sections of the International,” it accuses the
Conference, farther on, of the following sin:
“This Conference has... taken resolutions... which tend
to turn the International, which is a free federation of autonomous sections,
into a hierarchical and authoritarian organization of disciplined sections
placed entirely under the control of a General Council which may, at will,
refuse their admission or suspend their activity”!
Still farther on, the circular once more takes up the question
of the Basel Congress having allegedly “distorted the nature of the
General Council's functions”.
The contradictions contained in the circular of the Sixteen may be summed up
as follows: the 1871 Conference is responsible for the resolutions of the 1869
Basel Congress, and the General Council is guilty of having observed the Rules
which require it to carry out Congress resolutions.
Actually, however, the real reason for all these attacks against the
Conference is of a more profound nature. In the first place, it thwarted, by
its resolutions, the intrigues of the Alliance men in Switzerland. In the
second place, the promoters of the Alliance had, in Italy, Spain, and part of
Switzerland and Belgium, created and upheld with amazing persistence a
calculated confusion between the program of the International Working
Men’s Association and Bakunin’s makeshift program.
The Conference drew attention to this deliberate misunderstanding in its two
resolutions on proletarian policy and sectarian sections. The motivation of the
first resolution, which makes short work of the political abstention preached
by Bakunin’s program, is given fully in its recitals, which are based on
the General Rules, the Lausanne Congress resolution, and other precedents.
[4]
*
We now pass on to the sectarian sections:
The first phase of the proletariat’s struggle against the bourgeoisie
is marked by a sectarian movement. That is logical at a time when the
proletariat has not yet developed sufficiently to act as a class. Certain
thinkers criticize social antagonisms and suggest fantastic solutions thereof,
which the mass of workers is left to accept, preach, and put into practice. The
sects formed by these initiators are abstentionist by their very nature —
i.e., alien to all real action, politics, strikes, coalitions, or, in a word,
to any united movement. The mass of the proletariat always remains indifferent
or even hostile to their propaganda. The Paris and Lyon workers did not want
the St.-Simonists, the Fourierists, the Icarians, any more than the Chartists
and the English trade unionists wanted the Owenites. These sects act as levers
of the movement in the beginning, but become an obstruction as soon as the
movement outgrows them; after which they became reactionary. Witness the sects
in France and England, and lately the Lassalleans in Germany, who after having
hindered the proletariat’s organization for several years ended up
becoming simple instruments of the police. To sum up, we have here the infancy
of the proletarian movement, just as astrology and alchemy are the infancy of
science. If the International were to be founded, it was necessary that the
proletariat go through this phase.
Contrary to the sectarian organization, with their vagaries and rivalries,
the International is a genuine and militant organization of the proletarian
class of all countries, united in their common struggle against the capitalists
and the landowners, against their class power organized in the state. The
International’s Rules, therefore, speak of only simple
“workers’ societies”, all aiming for the same goal and
accepting the same program, which presents a general outline of the proletarian
movement, while having its theoretical elaboration to be guided by the needs of
the practical struggle and the exchange of ideas in the sections,
unrestrictedly admitting all shades of socialist convictions in their organs
and Congresses.
Just as in every new historical phase old mistakes reappear momentarily only
to disappear forthwith, so within the International there followed a
resurrection of sectarian sections, though in a less obvious form.
The Alliance, which considers the resurrection of the sects a great step
forward, is in itself conclusive proof that their time is over: for if
initially they contained elements of progress, the program of the Alliance, in
the tow of a “Mohammed without the Koran”, is nothing but a heap of
pompously worded ideas long since dead and capable only of frightening
bourgeois idiots or serving as evidence to be used by the Bonapartist or other
prosecutors against members of the International. [5]
The Conference, at which all shades of socialism were represented,
unanimously acclaimed the resolution against sectarian sections, fully
convinced that this resolution, stressing once again the International's true
character, would mark a new stage of its development. The Alliance supporters,
whom this resolution dealt a fatal blow, construed it only as the General
Council's victory over the International, through which, as their circular
pointed out, the General Council assured “the domination of the special
program” of some of its members, “their personal doctrine”,
“the orthodox doctrine”, “the official theory, and only one
permissible within the Association”. Incidently, this was not the fault
of those few members, but the necessary consequence, “the corrupting
effect”, of the fact that they were members of the General Council, for
“it is absolutely impossible for a person who has power” (!)
“over his fellows to remain a moral person. The General Council is
becoming a hotbed of intrigue”.
According to the opinion of the Sixteen, the General Rules of the
International should be censured for the grave mistakes of authorizing the
General Council to co-opt new members. Thus authorized, they claim, “the
Council could, whenever it saw fit, co-opt a group numerous enough to
completely change the nature of its majority and its tendencies”.
They seem to think that the mere fact of belonging to the General Council is
sufficient to destroy not only a person's morality, but also his
common sense. How else can we suppose that a majority will transform itself
into a minority by voluntary co-options?
At any rate, the Sixteen themselves do not appear to be very sure of all
this, for they complain farther on that the General Council has been
“composed for five years running of the same persons, continually
reelected”, and immediately afterwards they repeat: “Most of them
are not regular mandatories, not having been elected by a Congress.”
The fact is that the body of the General Council is constantly changing,
though some of the founding members remain, as in the federal councils in
Belgium, French Switzerland, etc.
The General Council must fulfill three essential conditions if it is to
carry out its mandate. In the first place, it must have a numerically adequate
membership to carry on its diverse functions; second, a membership of
“workingmen belonging to the different nations represented in the
International Association”; and, lastly, laborers must be the
pre-dominant element therein. Since the exigencies of the worker’s job
incessantly cause changes in the membership of the General Council, how can it
fulfill all these indispensable conditions without the right of co-option? The
Council nonetheless considers a more precise definition of this right
necessary, as it indicated at the recent Conference.
The reelection of the General Council’s original membership, at
successive Congresses at which England was definitely under-represented, would
seem to prove that it has done its duty within the limits of the means at its
disposal. The Sixteen, on the contrary, view this only as a proof of the
“blind confidence of the Congresses”, carried at Basel to the point
of “a sort of voluntary abdication in favor of the General
Council”.
In their opinion, the Council’s “normal role” should be
“that of a simple correspondence and statistical bureau”. They
justify this definition by adducing several articles extracted from an
incorrect translation of the Rules.
Contrary to the rules of all bourgeois societies, the International’s
General Rules touch only lightly on its administrative organization. They leave
its development to practice, and its regularization to future Congresses.
Nevertheless, inasmuch as only the unity and joint action of the sections of
the various countries could give them a genuinely international character, the
Rules pay more attention to the Council than to the other bodies of the
organization.
Article 6 of the original Rules states: “The General Council shall
form an international agency between the different national and local
groups”, and proceeds to give some examples of the manner in which it is
to function. Among these examples is a request to the Council to see that
“when immediate practical steps should be needed — as, for
instance, in case of international quarrels — the action of the
associated societies be simultaneous and uniform.”
The article continues:
“Whenever it seems opportune, the General Council shall
take the initiative of proposals to be laid before the different national or
local societies.”
In addition, the Rules define the Council’s role in
convening and arranging Congresses, and charge it with the preparation of
certain reports to be submitted thereto. In the original Rules, so little
distinction is made between the independent action of various groups and unity
of action of the Association as a whole, that Article 6 states:
“Since the success of the workingmen's movement in each
country cannot be secured but by the power of union and combination, while, on
the other hand, the activity of the General Council will be more effective...
the members of the International Association shall use their utmost efforts to
combine the disconnected workingmen’s societies of their respective
countries into national bodies, represented by central national
organs.”
The first administrative resolution of the Geneva Congress
(Article I) says:
“The General Council is commissioned to carry the
resolution of the Congress into effect.”
This resolution legalized the position that the General Council
has held ever since its origin: that of the Association’s executive
delegation. It would be difficult to carry out orders without enjoying
moral “authority” in the absence of any other “freely
recognized authority”. The Geneva Congress at the same time charged the
General Council with publishing “the official and obligatory text of the
Rules”.
The same Congress resolved (Administrative Resolution of Geneva, Article
14):
“Every section has the right to draw up its own rules
and regulations adapted to local conditions and to the laws of its own country,
but they must not contain anything contrary to the General Rules and
Regulations.”
Let us note, first of all, that these is not the least allusion
either to any special declarations of principles or to any special tasks which
this or that section should set itself apart from the common goal pursued by
all the groups of the International. The issue simply concerns the right of
sections to adapt the General Rules and Regulations to local conditions and to
the laws of their country.
In the second place, who is to establish whether or not the particular rules
conform to the General Rules? Evidently, if there were no
“authority” charged with this function, the resolution would be
null and void. Not only could police and hostile sections be formed, but also
the intrusion of declassed sectarians and bourgeois philanthropists into the
Association could warp its character and, by force of numbers at Congresses,
crush the workers.
Since their origin, the national and local federations have exercised in
their respective countries the right to admit or reject new sections, according
to whether or not their rules conformed to the General Rules. The exercise of
the same function by the General Council is provided for in Article 6 of the
General Rules, which allows local independent societies — i.e., societies
formed outside the federal body in the country concerned — the right to
establish direct contacts with the General Council. The Alliance did not
hesitate to exercise this right in order to fulfill the conditions set for the
admission of delegates to the Basel Congress.
Article 6 of the Rules deals further with legal obstacles to the formation
of national federations in certain countries where, consequently, the General
Council is asked to function as a Federal Council (see Minutes of the Lausanne
Congress, etc., 1867, p.13).
Since the fall of the Commune, these legal obstacles have been multiplying
in the various countries, making action by the General Council therein,
designed to keep doubtful elements out of the Association, more necessary than
ever. That is why the French committees recently demanded the General
Council’s intervention to rid themselves of informers, and why in another
great country [Austria] members of the International requested it not to
recognize any section which had not been formed by its direct mandates or by
themselves. Their request was motivated by the necessity to rid themselves of
agents-provocateurs, whose burning zeal manifested itself in the rapid
formation of sections of unparalleled radicalism. On the other hand, the
so-called anti-authoritarian sections do not hesitate to appeal to the Council
the moment a conflict arises in their midst, or even to ask it to deal severely
with their adversaries, as in the case of the Lyons conflict. More recently,
since the Conference, the Turin “Workers' Federation” decided to
declare itself a section of the International. As the result of the split that
followed, the minority formed the Emancipation of the Proletariat Society. It
joined the International and began by passing a resolution in favor of the Jura
people. Its newspaper, Il Proletario, is filled with outbursts against
all authoritarianism. When sending in the society's subscriptions, the
secretary [Carlo Terzaghi] warned the General Council that the old federation
would probably also send its subscriptions.
Then he continues: 
“As you will have read in Il Proletario, the
Emancipation of the Proletariat Society... has declared... its rejection of all
solidarity with the bourgeoisie who, under the mask of workers, are organizing
the Workers’ Federation,” and begs the Council to
“communicate this resolution to all sections and to refuse the 10
centimes in subscriptions in the event of their being sent.” [6]
Like all the International’s groups, the General Council
is required to carry on propaganda. This it has accomplished through its
manifestos and its agents, who laid the basis for the first organizations of
the International in North America, in Germany, and in many French towns.
Another function of the General Council is to aid strikers and organize
their support by the entire International (see General Council reports to the
various Congresses). The following fact, inter alia, indicates the
importance of its intervention in the strike movement. The Resistance Society
of the English Foundrymen is in itself an international trade union with
branches in other countries, notably in the United States. Nonetheless, during
a strike of American foundrymen, the latter found it necessary to invoke the
intercession of the General Council to prevent English foundrymen being brought
into America.
The growth of the International obliged the General Council and all federal
councils to assume the role of arbiter.
The Brussels Congress resolved that:
“The federal councils are obliged to send a report
every quarter to the General Council on their administration and financial
states” (Administrative Resolution No.3).
Lastly, the Basel Congress, which provokes the bilious wrath of
the Sixteen, occupied itself solely with regulating the administrative
relations engendered by the Association’s continuing development. If it
extended unduly the limits of the General Council’s powers, whose fault
was it if not that of Bakunin, Schwitzgeubel, F. Robert, Guillaume, and other
delegates of the Alliance, who were so anxious to achieve just that? Or will
they accuse themselves of “blind confidence” in the London General
Council?
Here are two resolutions of the Basel Congress:
“No.IV. Each new section or society which is formed and
wishes to be part of the International must immediately announce its adhesion
to the General Council,”
and
“No.V. The General Council has the right to admit or
reject the affiliation of any new society or group, subject to appeal at the
next Congress.”
As for the local independent societies formed outside the
federal body, these articles only confirm the practice observed since the
International’s origin, maintenance of which is a matter of life or death
for the Association. But extending this practice and applying it
indiscriminately to every section or society in the process of formation is
going too far. These articles do authorize the General Council to intervene in
the internal affairs of the federations; but they have never been applied in
this sense by the General Council. It defies the Sixteen to cite a single case
where it has intervened in the affairs of new sections desirous of affiliating
themselves with existing groups or federations.
The resolutions cited above refer to sections in the process of formation,
while the resolutions given below refer to sections already recognized:
“VI. The General Council has equally the right to
suspend until the next Congress any section of the International.”
“VII. When conflicts arise between the societies or
branches of a national group, or between groups of different nationalities, the
General Council shall have the right to decide the conflict, subject to appeal
at the next Congress, which will decide definitely.”
These two articles are necessary for extreme cases, although up
to the present the General Council has never had recourse to them. The review
presented above shows that the Council has never suspended any section, and in
cases of conflict has only acted as arbiter at the request of the two
parties.
We arrive, at last, at a function imposed on the General Council by the
needs of the struggle. However shocking this may be for supporters of the
Alliance, it is the very persistence of the attacks to which the General
Council is subjected by all the enemies of the proletarian movement that has
placed it in the vanguard of the defenders of the International Working
Men’s Association.

V.
Having dealt with the International, such as it is, the Sixteen
proceed to tell us what it should be.
First, the General Council should be nominally a simple correspondence and
statistical bureau. Once it has been relieved of its administrative functions,
its correspondence would be concerned only with reproducing the information
already published in the Association's newspapers. The correspondence bureau
would thus become needless. As for statistics, that function is possible only
if a strong organization, and especially, as the original Rules expressly say,
a common direction are provided. Since all that smacks very much of
“authoritarianism”, however, there might perhaps be a bureau, but
certainly no statistics. In a word, the General Council would disappear. The
federal councils, the local committees, and other “authoritarian”
centres, would go by the same token. Only the autonomous sections would
remain.
What, one may ask, will be the purpose of these “autonomous
sections”, freely federated and happily rid of all superior bodies,
“even of the superior body elected and constituted by the
workers”?
Here, it becomes necessary to supplement the circular by the report of the
Jura Federal Committee submitted to the Congress of the Sixteen:
“In order to make the working class the real
representative of humanity’s new interests,” its organization must
be “guided by the idea that will triumph. To evolve this idea from the
needs of our epoch, from mankind’s vital aspirations, by a consistent
study of the phenomena of social life, to then carry this idea to our
workers’ organizations — such should be our aim,” etc.
Lastly, there must be created “amid our working population a real
revolutionary socialist school.”
Thus, the autonomous workers’ sections are in a trice
converted into schools, of which these gentlemen of the Alliance will
be the masters. They “evolve” the idea by “consistent”
studies which leave no trace behind. They then “carry this idea to our
workers’ organizations”. To them, the working class is so much raw
material, a chaos into which they must breathe their Holy Spirit before it
acquires a shape.
All of which is but a paraphrase of the old Alliance program, which begins
with these words:
“The socialist minority of the League of Peace and
Freedom, having separated itself from the league,” proposes to found
“a new Alliance of Socialist Democracy... having a special mission to
study political and philosophical questions....”
This is the “idea” that is being
“evolved” therefrom:
“Such an enterprise... would provide sincere socialist
democrats of Europe and America with the means of being understood and of
affirming their ideas.” [7]
That is how, on its own admission, the minority of a bourgeois
society slipped into the International shortly before the Basel Congress with
the exclusive aim of utilizing it as a means for posing before the working
masses as a hierarchy of a secret science that may be expounded in hour phrases
and whose culminating point is “the economic and social equalization of
the classes.”
Apart from this “theoretical mission”, the new organization
proposed for the International also has its practical aspect.
“The future society,” says the circular of the
Sixteen, “should be nothing but a universalization of the organization
which the International will establish for itself. We must therefore take care
to bring this organization as near as possible to our ideal.... How could one
expect an egalitarian and free society to grow out of an authoritarian
organization? That is impossible. The International, embryo of the future human
society, must be, from now on, the faithful image of our principles of liberty
and federation.”
In other words, just as the mediaeval convents presented an
image of celestial life, so the International must be the image of the New
Jerusalem, whose embryo the Alliance bears in its womb. The Paris Communards
would not have failed if they had understood that the Commune was “the
embryo of the future human society” and had cast away all discipline and
all arms — that is, the things which must disappear when there are no
more wars!
Bakunin, however, the better to establish that, despite their
“consistent study”, the Sixteen did not hatch this pretty project
of disorganization and disarmament in the International when it was fighting
for its existence, has just published the original text of that project in his
report on the International's organization (see Almanach du Peuple pour
1872, Geneve).

VI.
Now, turn to the report presented by the Jura Committee at the
Congress of the Sixteen.
“A perusal of the report,” says their official
organ, Revolution Sociale (November 16), “will give the exact
measure of the devotion and practical intelligence that we can expect from the
Jura Federation members.”
It begins by attributing to “these terrible
events” — the Franco-Prussia War and the Civil War in France
— a “somewhat demoralizing influence... on the situation within the
International’s sections.”
If, in fact, the Franco-Prussian War could not but lead to the
disorganization of the sections because it drew great numbers of workers into
the two armies, it is no less true that the fall of the Empire and Bismarck's
open proclamation of a war of conquest provoked in Germany and England a
violent struggle between the bourgeoisie, which side with the Prussians, and
the proletariat, which more than ever demonstrated its international
sentiments. This alone should have been sufficient for the International to
have gained ground in both countries. In America, the same fact produced a
split between in the vast German proletarian emigre group, the internationalist
party definitely dissociating itself from the chauvinist party.
On the other hand, the advent of the Paris Commune gave an unprecedented
boost to the expansion of the International and to a vigorous support of its
principles by sections of all nationalities, except the Jura sections, whose
report continues thus:
“The beginning of the gigantic battle... has caused
people to think... some go away to hide their weakness.... For many, this
situation” (within their ranks) “is a sign of decrepitude,”
but “on the contrary... this situation is capable of transforming the
International completely,” according to their own pattern.
This modest wish will be understood more completely after a
deeper examination of so propitious a situation.
Leaving aside the dissolved Alliance, since replaced by the Malon section,
the Committee had to report on the situation in 20 sections. Among them, seven
simply turned their backs on the Alliance. This is what the report has to say
about it:
“The section of box makers and that of engravers and
designers of Bienne have never replied to any of the communications that we
sent them. The sections of Neuchatel craftsmen, i.e., joiners, box makers,
engravers, and designers, have made no reply to letters from the Federal
Committee. We have not been able to obtain any news of the Val-de-Ruz section.
The section of engravers and designers of Locle have given no reply to letters
from the Federal Committee.”
That is what is described as free intercourse between
autonomous sections and their Federal Committee.
Another section, that “of engravers and designers of the Courtelary
district, after three years of stubborn perseverance... at the present time...
is forming a resistance society” — independent of the
International, which does not in the least deter them from sending two
delegates to the Congress of the Sixteen.
Next come four completely defunct sections:
“The central section of Bienne has currently been
dissolved; one of its devoted members wrote to us recently, however, saying
that all hope of seeing the rebirth of the International at Bienne is not lost.
The Saint-Blaise section has been dissolved. The Catebat section, after a
brilliant existence, has had to yield to the intrigues woven by the
masters” (!) “of this district in order to dissolve this
valiant” (?) “section. Lastly, the Corgement section also has
fallen victim of intrigue on the part of the employers.”
The central section of the Courtelary district follows, which
“took the wise step of suspending its activity”; which did not
deter it from sending two delegates to the Congress of the Sixteen.
Now we come to four sections whose existence is more than problematical.
“The Grange section has been reduced to a small nucleus
of socialist workers.... Their local action is paralyzed by their numerically
modest membership. The central section of Neuchatel has suffered considerably
from the events, and would inevitably have disbanded except for the dedication
and activity of some of its members. The central section of Locle, hovering
between life and death for some months, ended up by being dissolved. It has
been reconstituted quite recently, however,” evidently for the sole
purpose of sending two delegates to the Congress of the Sixteen. “The
Chaux-de-Fonds section of socialist propaganda is in a critical situation....
Its position, far from getting better, tends rather to deteriorate.”
Next come two sections, the study circles of Saint-Imier and of
Sonvillier, which are mentioned only in passing, without so much as a word
about their circumstances.
There remains the model section, which, to judge by its name of central
section, is nothing but the residue of other defunct sections.
“The central section of Moutier is certainly the one
that has suffered least.... Its Committee has been in constant contact with the
Federal Committee... no sections have yet been founded....”
That is easily explained:
“The action of the Moutier section was particularly
favoured by the excellent attitude of a working population... given to their
traditional ways; we would like to see the working class of this district make
itself still more independent of political elements.”
One can see, in fact, that this report
“gives the exact measure of the devotion and practical
intelligence that we can expect from the Jura Federation members.”
They might have rounded it off by adding that the workers of
Chaux-de-Fonds, the original seat of their committee, have always refused to
have anything to do with them. Just recently, at the general assembly of
January 18, 1872, they replied to the circular of the Sixteen by a unanimous
vote confirming the London Conference resolutions and also the French
Switzerland Congress resolution of May 1871:
“To exclude forever from the International Bakunin,
Guillaume, and their supporters.”
Is it necessary to say anything more about the courage of this
sham Sonvillier Congress, which, in its own words, “caused war, open war,
within the International”?
Certainly these men, who make more noise than their stature warrants, have
had an incontestable success. The whole of the liberal and police press have
openly taken their side; they have been backed in their personal slander of the
General Council and the insipid attacks aimed against the International by
ostensible reformers in many lands: by the bourgeois republicans in England,
whose intrigues were exposed by the General Council; by the dogmatic
free-thinkers in Italy who, under the banner of Stefanoni, have just formed a
“Universal Rationalist Society” with permanent headquarters in
Rome, and “authoritarian” and “hierarchical”
organization of monasteries for atheist monks and nuns, whose rules provide for
a marble bust in the Congress hall for every bourgeois who donates 10,000
francs; and lastly by the Bismarck socialists in Germany who, apart from their
police mouthpiece, the Neuer Social-Demokrat, played the role of
“white shirts” for the Prusso-German Empire.
The Sonvillier conclave, in a pathetic appeal, requests all sections of the
International to insist on the urgency of an immediate Congress “to curb
the consistent encroachments of the London Council,” according to
Citizens Malon and Lefrancais, but actually to replace the International with
the Alliance. This appeal received such an encouraging response, that they
immediately set about falsifying a resolution voted at the last Belgian
Congress. Their official organ (Revolution Sociale, January 4, 1872)
writes as follows:
“Lastly, which is even more important, the Belgian
sections met at the Congress of Brussels on December 14 and 25 and voted
unanimously for a resolution identical with that of the Sonvillier Congress, on
the urgency of convening a General Congress.”
It is important to note that the Belgian congress voted the very
opposite. It charged the Belgian congress, which was not due to meet until the
following June, to draft new General Rule for submission to the next
Congress of the International.
In accordance with the will of the vast majority of members of the
International, the General Council is to convene the annual Congress only in
September 1872.

VII.
Some weeks after the Conference, Albert Richard and Gaspard
Blanc, the most influential and most ardent members of the Alliance, arrived in
London. They came to recruit, among the French refugees, aides willing to work
for the restoration of the Empire, which, according to them, was the only way
to rid themselves of Thiers and to avoid being left destitute. The General
Council warned all concerned, including the Brussels Federal Council, of their
Bonapartist plots.
In January 1872, they dropped their mask by publishing a pamphlet entitled
The Empire and the New France. Call of the People and the Youth to the
French Conscience, by Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc, Brussels, 1872.
With the modesty characteristic of the charlatans of the Alliance, they
declaim the following humbug:
“We who have built up the great army of the French
proletariat... we, the most influential leaders of the International in France
[8],... happily, we have not been shot, and we are
here to flaunt in their faces (to wit: ambitious parliamentarians, smug
republicans, sham democrats of all sorts) the banner under which we are
fighting, and despite the slander, threats, and all manner of attacks that
await us, to hurl at an amazed Europe the cry that comes from the very heart of
our conscience and that will soon resound in the hearts of all Frenchmen: ‘Long
Live the Emperor!’ Napoleon III, disgraced and scorned, must be splendidly
reinstated”; and Messrs. Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc, paid out of the
secret funds of Invasion III, are specially charged with this restoration.
Incidentally, they confess:
“It is the normal evolution of our ideas that made us
imperialists.”
Here is a confession that should give pleasure to their
co-religionists of the Alliance. As in the heyday of Solidarite, A.
Richard and G. Blanc mouth again the cliches about “abstention from politics”
which, on the principle of their “normal evolution”, can become a reality only
under the most absolute despotism, with the workers abstaining from any
meddling in politics, much like the prisoner abstaining from a walk in the
Sun.
“The time of the revolutionaries,” they say, “is over...
communism is restricted to Germany and England, especially Germany. That,
moreover, is where it had been developed in earnest for a long time to be
subsequently spread throughout the International, and this disturbing expansion
of German influence in the Association has in no small degree contributed to
retarding its development, or rather, to giving it a new course in the sections
of central and southern France, whom no German has ever supplied with a
slogan.”
Perhaps this is the voice of the great hierophant, who ever
since the Alliance's foundation has taken upon himself, in his capacity as a
Russian, the special task of representing the Latin races? Or do we have here
“the true missionaries” of the Revolution Sociale (November 2, 1871)
denouncing “the backward march which endeavors to foist German and Bismarckian
mentality on the International”?
Fortunately, however, the true tradition has survived, and Messrs. Albert
Richard and Gaspard Blanc have not been shot! Thus, their own “contribution”
consists in “setting a new course” for the International in central and
southern France to follow, by an effort to found Bonapartist sections, ipso
facto basically “autonomous”.
As for the constitution of the proletariat as a political party, as
recommended by the London Conference, “After the restoration of the Empire, we”
— Richard and Blanc — “shall quickly deal not only with the
Socialist theories but also with any attempts to implement them through
revolutionary organization of the masses.” Briefly, exploiting the great
“autonomy principle of the sections” which “constitute the real strength of the
International... especially in the Latin countries” (Revolution
Sociale, January 4), these gentlemen base their hopes on anarchy within
the International.
Anarchy, then, is the great war horse of their master Bakunin, who has taken
nothing from the socialist systems except a set of slogans. All socialists see
anarchy as the following program:
Once the aim of the proletarian movement —
i.e., abolition of classes — is attained, the power of the state, which
serves to keep the great majority of producers in bondage to a very small
exploiter minority, disappears, and the functions of government become simple
administrative functions.
The Alliance draws an entirely different picture.
It proclaims anarchy in proletarian ranks as the
most infallible means of breaking the powerful concentration of social and
political forces in the hands of the exploiters. Under this pretext, it asks
the International, at a time when the Old World is seeking a way of crushing
it, to replace its organization with anarchy.
The international police want nothing better for perpetuating
the Thiers republic, while cloaking it in a royal mantle.
 
Notes
1 B. MALON — Do
the friends of B. Malon, who have been advertising him in a stereotyped way for
the last three months as the founder of the International, who have called his
book the only independent work on the Commune, know the attitude taken by this
assistant to the Mayor of Batignolles on the eve of the February elections? At
that time, B. Malon, who did not yet foresee the Commune and saw nothing more
than the success of his election to the Assembly, plotted to get himself put on
the list of the four committees as a member of the International. To these
ends, he insolently denied the existence of the Paris Federal Council and
submitted to the committees the list of a section founded by himself at
Batignolles as coming from the entire Association. Later, on March 19, he
insulted in a public document the leaders of the great Revolution on the eve of
their consummating it. Today, this anarchist from top-to-toe prints, or has
printed, what he was saying a year ago to the four committees: I am the
International! B. Malon has hit on a way of parodying Louis XIV and Perron the
chocolate manufacturer at one and the same time. It was Perron who declared
that his chocolate was the only edible chocolate!
2 Here is the
national composition of the Council:
— 20 Englishmen, — 15 French, — 7 Germans
(of whom 5 are founding members of the International), — 2 Swiss, —
2 Hungarians, — 1 Pole, — 1 Belgian, — 1 Irishman, — 1
Dane, and — 1 Italian.
3 A little later,
this Chautard whom they had wanted to put on the General Council was expelled
from the section as an agent of Thiers’ police. He was accused by the same
people who had judged him worthy among all others of representing them on the
General Council.
4 The Conference
resolution on political action of the working class reads as follows:
“Considering the following passage of the Preamble to the
Rules:
‘The economical emancipation of
the working classes is the great end to which every political movement ought to
be subordinate as a means’;
“That the Inaugural Address of the International Working
Men’s Association (1864) states:
‘The lords of land and the lords
of capital will always use their political privileges for the defense and
perpetuation of their economical monopolies. So far from promoting, they will
continue to lay every possible impediment in the way of the emancipation of
labor.... To conquer political power has therefore become the great duty of the
working classes’;
“That the Congress of Lausanne (1867) has passed this
resolution: 
‘The social emancipation of the
workmen is inseparable from their political emancipation’;
“That the declaration of the General Council relative to the
pretended plot of the French Internationals on the eve of the plebiscite (1870)
says:
‘Certainly by the tenor of our
Statutes, all our branches in England, on the Continent, and in America, have
the special mission not only to serve as centres for the militant organization
of the working class, but also to support, in their respective countries, every
political movement tending toward the accomplishment of our ultimate end
— the economical emancipation of the working class.’;
“That false translations of the original Statutes have given
rise to various interpretations which were mischievous to the development and
action of the International Working Men’s Association;
“In presence of an unbridled reaction which violently crushed
every effort at emancipation on the part of the working men, and pretends to
maintain by brute force the distinction of classes and the political domination
of the propertied classes resulting from it;
“Considering that against this collective power of the
propertied classes the working class cannot act, as a class, except by
constituting itself into a political party, distinct from, and opposed to, all
old parties formed by the propertied classes;
"That this constitution of the working class into a political
party is indispensable in order to ensure the triumph of the Social Revolution
and its ultimate end — the abolition of classes;
“That the combination of forces which the working class has
already effected by its economical struggles ought at the same time to serve as
a lever for its struggles against the political power of landlords and
capitalists —
“The Conference recalls to the members of the
International:
“That in the militant state of the working class, its
economical movement and its political action are indissolubly united.”
5 Recent police
publications on the International, including the Jules Favre circular to
foreign powers and the report of Sacaze, a deputy in the rural assembly, on the
Dufaure project, are full of quotations from the Alliance’s pompous manifestos.
The phraseology of these sectarians, whose radicalism is wholly restricted to
verbiage, is extremely useful for promoting the aims of the reactionaries.
6 At this time, these
were the apparent ideas of the Emancipation of the Proletariat
Society, as represented by its corresponding secretary, a friend of Bakunin.
Actually, however, this section‘s tendencies were quite different. After
expelling this double-dealing traitor for embezzlement and for his friendly
relations with the Turin police chief, the society set forth in explanation,
which cleared up all misunderstanding between it and the General Council.
7 The gentlemen of
the Alliance, who continue to reproach the General Council for calling a
private Conference at a time when the convocation of a Congress would have been
the height of treachery or folly — these absolute proponents of clamor
and publicity — organized within the International itself with the aim of
bringing its sections, unbeknown to them, under the sacerdotal direction of
Bakunin.
The General Council intends to demand at the next Congress an investigation
of this secret organization and its promoters in certain countries, such as
Spain, for example.
8 Under the heading
“To the Pillory!”, L‘Egalite (of Geneva), February 15, 1872, had this
to say:
“The day has not yet come to describe the story of the defeat
of the movement of the Commune in the South of France; but what we, most of
whom witnessed the deplorable defeat of the Lyons insurrection on April 30, can
announce today is that one of the reasons for the insurrection's failure was
the cowardice, the treachery, and the thievery of G. Blanc, who intruded
everywhere carrying out the orders of A. Richard, who kept in the shade.
“By their carefully prepared maneuvers, these rascals
intentionally compromised many of those who took part in the preparatory work
of the insurrectionary Committees.
“Further, these traitors managed to discredit the
International at Lyon to such an extent that by the time of the Paris
revolution the International was regarded by the Lyon workers with the greatest
distrust. Hence the total absence of organization, hence the failure of the
insurrection, a failure which was bound to result in the fall of the Commune,
which was left to rely on its own isolated forces! It is only since this bloody
lesson that our propaganda has been able to rally the Lyon workers around the
flag of the International.
“Albert Richard was the pet and prophet of Bakunin and
company.”
 

Conflict with
Bakunin
International Workingmen's Association
Index | Marx-Engels Archive | Works by Date
 




==========

## Resolutions of the Meeting held to Celebrate the Anniversary of the Paris Commune









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## The Nationalisation of the Land






The International Workingmen's Association, The Nationalisation of the Land



The International Workingmen's Association, 1872
The Nationalisation of the Land


A Paper read at the Manchester Section of the International Working Men's Association;
Written: by Marx in March-April 1872;
Published:  in The International Herald No. 11, June 15, 1872;
On-line version: Taken from the newspaper;
Transcribed: by director@marx.org.


The property in the soil is the original source
of all wealth, and has become the great problem upon the solution of which
depends the future of the working class.
I do not intend discussing here all the arguments put forward
by the advocates of private property in land, by jurists, philosophers
and political economists, but shall confine myself firstly to state that
they have tried hard to disguise the primitive fact of conquest under the
cloak of "Natural Right". If conquest constituted a natural right
on the part of the few, the many have only to gather sufficient strength
in order to acquire the natural right of reconquering what has been taken
from them.
In the progress of history the conquerors found it convenient
to give to their original titles, derived from brute force, a sort of social
standing through the instrumentality of laws imposed by themselves.
At last comes the philosopher and demonstrates that those laws
imply and express the universal consent of mankind. If private property
in land be indeed founded upon such an universal consent, it will evidently
become extinct from the moment the majority of a society dissent from warranting
it.
However, leaving aside the so-called "rights" of property, I assert
that the economical development of society, the increase and concentration
of people, the very circumstances that compel the capitalist farmer to
apply to agriculture collective and organised labour, and to have recourse
to machinery and similar contrivances, will more and more render the nationalisation
of land a "Social Necessity", against which no amount of talk about
the rights of property can be of any avail. The imperative wants of society
will and must be satisfied, changes dictated by social necessity will work
their own way, and sooner or later adapt legislation to their interests.
What we require is a daily increasing production and its exigencies
cannot be met by allowing a few individuals to regulate it according to
their whims and private interests, or to ignorantly exhaust the powers
of the soil. All modern methods, such as irrigation, drainage, steam ploughing,
chemical treatment and so forth, ought to be applied to agriculture at
large. But the scientific knowledge we possess, and the technical means
of agriculture we command, such as machinery, etc., can never be successfully
applied but by cultivating the land on a large scale.
If cultivation on a large scale proves (even under its present
capitalist form, that degrades the cultivator himself to a mere beast of
burden) so superior, from an economical point of view, to small and piecemeal
husbandry, would it not give an increased impulse to production if applied
on national dimensions?
The ever-growing wants of the people on the one side, the ever-increasing
price of agricultural produce on the other, afford the irrefutable evidence
that the nationalisation of land has become a social necessity.
Such a diminution of agricultural produce as springs from individual
abuse, will, of course, become impossible whenever cultivation is carried
on under the control and for the benefit of the nation.
All the citizens I have heard here today during the progress of
the debate, on this question, defended the nationalisation of land, but
they took very different views of it.
France was frequently alluded to, but with its peasant proprietorship
it is farther off the nationalisation of land than England with its landlordism.
In France, it is true, the soil is accessible to all who can buy it, but
this very facility has brought about a division into small plots cultivated
by men with small means and mainly relying upon the land by exertions of
themselves and their families. This form of landed property and the piecemeal
cultivation it necessitates, while excluding all appliances of modern agricultural
improvements, converts the tiller himself into the most decided enemy to
social progress and, above all, the nationalisation of land. Enchained
to the soil upon which he has to spend all his vital energies in order
to get a relatively small return, having to give away the greater part
of his produce to the state, in the form of taxes, to the law tribe in
the form of judiciary costs, and to the usurer in the form of interest,
utterly ignorant of the social movements outside his petty field of employment;
still he clings with fanatic fondness to his bit of land and his merely
nominal proprietorship in the same. In this way the French peasant has
been thrown into a most fatal antagonism to the industrial working class.
Peasant proprietorship being then the greatest obstacle to the
nationalisation of land, France, in its present state, is certainly not
the place where we must look to for a solution of this great problem.
To nationalise the land, in order to let it out in small plots
to individuals or working men's societies, would, under a middle-class
government, only engender a reckless competition among themselves and thus
result in a progressive increase of "Rent" which, in its turn, would
afford new facilities to the appropriators of feeding upon the producers.
At the International Congress of Brussels, in 1868, one of our
friends [César De Paepe, in his report on land property: meeting
of the Brussels Congress of the International Working Men's Association
of Sept. 11 1868] said:

"Small private property in land is doomed by the verdict of science,
large land property by that of justice. There remains then but one alternative.
The soil must become the property of rural associations or the property
of the whole nation. The future will decide that question."

I say on the contrary; the social movement will lead to this decision that
the land can but be owned by the nation itself. To give up the soil to
the hands of associated rural labourers, would be to surrender society
to one exclusive class of producers.
The nationalisation of land will work a complete change in the
relations between labour and capital, and finally, do away with the capitalist
form of production, whether industrial or rural. Then class distinctions
and privileges will disappear together with the economical basis upon which
they rest. To live on other people's labour will become a thing of the
past. There will be no longer any government or state power, distinct from
society itself! Agriculture, mining, manufacture, in one word, all branches
of production, will gradually be organised in the most adequate manner.
National centralisation of the means of production will become the
national basis of a society composed of associations of free and equal
producers, carrying on the social business on a common and rational plan.
Such is the humanitarian goal to which the great economic movement of the
19th century is tending.
 


International Workingmen's Association Index
Marx-Engels Archive |
Works by Date
 



==========

## From the Resolutions of the General Congress held in The Hague




IWMA 1872: Resolutions






The International Working Men's Association, 1872
Resolutions


Adopted by the Hague Congress as Article 7 of the General Statutes, September 1872;
Drafted: The official publication of Hague Congress resolutions was the pamphlet Résolutions du congrès general tenu à la Haye du 2 au 7 Septembre 1872, Londres, 1872. Also published in La Emancipacion November 2, and The International Herald December 14, 1872
Online version: from The International Herald;
TRanscribed: by director@marx.org.


I. Resolution Relating to the General Rules
The following article which resumes  the contents of Resolution IX of the Conference of London (September 1871) to be inserted in the Rules after Article 7, viz.: --

Article 7a -- In its struggle against the collective
power of the propertied classes, the working class cannot act
as a class except by constituting itself into a political party,
distinct from, and opposed to all old parties formed by the propertied
classes.
This constitution of the working class into a political party
is indispensable in order to insure the triumph of the social
revolution, and of its ultimate end, the abolition of classes.
The combination of forces which the working class has already
effected by its economical struggles ought, at the same time,
to serve as a lever for its struggles against the political power
of landlords and capitalists.
The lords of land and the lords of capital will always use their
political privileges for the defence and perpetuation of their
economical monopolies, and for the enslavement of labour. The
conquest of political power has therefore become the great duty
of the working class.
Adopted by 29 votes against 5, and 8 abstentions. [1]

II. Resolutions Relating to the Administrative REgulations
1. Powers of the General Council.
Articles II, 2 and 6 have been replaced by the
following articles: -- 

"Article 2. -- The General Council is bound to execute the
Congress Resolutions, and to take care that in every country the
principles and the General Rules and Regulations of the International
are strictly observed.

"Article 6. -- The General Council has also the right to
suspend Branches, Sections, Federal Councils or committees, and
federations of the International, till the meeting of the next
Congress.

"Nevertheless, in the case of sections belonging to a federation,
the General Council will exercise this right only after having
consulted the respective Federal Council.

"In the case of the dissolution of a Federal Council, the General
Council shall, at the same time, call upon the Sections of the
respective Federation to elect a new Federal Council within 30 days at
most.

 "In the case of the suspension of an entire federation, the General
Council shall immediately inform thereof the whole of the federations.
If the majority of them demand it, the General Council shall convoke an
extraordinary conference, composed of one delegate for each
nationality, which shall meet within one month and finally decide upon
the question.

"Nevertheless, it is well understood that the countries where the
International is prohibited shall exercise the same rights as the
regular federations."

Article 2 was adopted by 40 votes against 4; abstentions, 11. [2]
2. Contributions to be paid to the General Council: 

With regard to the proposal, on the one hand to raise, on the other to
reduce, the amount of their contributions, the Congress had to decide
whether the actual amount of 1d. per annum, should be altered or not.
The Congress maintained the penny by 17 votes against 12, and 8
abstentions. [3]

III. Resolution Relating to the Internationalisation of Trades' Societies
The new General Council is entrusted with the
special mission to establish International trades unions.

For this purpose it will, within the month following this Congress,
draw up a circular which shall be translated and published in all
languages, and forwarded to all trades' societies whose addresses are
known, whether they are affiliated to the International or not.

In this circular every Union shall be called upon to enter into an
International union of its respective trade.

Every Union shall be invited to fix itself the conditions under which
it proposes to enter the International Union of its trade.

The General Council shall, from the conditions fixed by the Unions,
adopting the idea of International union, draw up a general plan, and
submit it to the provisional acceptance of the Societies.<>


The next Congress will finally settle the fundamental treaty for the
International trades unions.

(Voted unanimously minus a few abstentions, the number of which has not
been stated in the minutes.)

IV. Resolutions Relating to the Admission of Sections[4]

1. Section 2 (New York, French) of the North American
Federation. -- This Section had been excluded by the American
Federal Council. On the other hand, it had not been recognised as an
independent Section by the General Council. It was not admitted by the
Congress. Voted against the admission, 38; for, 9; abstained, 11.

2. Section 12 (New York, American) of the North
American Federation. -- Suspended by the General Council.

In the course of the debate on the credentials of Section 12, the
following resolution was adopted by 47 votes against 0; abstentions, 9:

The International Working Men's Association, based upon the principle
of the abolition of classes, cannot admit any middle class Sections. [5]

Section 12 was excluded by 49 votes against 0; abstentions, 9. [6]

3. Section of Marseilles. -- This Section, quite
unknown to the General Council, and to the French Sections in
correspondence with the latter, is not admitted. Against the admission,
38; for, 0; abstentions, 14.

4. Section of Propaganda and Revolutionary Action, at
Geneva. This Section, which is but the resurrection of the
(public) "Alliance de la Democratique Socialiste", of Geneva, dissolved
in August 1871, had been recognised neither by the Romance Federal
Committee nor by the General Council, which, indeed, had returned its
contributions when sent by the Jurassian Federal Committee. The
Congress resolved to suspend it till after the debate on the second
[secret] Alliance. The suspension was voted unanimously, less a few
abstentions not counted.

5. New Federation of Madrid. -- The new Federation
of Madrid was formed by the members of the previous Spanish Federal
Council, after the old Federation of Madrid, in flagrant breach of the
rules then in force, had expelled them for having denounced the
conspiracy of the secret alliance against the International Working
Men's Association. They addressed themselves, in the first instance, to
the Spanish Federal Council, which refused to affiliate the new
Federation. They then addressed themselves to the General Council,
which took upon itself the responsibility of recognising it without
consulting the Spanish Council, amongst whose eight members not less
than five belonged to the Alliance.

The Congress admitted this Federation by 40 votes against 0; the few
abstentions were not counted.

V. Audit of the Accounts of the General Council
The Committee appointed by the Congress for the
auditing of the accounts of the General Council for the year 1871-72,
was composed of the following citizens: -- Dumont, for France; Alerini,
for Spain; Farkas, for Austria and Hungary; Brismée, for
Belgium; Lafargue, for the new Federation of Madrid and for Portugal;
Pihl, for Denmark;

J. Ph. Becker, for German Switzerland; Duval, for the Romance Swiss
Federation; Schwitzguébel, for the Jurassian Swiss Federation;
Dave, for Holland; Dereure, for America; and Cuno, for Germany

The accounts submitted to this Committee were approved and signed by
all its members excepting Dave, absent.

The accounts having been read, the Congress approved of them by a
unanimous vote.

VI. Powers Issued by the General Council, and by Federal Councils
The Congress resolved, 

"To annul all powers issued, as well by the General Council as by
any of the Federal Councils, to members of the International in such
countries where the Association is prohibited, and to reserve to the
new General Council the exclusive right of appointing, in those
countries, the plenipotentiaries of the International Working Men's
Association."
Adopted unanimously, less a few abstentions not specially counted.

VII. Resolutions Relating to the Alliance
The Committee charged with the inquiry regarding
the (second/secret) Alliance of Social Democracy, consisted of the
citizens -- Cuno (33 votes), Lucain (24), Splingard (31), Vichard (30),
and Walter (29).

In its report to the Congress, the majority of this Committee declared
that "the secret Alliance was established with rules entirely opposed
to those of the International." 

It proposed: -- 

"To exclude from the International Michael Bakounine, as founder of
the Alliance, and for a personal affair.

"To exclude Guillaume and Schwitzguébel, as members of the
Alliance.

"To exclude B. Malon, Bousquet (Secretary of Police at
Béziers, France) [The Committee was not acquainted with the
fact that M. Bousquet, upon the demands of his Section, had already
been excluded by a formal vote of the General Council], and Louis
Marchand, as convicted of acts aiming at the disorganisation of the
International Working Men's Association.

"To withdraw the charges against Alerini, Marselau, Morago, Farga
Pellicer, and Joukowski, upon their formal declaration that they no
longer belong to the Alliance.

"To authorise the Committee to publish the documents upon
which their conclusions were based."

The Congress resolved

"1. To exclude Michael Bakounine. Voted for, 27; against, 6;
abstentions, 7. [7]

"2. To exclude Guillaume. 25 for, 9 against, 8 abstentions. [8]

"3. Not to exclude Schwitzguébel. For exclusion 15; against
16; abstentions, 7. [9]

"4. To refrain from voting upon the other exclusions proposed by
the Committee. Adopted unanimously, minus some few abstentions.

"5. To publish the documents relating to the Alliance. Adopted
unanimously, minus some few abstentions."

It is to be noted that these votes upon the Alliance were taken after a
great number of French and German delegates had been obliged to
leave.

VIII. Residence and Composition of the Nerxt General Council

1. Vote upon the change of residence of the General
Council. Voted for the change, 26; against, 23; abstentions, 9. [10]

2. The seat of the General Council has been transferred to
New York, by 30 votes against 14, for London, and 12 abstentions. [11]

3. The Congress resolved to appoint twelve members,
residing in New York, to the General  Council, with the faculty of
adding them to that number. The following were elected:
Votes

29 Bertrand (German)
29 Bolte (German)
29 Laurel (Swede)
29 Kavanagh (Irish)
29 Saint Clair (Irish)
28 Leviele (French)
28 Carl (German)
26 David (French)
26 Dereure (French)
25 Fornaccieri (Italian)
23 Speyer (German)
22 Ward (American)


IX. Place of Meeting of Next Congress
The proposition that the new Congress should meet
in Switzerland, and that the new General Council should determine in
what town, was adopted. There voted for Switzerland 15, for London 5,
for Chicago 1, and for Spain 1.

X. Committee to Draw up the Minutes
The following were appointed, without opposition:
-- Dupont, Engels, Frankel, Le Moussu, Marx and Serraillier.

 Committee:

F. Dupont
F. Engels
Leo Frankel
Le Moussu
Karl Marx,
Auguste Serraillier

London
21st October, 1872
Notes


1 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted for: Arnaud, J. Ph. Becker, B. Becker, Cournet,
Dereure, Dumont, Dupont, Duval, Eccarius, Engels, Farkas,
Friedländer, Frankel, Hepner, Heim, Johannard, Kugelmann,
Lafargue, Longuet, Le Moussu, Mottershead, Pihl, Ranvier, Serraillier,
Sorge, Swarm, Vaillant, Wilmot, MacDonnell.

Voted against: Brismée, Coenen, Gerhard,
Schwitzguébel, Van der Hout.

Abstained: Van den Abeele, Dave, Eberhardt, Fluse,
Guillaume, Herman, Sauva, Marselau.
The Congress officially decided to recognise as valid the votes of the
delegates who could not attend the sitting because of their work in
commissions.

The following delegates voted for: Cuno, Lucain, Marx, Vichard, Walter,
Wróblewski; 6 in all. Not a vote against.

In Engels' manuscript the following passage has been deleted:

"As the resolution obtained more than two-thirds of the votes,
according to Article 12 of the General Rules, it henceforth becomes
part of the General Rules."


2 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted for: Arnaud, Barry, J. Ph. Becker, B. Becker, Cournet,
Cuno, Dereure, Dumont, Dupont, Duval, Engels, Farkas, Frankel,
Friedländer, Hepner, Heim, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue,
Lessner, Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, MacDonnell, Marx, Milke, Pihl,
Ranvier, Roach, Sauva, Scheu, Serraillier, Sexton, Sorge, Swarm,
Schumacher, Vaillant, Vichard, Walter, Wróblewski.

Voted against: Fluse, Gerhard, Splingard, Van der Hout.

Abstained: Alerini, Coenen, Dave, Eberhardt, Guillaume,
Herman, Morago, Marselau, Farga Pellicer, Schwitzguébel, Van den
Abeele.

Article 6 -- adopted by 36 votes against 6, abstentions, 16.

Voted for: Arnaud, Barry, J. Ph. Becker, B. Becker, Cournet,
Cuno, Dereure, Dupont, Duval, Engels, Farkas, Frankel,
Friedländer, Hepner, Heim, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue,
Lessner, Le Moussu, Longuet, Ludwig, MacDonnell, Marx, Milke, Pihl,
Ranvier, Serraillier, Schumacher, Sexton, Sorge, Swarm, Vaillant,
Vichard, Walter, Wróblewski.

Voted against: Brismée, Coenen, Fluse, Herman, Sauva,
Splingard.

Abstained: Alerini, Cyrille, Dave, Dumont, Eberhardt,
Guillaume, Lucain, Marselau, Morago, Mottershead, Farga Pellicer,
Roach, Schwitzguébel, Van den Abeele, Van der Rout, Wilmot.


3 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted against the contribution being altered: J. Ph. Becker,
Brismée, Coenen, Cyrille, Dupont, Duval, Eberhardt,  Eccarius,
Farkas, Fluse, Gerhard, Herman, Hepner, Serraillier, Sorge, Swarm,
Wilmot.

Voted for the contribution being altered: Dumont, Engels,
Frankel, Heim, Johannard, Lafargue, Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain,
MacDonnell, Pihl, Sauva.

Abstained: Alerini, Dave, Dereure, Guillaume, Marselau,
Morago, Farga Pellicer, Schwitzguébel.

The following delegates, obliged to leave The Hague before this
question was discussed, handed in their vote in writing for the
raising of the contribution: Arnaud. Cournet, Ranvier, Vaillant.


4 The French text reads: Admission and Exclusion of
Sections.

The Mandate Commission was composed as follows: Gerhard (50 votes),
Ranvier (44), Roach (41), Marx (41), MacDonnell (39), Dereure (36),
Frankel (22).


5 After this the French text of the resolutions has:

Voted for: Arnaud, J. Ph. Becker, Barry, Brismée,
Cournet, Cuno, Coenen, Dave, Dereure, Dietzgen, Dupont, Duval,
Eberhardt, Fluse, Farkas, Frankel, Friedländer, Guillaume,
Gerhard, Heim, Hepner, Herman, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Le
Moussu, Lessner, Lucain, Marx, Milke, Mottershead, Pihl, Ranvier,
Sauva, Scheu, Schumacher, Serraillier, Sexton, Sorge, Splingard, Swarm,
Vaillant, Vichard, Wilmot, Wróblewski, Walter, Van den
Abeele.

Abstained: Alerini, Eccarius, Harcourt, Marselau, Morago,
Farga Pellicer, Roach, Schwitzguébel, Van der Hout.-Ed.


6 After this the French text of the resolutions has:

Voted for the exclusion: Arnaud, Barry, J. Ph. Becker,
Brismée, Cournet, Coenen, Cuno, Dave, Dereure, Dietzgen, Dumont,
Dupont, Duval, Eberhardt, Fluse, Farkas, Frankel, Friedländer,
Gerhard, Heim, Hepner, Herman, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Le
Moussu, Lessner, Lucain, MacDonnell, Marx, Milke, Pihl, Ranvier, Roach,
Sauva, Scheu, Schumacher, Serraillier, Sexton, Sorge, Splingard, Swarm,
Vaillant, Van den Abeele, Van der Rout, Vichard, Wilmot,
Wróblewski, Walter.

Abstained: Alerini, Eccarius, Guillaume, Harcourt, Marselan,
Morago, Farga Pellicer, Mottershead, Schwitzguébel.-Ed.


7 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted for: J. Ph. Becker, Cuno, Dereure, Dumont, Dupont,
Duval, Engels, Farkas, Frankel, Heim, Hepner, Johannard, Kugelmann,
Lafargue, Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, MacDonnell, Marx, Pihl,
Serraillier, Sorge, Swarm, Vichard, Wilmot, Walter,
Wróblewski.

Voted against: Brismée, Dave, Fluse, Herman, Coenen,
Van den Abeele.

Abstained: Alerini, Guillaume, Marselau, Morago, Sauva,
Splingard, Schwitzguébel.


8 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted for: J. Ph. Becker, Cuno, Dumont, Dupont, Duval,
Engels, Farkas, Frankel, Heim, Hepner, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue,
Le Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, Marx, Pihl, Serraillier, Sorge, Swarm,
Vichard, Walter, Wilmot, Wróblewski.

Voted against: Brismée, Cyrille, Dave, Fluse, Herman,
Coenen, Sauva, Splingard, Van den Abeele.

Abstained: Alerini, Dereure, Friedländer, MacDonnell,
Marselau, Morago, Farga Pellicer, Schwitzguébel.


9 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted for the exclusion: J. Ph. Becker, Cuno, Dumont,
Engels, Farkas, Helm, Hepner, Kugelmann, Le Moussu, Marx, Pihl,
Splingard, Walter, Vichard, Wróblewski.

Voted against: Brismée, Coenen, Cyrille, Dave,
Dereure, Dupont, Fluse, Frankel, Herman, Johannard, Longuet, Sauva,
Serraillier, Swarm, Wilmot, Van den Abeele.

Abstained: Duval, Lafargue, Lucain, MacDonnell, Marselau,
Morago, Farga Pellicer.


10 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted for: Barry, I. Ph. Becker, Brismée, Cuno, Dave,
Dumont, Dupont, Engels, Harcourt, Johannard, Kugelmann, Lafargue,
Lessner, Le Moussu, Longuet, MacDonnell, Marx, Roach, Sauva,
Serraillier, Sexton, Sorge, Swarm, Vichard, Van den Abeele,
Wróblewski.

Voted against: Arnaud, B. Becker, Cournet, Dereure, Duval,
Farkas, Frankel, Friedländer, Gerhard, Heim, Hepner, Herman,
Lucain, Ludwig, Milke, Pihl, Ranvier, Schumacher, Splingard, Vaillant,
Wilmot, Walter, Van der Hout.

Abstained: Cyrille, Eberhardt, Fluse, Guillaume, Marselau,
Morago, Farga Pellicer, Schwitzguébel, Alerini.


11 The French text of the resolutions has here:

Voted for New York: J. Ph. Becker, B. Becker,
Brismée, Cuno, Coenen, Dave, Dumont, Dupont, Engels, Farkas,
Fluse, Friedländer, Herman, Kugelmann, Lafargue, Lessner, Le
Moussu, Longuet, Lucain, MacDonnell, Marx, Pihl, Roach, Serraillier,
Sexton, Splingard, Swarm, Vichard, Van den Abeele,
Wróblewski.

Voted for London: Arnaud, Cournet, Dereure, Duval, Frankel,
Helm, Hepner, Ludwig, Milke, Ranvier, Schumacher, Vaillant, Wilmot,
Walter.

Abstained: Cyrille, Eberhardt, Gerhard, Guillaume,
Johannard, Alerini, Marselau, Morago, Farga Pellicer, Sorge,
Schwitzguébel, Van der Hout.


Hague Congress Index
International Workingmen's Association Index

 



==========

## The Hague Congress




IWMA 1872: La Liberte speech





The International Working Men's Association, 1872
La Liberté Speech


Speech: delivered by Karl Marx on September 8, 1872, in Amsterdam;
Source: K. Marx and F. Engels, On Britain, Foreign Languages Press, Moscow, 1962;
Printed: September 15, 1872, in La Liberte.
Also printed in Dutch, Belgian and German papers.

In the 18th century, the kings and the potentates were 
  in the habit of meeting at The Hague to discuss the interests of their dynasties. 

It is precisely in this place that we wanted to hold our workers' meeting, 
  despite attempts to arouse apprehensions among us. We wanted to appear amid 
  the most reactionary population, to reinforce the existence, propagation, and 
  hope for the future of our great Association [International Working Men's Association]. 

When our decision became known, it was rumored that we sent emissaries 
  to prepare the ground. Yes, we do not deny that we have such emissaries everywhere, 
  but they are mostly unknown to us. Our emissaries in The Hague were the workers 
  whose labor is as toilsome as that of our emissaries in Amsterdam, who are likewise 
  workers, laboring 16 hours a day. Those are our emissaries; we have no other; 
  and in all the countries where we recruit we find them prepared to receive us 
  with open hearts, because they understand immediately that we strive to improve 
  their lot. 

The congress at The Hague has brought to maturity three important
points:

It has proclaimed the necessity for the working class to fight
the old, disintegrating society on political as well as social grounds;
and we congratulate ourselves that this resolution of the London Conference
will henceforth be in our Statutes.
In our midst there has been formed a group advocating the workers'
abstention from political action. We have considered it our duty to declare
how dangerous and fatal for our cause such principles appear to be.
Someday the worker must seize political power in order to build up the 
  new organization of labor; he must overthrow the old politics which sustain 
  the old institutions, if he is not to lose Heaven on Earth, like the old Christians 
  who neglected and despised politics. 
But we have not asserted that the ways to achieve that goal are
everywhere the same.
You know that the institutions, mores, and traditions of various countries 
  must be taken into consideration, and we do not deny that there are countries 
  -- such as America, England, and if I were more familiar with your institutions, 
  I would perhaps also add Holland -- where the workers can attain their goal 
  by peaceful means. This being the case, we must also recognize the fact that 
  in most countries on the Continent the lever of our revolution must be force; 
  it is force to which we must some day appeal in order to erect the rule of labor.

The Hague Congress has granted the General Council [London-based administrative 
  body of IWMA] new and wider authority. In fact, at the moment when the kings 
  are assembling in Berlin, whence are to be issued new and decisive measures 
  of oppression against us by the mighty representatives of feudalism and of the 
  past -- precisely at that moment, when persecution is being organized, the congress 
  of The Hague considered it proper and necessary to enlarge the authority of 
  the General Council and to centralize all action for the approaching struggle, 
  which would otherwise be impotent in isolation. And, moreover, where else could 
  the authorization of the General Council arouse disquiet if not among our enemies? 
  Does the General Council have a bureaucracy and an armed police to compel obedience? 
  Is not its authority entirely a moral one, and does it not submit its decisions 
  to the judgment of the various federations entrusted with their execution? Under 
  such conditions -- without an army, without police, without courts -- on the 
  day when the kings are forced to maintain their power only with moral influence 
  and moral authority, they will form a weak obstacle to the forward march of 
  the revolution. 
Finally, the congress of The Hague has moved the headquarters
of the General Council to New York. Many, even among our friends, seem
to have wondered at such a decision. Do they then forget that America will
be the workers' continent par excellence, that half a million men -- workers
-- emigrate there yearly, and that on such soil, where the worker dominates,
the International is bound to strike strong roots? Moreover, the decision
of the congress gives the General Council the right to employ [in Europe]
any members whose collaboration it considers necessary and useful for the
common welfare. Let us trust its prudence and hope it will succeed in selecting
persons who will be capable or carrying out their task and who will understand
how to hold up the banner of our Assocation in Europe with a firm hand.
Citizens, let us think of the basic principle of the International: Solidarity. 
  Only when we have established this life-giving principle on a sound basis among 
  the numerous workers of all countries will we attain the great final goal which 
  we have set ourselves. The revolution must be carried out with solidarity; this 
  is the great lesson of the French Commune, which fell becaue none of the other 
  centres -- Berlin, Madrid, etc. -- developed great revolutionary movements comparable 
  to the mighty uprising of the Paris proletariat. 
So far as I am concerned, I will continue my work and constantly strive 
  to strengthen among all workers this solidarity that is so fruitful for the 
  future. No, I do not withdraw from the International, and all the rest of my 
  life will be, as have been all my efforts of the past, dedicated to the triumph 
  of the social ideas which -- you may be assured! -- will lead to the world domination 
  by the proletariat.
 


International Workingmen's Association Index
Marx-Engels Archive |
Works by Date
 




==========

## The Housing Question






The Housing Question





Works of Frederick Engels 1872
The Housing Question


Written: May 1872-January 1873;
First published: in Der Volksstaat, Leipzig 1872, Nos. 51, 52, 53, 103 and 104 for June 26 and 29, July 3 and December 25 and 28, 1872; Nos. 2, 3, 12, 13, 15 and 16 for January 4 and 8, February 8, 12, 19 and 22, 1873. Also re-published as a pamphlet. Reprinted by the Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign Workers;
Other formats:
doc
epub
mobi
pdf
azw
odt
Transcribed: Zodiac, June 1995.


During the 1870s, a major polemical debate unfolded
in Germany’s worker/democratic press on the shortage of housing available
to workers in major industrial centres. The influx and increase of the
proletariat created a housing crisis.

On June 26 1872, Engels contributed the first of a series of articles
to the Volksstaat, entitled “The Housing Question.” The last appeared
on February 22 1873. Engels’ central point was that the revolutionary class
policy of the proletariat cannot be replaced by a policy of reforms, because
"it is not that the solution of the housing question simultaneously solves
the social question, but that only by the solution of the social question,
that is, by the abolition of the capitalist mode of production, is the
solution of the housing question made possible."

The series criticizes Proudhonism (and petty-bourgeois socialism
in general, including Lassalleanism). It also discusses things like the
nature of the State, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the eradication
of the antithesis between town and country, the solution of the agrarian
problem, forms of the socialist reconstruction of society and the tasks
of the proletarian party.


Contents

Preface to the second German edition (1887)

Part 1: How Proudhon Solves The Housing Question

Part 2: How The Bourgeoisie Solves The Housing Question

Part 3: Supplement On Proudhon And The Housing Question
 


Works Index |
Marx Engels Archive |
Marxism & Ethics




==========

## Preface to the Second Edition






The Housing Question – Preface




The Housing Question by Frederick Engels
1887 Preface to the Second German Edition
 

The following work is a reprint of three articles
which I wrote in 1872 for the Leipzig Volksstaat. Just at that time,
the blessing of the French milliards was pouring over Germany: public debts
were paid off, fortresses and barracks built, stocks of weapons and war
material renewed; the available capital no less than the volume of money
in circulation was suddenly enormously increased, and all this just at
a time when Germany was entering the world arena not only a “united empire,”
but also as a great industrial country. These milliards gave the new large-scale
industry a powerful impetus, and above all they were responsible for the
short period of prosperity, so rich in illusions, which followed on the
war, and for the great crash which came immediately afterwards in 1873-74,
through which Germany proved itself to be an industrial country capable
of competing on the world market.
The period in which an old civilized country makes such a transition
from manufacture and small-scale production to large-scale industry, a
transition which is, moreover, accelerated by such favorable circumstance,
is also predominantly the period of “housing shortage.” On the one hand,
masses of rural workers are suddenly drawn into the big towns, which develop
into industrial centres; on the other hand, the building plan of these
old towns does not any longer conform with the conditions of the new large-scale
industry and the corresponding traffic; streets are widened and new ones
cut through, and railways run through the centre of the town. At the very
time when masses of workers are streaming into the towns, workers’ dwellings
are pulled down on a large scale. Hence the sudden housing shortage for
the workers and for the small traders and small businesses which depend
for their custom on the workers. In the towns which grew up from the very
beginning as industrial centres, this housing shortage is as good as unknown
– for instance, Manchester, Leeds, Bradford, Barmen-Elberfeld. On the
other hand, in London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, the shortage took on acute
forms at the time, for the most part, continued to exist in a chronic form.
It was, therefore, just this acute housing shortage, this symptom
of the industrial revolution taking place in Germany, which filled the
press of the day with contributions on the “housing question,” and gave
rise to all sorts of social quackery. A series of such articles even found
their way into the Volksstaat. The anonymous author, who revealed
himself later on as Dr. A. Mülberger of Wurttemburg, considered the opportunity
a favorable one for enlightening the German workers, by means of this question,
on the miraculous effects of Proudhon’s social panacea. When I expressed
my astonishment to the editors at the acceptance of these peculiar articles,
I was called upon to answer them, and this I did. (See Part
One: How Proudhon Solves the Housing Question.) This series of articles
was soon followed by a second series examining the philanthropic bourgeois
view of the question, on the basis of a work by Dr. Emil Sax. (See Part
Two: How the Bourgeoisie Solves the Housing Question.) After a long
pause, Dr. Mülberger did me the honor of replying to my articles, and this
compelled me to make a rejoinder. (Part
Three: Supplement on Proudhon and the Housing Question.) With this,
however, both the polemic and also my special occupation with this question
came to an end. This is the history of the origin of these three series
of articles, which have also appeared as a reprint in pamphlet form. The
fact that a new reprint has now become necessary I owe undoubtedly to the
benevolent solicitude of the German imperial government which, by prohibiting
the work, as usual tremendously increased the sale, and I hereby take this
opportunity of expressing my respectful thanks to it.
I have revised the text for this new edition, inserted a few additions
and notes, and I have corrected a small economic error in the first edition,
as my opponent Dr. Mülberger unfortunately failed to discover it.
During this revision, it was borne in one me what gigantic progress
the international working class movement has made during the past 14 years.
At that time, it was still a fact that “for 20 years the workers of the
Latin countries had no other mental nourishment than the works of Proudhon,”
and, at best, the still more one-sided version of Proudhonism presented
by the father of “anarchism,” Bakunin, who regarded Proudhon as “notre
maitre a nous tous,” the master of us all. Although the Proudhonists in
France were only a small sect among the workers, they were still the only
ones who had a definitely formulated programme and who were able in the
Commune to take over the leadership on the economic field. In Belgium,
Proudhonism reigned unchallenged among the Walloon workers, and in Spain
and Italy, with isolated exceptions, everything in the working class movement
which was not anarchist was definitely Proudhonist. And today? In France,
Proudhon has been completely disposed of among the workers and retains
supporters only among the radical bourgeois and petty bourgeois, who, as
Proudhonists, also call themselves “socialists,” but against whom the most
energetic fight is carried on by the socialist workers. In Belgium, the
Flemish have ousted the Walloons from the leadership, deposed Proudhonism,
and greatly raised the level of the movement. In Spain, as in Italy, the
anarchist high tide of the ’70s has receded and swept away with it the
remnants of Proudhonism. While in Italy, the new party is still in process
of clarification and formation, in Spain the small nucleus, which as the
Neuva Federacion Madrilena remained loyal to the General Council
of the International, has developed into a strong party which – as can
be seen from the republican press itself – is destroying the influence
of the bourgeois republicans on the workers far more effectively than its
noisy anarchist predecessors were ever able to do. Among most Latin workers,
the forgotten works of Proudhon have been replaced by Capital, The Communist
Manifesto, and a series of other works of the Marxist school, and
the main demand of Marx – the seizure of all means of production in the
name of society by the proletariat, which has attained the monopoly of
political power – is now the demand of the whole revolutionary working
class in the Latin countries also.
If therefore Proudhonism has been finally supplanted among the
workers of the Latin countries also, if it – in accordance with its real
significance – only serves French, Spanish, Italian and Belgian bourgeois
radicals as an expression of their bourgeois and petty-bourgeois desires,
why bother about it today? Why combat anew a dead opponent by reprinting
these articles?
First of all, because these articles do not confine themselves
to a mere polemic against Proudhon and his German representatives. As a
consequence of the division of labour that existed between Marx and myself,
it fell to me to present our opinions in the periodical press, that is
to say, particularly in the fight against opposing views, in order that
Marx should have time for the elaboration of his great basic work. Thus
it became my task to present our views, for the most part in a polemical
form, in opposition to other kinds of views. So also here. Parts One and
Two contain not only a criticism of the Proudhonist conception of the question,
but also a presentation of our own conception.
Secondly, however, Proudhon played much too significant a role
in the history of the European working class movement for him to fall into
oblivion without more ado. Refuted theoretically and discarded practically,
he still retains his historical interest. Whoever occupies himself in any
detail with modern socialism must also acquaint himself with the “vanquished
standpoints” of the movement. Marx’s Poverty of Philosophy appeared
several years before Proudhon put forward his practical proposals for social
reform. In this work Marx was able to do no more than discover and criticise
the germ of Proudhon’s exchange bank. From this angle, therefore, this
work of mine supplements, unfortunately imperfectly enough, Marx’s work.
Marx would have accomplished all this much better and more convincingly.
And finally, bourgeois and petty-bourgeois socialism is strongly
represented in Germany down to this very hour; on the one hand by professorial
socialists and philanthropists of all sorts with whom the wish to turn
the workers into owners of their dwellings still plays a great role and
against whom, therefore, my work is still appropriate; and on the other
hand, in the Social-Democratic Party itself, and even in the ranks of the
Reichstag fraction, a certain petty-bourgeois socialism finds a voice.
This takes the form that while the fundamental views of modern socialism
and the demand for the transformation of all the means of production into
social property are recognised as justified, however, the realisation of
this is declared possible only in the distant future, a future which for
all practical purposes is quite out of sight. Thus, for the present time,
one has to have recourse to mere social patchwork, and sympathy can be
shown, according to circumstances, even with the most reactionary efforts
for so-called “uplifting the working classes.” The existence of such a
tendency is quite inevitable in Germany, the land of philistinism par
excellence, particularly at a time when industrial development is violently
and on a mass scale doing away with this old and deeply-rooted philistinism.
The tendency is also quite harmless to the movement, in view of the wonderful
common sense of our workers which has been demonstrated so magnificently
during the last eight years of the struggle against the anti-socialist
law, the police and the courts. But it is necessary that it should be clearly
realised that such a tendency exists. And when later on this tendency takes
on a firmer shape and more clearly defined contours, as it is necessary
and even desirable that it should do, it will have to go back to its predecessors
in order to formulate its programme and in doing so it will hardly be able
to avoid Proudhon.
The essence of both the big bourgeois and petty-bourgeois solutions
of the “housing question” is that the worker should own his own dwelling.
However, this is a point which has been shown in a very peculiar light
by the industrial development of Germany during the past twenty years.
In no other country do there exist so many wage workers who own not only
their own dwellings but also a garden or field as well. Besides these workers
there are numerous others who hold house and garden or field as tenants,
with, in fact, fairly secure possession. Rural domestic industry carried
on in conjunction with horticulture or small-scale agriculture forms the
broad basis of Germany’s new large-scale industry. In the west the workers
are for the most part the owners of their dwellings, and in the east they
are chiefly tenants. We find this combination of domestic industry with
horticulture and small-scale agriculture and therefore with secure possession
of a dwelling not only wherever handweaving still fights against the mechanical
loom: in the Lower Rhineland and in Westphalia, in the Saxon Erzgebirge
and in Silesia, but also wherever domestic industry of any sort has established
itself as a rural occupation: in the Thuringia Forest and in the Rhön.
At the time of the debates on the tobacco monopoly, it was revealed to
what extent cigar making was already being carried on as a rural domestic
industry. Wherever any condition of distress occurs among the small peasants,
as for instance a few years ago in the Eifel, the bourgeois press immediately
raises an outcry for the introduction of a suitable domestic industry as
the only remedy. And in fact both the growing state of want of the German
small peasants and the general situation of German industry leads to a
continual extension of rural domestic industry. This is a phenomenon peculiar
to Germany. Only very exceptionally do we find a similar phenomenon in
France, for instance in the regions of silk cultivation. In England, where
there are no small peasants, rural domestic industry depends on the labour
power of the wives and children of the agricultural labourers. Only in
Ireland can we observe the rural domestic industry of garment making being
carried on, as in Germany, by real peasant families. Naturally we do not
speak here of Russia and other countries not represented on the industrial
world market.
Thus as regards industry there exists today a state of affairs
over widespread areas in Germany which appears at first glance to resemble
that which prevailed generally before the introduction of machinery. However,
this is so only at first glance. The rural domestic industry of earlier
times, combined with horticulture and agriculture, was, at least in the
countries in which industry was developing, the basis of a tolerable and
in some cases even comfortable material situation for the working class,
but at the same time the basis of its intellectual and political nullity.
The hand-made product and its cost determined the market price, and owing
to the insignificantly small productivity of labour, compared with the
present day, the market grew faster than the supply as a rule. This held
good at about the middle of the last century for England, and partly for
France, and particularly in the textile industry. In Germany, however,
which was at that time only just recovering from the devastation of the
Thirty Years War and working its way up under most unfavourable circumstances,
the situation was quite different. The only domestic industry in Germany
producing for the world market, linen weaving, was so burdened by taxes
and feudal exactions that it did not raise the peasant weavers above the
very low level of the rest of the peasantry. But, nevertheless, at that
time the rural industrial worker enjoyed a certain security of existence.
With the introduction of machinery all this was altered. Prices
were now determined by the machine-made product, and the wage of the domestic
industrial worker fell with this price. However, the worker had to accept
it or look for other work, and he could not do that without becoming a
proletarian, that is without giving up his little house garden and field,
whether his own property or held by him as tenant. Only in the rarest cases
was he ready to do this. And thus the horticulture and agriculture of the
old rural hand weavers became the cause by virtue of which the struggle
of the hand loom against the mechanical loom was so protracted and has
not yet been fought to a conclusion in Germany. In this struggle it was
shown for the first time, especially in England, that the same circumstance
which formerly served as a basis for a comparatively comfortable material
situation of the workers – the ownership by the worker of his means of
production – had now become a hindrance and a misfortune for them. In
industry the mechanical loom defeated the hand loom, and in agriculture
large-scale methods (agriculture carried on in accordance with scientific
principles and with technically perfected tools) drove small-scale cultivation
from the field. However, while collective labour and the application of
machinery and science became the social rule on both fields of production,
the worker was chained to the antiquated method of individual production
and hand labour by his little house, garden, field and hand loom. The possession
of house and garden was now of much less advantage than the possession
of complete freedom of movement. No factory worker would have changed places
with the slowly but surely starving rural hand weaver.
Germany appeared late on the world market. Our large-scale industry
dates from the ’forties; it received its first impetus from the Revolution
of 1848, and was able to develop fully only after the Revolutions of
1866 and 1870 had cleared at least the worst political obstacles out
of its way. But to a large extent it found the world market already occupied.
The articles of mass production were supplied by England and the elegant
luxury articles by France. Germany could not beat the former in price or
the latter in quality. For the moment, therefore, nothing else remained
but, in accordance with the tendency of German production up to that time,
to squeeze into the world market with articles which were too petty for
the English and too shoddy for the French. Of course the popular German
custom of cheating, by first sending good samples and afterwards inferior
articles, soon met with sufficiently severe punishment on the world market
and was pretty well abandoned. On the other hand, the competition of overproduction
is gradually forcing even the respectable English along the downward path
of quality deterioration and so has given an advantage to the Germans,
who are unbeatable on this field. And thus we finally came to possess a
large-scale industry and to play a role on the world market. But our large-scale
industry works almost exclusively for the home market (with the exception
of the iron industry which produces far beyond the limits of home demand),
and our mass export consists of a tremendous number of small articles,
for which large-scale industry provides at most the half-finished manufactures,
which small articles, however, are supplied chiefly by rural domestic industry.
And here is seen in all its glory the “blessing” of house- and
land-ownership for the modern worker. Nowhere, hardly excepting even the
Irish domestic industries, are such infamously low wages paid as in the
German domestic industries. Competition permits the capitalist to deduct
from the price of labour power that which the family earns from its own
little garden or field; the workers are compelled to accept any piece wages
offered to them, because otherwise they would get nothing at all, and they
could not live from the products of their small-scale agriculture alone,
and because, on the other hand, it is just this agriculture and landownership
which chains them to the spot and prevents them from looking around for
other employment. This is the basis which upholds Germany’s capacity to
compete on the world market in a whole series of small articles. The
whole capital profit is derived from a deduction from normal wages and
the whole surplus value can be presented to the purchaser. That is
the secret of the extraordinary cheapness of most of the German export
articles.
It is this circumstance more than any other which keeps the wages
and the living conditions of the German workers on other industrial fields
also below the level of the Western European countries. The dead weight
of such prices for labour, kept traditionally far below the value of labour
power, depresses the wages of the urban workers also, even of the workers
in the big towns, below the value of labour power; and this is all the
more the case because poorly-paid domestic industry has taken the place
of the old handicrafts in the towns also, and here, too, depresses the
general level of wages.
Here we see clearly: that which at an earlier historical stage
was the basis of relative well-being for the workers, namely, the combination
of agriculture and industry, the ownership of house, garden and field,
and security of tenure in the dwelling-place, is becoming today, under
the rule of large-scale industry, not only the worst hindrance to the worker,
but the greatest misfortune for the whole working class, the basis for
an unexampled depression of wages below their normal level, and that not
only for individual districts and branches of enterprise, but for the whole
country. No wonder that the big bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie who live
and grow rich from these abnormal deductions from wages are enthusiastic
over rural industry and the workers owning their own houses, and that they
regard the introduction of new domestic industries as the sole remedy for
all rural distress.
That is one side of the matter, but it also has its reverse side.
Domestic industry has become the broad basis of the German export trade
and therefore of the whole of large-scale industry. It is thus spread over
wide areas of Germany and is extending still further daily. The ruin of
the small peasant, inevitable from the time when his industrial domestic
production for his own use was destroyed by the cheap, hand-made and machine
product, and his cattle breeding, and thus his manure production also,
was destroyed by the dissolution of the old Mark system, the abolition
of the common Mark and of compulsory land tillage – this ruin forcibly
drives the small peasant, fallen victim to the usurer, into the arms of
modern domestic industry. Like the ground rent of the landlord in Ireland,
the interest of the mortgage usurer in Germany cannot be paid from the
yield of the soil, but only from the wages of the industrial peasant. However,
with the expansion of domestic industry, one peasant area after the other
is being drawn into the present-day industrial movement. It is this revolutionisation
of the rural areas by domestic industry which spreads the industrial revolution
in Germany over a far wider territory than is the case in England and France;
it is the comparatively low level of our industry which makes its extension
in area all the more necessary. This explains why in Germany, in contrast
to England and France, the revolutionary working class movement has spread
so tremendously over the greater part of the country instead of being confined
exclusively to the urban centres. And this further explains the steady,
certain and irresistible progress of the movement. It is perfectly clear
that in Germany a victorious rising in the capital and in the other big
towns will be possible only when the majority of the smaller towns and
a great part of the rural areas have become ripe for the change. Given
anything like normal development, we shall never be in a position to win
working class victories like those of the Parisians in 1848 and 1871, but
for the same reason we shall not suffer defeats of the revolutionary capital
by the reactionary provinces as Paris suffered them in both cases. In France,
the movement always originated in the capital; in Germany, it originated
in the areas of big industry, of manufacture and of domestic industry;
the capital was conquered only later. Therefore, perhaps, in the future
also the initiative will continue to rest with the French but the decision
can be fought out only in Germany.
However, this rural domestic industry and manufacture, which in
its expansion has become the decisive branch of German production and thus
revolutionises more and more the German peasantry, is itself only the preliminary
stage of a far-reaching revolution. As Marx has already proved (Capital,
Vol. I, page 514, et seq.), at a certain stage of development the
hour of its downfall owing to machinery and factory production will sound
for it also. And this hour would appear to be at hand. But in Germany the
destruction of rural domestic industry and manufacture by machinery and
factory production means the destruction of the livelihood of millions
of rural producers, the expropriation of almost half the German small peasantry;
the transformation not only of domestic industry into factory production,
but also of peasant agriculture into large-scale capitalist agriculture,
of small landed property into big estates – an industrial and agricultural
revolution in favour of capital and big landownership at the cost of the
peasants. Should it be Germany’s fate also to undergo this transformation
while still under the old social conditions then it will unquestionably
be the turning point. If the working, class of no other country has taken
the initiative by that time, then Germany will certainly strike first,
and the peasant sons of the “glorious army” will bravely assist.
And with this the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois utopia which would
give each worker the ownership of his own dwelling, and thus chain him in
semi-feudal fashion to his own particular capitalist, takes on a very different
complexion. Its realisation is seen to be the transformation of all the
small rural house owners into industrial domestic workers; the destruction
of the old isolation and with it the destruction of the political insignificance
of the small peasants who would be dragged into the “social whirlpool”;
the extension of the industrial revolution over the rural areas and thus
the transformation of the most stable and conservative class of the population
into a revolutionary hotbed; and, as the culmination of the whole process,
the expropriation by machinery of the peasants engaged in home industry,
driving them forcibly into insurrection.
We can readily allow the bourgeois-socialist philanthropists the
private enjoyment of their ideal so long as they continue in their public
function as capitalists to realise it in this inverted fashion to the benefit
of the social revolution.
FREDERICK ENGELS
London, January 10 1887.
 


Contents |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Part One. How Proudhon Solves the Housing Question






The Housing Question




The Housing Question by Frederick Engels
Part One
How Proudhon Solves the Housing Question
In No. 10 and the following numbers of the Volksstaat
appears a series of six articles on the housing question. These articles
are only worthy of attention because, apart from some long-forgotten would-be
literary writings of the ‘forties, they are the first attempt to transplant
the Proudhonist school to Germany. This represents such an enormous step
backward in comparison with the whole course of development of German socialism,
which delivered a decisive blow particularly to the Proudhonist ideas as
far back as twenty-five years ago, [In Marx: Misère de la Philosophie,
etc., Bruxelles et Paris, 1847 (The Poverty of Philosophy, etc.).
– Note by F. Engels.] that it is worth while answering it immediately.
The so-called housing shortage, which plays such a great role
in the press nowadays, does not consist in the fact that the working class
generally lives in bad, overcrowded and unhealthy dwellings. This shortage
is not something peculiar to the present; it is not even one of the sufferings
peculiar to the modern proletariat in contradistinction to all earlier
oppressed classes. On the contrary, all oppressed classes in all periods
suffered more or less uniformly from it. In order to make an end of this
housing shortage there is only one means: to abolish altogether the exploitation
and oppression of the working class by the ruling class.  — What is meant
today by housing shortage is the peculiar intensification of the bad housing
conditions of the workers as the result of the sudden rush of population
to, the big towns; a colossal increase in rents, a still further aggravation
of overcrowding in the individual houses, and, for some, the impossibility
of finding a place to live in at all. And this housing shortage gets talked
of so much only because it does not limit itself to the working class but
has affected the petty bourgeoisie also.
The housing shortage from which the workers and part of the petty
bourgeoisie suffer in our modern big cities is one of the numerous smaller,
secondary evils which result from the present-day capitalist mode of production.
It is not at all a direct result of the exploitation of the worker as a
worker by the capitalists. This exploitation is the basic evil which the
social revolution strives to abolish by abolishing the capitalist mode
of production. The cornerstone of the capitalist mode of production is,
however, the fact that our present social order enables the capitalists
to buy the labour power of the worker at its value, but to extract from
it much more than its value by making the worker work longer than is necessary
in order to reproduce the price paid for the labour power. The surplus
value produced in this fashion is divided among the whole class of capitalists
and landowners together with their paid servants, from the Pope and the
Kaiser, down to the night watchman and below. We are not concerned here
as to how this distribution comes about, but this much is certain: that
all those who do not work can live only from fragments of this surplus
value which reach them in one way or another. (See Marx’s Capital where
this was worked out for the first time.)
The distribution of this surplus value, produced by the working
class and taken from it without payment, among the non-working classes
proceeds amid extremely edifying squabblings and mutual swindling. In so
far as this distribution takes place by means of buying and selling, one
of its chief methods is the cheating of the buyer by the seller, and in
retail trade, particularly in the big towns, this has become an absolute
condition of existence for the sellers. When, however, the worker is cheated
by his grocer or his baker, either in regard to the price or the quality
of the commodity, this does not happen to him in his specific capacity
as a worker. On the contrary, as soon as a certain average level of cheating
has become the social rule in any place, it must in the long run be leveled
out by a corresponding increase in wages. The worker appears before the
small shopkeeper as a buyer, that is, as the owner of money or credit,
and hence not at all in his capacity as a worker, that is, as a seller
of labour power. The cheating may hit him, and the poorer class as a whole,
harder than it hits the richer social classes, but it is not an evil which
hits him exclusively or is peculiar to his class.
And it is just the same with the housing shortage. The growth
of the big modern cities gives the land in certain areas, particularly
in those which are centrally situated, an artificial and often colossally
increasing value; the buildings erected on these areas depress this value,
instead of increasing it, because they no longer correspond to the changed
circumstances. They are pulled down and replaced by others. This takes
place above all with workers’ houses which are situated centrally and whose
rents, even with the greatest overcrowding, can never, or only very slowly,
increase above a certain maximum. They are pulled down and in their stead
shops, warehouses and public buildings are erected. Through its Haussmann
in Paris, Bonapartism exploited this tendency tremendously for swindling
and private enrichment. [Haussmann was Prefect of the Seine Department
in the years 1853-70 and carried on big building alterations in Paris in
the interests of the bourgeoisie. He did not fail to profit himself also.
-Ed.] But the spirit of Haussmann has also been abroad in London, Manchester
and Liverpool, and seems to feel itself just as much at home in Berlin
and Vienna. The result is that the workers are forced out of the centre
of the towns towards the outskirts; that workers’ dwellings, and small
dwellings in general, become rare and expensive and often altogether unobtainable,
for under these circumstances the building industry, which is offered a
much better field for speculation by more expensive houses, builds workers’
dwellings only by way of exception.
This housing shortage therefore certainly hits the worker harder
than it hits any more prosperous class, but it is just as little an evil
which burdens the working class exclusively as the cheating of the shopkeeper,
and it must, as far as the working class is concerned, when it reaches
a certain level and attains a certain permanency similarly find a certain
economic adjustment.
It is with just such sufferings as these, which the working class
endures in common with other classes, and particularly the petty bourgeoisie,
that petty-bourgeois socialism, to which Proudhon belongs, prefers to occupy
itself. And thus it is not at all accidental that our German Proudhonist
occupies himself chiefly with the housing question, which, as we have seen,
is by no means exclusively a working class question; and that, on the contrary,
he declares it to be a true, exclusively working class question.
 “As the wage worker in relation to the capitalist, so is the tenant in relation to the house owner.” [Mülberger in Der Volkstaat February 10 1872]
This is totally untrue.
In the housing question we have two parties confronting each other:
the tenant and the landlord or house owner. The former wishes to purchase
from the latter the temporary use of a dwelling; he has money or credit,
even if he has to buy this credit from the house owner himself at a usurious
price as an addition to the rent. It is simple commodity sale; it is not
an operation between proletarian and bourgeois, between worker and capitalist.
The tenant – even if he is a worker – appears as a man with money; he
must already have sold his own particular commodity, his labour power,
in order to appear with the proceeds as the buyer of the use of a dwelling,
or he must be in a position to give a guarantee of the impending sale of
this labour power. The peculiar results which attend the sale of labour
power to the capitalist are completely absent here. The capitalist causes
the purchased labour power firstly to produce its own value and secondly
to produce a surplus value which remains in his hands for the time being,
subject to its distribution among the capitalist class. In this case therefore
an extra value is produced, the total sum of the existing value is increased.
In the rent transaction the situation is quite different. No matter how
much the landlord may overreach the tenant it is still only a transfer
of already existing, previously produced value, and the total sum of values
possessed by the landlord and the tenant together remains the same after
as it was before. The worker is always cheated of a part of the product
of his labour, whether that labour is paid for by the capitalist below,
above, or at its value.
The tenant, on the other hand, is cheated only when he is compelled
to pay for the dwelling above its value. It is, therefore, a complete misrepresentation
of the relation between landlord and tenant to attempt to make it equivalent
to the relation between worker and capitalist. On the contrary, we are
dealing here with a quite ordinary commodity transaction between two citizens,
and this transaction proceeds according to the economic laws which govern
the sale of commodities in general and in particular the sale of the commodity,
land property. The building and maintenance costs of the house, or of the
part of the house in question, enters first of all into the calculation;
the land value, determined by the more or less favourable situation of
the house, comes next; the state of the relation between supply and demand
existing at the moment is finally decisive. This simple economic relation
expresses itself in the mind of our Proudhonist as follows:
 “The house, once it has been built, serves as a perpetual legal
 title to a definite fraction of social labour although the real
 value of the house has already long ago been more than paid out in
 the form of rent to the owner. Thus it comes about that a house
 that, for instance, was built fifty years ago, during this period
 covers the original cost two, three, five, ten and more times over
 in its rent yield.” 

Here we have at once the whole Proudhon. Firstly, it is forgotten that
the rent must not only pay the interests on the building costs, but must
also cover repairs and the average sum of bad debts, unpaid rents, as
well as the occasional periods when the house is untenanted, and finally
pay off in annual sums the building capital which has been invested in
a house which is perishable and which in time becomes uninhabitable and
worthless. Secondly, it is forgotten that the rent must also pay interest
on the increased value of the land upon which the building is erected and
that therefore a part of it consists of ground rent. Our Proudhonist immediately
declares, it is true, that this increase of value does not equitably belong
to the landowner, since it comes about without his co-operation, but to
society as a whole. However, he overlooks the fact that with this he is
in reality demanding the abolition of landed property, a point which would
lead us too far if we went into it here. And finally he overlooks the
fact that the whole transaction is not one of buying the house from its
owner, but of buying its use for a certain time. Proudhon, who never bothered
himself about the real and actual conditions under which any economic phenomenon
occurs, is naturally also unable to explain how the original cost price
of a house is paid back ten times over in the course of fifty years in
the form of rent. Instead of examining and establishing this not at all
difficult question economically, and discovering whether it is really in
contradiction to economic laws, and if so how, Proudhon rescues himself
by a bold leap from economics into legal talk: “The house, once it has
been built, serves as a perpetual legal title” to a certain annual payment.
How this comes about, how the house becomes a legal title, on this Proudhon
is silent. And yet – that is just what he should have explained. Had he
examined it, he would have found that not all the legal titles in the world,
no matter how perpetual, could give a house the power of obtaining its
cost price back ten times over in the course of fifty years in the form
of rent, but that only economic conditions (which may have social recognition
in the form of legal titles) can accomplish this. And with this he would
again be as far as at the start.
The whole Proudhonist teaching rests on this saving leap from
economic reality into legal phraseology. Every time our good Proudhon loses
the economic hang of things – and this happens to him with every serious
problem – he takes refuge in the sphere of law and appeals to eternal
justice.
 “Proudhon begins by taking his ideal of justice, of ‘justice
 eternelle,’ from the juridical relations that correspond to the
 production of commodities: thereby, it may be noted, he proves, to
 the consolation of all good citizens, that the production of
 commodities is a form of production as everlasting as justice.
 Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of
 commodities, and the actual legal system corresponding thereto, in
 accordance with this ideal. What opinion should we have of a
 chemist, who, instead of studying the actual laws of the molecular
 changes in the composition and decomposition of matter, and on
 that foundation solving definite problems, claimed to regulate the
 composition and decomposition of matter by means of the ‘eternal
 ideas,’ of ‘naturalite and affinite’? Do we really know any more
 about ‘usury,’ when we say it contradicts ‘justice kernel,’
 ‘equite eternelle,’ ‘mutualite eternelle,’ and other ‘verites
 eternelles’ than the fathers of the church did when they sad it
 was incompatible with ‘grace eternelle,’ ‘foi eternelle,’ and ‘la
 volonte eternelle de Dieu’?” [Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, Kerr edition,
 footnote, pp. 96-97. - Ed.]

Our Proudhonist does not fare any better than his lord and master:
 “The rent agreement is one of the thousand exchanges which are as
 necessary in the life of modern society as the circulation of the
 blood in the bodies of animals. Naturally, it would be in the
 interests of this society if all these exchanges were pervaded by
 a conception of justice, that is to say, if they took place always
 according to the strict demands of justice. In a word, the
 economic life of society must, as Proudhon says, raise itself to
 the heights of economic justice. In reality, as we know, exactly
 the opposite takes place.” 

Is it credible that, five years after Marx had characterised Proudhonism
so summarily and convincingly precisely from this decisive angle, it should
be possible to print such confused stuff in the German language. What does
this rigmarole mean? Nothing more than that the practical effects of the
economic laws which govern present-day society run contrary to the author’s
sense of justice and that he cherishes the pious wish that the affair might
be so arranged that this would then no longer be the case. — Yes, but if
toads had tails they would no longer be toads! And is then the capitalist
mode of production not “pervaded by a conception of justice,” namely, that
of its own right to exploit the workers? And if the author tells us that
that is not his idea of justice, are we one step further?
But let us go back to the housing question. Our Proudhonist now
gives his “conception of justice” free rein and treats us to the following
moving declamation:
 “We do not hesitate to assert that there is no more terrible
 mockery of the whole culture of our lauded century than the fact
 that in the big cities 90 per cent and more of the population have
 no place that they can call their own. The real key point of moral
 and family existence, hearth and home, is being swept away by the
 social whirlpool.... In this respect we are far below the savages.
 The troglodyte has his cave, the Australian aborigine has his clay
 hut, the Indian has his own hearth – the modern proletarian is
 practically suspended in mid air,” etc.

In this jeremiad we have Proudhonism in its whole reactionary form. In
order to create the modern revolutionary class of the proletariat it was
absolutely necessary to cut the umbilical cord which still bound the worker
of the past to the land. The hand weaver who had his little house, garden
and field along with his loom, was a quiet, contented man “in all godliness
and respectability” despite all misery and despite all political pressure;
he doffed his cap to the rich, to the priests and to the officials of the
state; and inwardly was altogether a slave. It is precisely modern large-scale
industry, which has turned the worker, formerly chained to the land, into
a completely propertyless proletarian, liberated from all traditional fetters
and free as a [jail-]bird; it is precisely this economic revolution which has
created the sole conditions under which the exploitation of the working
class in its final form, in the capitalist mode of production, can be overthrown.
And now comes this tearful Proudhonist and bewails the driving of the workers
from hearth and home as though it were a great retrogression instead of
being the very first condition for their intellectual emancipation.
Twenty-seven years ago I described in The Condition of the Working
Class in England the main features of just this process of driving the
workers from hearth and home as it took place in the eighteenth century
in England. The infamies of which the landowners and factory owners were
guilty in so doing, and the deleterious effects, material and moral, which
this expulsion inevitably had on the workers concerned in the first place,
are there also described as they deserve. But could it enter my head to
regard this, which was in the circumstances an absolutely necessary historical
process of development, as a retrogression “below the savages”? Impossible!
The English proletarian of 1872 is on an infinitely higher level than the
rural weaver of 1772 with his “hearth and home.” Will the troglodyte with
his cave, the Australian aborigine with his clay hut, and the Indian with
his hearth ever accomplish a June insurrection and a Paris Commune?
That the situation of the workers has in general become materially
worse since the introduction of capitalist production on a large scale
is doubted only by the bourgeoisie. But should therefore look backward
longingly to the (likewise very meager) flesh-pots of Egypt, to rural small-scale
industry, which produced only servile souls, or to “the savages”? On the
contrary.
Only the proletariat created by modern large-scale industry, liberated
from all inherited fetters, including those which chained it to the land,
and driven in herds into the big towns, is in a position to accomplish
the great social transformation which will put an end to all class exploitation
and all class rule. The old rural hand weavers with hearth and home would
never have been able to do it; they would never have been able to conceive
such an idea, much less able to desire to carry it out.
For Proudhon, on the other hand, the whole industrial revolution
of the last hundred years, the introduction of steam power and large-scale
factory production which substituted machinery for hand labour and increased
the productivity of labour a thousandfold, is a highly repugnant occurrence,
something which really ought never to have taken place. The petty-bourgeois
Proudhon demands a world in which each person turns out a separate and
independent product that is immediately consumable and exchangeable in
the market. Then, as long as each person only receives back the full value
of his labour in the form of another product, “eternal justice” is satisfied
and the best possible world created. But this best possible world of Proudhon
has already been nipped in the bud and trodden underfoot by the advance
of industrial development which has long ago destroyed individual labour
in all the big branches of industries and which is destroying it daily
more and more in the smaller and smallest branches which has set social
labour supported by machinery and the harnessed forces of nature in its
place, and whose finished product immediately exchangeable or consumable,
is the joint work of many individuals through whose hands it has to pass.
And it is precisely this industrial revolution which has raised the productive
power of human labour to such a high level that – for the first time in
the history of humanity – the possibility exists, given a rational division
of labour among all, to produce not only enough for the plentiful consumption
of all members of society and for an abundant reserve fund, but also to
leave each individual sufficient leisure so that what is really worth preserving
in historically inherited culture – science, art, human relations is not
only preserved, but converted from a monopoly of the ruling class into
the common property of the whole of society, and further developed. And
here is the decisive point: as soon as the productive power of human labour
has developed to this height, every excuse disappears for the existence
of a ruling class. Was not the final reason with which class differences
were defended always: there must be a class which need not plague itself
with the production of its daily subsistence, in order that it may have
time to look after the intellectual work of society? This talk, which up
to now had its great historical justification, has been cut off at the
root once and for all by the industrial revolution of the last hundred
years. The existence of a ruling class is becoming daily more and more
a hindrance to the development of industrial productive power, and equally
so to science, art and especially cultural human relations. There never
were greater boors than our modern bourgeois.
But all this is nothing to friend Proudhon. He wants “eternal
justice” and nothing else. Each shall receive in exchange for his product
the full proceeds of his labour, the full value of his labour. But to reckon
that out in a product of modern industry is a complicated matter. For modern
industry obscures the particular share of the individual in the total product,
which in the old individual handicraft was obviously represented by the
finished product. Further, modern industry abolishes more and more the
individual exchange on which Proudhon’s whole system is built up, namely
direct exchange between two producers, each of whom takes the product of
the other in order to consume it. Consequently a reactionary character
runs throughout the whole of Proudhonism; an aversion to the industrial
revolution, and the desire, sometimes overtly, sometimes covertly expressed,
to drive the whole of modern industry out of the temple, steam engines,
mechanical looms and the rest of the swindle, and to return to the old,
respectable hand labour. That we would then lose nine hundred and ninety-nine
thousandths of our productive power, that the whole of humanity would be
condemned to the worst possible labour slavery, that starvation would become
the general rule – what does all that matter if only we succeed in organising
exchange in such a fashion that each receives “the full proceeds of his
labour,” and that “eternal justice” is realized? Fiat justitia, pereat
mundus!
Justice must prevail though the whole world perish!
And the world would perish in this Proudhonist counter-revolution
if it were at all possible to carry it out.
It is, moreover, self-evident that, with social production conditioned
by modern large-scale industry, it is possible to assure each person “the
full proceeds of his labour,” so far as this phrase has any meaning at
all. And it has a meaning only if it is extended to mean not that each
individual worker becomes the possessor of “the full proceeds of his
labour,” but that the whole of society, consisting entirely of workers,
becomes the possessor of the total proceeds of its labour, which it partly
distributes among its members for consumption, partly uses for replacing
and increasing the means of production, and partly stores up as a reserve
fund for production and consumption.

After what has been said above, we already know in advance how our Proudhonist
will solve the great housing question. On the one hand, we have the demand
that each worker own his own home in order that we may not remain “below
the savages.” On the other hand, we have the assurance that the two, three,
five or tenfold repayment of the original cost price of a house in the
form of rent, as it actually takes place, is based on a “legal title” and
that this legal title is in contradiction to “eternal justice.” The solution
is simple: we abolish the legal title and declare, in virtue of eternal
justice, the rent paid to be a payment on account of the cost of the dwelling
itself. If one has so arranged on premises that they already contain the
conclusion in them, then of course it demands no greater skill than any
charlatan possesses to produce the already prepared result from the bag
and to point to unshakable logic whose result it is.
And so it happens here. The abolition of rented dwellings proclaimed
as an necessity, and indeed in the form that the demand is put forward
for the conversion of every tenant into the owner of his own dwelling.
How are we to do that? Very simply:
 “Rented dwellings will be redeemed.... The previous house owner
 will be paid the value of Ws house to the last farthing. Rent,
 instead of being as previously the tribute which the tenant must
 pay to the perpetual title of capital, will be, from the day when
 the redemption of rented dwellings is proclaimed, the exactly
 fixed sum paid by the tenant to provide the annual installment for
 the payment of the dwelling which has passed into the possession
 of the tenant.... Society... transforms itself in this way into a
 totality of independent and free owners of dwellings.” 

The Proudhonist finds it a crime against eternal justice that the house
owner can without working obtain ground rent and interest out of the capital
he has invested in the house. He decrees that this must cease, that capital
invested in houses shall produce no interest, and so far as it represents
purchased landed property, no ground rent either. Now we have seen that
hereby the capitalist mode of production, the basis of present-day society,
is in no way affected. The pivot on which the exploitation of the worker
turns is the sale of labour power to the capitalist and the use which the
capitalist makes of this transaction in that he compels the worker to produce
far more than the paid value of the labour power amounts to. It is this
transaction between capitalist and worker which produces all the surplus
value which is afterwards divided in the form of ground rent, commercial
profit, interest on capital, taxes, etc., among the various sub-species
of capitalists and their servants. And now our Proudhonist comes along
and believes that if we were to forbid one single sub-species of capitalists,
and at that of such capitalists who purchase no labour power directly and
therefore also cause no surplus value to be produced, to receive profit
or interest, it would be a step forward! The mass of unpaid labour taken
from the working class would remain exactly the same even if house owners
were to be deprived tomorrow of the possibility of receiving ground rent
and interest. However, this does not prevent our Proudhonist from declaring:

“The abolition of rent dwellings is thus one of the most fruitful and magnificent
efforts which has ever sprung from the womb of the revolutionary idea and
it must become one of the primary demands of Social-Democracy.”

This is exactly the type of market cry of the master Proudhon himself, whose cackling
was always in inverse ratio to the size of the eggs laid.
And now imagine the fine state of things if each worker, petty
bourgeois and bourgeois were compelled by paying annual installments to
become first part owner and then full owner of his dwelling! In the industrial
districts in England, where there is large-scale industry but small workers’
houses and each married worker occupies a little house of his own, there
might possibly be some sense in it. But the small-scale industry in Paris
and in most of the big towns on the continent is accompanied by large houses
in each of which ten, twenty or thirty families live together. On the day
of the world-delivering decree, when the redemption of rent dwellings is
proclaimed, Peter is working in an engineering works in Berlin. A year
later he is owner of, if you like, the fifteenth part of his dwelling consisting
of a little room on the fifth floor of a house somewhere in the neighborhood
of Hamburger Tor. He then loses his work and soon finds himself in a similar
dwelling on the third floor of a house in the Pothof in Hanover with a
wonderful view on to the courtyard. After five months’ stay there he has
just acquired 1/36 of this property when a strike sends
him to Munich and compels him by a stay of eleven months to take on himself
ownership in exactly 11/180 of a rather gloomy
property on the street level behind the Ober-Angergasse. Further removals
such as nowadays so often occur to workers saddle him further with 7/360 of a no less desirable residence in St. Gallen, 23/180 of another one in Leeds, and 347/56223,
to reckon it out exactly in order that “eternal justice” may have nothing
to complain about, of a third dwelling in Seraing. And now what is the
use for our Peter of all these shares in dwellings? Who is to give him
the real value of these shares? Where is he to find the owner or owners
of the remaining shares in his various one-time dwellings? And what exactly
are the property relations of any big house whose floors hold, let us say,
twenty dwellings and which, when the redemption period has elapsed and
rented dwellings are abolished, belongs perhaps to three hundred part owners
who are scattered in all quarters of the globe. Our Proudhonist will answer
that by that time the Proudhonist exchange bank will exist and will pay
to anyone at any time the full labour proceeds for any labour product,
and will therefore pay out also the full value of a share in a dwelling.
But in the first place we are not at all concerned here with the Proudhonist
exchange bank since it is nowhere even mentioned in the articles on the
housing question, and secondly it rests on the peculiar error that if someone
wants to sell a commodity he will necessarily also find a buyer for its
full value and thirdly it has already gone bankrupt in England more than
once under the name of Labour Exchange Bazaar, before Proudhon invented
it.
The whole conception that the worker should buy his dwelling rests
in its turn on the reactionary basic outlook of Proudhonism, already emphasized,
according to which the conditions created by modern large-scale industry
are diseased excrescences, and that society must be led violently, i.e.,
against the trend which it has been following for a hundred years, to a
condition in which the old stable handicraft of the individual is the rule,
which as a whole is nothing but the idealized restoration of small-scale
enterprise, which has been ruined and is still being ruined. If the workers
are only flung back into these stable conditions, if the “social whirlpool” 
has been happily abolished, then the worker naturally could also again
make use of property in “hearth and home,” and the above redemption theory
appears less ridiculous. Proudhon only forgets that in order to accomplish
all this he must first of all put back the clock of world history by a
hundred years, and that thereby he would make the present-day workers into
just such narrow-minded, crawling, sneaking slaves as their great-grandfathers
were.
As far, however, as this Proudhonist solution of the housing question
contains any rational and practically applicable content it is already
being carried out today, but this realization does not spring from “the
womb of the revolutionary idea,” but from the big bourgeois himself. Let
us listen to an excellent Spanish newspaper, La Emancipacion, of Madrid
of March 16, 1872:
 “There is still another means of solving the housing question, the
 way proposed by Proudhon, which dazzles at first glance, but on
 closer examination reveals its utter impotence. Proudhon proposed
 that the tenants should be converted into purchasers by
 installments, so that the rent paid annually would be reckoned as
 an installment on the payment of the value of the dwelling, and,
 after a certain time, the tenant would become the owner of the
 dwelling. This means, which Proudhon considered very
 revolutionary, is being put into operation in all countries by
 companies of speculators who thus secure double and treble payment
 of the value of the houses by raising the rents. M. Dollfus and
 other big manufacturers in Northeastern France have carried out
 this system not only in order to make money, but in addition, with
 a political idea at the back of their minds.

 “The cleverest leaders of the ruling class have always directed their efforts
towards increasing the number of small property owners in order to build
an army for themselves against the proletariat. The bourgeois revolutions
of the last century divided up the big estates of the nobility and the
church into small properties, just as the Spanish republicans propose to
do today with the still existing large estates, and created thereby a class
of small landowners which has since become the most reactionary element
in society and a permanent hindrance to the revolutionary movement of the
urban proletariat. Napoleon III aimed at creating a similar class in the
towns by reducing the size of the individual bonds of the public debt,
and M. Dollfus and his colleagues sought to stifle all revolutionary spirit
in their workers by selling them small dwellings to be paid for in annual
installments, and at the same time to chain the workers by this property
to the factory in which they work. Thus we see that the Proudhon plan has
not merely failed to bring the working class any relief, it has even turned
directly against it.” *
[How this solution of the housing question by means of chaining
worker to his own “home” is arising spontaneously in the neighborhood of
big or growing American towns can be seen from the following passage of
a letter by Eleanor Marx-Aveling, Indianapolis, November 28, 1886: “In,
or rather near Kansas City we saw some miserable little wooden huts, containing
about three rooms each, still in the wilds; the land cost 600 dollars and
was just enough to put the little house on it; the latter cost a further
600 dollars, that is together about 4,800 marks [£240] for a miserable
little thing, an hour away from the town, in a muddy desert.” In this way
the workers must shoulder heavy mortgage debts in order to obtain even
these houses and thus they become completely the slaves of their employers;
they are bound to their houses, they cannot go away, and they are compelled
to put up with whatever working conditions are offered them. — Note by F.
Engels to the second German edition.] 

How is the housing question to be solved then? 
In present-day society just as any other social question is
solved: by the gradual economic adjustment of supply and demand, a solution
which ever reproduces the question itself anew and therefore is no solution.
How a social revolution would solve this question depends not only on the
circumstances which would exist in each case, but is also connected with
still more far-reaching questions, among which one of the most fundamental
is the abolition of the antithesis between town and country. As it is not
our task to create utopian systems for the arrangement of the future society,
it would be more than idle to go into the question here. But one thing
is certain: there are already in existence sufficient buildings for dwellings
in the big towns to remedy immediately any real “housing shortage,” given
rational utilization of them. This can naturally only take place by the
expropriation of the present owners and by quartering in their houses the
homeless or those workers excessively overcrowded in their former houses.
Immediately the proletariat has conquered political power such a measure
dictated in the public interests will be just as easy to carry out as other
expropriations and billetings are by the existing state.

However, our Proudhonist is not satisfied with his previous achievements
in the housing question. He must raise the question from the level ground
into the sphere of the higher socialism in order that it may prove there
also an essential “fractional part of the social question:” 

 “Let us now assume that the productivity of capital is really
 taken by the horns, as it must be sooner or later, for instance by
 a transitional law which fixes the interest on all capitals at one
 per cent, but mark you, with the tendency to make even this rate
 of interest approximate more and more to the zero point so that
 finally nothing more would be paid than the labour necessary to
 turn over the capital. Like all other products, houses and
 dwellings are naturally also included within the framework of this
 law.... The owner himself would be the first one to agree to a
 sale because otherwise his house would remain unused and the
 capital invested in it would be simply useless.” 

This passage contains one of the chief articles of faith of the Proudhonist
catechism and offers a striking example of the confusion prevailing in
it.
The “productivity of capital” is an absurdity that Proudhonism
takes over uncritically from the bourgeois economists. The bourgeois economists,
it is true, also begin with the statement that labour is the source of
all wealth and the measure of value of all commodities; but they also have
to explain how it comes about that the capitalist who advances capital
for an industrial or handicraft business receives back at the end of it
not only the capital which he advanced, but also a profit over and above
it. In consequence they are compelled to entangle themselves in all sorts
of contradictions and also to ascribe to capital a certain productivity.
Nothing proves more clearly how deeply Proudhon remains entangled in the
bourgeois ideology than the fact that he has taken over this phrase about
the productivity of capital. We have already seen at the beginning that
the so-called “productivity of capital” is nothing but the quality attached
to it (under present-day social relations, without which it would not be
capital at all) of being able to appropriate the unpaid labour of wage
workers.
However, Proudhon differs from the bourgeois economists in that
he does not approve of this “productivity of capital,” but, on the contrary,
finds it a violation of “eternal justice.” It is this which prevents the
worker from receiving the full proceeds of his labour. It must therefore
be abolished. But how? By lowering the rate of interest by compulsory legislation
and finally by reducing it to zero. And then, according to our Proudhonist,
capital would cease to be productive.
The interest on loaned money capital is only a part of profit;
profit, whether on industrial or commercial capital, is only a part of
the surplus value taken by the capitalist class from the working class
in the form of unpaid labour. The economic laws which govern the rate of
interest are as independent of those which govern the rate of surplus value
as could possibly be the case between laws of one and the same social form.
But as far as the distribution of this surplus value among the individual
capitalists is concerned, it is clear that for those industrialists and
business men who have large quantities of capital in their businesses advanced
by other capitalists, the rate of their profit must rise – all other things
being equal – to the same extent as the rate of interest falls. The reduction
and final abolition of interest would therefore by no means really take
the so-called “productivity of capital” “by the horns”; it would do no
more than re-arrange the distribution among the individual capitalists
of the unpaid surplus value taken from the working class; it would not,
therefore, give an advantage to the worker as against the industrial capitalist,
but to the industrial capitalist as against the rentier.
Proudhon, from his legal standpoint, explains interest, as he
does all economic facts, not by the conditions of social production, but
by the state laws in which these conditions receive their general expression.
From this point of view, which lacks any inkling of the inter-relation
between the state laws and the conditions of production in society, these
state laws necessarily appear as purely arbitrary orders which at any moment
could be replaced just as well by their exact opposite. Nothing is therefore
easier for Proudhon than to issue a decree – as soon as he has the power
to do so – reducing the rate of interest to one per cent. And if all the
other social conditions remained as they were, then indeed this Proudhonist
decree would exist on paper only. The rate of interest will continue to
be governed by the economic laws to which it is subject today, despite
all decrees. Persons possessing credit will continue to borrow money at
two, three, four and more per cent, according to circumstances, just as
much as before, and the only difference will be that the financiers will
be very careful to advance money only to persons from whom no subsequent
court proceedings might be expected. Moreover this great plan to deprive
capital of its “productivity” is as old as the hills; it is as old as-the
usury laws which aimed at nothing else but limiting the rate of interest,
and which have since been abolished everywhere because in practice they
were continually broken or circumvented, and the state was compelled to
admit its impotence against the laws of social production. And the reintroduction
of these mediaeval and unworkable laws is now “to take the productivity
of capital by the horns?” One sees that the closer Proudhonism is examined
the more reactionary it appears.
When, now, in this fashion the rate of interest has been reduced
to zero, and interest on capital therefore abolished, then “nothing more
would be paid than the labour necessary to turn over the capital.” This
means that the abolition of interest is equivalent to the abolition of
profit and even of surplus value. But if it were possible really to abolish
interest by decree what would be the consequence? The class of rentiers
would no longer have any inducement to loan out their capital in the form
of advances, but would invest it industrially themselves or in joint-stock
companies on their own account. The mass of surplus value extracted from
the working class by the capitalist class would remain the same; only its
distribution would be altered, and even that not much.
In fact, our Proudhonist fails to see that, even now, no more
is paid on the average in commodity purchase in bourgeois society than
 “the labour necessary to turn over the capital” (it should read, necessary
for the production of the commodity in question). Labour is the measure
of value of all commodities, and in present-day society – apart from fluctuations
of the market – it is absolutely impossible that on a total average more
should be paid for commodities than the labour necessary for their production.
No, no, my dear Proudhonist, the difficulty lies elsewhere: it is contained
in the fact that “the labour necessary to turn over the capital” (to use
your confused terminology) is not fully paid! How this comes about you
can look up in Marx (Capital pp. 128-60).
But that is not enough. If interest on capital is abolished, house
rent is also abolished with it; for, “like all other products, houses and
dwellings are naturally also included within the framework of this law.” 
This is quite in the spirit of the old Major who summoned one of the new
recruits and declared:
 “I say, I hear you are a doctor; you might report from time to
time at my quarters; when one has a wife and seven children there is always
something to patch up.” 
Recruit: “Excuse me, Major, but I am a doctor of philosophy.” 
Major: “That’s all the same to me; one sawbones is the same as
another.” 
Our Proudhonist behaves just like this: house rent or interest
on capital, it is all the same to him. Interest is interest; sawbones is
sawbones.
We have seen above that the rent price commonly called house rent
is composed as follows:

a part which is ground rent;
a part which is interest on the building capital, including the profit
of the builder;
a part which is for costs of repairs and insurance;
a part which has to amortize the building capital inclusive of profit in
annual deductions according to the rate at which the house gradually depreciates.


And now it must have become clear even to the blindest that

“the owner himself would be the first one to agree to a sale because otherwise his
house would remain unused and the capital invested in it would be simply
useless.”
Of course. If the interest on loaned capital is abolished then
no house owner can obtain a penny piece in rent for his house, simply because
house rent is spoken of as interest and because the rent contains a part
which is really interest on capital. Sawbones is sawbones. Though it was
only possible to make the usury laws relating to ordinary interest on capital
ineffective by circumventing them, yet they never touched even remotely
the rate of house rent. It was reserved for Proudhon to imagine that his
new usury law would without more ado regulate and gradually abolish not
only simple interest on capital, but also the complicated house rents of
dwellings. Why then the “simply useless” house should be purchased for
good money from the house owner, and how it is that under such circumstances
the house owner would not also pay money himself to get rid of this “simply
useless” house in order to save himself the cost of repairs, we are not
told.
After this triumphant achievement in the sphere of higher socialism
(Master Proudhon called it super-socialism) our Proudhonist considers himself
justified in flying still higher:
“All that has now to be done is to draw
some conclusions in order to cast complete light from all sides on our
so important subject.”
And what are these conclusions? They are things
which follow as little from what has been said before, as that dwelling
houses would become valueless on the abolition of interest. Deprived of
the pompous and solemn phraseology of their author, they mean nothing more
than that, in order to facilitate the business of redemption of rented
dwellings, what is desirable is: 1. exact statistics on the subject; 2.
a good sanitary inspection force; and 3. co-operatives of building workers
to undertake the building of new houses. All these things are certainly
very fine and good, but, despite all the clothing of quack phrases, they
by no means cast “complete light” into the obscurity of Proudhonist mental
confusion.
One who has achieved so much feels he has the right to deliver
the following serious exhortation to the German workers:
 “In our opinion, such and similar questions are well worth the
 attention of Social-Democracy.... Let them therefore, as here in
 connection with the housing question, seek to become clear on
 other and equally important questions such as credit, state debts,
 private debts, taxation,” etc.

Thus, our Proudhonist here faces us with the prospect of a whole series
of articles on “similar questions,” and if he deals with them all as thoroughly
as the present “so important subject,” then the Volksstaat will have copy
enough for a year. But we are in a position to anticipate: – it all amounts
to what has already been said: interest on capital is to be abolished and
with that the interest on public and private debts disappears, credit will
be gratis, etc. The same magic formula is applied to every subject and
in each separate case the same astonishing result is obtained with inexorable
logic, namely, that when interest on capital has been abolished no more
interest will have to be paid on borrowed money.
They are fine questions, by the way with which our Proudhonist
threatens us: Credit! What credit does the worker need apart from that
from week to week, or the credit he obtains from the pawnshop? Whether
he gets this credit free or at interest, even at the usurious interests
of the pawnshop, how much difference does that make to him? And if he did,
generally speaking, obtain some advantage from it, that is to say, if the
costs of production of labour power were reduced, would not the price of
labour power necessarily fall also? But for the bourgeois, and in particular
for the petty bourgeois, credit is an important matter and it would therefore
be a very fine thing for them, and in particular for the petty bourgeois,
if credit could be obtained at any time and, in addition, without payment
of interest. “State debts!” ‘The working class knows very well that it
did not make the state debt, and when it comes to power it will leave the
payment of it to those who did make it. “Private debts!” – see credit.
 “Taxes!” Matters that interest the bourgeoisie very much, but the worker
only very little. What the worker pays in taxes goes in the long run into
the costs of production of labour power and must therefore be compensated
for by the capitalist. All these things which are held up to us here as
highly important questions for the working class are in reality of essential
interest only to the bourgeoisie, and in particular to the petty bourgeoisie,
and, despite Proudhon, we assert that the working class is not called upon
to look after the interests of these classes.
Our Proudhonist has not a word to say about the great question
which really concerns the workers, that of the relation between capitalist
and wage worker, the question of how it comes about that the capitalist
can enrich himself from the labour of his workers. His lord and master
it is true, did occupy himself with it, but introduced absolutely no clearness
into it, and even in his latest writings he has got essentially no farther
than he was in his Philosophie de la Misère [Philosophy of Poverty] which
Marx disposed of so conclusively in all its emptiness in 1847.
It was bad enough that for twenty-five years the workers of the
Latin countries had almost no other socialist mental nourishment than the
writings of this “Socialist of the Second Empire,” and it would be a double
misfortune if Germany were now to be inundated with the Proudhonist theory.
However, there need be no fear of this. The theoretical standpoint of the
German workers is fifty years ahead of that of Proudhonism, and it will
be sufficient to make an example of it in this one question of housing
in order to save any further trouble in this respect.
 


Contents |
Part II |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Part Two. How the Bourgeoisie Solves the Housing Question






The Housing Question




The Housing Question by Frederick Engels
Part two
How the Bourgeoisie Solves the Housing Question
In the section on the Proudhonist solution of the
housing question it was shown how greatly the petty bourgeoisie is directly
interested in this question. However, the big bourgeoisie also is very
much interested in it, if indirectly. Modern natural science has proved
that the so-called “poor districts” in which the workers are crowded together
are the breeding places of all those epidemics which from time to time
afflict our towns. Cholera, typhus, typhoid fever, small-pox and other
ravaging diseases spread their germs in the pestilential air and the poisoned
water of these working-class quarters. In these districts, the germs hardly
ever die out completely, and as soon as circumstances permit it they develop
into epidemics and then spread beyond their breeding places also into the
more airy and healthy parts of the town inhabited by the capitalists. Capitalist
rule cannot allow itself the pleasure of creating epidemic diseases among
the working class with impunity; the consequences fall back on it and
the angel of death rages in its ranks as ruthlessly as in the ranks of
the workers.
As soon as this fact had been scientifically established the philanthropic
bourgeois began to compete with one another in noble efforts on behalf
of the health of their workers. Societies were founded, books were written,
proposals drawn up, laws debated and passed, in order to close the sources
of the ever-recurring epidemics. The housing conditions of the workers
were examined and attempts were made to remedy the most crying evils. In
England particularly, where the greatest number of large towns existed
and where the bourgeoisie itself was most immediately threatened, great
activity began. Government commissions were appointed to inquire into the
hygienic conditions of the working classes; their reports, honorably distinguished
from all continental sources by their accuracy, completeness and impartiality,
provided the basis for new, more or less, radically effective, laws. Incomplete
as these laws are, they are still infinitely ahead of everything that has
been done in this direction up to the present on the continent. Nevertheless,
the capitalist order of society reproduces again and again the evils which
are to be remedied with such inevitable necessity that even in England
the remedying of them has hardly advanced a single step.
As usual, Germany needed a much longer time before the chronic
sources of infection existing there also reached the acute degree necessary
to arouse the indolent big bourgeoisie. But he who goes slowly goes surely,
and so among us also there finally arose a bourgeois literature on public
health and the housing question, a watery extract of its foreign, and in
particular its English, predecessors, to which it was sought to give a
deceptive semblance of a higher conception by means of fine-sounding and
solemn phrases. Die Wohnungszustande der arbeitenden Klassen und ihre
Reform [The Housing Conditions of the Working Classes and their Reform]
by Dr. Emil Sax, Vienna, 1869. belongs to this literature.
I have selected this book in order to present the bourgeois treatment
of the housing question only because it makes the attempt to summarize
as far as possible the bourgeois literature on the subject. And a fine
literature it is which serves our author as his “sources!” Of the English
parliamentary reports, the real main sources, only three of the oldest
are mentioned by name; the whole book proves that its author has never
glanced at even a single one of them. On the other hand, a whole series
of banal, bourgeois, well-meaning philistine and hypocritical philanthropic
writings are enumerated: Ducpétiaux, Roberts, Hole, Huber, the proceeding
of the English congresses on social science (or rather social bosh), the
journal of the Association for the Welfare of the Laboring Classes in Prussia,
the official Austrian report on the World Exhibition in Paris, the official
Bonapartist reports on the same subject, the Illustrated London News, Uber
Land und Meer [On Land and Sea] and finally a “recognized authority,” a
man of “acute practical perception,” of “convincing impressiveness of speech,” 
namely – Julius Faucher! All that is missing in this list of sources is
the Gartenlaube, Klepdderadatsch and the Fusilier Kutschke. [Pseudonym
of a German patriotic poet. -Ed.]
In order that no misunderstanding may arise concerning the standpoint
of Dr. Sax, he declares on page 22:
 “By social economy we mean political economy in its application to
 social questions; or, to put it more precisely, the totality of
 the ways and means which this science offers us for raising the
 so-called (!) propertyless classes to the level of the propertied
 classes, on the basis of its ‘iron’ laws within the framework of
 the order of society at present prevailing.” 

We shall not bother to deal with the confused idea that “economics” or
 “Political economy” deals at all with any other than “social” questions.
Let us get down to the main point immediately. Dr. Sax demands that the
 “iron laws” of bourgeois economics, the “framework of the order of society
at present prevailing,” in other words, that the capitalist mode of production
must continue to exist unchanged, but nevertheless “the so-called propertyless
classes” are to be raised “to the level of the propertied classes.” However,
it is an unavoidable preliminary condition of the capitalist mode of production
that a really, and not a so-called, propertyless class, should exist, a
class which has nothing to sell but its labor power and which is therefore
compelled to sell its labor power to the industrial capitalists. The task
of the new science of social economy invented by Dr. Sax is therefore to
find ways and means, in a state of society founded on the antagonism of
capitalists, owners of all raw materials, instruments of production and
foodstuffs, on the one hand, and of propertyless wage workers, who own
only their labor power and nothing else, on the other hand, by which, inside
this social order, all wage workers can be turned into capitalists without
ceasing to be wage workers. Dr. Sax thinks he has solved this question.
Perhaps he would be so good as to show us how all the soldiers of the French
army, each of whom carries a marshal’s baton in his knapsack since the
days of the old Napoleon, can be turned into field marshals without at
the same time ceasing to be private soldiers? Or how it could be brought
about that all the forty million subjects of the German Empire could be
made into German kaisers.
It is the essence of bourgeois socialism to want to maintain the
basis of all the evils of present-day society and at the same time to want
to abolish the evils themselves. As already pointed out in The Communist
Manifesto, the bourgeois socialist “is desirous of redressing social grievances
in order to secure the continued existence of bourgeois society,” he wants
 “a bourgeoisie without a proletariat.” We have already seen that Dr. Sax
formulates the question in exactly the same fashion. The solution he finds
in the solution of the housing question. He is of the opinion that:
 “by improving the housing of the working classes it would be
 possible successfully to remedy the material and spiritual misery
 which has been described, and thereby – by a radical improvement
 of the housing conditions alone – to raise the greater part of
 these classes out of the morass of their often hardly human
 conditions of existence to the pure heights of material and
 spiritual well-being.” (Page 14.)

Incidentally, it is in the interests of the bourgeoisie to disguise the
fact of the existence of a proletariat created by the bourgeois production
relations and determining the continued existence of these production relations.
And, therefore, Dr. Sax tells us (page 21) that the expression working
classes is to be understood as including all “impecunious social classes,” 
 “and in general, people in a small way, such as handicraftsman, widows,
pensioners (!), subordinate officials, etc.,” as well as actual workers.
Bourgeois socialism extends its band to the petty-bourgeois variety.
Whence then comes the housing shortage? How did it arise? As a
good bourgeois, Dr. Sax is not supposed to know that it is a necessary
product of the bourgeois social order; that it cannot fail to be present
in a society in which the great masses of the workers are exclusively dependent
upon wages, that is to say, on the sum of foodstuffs necessary for their
existence and for the propagation of their kind; in which improvements
of the existing machinery continually throw masses of workers out of employment;
in which violent and regularly recurring industrial vacillations determine
on the one hand the existence of a large reserve army of unemployed workers,
and on the other hand drive large masses of the workers temporarily unemployed
onto the streets; in which the workers are crowded together in masses in
the big towns, at a quicker rate than dwellings come into existence for
them under existing conditions; in which, therefore, there must always
be tenants even for the most infamous pigsties; and in which finally the
house owner in his capacity as capitalist has not only the right, but,
in view of the competition, to a certain extent also the duty of ruthlessly
making as much out of his property in house rent as he possibly can. In
such a society the housing shortage is no accident; it is a necessary institution
and it can be abolished together with all its effects on health, etc.,
only if the whole social order from which it springs is fundamentally refashioned.
That, however, bourgeois socialism dare not know. It dare not explain the
housing shortage from the existing conditions. And therefore nothing remains
for it but to explain the housing shortage by means of moral phrases as
the result of the baseness of human beings, as the result of original sin,
so to speak.
 “And here we cannot fail to recognize – and in consequence we
 cannot deny” (daring conclusion!) – that the responsibility rests
 partly with the workers themselves, those who want dwellings, and
 partly, the much greater part it is true, with those who undertake
 to supply the need, or those who, although they have sufficient
 means, make no attempt to supply the need, viz., the propertied,
 higher social classes. The responsibility of these last consists
 in the fact that they do not make it their business to provide for
 a sufficient supply of good dwellings.” 

Just as Proudhon takes us from the sphere of economics into the sphere
of legal phrases so our bourgeois socialist takes us from the economic
sphere into the moral sphere. And nothing is more natural. Whoever declares
that the capitalist mode of production, the “iron laws” of present-day
bourgeois society, are inviolable, and yet at the same time would like
to abolish their unpleasant but necessary consequences, has no other resource
but to deliver moral sermons to the capitalists, moral sermons whose emotional
effects immediately evaporate under the influence of private interests
and, if necessary, of competition. These moral sermons are in effect exactly
the same as those of the hen at the edge of the pond in which she sees
the family of ducklings she has hatched out gaily swimming. Ducklings take
to the water although it is not dry land, and capitalists grab after profit
although it is heartless. “There is no room for sentiment in money matters,” 
was said already by old Hansemann, who knew more about it than Dr. Sax.
[Hansemann, David Justus (1790-1864), Prussian financier and leader of the Rhenish “progressive” bourgeoisie, was Finance Minister of Prussia from March to September 1848, and later head of the Bank of Prussia. He founded
the Diskonto-Gesellschaft. – Ed.]
 “Good dwellings are so expensive that it is absolutely impossible
 for the greater part of the workers to use them. Big capital...
 is shy of investing in houses for the working classes – and as a
 result these classes and their housing needs fall for the greater
 part into the hands of speculators.” 

Disgusting speculation – big capital naturally never speculates! But it
is not ill will, it is only ignorance which prevents big capital from speculating
in workers’ houses:
 “House owners do not know what a great and important role is
 played by a normal satisfaction of housing needs; they do not know
 what they are doing to the people when they give them, as a
 general rule, such irresponsibly bad and deleterious dwellings,
 and, finally, they do not know how they damage themselves
 thereby.” (Page 27.)

However, the ignorance of the capitalists must be supplemented by the ignorance
of the workers in order that the housing shortage may be created. After
Dr. Sax has admitted that:
 “The very lowest sections” of the workers “are obliged (!) to seek
 a night’s lodging wherever and however they can find it in order
 not to remain altogether without shelter and in this connection
 they are absolutely defenseless and helpless,” he tells us, “for
 it is a well-known fact how many among them (the workers) from
 carelessness, but chiefly from ignorance, deprive their bodies.
 One is almost inclined to say, with virtuosity, of the conditions
 of natural development and healthy existence, in that they have
 riot the faintest idea of rational hygiene and, in particular, of
 the enormous importance played by the dwelling in this hygiene.”  
 (Page 27.)

Here, however, the bourgeois donkey’s ears protrude. Whereas, so far as
the capitalists are concerned, their “guilt” disappears in ignorance, where
the workers are concerned ignorance is only the cause of their guilt. Listen:
 “Thus it comes (namely through ignorance) that if they can only
 save something on the rent they will move into dark, damp and
 inadequate dwellings, which are in short a mockery of all the
 demands of hygiene... that often several families together rent a
 single dwelling, indeed even a single room – all this in order to
 spend as little as possible for rent, while on the other hand they
 squander their income in a really sinful fashion on drink and all
 sorts of idle pleasures.” 

The money which the workers “waste on spirits and tobacco” (page 28), the
 “public-house life with all its regrettable consequences which drags the
workers again and again like a lead weight back into the mire” lies indeed
like a lead weight in Dr. Sax’s stomach. The fact that under existing circumstances
drunkenness among the workers is an inevitable product of their living
conditions, just as inevitable as typhus, crime, vermin, the bailiff and
other social ills, so inevitable in fact that the average figures of those
who succumb to chronic drunkenness can be calculated in advance, is again
something that Dr. Sax cannot allow himself to know. My old elementary
teacher used to say, by the way: “The common people go to the public houses
and the people of quality go to the clubs,” and as I have been in both
I am in a position to confirm it.
The whole talk about the “ignorance” of both parties amounts to
nothing but the old phrases about the harmony of interests of labor and
capital. If the capitalists knew their true interests, then they would
give the workers good houses and put them in a better position in general,
and if the workers understood their true interests they would not go on
strike, they would not go in for Social Democracy, they would not take
part in politics, but docilely follow their superiors, the capitalists.
Unfortunately, both sides find their real interests altogether elsewhere
than in the sermons of Dr. Sax and his numerous predecessors. The gospel
of harmony between labor and capital has been preached now for almost fifty
years, and bourgeois philanthropy has expended large sums of money to prove
this harmony of interests by building model institutions, and, as we shall
see later, we are today exactly where we were fifty years ago.
Our author now proceeds to the practical solution of the. question.
How little revolutionary Proudhon’s proposal to make the workers into the
owners of their dwellings was, can be seen from the fact that bourgeois
socialism even before him, tried to carry it out in practice and is still
trying to do so. Dr. Sax also declares that the housing question can be
completely solved only by transferring property in dwellings to the hands
of the workers. (Pages 58 and 59.) More than that. he falls into poetic
raptures at the idea and breaks out with the following flight of enthusiasm:
 “There is something peculiar about the longing in mankind to own
 land; it is an urge which not even the feverishly pulsating
 business life of the present day has been able to weaken. It is
 the unconscious appreciation of the significance of the economic
 achievement represented by landownership. With it the individual
 obtains a secure hold; he is rooted firmly in the earth, and every
 economy (!) has its most permanent basis in it. However, the
 blessings of landownership extend far beyond these material
 advantages. Whoever is fortunate enough to call a piece of land
 his own has reached the highest conceivable stage of economic
 independence; he has a terrain on which he can rule with sovereign
 power; he is his own master; he has a certain power and a secure
 guarantee in time of need; his self-confidence develops and with
 this his moral power. And from this comes the deep significance
 of property in the question before us.... The worker, today
 helplessly exposed to all the changing circumstances of economic
 life, and in constant dependence on his employer, would thereby be
 rescued to a certain extent from this precarious situation; he
 would become a capitalist and be safeguarded against the dangers
 of unemployment or incapacity to work, as a result of the real
 estate credit which would thereby be open to him. He would
 thereby be raised out of the ranks of the propertyless into the
 class of the property owners.” (Page 63.)

Dr. Sax seems to assume that man is essentially a peasant, otherwise he
would not ascribe to the workers of our big cities a longing for property
in land, a longing which no one else has discovered. For our workers in
the big cities freedom of movement is the first condition of their existence,
and landownership could only be a hindrance to them. Give them their own
houses, chain them once again to the soil and you break their power of
resistance to the wage cutting of the factory owners. The individual worker
might be able to sell his house on occasion, but during a big strike or
a general industrial crisis all the houses belonging to the affected workers
would have to come onto the market for sale and would therefore find no
purchasers or be sold off far below their cost price. And even if they
all found purchasers, the whole great solution of the housing question
of Dr. Sax would have come to nothing and he would have to start from the
beginning again. However, poets live in a world of fantasy, and so does
Dr. Sax, who imagines that a landowner has “reached the highest... stage
of economic independence,” that he has “a secure hold,” that he has “become
a capitalist and... safeguarded against the dangers of unemployment or
incapacity to work, as a result of the real estate credit which would thereby
be open to him,” etc. Dr. Sax should take a look at the French peasants
and at our own small peasants in the Rhineland; their houses and fields
are loaded down with mortgages, their harvests belong to their creditors
before they are brought in, and it is not they who rule with sovereign
power on their “terrain” but the usurer, the lawyer and the bailiff. That
certainly represents the highest conceivable stage of economic independence
– for the usurer! And in order that the workers may bring their little
houses as quickly as possible under the same sovereignty of the usurer,
our well-meaning Dr. Sax carefully points to the real estate credit which
they can make use of in times of unemployment or incapacity to work instead
of becoming a burden on the poor rate.
In any case, Dr. Sax has solved the question raised in the beginning:
the worker “becomes a capitalist” by acquiring his own little house.
Capital is the command over the unpaid labor of others. The house
of the worker can only become capital therefore if he rents it to a third
person and appropriates a part of the labor product of this third person
in the form of rent. By the fact that the worker lives in it himself the
house is prevented from becoming capital, just as a coat ceases to be capital
the moment I buy it from the tailor and put it on. The worker who owns
a little house to the value of a thousand talers is certainly no longer
a proletarian, but one must be Dr. Sax to call him a capitalist.
However, the capitalist character of our worker has still another
side. Let us assume that in a given industrial area it has become the
rule that each worker owns his own little house. In this case the working
class of that area lives rent free; expenses for rent no longer enter into
the value of its labor power. Every reduction in the cost of production
of labor power, that is to say, every permanent price reduction in the
worker’s necessities of life is equivalent “on the basis of the iron laws
of political economy” to a reduction in the value of labor power and will
therefore finally result in a corresponding fall in wages. Wages would
fall on an average corresponding to the average sum saved on rent, that
is, the worker would pay rent for his own house, but not, as formerly,
in money to the house owner, but in unpaid labor to the factory owner for
whom he works. In this way the savings of the worker invested in his little
house would certainly become capital to some extent, but not capital for
him, but for the capitalist employing him.
Dr. Sax is thus unable to succeed even on paper in turning his
worker into a capitalist.
Incidentally, what has been said above applies to all so-called
social reforms which aim at saving or cheapening the means of subsistence
of the worker. Either they become general and then they are followed by
a corresponding reduction of wages, or they remain quite isolated experiments,
and- then their very existence as isolated exceptions proves that their
realization on a general scale is incompatible with the existing capitalist
mode of production. Let us assume that in a certain area a general introduction
of consumers’ co-operatives succeeds in reducing the cost of foodstuffs
for the workers by 20 per cent; in the long run wages would fall in that
area by approximately 20 per cent, that is to say, in the same proportion
as the foodstuffs in question enter into the means of subsistence of the
workers. If the worker, for example, spends three-quarters of his weekly
wage on these foodstuffs, then wages would finally fall by three-quarters
of 20 = 15 per cent. In short, as soon as any such savings reform has become
general, the worker receives in the same proportion less wages, as his
savings permit him to live cheaper. Give every worker a saved, independent
income of 52 talers a year and his weekly wage must finally fall by one
taler. Therefore: the more he saves the less he will receive in wages.
He saves therefore not in his own interests, but in the interests of the
capitalist. Is anything else necessary in order “to stimulate in the most
powerful fashion the primary economic virtue, thrift?” (Page 64.)
For the rest, Herr Sax tells us immediately afterwards that the
workers are to become house owners not so much in their own interests as
in the interests of the capitalists:
 “However. not only the working class. but society as a whole has
 the greatest interest in seeing as many of its members as possible
 bound (!) to the land” (I should like to see Dr. Sax himself in
 this position.) “.... All the secret forces which set on fire the
 volcano called the social question which glows under our feet, the
 proletarian bitterness, the hatred... the dangerous confusion of
 ideas... must disappear like mist before the morning sun when...
 the workers themselves enter in this fashion into the ranks of the
 property owners.” (Page 65.)

In other words, Herr Sax hopes that by an alteration of their proletarian
status such as would be brought about by the acquisition of house property,
the workers would also lose their proletarian character and become once
again obedient toadies like their forefathers who were also house owners.
The Proudhonists should take that to heart.
Herr Sax believes he has thereby solved the social problem:
 “A juster distribution of goods, the riddle of the Sphinx which so
 many have already tried in vain to solve, does it not now lie
 before us as a tangible fact, has it not thereby been taken from
 the region of ideals and brought into the realm of reality? And
 if it is carried out is not thereby one of the highest aims
 achieved, one which even the socialists of the extremist tendency
 present as the culminating point of their theories?” (Page 66.)

It is really lucky that we have worked our way through as far as this,
because this shout of triumph is the culminating point of Herr Sax’s book,
and after that it gently descends from “the region of ideals” into insipid
reality, and when we have descended we shall find that nothing, nothing
at all, has changed in our absence.
Our leader causes us to take the first step downwards by informing
us that there are two systems of workers’ dwellings: the cottage system
in which each working-class family has its own little house and if possible
a little garden as well, as in England; and the barrack system of large
buildings containing numerous workers’ dwellings, as in Paris, Vienna,
etc. Between the two is the system usual in Northern Germany. Now it is
true that the cottage system is said to be the only correct one, and the
only one whereby the worker could acquire the ownership of his own house,
while further the barrack system has very great disadvantages with regard
to hygiene, morality and domestic peace – but unfortunately the cottage
system is not realizable just in the centres of the housing shortage, in
the big cities, on account of the high price of land, and one should therefore
be glad if houses were built containing from four to six dwellings instead
of big barracks, or at least the disadvantages of the big tenement system
made up for by various building refinements. (Pages 71-92.)
We have descended quite a long way already, have we not? The transformation
of the workers into capitalists, the solution of the social question, a
house of his own for each worker, all these things have been left behind,
up above in “the region of ideals.” All that remains for us to do is to
introduce the cottage system into the country areas and to make the workers’
barracks in the towns as tolerable as possible.
On its own admission, therefore, the bourgeois solution of the
housing question has come to grief-it has come to grief owing to the antithesis
of town and country. And with this we have arrived at the kernel of the
problem. The housing question can only be solved when society has been
sufficiently transformed for a start to be made towards abolishing the
antithesis between town and country, which has been brought to an extreme
point by present-day capitalist society. Far from being able to abolish
this antithesis, capitalist society on the contrary is compelled to intensify
it day by day. On the other hand the first modern utopian socialists, Owen
and Fourier, already correctly recognized this. In their model plans the
antithesis between town and country no longer exists. Consequently there
takes place exactly the contrary of that which Herr Sax contends; it is
not the solution of the housing question which simultaneously solves the
social question, but only by the solution of the social question, that
is, by the abolition of the capitalist mode of production, is the solution
of the housing question made possible. To want to solve the housing question
while at the same time desiring to maintain the modern big cities is an
absurdity. The modern big cities, however, will be abolished only by the
abolition of the capitalist mode of production, and when this is once on
the way then there will be quite other thing to do than supplying each
worker with a little house for his own possession.
In the beginning, however, each social revolution will have to
take things as it finds them and do its best to get rid of the most crying
evils with the means at its disposal. And we have already seen that the
housing shortage can be remedied immediately by expropriating a part of
the luxury dwellings belonging to the propertied classes and by quartering
workers in the remaining part.
Continuing, Herr Sax once more leaves the big cities and delivers
a lengthy verbose discourse upon working class colonies to be established
near the towns; he describes all the beauties of such colonies with their
joint “water supply, gas lighting, air or hot water heating, wash houses,
drying rooms, bathrooms, etc.,” with their “creche, school, prayer hall
(!), reading room, library ... wine and beer hall, dancing and concert
hall in all respectability,” with steam power laid on to all the houses
so that “to a certain extent production can be relayed from the factory
into domestic workshops”; but this does not alter the situation at all.
The colony Herr Sax describes has been directly borrowed by Mr. Huber from
the socialists Owen and Fourier and merely made entirely bourgeois by discarding
everything socialist about them. Thereby, however, it becomes really utopian.
No capitalist has any interest in establishing such colonies, and in fact
none such exists anywhere in the world, except in Guise in France and that
was built by a follower of Fourier, not as profitable speculation but as
a socialist experiment. [And this one also has finally become a mere centre
of working class exploitation. (See the Paris Socialiste of 1886.) – Note
by F. Engels to the second German edition.] Herr Sax might just as well
have quoted in support of big bourgeois project-spinning the example of
the communist colony “Harmony Hall” founded by Owen in Hampshire at the
beginning of the ’forties and long since defunct.
In any case, all this talk about colonization is nothing more
than a lame attempt to soar again into “the region of ideals” and it is
immediately afterwards again abandoned. We descend rapidly again. The simplest
solution then is:
 “that the employers, the factory owners, should assist the workers
 to obtain suitable dwellings, whether they do so by building such
 themselves or by encouraging and assisting the workers to do their
 own building and by providing them with land, advancing them
 building capital, etc.” (Page 106.)

With this we are once again out of the big towns where there can be no
question of anything of the sort and back in the country. Herr Sax then
proves that here it is in the interests of the factory owners themselves
that they should assist their workers to obtain tolerable dwellings, on
the one hand because it is a good investment, and on the other hand because
the inevitable:
 “resulting uplift of the workers ... must result in an increase of
 their mental and physical working capacity, which naturally – no
 less – is of advantage to the employers. With this, however, the
 right point of view for the participation of the latter in the
 solution of the housing question is given; it appears as the
 outcome of a latent association, as the outcome of the care of the
 employers for the physical and economic, mental and moral
 well-being of their workers, which is concealed for the most part
 under the cloak of humanitarian efforts and which is its own
 pecuniary reward because of its results in producing and
 maintaining a diligent, skilled, willing, contented and devoted
 working class.” (Page 108.)

The phrase “latent association,” with which Huber attempts to impose on
this bourgeois philanthropic drivel “a higher significance,” does not alter
the situation at all. Even without this phrase the big rural factory owners,
particularly in England, have long ago recognized that the building of
workers’ dwellings is not only a necessity, a part of the factory equipment
itself, but also that it pays very well. In England whole villages have
grown up in this way, and some of them have later developed into towns.
The workers, however, instead of being thankful to the philanthropic capitalists,
have always raised very considerable objections to this “cottage system.” 
Not only are they compelled to pay monopoly prices for these houses because
the factory owner has no competitors, but immediately a strike breaks out
they are homeless, because the factory owner throws them out of his houses
without any more ado and thus renders any resistance difficult.
Further details can be studied in my Condition of the Working
Class in England, pp. 184 and 256. Herr Sax, however, thinks that these
objections “hardly deserve refutation.” (Page 111.) But does he not want
to make the worker the owner of his dwelling? Certainly, but, as “the employers
must always be in a position to dispose of the dwelling in order that when
they dismiss a worker to have room for the one who replaces him,” well
then, there is nothing for it but “to make some provision for such cases
by agreement for the revocation of ownership.” (Page 113.)
[In this respect also. the English capitalists have long ago not
only fulfilled but far exceeded all the cherished wishes of Herr Sax. On
Monday, October 14, 1872, the court in Morpeth had to adjudicate on an
application on behalf of 2,000 miners to have their names enrolled on the
list of parliamentary voters. It transpired that the greater number of
these miners, according to the regulations of the mine at which they were
employed, were not to be regarded as tenants of the dwellings in which
they lived, but, as occupying these dwellings on sufferance, and they could
be thrown out of them at any moment without notice. (The landowner and
house owner were naturally one and the same per-on.) The judge decided
that these men were not tenants but servants, and therefore as such not
entitled to be included in the list of voters. (Daily News, October 15,
1872.) – Note by F. Engels.]


II
This time we have come down with unexpected suddenness. First it was
said the worker must own his own little house. Then we are informed that
this is impossible in the towns and can be carried out only in-the country.
And now we are told that ownership even in the country is to be “revocable
by agreement!” With this new sort of property for the workers discovered
by Herr Sax, with this transformation of the workers into capitalists “revocable
by agreement,” we have safely arrived again on firm ground, and have here
to examine what the capitalists and other philanthropists have actually
done to solve the housing question.
If we are to believe our worthy Dr. Sax, much has already been
done by Messieurs the capitalists to remedy the housing shortage; and the
proof has been provided that the housing question can be solved on the
basis of the capitalist mode of production.
Above all, Herr Sax quotes us the example of – Bonapartist France!
As is known, Louis Bonaparte appointed a commission at the time of the
Paris World Exhibition ostensibly to report upon the situation of the working
classes in France, but in reality to describe their situation as blissful
in the extreme, to the greater glory of the Empire. And it is to this report,
drawn up by a commission composed of the corruptest tools of Bonapartism,
that Herr Sax refers, particularly because the results of its work are
 “according to the committee’s own statement fairly complete for France.” 
And what are these results? Of eighty-nine big industrialists or joint-stock
companies which gave information to the commission, thirty-one had built
no workers’ dwellings at all. According to the estimate of Dr. Sax himself,
the dwellings that were built house at the most from 50,000 to 60,000 people,
and the dwellings themselves consist almost exclusively of no more than
two rooms for each family.
It is obvious that every capitalist who is tied down to a particular
rural district by the conditions of his industry – water power, the position
of coal mines, iron-stone deposits and other mines, etc. – must build
dwellings for his workers if none are available. To see in this a proof
of “latent association,” “an eloquent testimony to a growing understanding
of the question and its wide import,” a “very promising beginning” (page
115), all this demands a very highly developed habit of self-deception.
For the rest, the industrialists of the various countries differ from each
other in this respect also according to national character. For instance,
Herr Sax informs us (page 117):
 “In England only recently has increased activity on the part of
 employers in this direction been observable. This refers in
 particular to the more out of the way hamlets in the rural
 areas.... The circumstance that otherwise the workers often have
 to walk a long way from the nearest village to the factory and
 arrive there so exhausted that they do not perform enough work is
 the chief reason which furnishes the employers with the motive for
 building dwellings for their workers. However, the number of
 those who have a deeper understanding of conditions and who
 combine with the cause of housing reform more or less all the
 other elements of latent association is also increasing, and it is
 these people to whom credit is due for the establishment of those
 flourishing colonies.... The names of Ashton in Tiyde, Ashworth in
 Tuxton, Grant in Bury, Greg in Bollington, Marshall in Leeds,
 Stratt in Belper, Salt in Saltaire, Ackroid in Copley, and others
 are known on this account throughout the United Kingdom.” 

Blessed simplicity and still more blessed ignorance! The English rural
factory owners have “only recently” begun to build workers’ dwellings!
No, my dear Herr Sax, the English capitalists are really big industrialists,
not only as regards their purses, but also as regards their brains. Long
before Germany possessed a really large-scale industry, they had realized
that for factory production in the rural districts expenditure on workers’
dwellings was a necessary part of the total investment of capital and a
very profitable one, both directly and indirectly. Long before the struggle
between Bismarck and the German bourgeoisie had given the German workers
freedom of association, the English factory, mine and foundry owners had
had practical experience of the pressure they could exert on striking workers
if they were at the same time the landlords of those workers. The “flourishing
colonies” of Greg, Ashton and Ashworth are so “recent” that even forty
years ago they were hailed by the bourgeoisie as model examples, as I myself
described twenty-eight years ago. (The Condition of the Working Class in
England, Note on page 186.) The colonies of Marshall and Akroyd (that is
how the man spells his name) are about as old, and the colony of Strutt
is much older, its beginnings reaching back into the last century. Since
in England the average duration of a worker’s dwelling is reckoned as forty
years, Herr Sax can calculate on his fingers the dilapidated condition
in which these “flourishing colonies” are today. In addition, the majority
of these colonies are now no longer in the countryside. The colossal expansion
of industry has surrounded most of them with factories and houses to such
an extent that they are now situated in the middle of dirty, smoky towns
with 20,000, 30,000, and more inhabitants. But all this does not prevent
German bourgeois science, as represented by Herr Sax, from devoutly repeating
today the old English paeans of praise of 1840, which no longer have any
application.
And to give us old Akroyd as an example! This worthy was certainly
a philanthropist of the first water. He loved his workers, and in particular
his female employees, to such an extent that his less philanthropic competitors
in Yorkshire used to say of him that he ran his factories exclusively with
his own children! It is true that Dr. Sax contends that “illegitimate children
are becoming more and more rare” in these flourishing colonies. (Page 118.)
Yes, that is true so far as it refers to illegitimate children born out
of wedlock, for in the English industrial districts the pretty girls marry
very young.
In England the establishment of workers’ dwellings close to each
big rural factory and simultaneously with the factory has been the rule
for sixty years and more. As already mentioned, many of these factory villages
have become the nucleus around which later on a whole factory town has
grown up with all the evils which a factory town brings with it. These
colonies have therefore not solved the housing question, on the contrary,
they first really created it in their localities. On the other hand, in
countries which in the sphere of large-scale industry have only limped
along behind England, and which have really only got to know what large-scale
industry is after 1848, in France and particularly in Germany, the situation
is quite different. Here, it is only colossal foundries and factories which
decided after much hesitation to build a certain number of workers’ dwellings
– for instance, the Schneider works in Creusot and the Krupp works in
Essen. The great majority of the rural industrialists let their workers
trudge miles through the heat, snow and rain every morning to the factories,
and back again every evening to their homes. This is particularly the case
in mountainous districts, in the French and Alsatian Vosges districts,
in the valleys of the Wupper, Sieg, Agger, Lenne and other Rhineland-Westphalian
rivers. In the Erzgebirge the situation is probably no better. The same
petty niggardliness occurs both among the Germans and among the French.
Herr Sax knows very well that both the very promising beginning
and the flourishing colonies mean less than nothing. Therefore, he tries
now to prove to the capitalists what magnificent rents they can obtain
by building workers dwellings. In other words, he seeks to show them a
new way of cheating the workers.
First of all, he holds up to them the example of a number of London
building societies; partly philanthropic and partly speculative, which
have shown a net profit of from four to six per cent and more. It is not
necessary for Herr Sax to prove to us that capital invested in workers’
houses yields a good profit. The reason why the capitalists do not invest
still more than they do in workers’ dwellings is that more expensive dwellings
bring in still greater profits for their owners. The exhortation of Herr
Sax to the capitalists, therefore, amounts, once again, to nothing but
a moral sermon.
As far as these London building societies are concerned, whose
brilliant successes Herr Sax so loudly proclaims, they have according to
his own figures – and every sort of building speculation is included –
provided dwellings for a total of 2,132 families and 706 single men, i.e.,
for less than 15,000 persons! And is it presumed seriously to present in
Germany this sort of childishness as a great success, although in the East
End of London alone half a million workers live under the most miserable
housing conditions? The whole of these philanthropic efforts are in fact
so miserably futile that the English parliamentary reports dealing, with
the situation of the workers never even bother to mention them.
We will not even speak here of the ludicrous ignorance of London
which shows itself throughout this whole section. Just one point, however:
Herr Sax is of the opinion that the Lodging House for Single Men in Soho
went out of business because there was no hope of obtaining a large
clientele” in this neighborhood. Herr Sax imagines that the whole of the
West End of London is one big luxury town, and does not know that right
behind the most elegant streets the dirtiest workers’ quarters are to be
found, of which, for example, Soho is one. The model lodging house in Soho
which he mentions and which I knew twenty-three years ago, was well enough
frequented in the beginning, but closed down finally because no one could
stand it, and yet it was one of the best.
But the workers’ town of Millhausen in Alsace – that is surely
a success?
The workers’ town of Millhausen is the great show-piece of the
continental bourgeois, just as the one-time flourishing colonies of Ashton,
Ashworth, Greg and Co., are of the English bourgeois. Unfortunately, the
Millhausen example is not any product of “latent association,” but of the
open association between the Second French Empire and the capitalists of
Alsace. It was one of Louis Bonaparte’s socialist experiments, for which
the state advanced one-third of the capital. In fourteen years (up to 1867)
it built 800 small houses according to a very defective system, an impossible
one in England where they understand these things better, and these houses
are handed over to the workers to become their own property after thirteen
to fifteen years of monthly payments at an increased rental.
It was not necessary for the Bonapartists of Alsace to invent
this way of acquiring property; as we shall see, it had been introduced
by the English co-operative building societies long before. Compared with
English conditions, the extra rent paid for the purchase of these houses
is rather high. For instance, after having paid 4,500 francs by installments
in fifteen years, the worker receives a house which was worth 3,300 francs
fifteen years before. If the worker wants to go away or if he is in arrears
with only a single monthly installment (in which case he can be turned
on to the streets), six and two-thirds per cent of the original value of
the house is reckoned as the annual rent (for instance, 17 francs a month
for a house worth 3,000 francs) and the rest is paid out to him, but without
a penny of interest. It is quite clear that under such circumstances the
society is able to grow fat, quite apart from “state assistance.” It is
just as clear that the houses provided under these circumstances are better
than the old tenement houses in the town itself, if only because they are
built outside the town in a semi-rural neighborhood.
We need not say a word about the few miserable experiments which
have been made in Germany; even Herr Sax, page 157, recognizes their woefulness.
What then exactly do all these examples prove? Simply that the
building of workers’ dwellings is profitable from the capitalist point
of view, even when all the laws of hygiene are not trodden under foot.
But that has never been denied; we all knew that long ago. Any investment
of capital which satisfies an existing need is profitable if conducted
rationally. The question, however, is precisely, why the housing shortage
continues to exist all the same, why the capitalists all the same do not
provide sufficient healthy dwellings for the workers. And here Herr Sax
has again nothing but exhortations to make to the capitalists and fails
to provide us with an answer. The real answer to this question we have
already given above.
Capital does not desire to abolish the housing shortage even if
it could; this has now been completely established. There remain, therefore,
only two other expedients, self-help on the part of the workers and state
assistance.
Herr Sax, an enthusiastic worshipper of self-help, is able to
report wonderful things about it also in regard to the housing question.
Unfortunately he is compelled to admit right at the beginning that self-help
can only effect anything where the cottage system either already exists
or where it can be introduced, i.e., once again only in the rural areas.
In the big cities, even in England, it can be effective only in a very
limited measure. Herr Sax then sighs: “Reform in this way (by self-help)
can be effected only in a roundabout way and must therefore always be imperfect,
namely in so far as the principle of ownership reacts on the quality of
the dwelling.” It would be permissible to doubt even this, in any case,
the “principle of ownership” has not exercised any reforming influence
on the “quality” of the author’s style. Despite all this, self-help in
England has achieved such wonders “that thereby everything done there to
solve the housing question from other angles has been far exceeded.” Herr
Sax is referring to the English “building societies” and he deals with
them at great length because:
 “very inadequate or erroneous ideas are current about their
 general character and activities. The English building societies
 are by no means associations for building houses or building
 co-operatives; they can be described in German rather as
 ‘Hauswerbvereine’ [associations for the acquisition of housing
 property]. They are associations which aim at accumulating funds
 from the periodical contributions of their members in order then,
 out of these funds and according to their size, to grant loans to
 their members for the purchase of a house.... The building society
 is thus a savings bank for one section of its members, and for the
 other section a loan bank. The building societies are therefore
 mortgage credit institutions calculated for the requirements of
 the workers which, in the main, use the savings of the workers to
 assist persons of the same social standing as the depositors to
 purchase or build a house. As may be supposed, such loans are
 granted by mortgaging the real property in question, and the
 conditions are such that they must be paid back in short
 installments which combine both interest and amortization. The
 interest is not paid out to the depositors, but always placed to
 their credit at compound interest. The members can demand the
 return of the sums they have paid in, plus interest, at any time,
 by giving a month’s notice.” (Pages 170 to 172.) “There are over
 2,000 such associations in England and their total capital amounts
 to about L15,000,000 sterling. In this way about 100,000 working
 class families have obtained possession of their own hearth and
 home; a social achievement the like of which will certainly not be
 quickly found.” (Page 174.)

Unfortunately here too the “but” comes limping along immediately after:
 “However, a perfect solution of the question has by no means been
 achieved in this way; for the reason, if for no other, that the
 acquisition of a house is open only to the better situated
 workers. In particular, sanitary considerations are not always
 sufficiently taken into consideration.” (Page 176.)

On the continent, “such associations find only little scope for development.” 
They presuppose the existence of the cottage system which exists only in
the countryside on the continent, and in the countryside the workers are
not sufficiently developed for self-help. On the other hand, in the towns
where real building societies could be formed, they are faced with “very
considerable and serious difficulties of all sorts.” (Page 179.) They could
build only cottages and that is no good in the big cities. In short, “this
form of co-operative self-help” can “in the present circumstances – and hardly
in the near future – not play the chief role in the solution of the question
before us.” These building societies are, we are told, still “in their
first undeveloped beginnings” and “this is true even of England.” (Page
181.)
Hence, the capitalists will not and the workers cannot. And with
this we could close this section if it were not absolutely necessary to
provide a little information about the English building societies, which
the bourgeoisie of the Schulze-Delitzsch type always hold up to our workers
as models.
These building societies are not workers’ societies, nor is it
their main aim to provide workers with their own houses. On the contrary,
we shall see that this happens only very exceptionally. The building societies
are essentially of a speculative nature, the smaller ones., which were
the original societies, not less so than their bigger imitators. In a public
house, usually at the instigation of the proprietor, in whose rooms the
weekly meetings then take place, a number of regular customers and their
friends, small shopkeepers, clerks, commercial travelers, master artisans
and other petty bourgeois – with here and there perhaps an engineer or
some other worker belonging to the aristocracy of his class found a building
society. The immediate occasion is usually that the proprietor has discovered
a comparatively cheap plot of land in the neighborhood or somewhere else.
Most of the members are not bound by their occupations to any particular
district. Even many of the small shopkeepers and artisans have only business
premises in the town and not any dwelling; whoever is in a position to
do so prefers to live in the suburbs rather than in the centre of the smoky
town. The building plot is purchased and as many cottages as possible erected
on it. The credit of the better off members makes the purchase possible,
and the weekly contributions together with a few small loans cover the
weekly costs of building. Those members who aim at getting a house of their
own receive cottages by lot as they are completed, and the appropriate
extra rent serves for the amortization of the purchase price. The remaining
cottages are then either let or sold. The building society, however, assuming
that it does good business, accumulates a larger or smaller sum which remains
the property of the members, providing that they keep up their contributions,
and which from time to time, or when the society is dissolved, is distributed
among them. This is the life history of nine out of ten of the English
building societies. The others are bigger societies, sometimes formed under
political or philanthropic pretexts, but their chief aim is always to provide
the savings of the petty bourgeoisie with a more profitable mortgage investment
at a good rate of interest, with the prospect of dividends as a result
of speculation in real estate.
The sort of clients these societies speculate on can be seen from
the prospectus of one of the largest if not the largest of them. The Birkbeck
Building Society, 29 and 30, Southampton Buildings, Chancery Lane, London,
whose gross receipts since its existence total £10,500,000 sterling, which
has over £416,000 in the bank or invested in state securities, and which
at present has 21,441 members and depositors, introduces itself to the
public in the following fashion:
 “Most people are acquainted with the so-called three-year system
 of the piano manufacturers according to which anyone hiring a
 piano for three years becomes the owner of the piano after the
 expiration of that period. Prior to the introduction of this
 system it was almost as difficult for people of limited income to
 acquire a good piano as it was for them to acquire their own
 house. Year after year such people paid the hire money for the
 piano and expended two or three times as much money in this way as
 the piano was worth. But what is feasible with regard to a piano
 is feasible with regard to a house. However, as a house costs
 more than a piano, a longer period is necessary to pay off the
 purchase price in rent. In consequence the directors have come to
 an agreement with house owners in various parts of London and its
 suburbs, as a result of which they are in a position to offer the
 members of the Birkbeck Building Society and others a great
 selection of houses in all parts of the town. The system
 according to which the board of directors intends to work is the
 following: it will let these houses for twelve and a half years
 and at the end of this period, providing that the rent has been
 paid regularly, the tenant will become the absolute owner of his
 house without any further payment of any kind. The tenant can
 also contract for a shorter space of time with a higher rental, or
 for a longer space of time with a lower rental. People of limited
 income, clerks, shop assistants and others can make themselves
 independent of landlords immediately by becoming members of the
 Birkbeck Building Society.” [Retranslated from the German.-Ed.]

That is clear enough. There is no mention of workers, but rather of people
of limited income, clerks and shop assistants, etc., and in addition it
is assumed that, as a rule, the applicants already possess a piano. In
fact we have to do here not with workers, but with petty bourgeois and
those who would like and are able to become petty bourgeois; people whose
incomes gradually rise as a rule, even if within certain limits, such as
clerks and employees in similar occupations. The income of the worker,
however, in the best case remains the same in amount, and in reality it
falls in proportion to the increase of his family and its growing needs.
In fact, few workers can take part in such societies and then only in exceptional
cases. On the one hand their income is too low, and on the other hand it
is of too uncertain a character for them to be able to undertake responsibilities
for twelve and a half years ahead. The few exceptions where this is not
valid are either better-paid workers or foremen.
[We add here a little contribution on the way in which these building
societies and in particular the London building societies are managed.
As is known, almost the whole of the land on which London is built belongs
to a dozen aristocrats, including the most eminent, the Duke of Westminster,
the Duke of Bedford, the Duke of Portland, etc. They originally leased
out the separate building plots for a period of ninety-nine years, and
at the end of that period they take possession of the land with everything
on it. They then let the houses on shorter leases, thirty-nine years for
example, with a so-called repairing clause, according to which the leaseholder
must put the house in good repair and maintain it in such condition. As
soon as the contract has progressed thus far. the ground landlord sends
his architect and the district surveyor to inspect the house and determine
the repairs necessary. These repairs are often very considerable and may
include the renewal of the whole frontage, or of the roof, etc. The leaseholder
now deposits his lease as a security with a building society and receives
from this society a loan of the necessary money – up to L1000 and more
in the case of an annual rental-of from £130 to £150 – for the building
repairs which are to be carried out at his cost. These building societies
have thus become an important intermediate link in a system which aims
at securing the continual renewal and maintenance in habitable condition
of London’s houses belonging to the landed aristocracy without any trouble
to the latter and at the cost of the public. And this is supposed to be
a solution of the housing question for the workers! — Note by F. Engels
to the second German edition.]
For the rest, it is clear to everyone that the Bonapartists of
the workers’ town of Mulhausen are nothing more than miserable imitators
of these petty-bourgeois English building societies. The sole difference
is that the former, in spite of the state assistance granted to them, swindle
their clients far more than the building societies do. On the whole their
terms are less liberal than the average existing in England, and while
in England interest and compound interest is reckoned on each deposit and
the latter also can be withdrawn at a month’s notice, the factory owners
of Mulhausen put both interest and compound interest into their own pockets
and repay no more than the amount paid in by the workers in hard-earned
five-franc pieces. And no one will be more astonished at this difference
than Herr Sax who has it all in his book without knowing it.
Thus workers’ self-help is also no good. There remains state assistance.
What can Herr Sax offer us in this connection? Three things:
 “First of all, the state must take care that in its legislation
 and administration, all those things which in any way result in
 accentuating the housing shortage among the working classes are
 abolished or appropriately remedied.” (Page 187.)

Consequently, revision of building legislation and freedom for the building
trades in order that building shall be cheaper. But in England building
legislation is reduced to a minimum, the building trades are as free as
the birds in the air; nevertheless, the housing shortage exists. In addition,
building is now carried out so cheaply in England that the houses totter
when a cart goes by and every day some of them collapse. Only yesterday
(October 25, 1872) six of them collapsed simultaneously in Manchester and
seriously injured six workers. Therefore, that is also no remedy.
 “Secondly, the state power must prevent individuals in their
 narrow-minded individualism from reproducing the evil or causing
 it anew.” 

Consequently, inspection of workers’ dwellings by the sanitary authorities
and building inspectors; the authorities to have power to close down dilapidated
and unhygienic houses, as has been the case in England since 1857. But
how did it work there? The first law of 1855 (the Nuisances Removal Act)
remained, as Herr Sax admits himself, “a dead letter,” as also did the
second law of 1858 (the Local Government Act). (Page 197.) On the other
hand Herr Sax believes that the third law (the Artisans’ Dwellings Act),
which applies only to towns with a population of over 10,000, “certainly
offers favorable testimony to the great understanding of the British Parliament
in social matters.” (Page 199.) But, as a matter of fact, this contention
does no more than offer “favorable testimony of the utter ignorance of
Dr. Sax in English matters.” That England in general is far in advance
of the continent in “social matters” is a matter of course. England is
the motherland of modern large-scale industry; the capitalist mode of production
has developed here most freely and extensively of all, its consequences
show themselves here most glaringly of all and therefore it is here also
that they first produce a reaction in the sphere of legislation. The best
proof of this is factory legislation. If, however, Herr Sax thinks that
an Act of Parliament only requires to become legally effective in order
to be carried immediately into practice as well, he is making a great mistake.
And this is true of the Local Government Act more than of any other act
(with the exception, of course, of the Workshops Act). The administration
of this law was entrusted to the urban authorities, which almost everywhere
in England are recognized centres of corruption of all kinds, nepotism
and jobbery.
[Jobbery is the exploitation of a public office to the private
advantage of the official or his family. If, for instance, the director
of the state telegraphs of a country becomes a sleeping partner in a paper
factory, provides this factory with timber from his forests, and then gives
the factory orders for supplying paper for the telegraph offices, then
that is a fairly small but quite a pretty “job,” inasmuch as it demonstrates
a complete understanding of the principles of jobbery; such as, for the
rest, in the case of Bismarck was a matter of course and to be, expected.
– Note by F. Engels.]
The agents of these urban authorities, who owe their positions
to all sorts of family considerations, are either incapable of carrying
into effect such social laws, or disinclined to do so. On the other hand,
it is precisely in England that the state officials who are entrusted with
the preparation and carrying into effect of social legislation are usually
distinguished by a strict sense of duty – although in a lesser degree
today than twenty or thirty years ago. In the town councils, the owners
of unsound and dilapidated dwellings are almost everywhere strongly represented
either directly or indirectly. The system of electing these town councils
according to small wards makes the elected members dependent on the pettiest
local interests and influences; no town councilor who desires to be re-elected
dare vote for the application of this law in his constituency. It is comprehensible
therefore with what aversion this law was received almost everywhere by
the local authorities, and that up to the present it has been applied only
in the most scandalous cases – and even then, as a general rule, only
as the result of the outbreak of some epidemic, such as in the case of
the small-pox epidemic last year in Manchester and Salford. Appeals to
the Home Secretary have up to the present been effective only in such cases,
for it is the principle of every Liberal government in England to propose
social reform laws only when compelled to do so and, if at all possible,
to avoid carrying into effect those already existing. The law in question,
like many others in England, has only the importance that, in the hands
of a government dominated by or under the pressure of the workers, a
government which would at last really administer it, it would be a powerful
weapon for making a breach in the existing social state of things.
 “Thirdly, the state power must,” according to Herr Sax, “make use
 of all the positive means at its disposal to remedy the existing
 housing shortage to the most comprehensive extent.” 

That is to say, it must build barracks, “truly model buildings,” for its
 “subordinate officials and servants” (but these are certainly not workers),
and “grant loans to municipalities, societies and also to private persons
with a view to improving the housing conditions of the working classes” 
(page 203), as is done in England under the Public Works Loan Act, and
as Louis Bonaparte has done in Paris and Mulhausen. But the Public Works
Loan Act also exists only on paper, the government places at the disposal
of the commissioners a maximum sum of £50,000 sterling, i.e., sufficient
to build at the utmost 400 cottages, that is to say, in forty years a total
of 16,000 cottages, or dwellings for at the most 80,000 persons – a drop
in the ocean! Even if we assume that after twenty years the funds at the
disposal of the commissioners were to double as a result of repayments,
that, therefore, during the past twenty years dwellings for a further 40,000
persons have been built, the whole still remains a drop in the ocean. And
as the cottages have an average life of no more than forty years, after
forty years the liquid assets of £50,000 or £100,000 must be used every
year to replace the most dilapidated, the oldest of the cottages.
Herr Sax declares on page 203 that this is carrying the principle
into practice correctly and to “an unlimited extent also.” And with the
confession that even in England and to “an unlimited extent” the state
has achieved next to nothing, Dr. Sax concludes his book, but not before
having delivered another moral homily to all concerned.
[In recent English Acts of Parliament giving the London building
authorities the right of expropriation for the purpose of new street construction,
a certain amount of consideration is given to the workers turned out of
their homes. A provision has been inserted that the new buildings to be
erected must be suitable for housing those classes of the population previously
living there. Big five or six storey tenement barracks are therefore erected
for the workers on the least valuable sites and in this way the letter
of the law is complied with. it remains to be seen how these buildings
will serve; the workers are unaccustomed to them and in the midst of the
old conditions in London they form a completely foreign development. In
the best case, however, they will provide new dwellings for hardly more
than a quarter of the workers actually evicted by the building operations.
– Note by F. Engels to the second German edition.]
It is perfectly clear that the existing state is neither able
nor willing to do anything to remedy the housing difficulty. The state
is nothing but the organized collective power of the possessing classes,
the landowners and the capitalists as against the exploited classes, the
peasants and the workers. What the individual capitalists (and it is here
only a question of these because in this matter the landowner who is also
concerned acts primarily as a capitalist) do not want, their state also
does not want. If therefore the individual capitalists deplore the housing
shortage, but can hardly be persuaded even superficially to palliate its
most terrifying consequences, then the collective capitalist, the state,
will not do much more. At the most it will see to it that the measure of
superficial palliation which has become standard is carried out everywhere
uniformly. And we have already seen that this is the case.
But, one might object, in Germany the bourgeoisie does not rule
as yet; in Germany the state is still to a certain extent a power hovering
independently over society as a whole, which for that very reason represents
the collective interests of society and not those of a single class. Such
a state can certainly do much that a bourgeois state cannot do, and one
could expect from it something quite different on the social field also.
That is the language of reactionaries. In reality, however, the
state as it exists at present in Germany is also the necessary product
of the social basis out of which it has developed. In Prussia – and Prussia
is now decisive – there exists side by side with a landowning aristocracy
which is still powerful, a comparatively young and markedly very cowardly
bourgeoisie, which up to the present has not won either direct political
domination, as in France, or more or less indirect as in England. Side
by side with these two classes, however, there exists further a rapidly
increasing proletariat which is intellectually highly developed and which
is becoming more and more organized every day. We find, therefore, in Germany
alongside of the basic condition of the old absolute monarchy, an equilibrium
between the landowning aristocracy and the bourgeoisie, also the basic
condition of modern Bonapartism, an equilibrium between the bourgeoisie
and the proletariat.
But both in the old absolute monarchy and in the modern Bonapartist
monarchy the real governing power lies in the hands of a special caste
of army officers and state officials. In Prussia this caste is supplemented
partly from its own ranks, partly from the lesser aristocracy owning the
entailed estates, more rarely the higher aristocracy, and least of all
from the bourgeoisie. The independence of this caste, which appears to
occupy a position outside and, so to speak, above society, gives the state
the semblance of independence in relation to society.
The state form which has developed with necessary logic in Prussia
(and, following the Prussian example, in the new imperial constitution
of Germany) out of these contradictory social conditions is pseudo-constitutionalism,
a form which is at once both the present-day form of the dissolution of
the old absolute monarchy and the form of existence of the Bonapartist
monarchy. In Prussia, pseudo-constitutionalism from 1848 to 1866 only concealed
and brought about the slow decay of the absolutist monarchy. However, since
1866, and still more since 1870, the transformation of social conditions
and thus the dissolution of the old state has proceeded openly in the view
of all and on a tremendously increasing scale.
The rapid development of industry and in particular of stock exchange
swindling has dragged all the ruling classes into the whirlpool of speculation.
The wholesale corruption imported from France in 1870 is developing at
an unprecedented rate. Stroussberg and Péreire take off their hats to each
other. Ministers, generals, princes and counts deal in shares in competition
with the cunningest stock-exchange Jews, and the state recognizes their
equality by conferring titles wholesale on these stock-exchange Jews. The
rural aristocracy, who have been industrialists for a long time as producers
of beet sugar and distillers, had long ago left the old and respectable
days behind and now swell the lists of directors of all sorts of sound
and unsound joint-stock companies. The bureaucracy is beginning more and
more to despise embezzlement as the sole means of improving its income;
it is turning its back on the state and beginning to hunt after the far
more lucrative posts on the administration of industrial enterprises. Those
who still remain in office follow the example of their superiors and speculate
in shares, or “participate” in railways, etc. One is even justified in
assuming that the lieutenants also have their hands in certain speculations.
In short, the decomposition of all the elements of the old state and the
transition from the absolute monarchy is in full swing, and with the next
big trade and industrial crisis not only will the present swindle collapse,
but the old Prussian state as well. [Even today, 1886, what holds together
the old Prussian state and its basis, the alliance of the big landowners
and the industrialist capitalists sealed by the protective tariffs is solely
the fear of the proletariat which has grown tremendously in numbers and
class consciousness since 1872. – Note by F. Engels to the second German
edition.]
And this state, in which the non-bourgeois elements are becoming
more bourgeois every day, is to solve “the social question,” or even only
the housing question? On the contrary. In all economic questions the Prussian
state is falling more and more into the hands of the bourgeoisie. And if
since 1866 legislation on the economic field has not been even more adapted
to the interests of the bourgeois than was actually the case, whose fault
is that? The bourgeoisie itself is chiefly responsible, being firstly too
cowardly to press its own demands energetically, and secondly resisting
every concession immediately the latter simultaneously gives the menacing
proletariat new weapons. And if the state power, i.e., Bismarck, is attempting
to organize its own bodyguard proletariat in order thereby to keep in check
the political activity of the bourgeoisie, what is that but a necessary
and familiar Bonapartist recipe which pledges the state to nothing more,
as far as the workers are concerned, than a few benevolent phrases and
at the utmost to a minimum of state assistance for building societies à
la Louis Bonaparte?
The best proof of what the workers have to expect from the Prussian
state lies in the utilization of the French milliards which has given a
new short reprieve to the independence of the Prussian state machine in
regard to society. Has even a single taler of all these milliards been
used to provide shelter for those Berlin working class families which have
been thrown on to the streets? On the contrary. As autumn approached, the
state even caused to be pulled down those few miserable huts which had
served the workers and their families as a temporary shelter during the
summer. The five milliards are being expended rapidly enough for fortresses,
cannon and soldiers; and despite Wagner von Dummerwitz, and despite Stieber’s
conferences with Austria, there will not be used for the German workers
even as much of those milliards as was used for the French workers out
of the millions which Louis Bonaparte stole from France.

[Engels alludes to the repeated declarations of the German political economist, Adolph Wagner, that if the favorable conjuncture created in Germany after the French-German war, were to be utilised to set up credits of five billions for France, it would have produced a meaningful improvement of the situation into which the working masses had been thrown. It does not appear that the Wagner, a university professor and member of the Prussian Senate, ever acquired a noble title; most likely, Engels is being satirical; Dummerwitz is equivalent, in fact, to  “dim wit.” ]

III
In reality the bourgeoisie has only one method of solving the housing
question after its fashion-that is to say, of solving it in such a way
that the solution continually reproduces the question anew. This method
is called “Haussmann.” 
By the term “Haussmann” I do not mean merely the specifically
Bonapartist manner of the Parisian Haussmann – breaking long, straight
and broad streets through the closely-built workers’ quarters and erecting
big luxurious buildings on both sides of them, the intention thereby, apart
from the strategic aim of making barricade fighting more difficult, being
also to develop a specifically Bonapartist building trades’ proletariat
dependent on the government and to turn the city into a pure luxury city.
By “Haussmann” I mean the practice which has now become general of making
breaches in the working class quarters of our big towns, and particularly
in those which are centrally situated, quite apart from whether this is
done from considerations of public health and for beautifying the town,
or owing to the demand for big centrally situated business premises, or
owing to traffic requirements, such as the laying down of railways, streets,
etc. No matter how different the reasons may be, the result is everywhere
the same: the scandalous alleys and lanes disappear to the accompaniment
of lavish self-praise from the bourgeoisie on account of this tremendous
success, but they appear again immediately somewhere else and often in
the immediate neighborhood.
In The Condition of the Working Class in England I gave a description
of Manchester as it looked in 1843 and 1844. Since then the construction
of railways through the centre of the town, the laying out of new streets,
and the erection of great public and private buildings have broken through,
laid bare and improved some of the worst districts described in my book,
others have been abolished altogether, but many of them are still, apart
from the fact that official sanitary inspection has since become stricter,
in the same state or in an even worse state of dilapidation than they were
then. On the other hand, however, thanks to the enormous extension of the
town, whose population has increased since then by more than half, districts
which were at that time still airy and clean are now just as excessively
built upon, just as dirty and overcrowded as the most ill-famed parts of
the town formerly were.
Here is just one example: On page 80 and the following pages of
my book I describe a group of houses situated in the valley bottom of the
river Medlock, which under the name of Little Ireland was for years one
of the worst blots on Manchester. Little Ireland has long ago disappeared
and on its site there now stands a railway station built on a high foundation.
The bourgeoisie printed with pride to the happy and final abolition of
Little Ireland as to a great triumph. Now last summer a great inundation
took place, as in general the rivers embanked in our big towns cause extensive
floods year after year owing to easily understood causes. And it was then
revealed that Little Ireland had not been abolished at all, but had simply
been shifted from the south side of Oxford Road to the north side, and
that it still continues to flourish. Let us hear what the Manchester Weekly
Times, the organ of the radical bourgeoisie of Manchester, has to say in
its number of July 20, 1872:
 “The misfortune which befell the inhabitants of the lower valley
 of the Medlock last Saturday will, it is to be hoped, have one
 good result: namely that public attention will be directed to the
 obvious mockery of all the laws of hygiene which has been
 tolerated there so long under the noses of our municipal officials
 and our municipal health committee. A forcible article in our
 daily edition yesterday revealed, though hardly trenchantly
 enough, the scandalous condition of some of the cellar dwellings
 near Charles Street and Brook Street which were reached by the
 floods. A detailed examination of one of the courts mentioned in
 this article enables us to confirm all the statements made about
 them, and to declare that the cellar dwellings in this court
 should long ago have been closed down, or rather, they should
 never have been tolerated as human habitations. Squire’s Court is
 made up of seven or eight dwelling houses on the corner of Charles
 Street and Brook Street. Even at the lowest part of Brook Street,
 under the railway bridge, a pedestrian may pass daily and never
 dream that human beings are living under his feet in what are
 little more than caves. The court itself is hidden from public
 view and is accessible only to those who are compelled by their
 impoverishment to seek a shelter in its sepulchral seclusion.
 Even if the usually stagnant waters of the Medlock, which are shut
 in between locks, do not exceed their usual level, the floors of
 these dwellings can hardly be more than a few inches above the
 surface of the river. A good shower of rain is capable of driving
 up filthy and nauseous water through the drains and filling the
 rooms with pestilential gases such as every flood leaves behind it
 as a souvenir....
 “Squire’s Court lies at a still lower level than the uninhabited
 cellars of the houses in Brook Street-twenty feet lower than the
 street level, and the foul water driven up on Saturday through the
 drains reached to the roofs. We knew this and therefore expected
 that we should find the place uninhabited or occupied only by the
 sanitary officials engaged in cleaning the stinking walls and
 disinfecting the houses. Instead of this we saw a man, in the
 cellar home of a barber, engaged in shoveling a heap of
 decomposing filth, which lay in a corner, onto a wheelbarrow. The
 barber, whose cellar was already more or less cleaned up, sent us
 still lower down to a number of dwellings about which he declared
 that, if he could write, he would have written to the press to
 demand that they be closed down. And so finally we came to
 Squire’s Court where we found a buxom and healthy-looking
 Irishwoman busy at the washtub. She and her husband, a night
 watchman, had lived for six years in the court and had a numerous
 family.... In the house which they had just left, the water had
 risen almost to the roof, the windows were broken and the
 furniture was reduced to ruins. The man declared that the
 occupant of the house had been able to keep the smells from
 becoming intolerable only by whitewashing it every two months....
 In the inner court, into which our correspondent then went, he
 found three houses whose rear walls abutted on the rear walls of
 the houses just described. Two of these three houses were
 inhabited. The smell there was so frightful that the healthiest
 man would have felt sick in a very short space of time.... This
 disgusting hole was inhabited by a family of seven, all of whom
 had slept in the place on Thursday evening (the first day the
 water rose). Or rather, not slept, as the woman immediately
 corrected herself, for she and her husband had vomited continually
 the greater part of the night owing to the terrible smell. On
 Saturday they had been compelled to wade through the water, chest
 high, to carry out their children. She was of the opinion that
 the place was not fit for pigs to live in, but on account of the
 low rent – one and sixpence a week – she had taken it, because
 her husband had been out of work a lot recently owing to sickness.
 The impression made upon the observer by this court and the
 inhabitants huddled in it, as though in a premature grave, was one
 of utter helplessness. We must point out, by the way, that,
 according to our observations, Squire’s Court is no more than
 typical – though perhaps an extreme case – of many other places
 in the neighborhood whose continued existence our health committee
 should not countenance. Should the committee permit these places
 to be inhabited in the future then it is taking on itself a
 responsibility whose gravity we shall not discuss further here,
 and it is exposing the whole neighborhood to the danger of
 infectious epidemics.” [Retranslated from the German.-Ed.]

This is a striking example of how the bourgeoisie solves the housing question
in practice. The breeding places of disease, the infamous holes and cellars
in which the capitalist mode of production confines our workers night after
night, are not abolished; they are merely shifted elsewhere! The same economic
necessity which produced them in the first place, produces them in the
next place also. As long as the capitalist mode of production continues
to exist, it is folly to hope for an isolated solution of the housing question
or of any other social question affecting the fate of the workers. The
solution lies in the abolition of the capitalist mode of production and
the appropriation of all the means of life and labor by the working class
itself.
 


Contents |
Part III |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Part Three. Supplement on Proudhon and the Housing Question






The Housing Question




The Housing Question by Frederick Engels
Part Three
Supplement on Proudhon and the Housing Question
In No. 86 of the Volksstaat, A. Mülberger
reveals himself as the author of the articles criticized by me in No. 51
and subsequent numbers of the paper. In his answer he overwhelms me with
such a series of reproaches, and at the same time distorts to such an extent
all the points of view which are at issue, that, willy-nilly, I am compelled
to reply to him. I shall attempt to give my reply, which to my regret must
be made to a large extent on the field of personal polemics enjoined upon
me by Mülberger himself, a general interest by presenting once again the
chief points and if possible more clearly than before, even at the risk
of being told once again by Mülberger that all this contains “nothing essentially
new either for him or for the other readers of the Volksstaat.” 
Mülberger complains of the form and the content of my criticism.
As far as the form is concerned, it will be sufficient to reply that at
the time I did not even know who had written the articles in question.
There can therefore be no question of any personal “prejudice” against
their author; against the solution of the housing question put forward
in the articles I was certainly in so far “prejudiced” that I was long
ago acquainted with it from Proudhon and my opinion on it was firmly fixed.
I am not going to quarrel with friend Mülberger about the “tone” 
of my criticism. When one has been so long in the movement as I have, one
develops a fairly thick skin against attacks, and therefore one easily
presumes also the existence of the same in others. In order to compensate
Mülberger I shall try this time to bring my “tone” into the right relation
to the sensitiveness of his epidermis.
Mülberger complains with particular bitterness that I called him
a Proudhonist, and he protests that he is not one. Naturally, I must believe
him, but I shall adduce the proof that the articles in question – and
I had to do with them alone – contain nothing but undiluted Proudhonism.
But according to Mülberger I have also criticized Proudhon “frivolously” 
and have done him a serious injustice. “The doctrine of the petty-bourgeois
Proudhon has become an accepted dogma in Germany, which is even proclaimed
by many who have never read a line of him.” When I express regret that
for twenty years the workers of the Latin countries have had no other mental
nourishment than the works of Proudhon, Mülberger answers that as far as
the workers of the Latin countries are concerned, “the principles formulated
by Proudhon are almost everywhere the driving spirit of the movement.” 
This I am compelled to deny. First of all, the “driving spirit” of the
working class movement nowhere lies in “principles,” but everywhere in
the development of large-scale industry and its effects, the accumulation
and concentration of capital on the one hand and of the proletariat on
the other. Secondly, it is not correct that in the Latin countries Proudhon’s
so-called “principles” play the decisive role ascribed to them by Mülberger;
that “the principles of anarchism, of the organization of the forces economiques,
of the liquidation sociale, etc., have become the true bearers of the revolutionary
movement.” Not to speak of Spain and Italy, where the Proudhonist universal
panacea has only gained some influence in the still more botched form presented
by Bakunin, it is a notorious fact for anyone who knows the international
working class movement that in France the Proudhonists are nothing more
than an insignificant sect, while the masses of the French workers refuse
to have anything to do with the social reform plan drawn up by Proudhon
under the title Liquidation sociale and Organization des forces economiques.
This was shown, among other things, in the Commune. Although the Proudhonists
were strongly represented in the Commune, not the slightest attempt was
made to liquidate the old society or to organize the economic forces according
to Proudhon’s proposals. On the contrary, it is to the great honor of the
Commune that in all its economic measures the “driving spirit” was not
any set of “principles,” but simple, practical needs. And therefore the
measures taken by the Commune – abolition of night work in the bakeries,
prohibition of monetary fines in the factories, confiscation of idle factories
and workshops and their handing over to workers’ associations – were not
at all in accordance with the spirit of Proudhonism, but certainly in accordance
with the spirit of German scientific socialism. The only social measure
which the Proudhonists put through was the decision not to seize the Bank
of France, and this was partly responsible for the downfall of the Commune.
In the same way, when the so-called Blanquists made an attempt to transform
themselves from mere political revolutionaries into a socialist workers’
fraction with a definite programme – as was done by the Blanquist fugitives
in London in their manifesto, Internationale et Revolution – they did
not proclaim the “principles” of the Proudhonist plan of social salvation,
but rather adopted, and almost literally at that, the views of German scientific
socialism on the necessity of the political action of the proletariat and
of the dictatorship of the proletariat as the transitional stage to the
abolition of classes and with them of the state, views such as had already
been expressed in The Communist Manifesto and since then on innumerable
occasions. And if Mülberger even concludes, from the disapproval of Proudhon
by the Germans, a lack of understanding of the movement in the Latin countries
 “down to the Paris Commune,” then let him as a proof of this lack tell
us what work from the Latin side has even approximately so correctly understood
and described the Commune as the Address of the General Council of the
International on the Civil War in France, written by the German, Marx.
The only country where the working class movement is directly
under the influence of Proudhonist “principles” is Belgium, and precisely
as a result of this the Belgian movement comes, as Hegel would say, “from
nothing, through nothing, to nothing.” 
When I consider it a misfortune that for twenty years the workers
of the Latin countries were fed directly or indirectly on Proudhon, I do
not mean that thoroughly mythical dominance of Proudhon’s reform recipe
– termed by Mülberger the “principles” – but the fact that their economic
criticism of existing society was infected by the absolutely false Proudhonist
phrases and that their political actions were bungled by Proudhonist influence.
Whether thus the “Proudhonized workers of the Latin countries” “stand more
in the revolution” than the German workers, who, in any case, understand
the meaning of German scientific socialism infinitely better than the workers
of the Latin countries understand their Proudhon, we shall be able to answer
when we have discovered what to “stand in the revolution” really means.
We have heard talk of people who “stand in the Grace of God, in the true
faith, in Christianity,” etc. But “standing” in the revolution, in the
most violent of all movements? Is then “the revolution” a dogmatic religion
in which one must have faith?
Mülberger further accuses me of having asserted, in defiance of
the express wording of his articles, that he had declared the housing question
to be an exclusively working class question.
This time Mülberger is really right. I overlooked the passage
in question. It was irresponsible of me to overlook it, for it is one of
the most characteristic of the whole tendency of his articles. Mülberger
writes actually in plain words:
 “As we have been so frequently and largely exposed to the absurd
 accusation of pursuing a class policy, of striving for class
 domination, and such like, we wish to stress first of all and
 expressly that the housing question is by no means a question
 which affects the proletariat exclusively, but that, on the
 contrary, it interests to a quite outstanding extent the actual
 middle classes, the small tradesmen, the petty bourgeoisie, the
 whole bureaucracy.... The housing question is precisely that point
 of social reform which more than any other appears calculated to
 reveal the absolute inner identity of the interests of the
 proletariat on the one hand, and the interests of the actual
 middle classes of society on the other. The middle classes suffer
 just as much as, and perhaps even more than, the proletariat under
 the oppressive fetters of the rented dwelling. Today the actual
 middle classes of society are faced with the question of
 whether... they can summon up sufficient strength... to
 participate in the process of the transformation of society in
 alliance with the youthful, vigorous and energetic workers party,
 a transformation whose blessings will be enjoyed above all by the
 middle classes.” 

Friend Mülberger, therefore, lays down the following points here:


 “We” are not pursuing any “class policy” and are not striving for “class
domination.” But the German Social-Democratic Party, just because it is
a working-class party, does inevitably pursue a “class policy,” the policy
of the working class. Since each political party sets out to win dominance
in the state, so the German Social-Democratic Party is necessarily striving
for its domination, that of the working class, hence a “class domination.” 
Moreover, every real proletarian party, from the English Chartists onward,
has put forward a class policy, the organization of the proletariat as
an independent political party, as the primary condition of its struggle,
and the dictatorship of the proletariat as the immediate aim of the struggle.
By declaring this to be “absurd,” Mülberger puts himself outside the
proletarian movement and into the camp of petty-bourgeois socialism.

The housing question has the advantage that it is not an exclusively working
class question, but a question which “interests to a quite outstanding
extent” the petty bourgeoisie, in that, “the actual middle classes” suffer
from it “just as much as, and perhaps even more than, the proletariat.” 
If anyone declares that the petty bourgeoisie suffers, even if in one connection
only, “perhaps even more than the proletariat,” then he can hardly complain
when one counts him among the petty-bourgeois socialists. Has Mülberger
therefore any grounds for complaint when I say:

 “It is with just such sufferings as these, which the working class
 endures in common with other classes, and particularly the petty
 bourgeoisie, that petty-bourgeois socialism, to which Proudhon
 belongs, prefers to occupy itself. And thus it is not at all
 accidental that our German Proudhonist occupies himself chiefly
 with the housing question, which, as we have seen, is by no means
 exclusively a working class question.” 


There is an “absolute inner identity” between the interests of “the actual
middle classes of society” and the interests of the proletariat, and it
is not the proletariat, but these actual middle classes who will “enjoy
above all” the “blessings” of the coming transformation of society.


The workers, therefore, are going to make the coming social revolution
 “above all” in the interests of the petty bourgeoisie. And further, there
is an absolute inner identity of the interests of the petty bourgeoisie
and those of the proletariat. If the interests of the petty bourgeoisie
have an inner identity with those of the workers, then the interests of
the workers have an inner identity with those of the petty bourgeoisie.
The petty-bourgeois standpoint has thus as much right to exist in the movement
as the proletarian standpoint has, and it is precisely the assertion of
this equality of right that is called petty-bourgeois socialism.
It is, therefore also perfectly logical when, on page 25 of the
reprint, Mülberger extols “small enterprise” as the “actual buttress of
society,” because “in accordance with its own nature, it unites the three
factors: labor – acquisition – property, and because in the unification
of these three factors it places no bounds to the capacity for development
of the individual,” and when he reproaches modern industry in particular
with destroying this nursery for the production of normal human beings
and “making out of a vigorous class continually reproducing itself, a helpless
mass of human beings who do not know whither to direct their anxious glances.” 
The petty bourgeois is thus Mülberger’s model human being and small-scale
enterprise is Mülberger’s model mode of production. Did I defame him therefore
when I put him among the petty-bourgeois socialists?
As Mülberger rejects all responsibility for Proudhon, it would
be superfluous to discuss here any further how Proudhon’s reform plans
aim at transforming all members of society into petty bourgeois and small
peasants. It will be just as unnecessary to deal here with the alleged
identity of the interests of the petty bourgeoisie and the workers. What
is necessary is to be found already in The Communist Manifesto. (Leipzig
Edition, 1872, pp. 12, 21.)
The result of our examination is therefore that side by side with
the “myth of the petty bourgeois Proudhon” appears the reality of the petty
bourgeois Mülberger.
II
We now come to one of the main points. I accused Mülberger’s articles
of falsifying economic relationships after the manner of Proudhon by translating
them into legal terminology. As an example of this, I picked out the following
passage of Mülberger:
 “The house, once it has been built, serves as a perpetual legal
 title to a definite fraction of social labor although the real
 value of the house has already long ago been more than paid out in
 the form of rent to the owner. Thus it comes about that a house
 that, for instance, was built fifty years ago, during this period
 covers the original cost two, three, five, ten or more times over
 in its rent yield.” 

Mülberger now complains as follows:
 “This simple, sober statement of fact causes Engels to enlighten
 me to the effect that I should have explained how the house became
 a ‘legal title’ – something which was quite outside the scope of
 my task.... A description is one thing, an explanation another.
 When I say with Proudhon that the economic life of society should
 be pervaded by a conception of justice, then I am describing
 present-day society as one in which, it is true, not all
 conceptions of justice are absent, but in which the conception of
 justice of the revolution is absent, a fact which even Engels will
 admit.” 

Let us keep for the moment to the house which has been built. The house,
once it has been let, brings in for its builder ground rent, repairing
costs, and interest on the building capital invested, as well as the profit
made thereon in the form of rent, and, according to the circumstances,
the rent installments can gradually amount to twice, thrice, five times,
or ten times as much as the original cost price of the house. This, friend
Mülberger, is the “simple, sober statement of fact,” an economic fact,
and if we want to know “how it happens” that it exists, then we must conduct
our examination on the economic field. Let us, therefore, look a little
closer at the fact so that not even a child may misunderstand it any longer.
As is known, the sale of a commodity consists in the fact that its owner
relinquishes its use value and puts its exchange value into his pocket.
The use values of commodities differ from one another among other things
in the varying periods of time required for their consumption. A loaf of
bread is consumed in a day, a pair of trousers will be worn out in a year,
and a house, if you like, in a hundred years. Hence, in the case of commodities
with a long period of wear, the possibility arises of selling their use
value piecemeal and each time for a definite period, that is to say, to
let it out. The piecemeal sale therefore realizes the exchange value only
gradually. As a compensation for his renouncing the immediate repayment
of the capital advanced and the profit earned on it, the seller receives
an increased price, interest, whose rate is determined by the laws of political
economy and not by any means in an arbitrary fashion. At the end of the
hundred years the house is used up, worn out and no longer habitable. If
we then deduct from the total rent paid for the house the following: 1.
The ground rent together with any increase that may have occurred to it
during the period in question, and 2. the sums expended for current repairs,
we shall find that the remainder is composed on an average as follows:
1. the building capital originally invested in the house; 2. the profit
on this, and 3. the interest on the gradually maturing capital and on the
profit. Now it is true that at the end of this period the tenant has no
house, but neither has the house owner. The latter has only the site (provided
that it belongs to him) and the building material on it, which, however,
is no longer a house. And although in the meantime the house may have brought
in a sum “which covers five or ten times the original cost price,” we shall
see that this is solely due to an increase of ground rent. This process
is a secret to no one in such cities as London where the landowner and
the house owner are usually two different persons. Such tremendous rent
increases occur in rapidly growing towns, but not in a village, where the
ground rent for building sites remains practically unchanged. It is indeed
a notorious fact that, apart from increases in the ground rent, rents produce
on an average no more than seven per cent per annum on the invested capital
(including profit) for the house owner, and out of this sum, repair costs,
etc., must be paid. In short, the rent agreement is quite an ordinary commodity
transaction which is, theoretically speaking, of no greater and no lesser
interest to the worker than any other commodity transaction, with the exception
of that which concerns the buying and selling of labor power, and, practically,
the worker comes face to face with the rent agreement as one of the thousand
forms of bourgeois cheating which I dealt with on page 4 of the reprint,
but even then, as I proved there, it is subject to economic regulation.
Mülberger, on the other hand, regards the rent agreement as nothing
but pure “arbitrariness” (page 19 of the reprint) and when I prove the
contrary to him he complains that I am telling him “all sorts of things
which unfortunately” he “already knew.” 
But with all the economic investigations into house rent we are
not able to turn the abolition of the rented dwelling into “one of the
most fruitful and magnificent efforts which has ever sprung from the womb
of the revolutionary idea.” In order to accomplish this we must translate
the simple fact from sober economics into the far more ideological sphere
of legal talk. “The house serves as a perpetual legal title” to house rent,
and “thus it comes about” that the value of a house can be paid back in
rent two, three, five or ten times. In order to discover how it really
comes about, the “legal title” does not help us in the least and therefore
I said that Mülberger would have been able to find out how it “thus comes
about” by first of all inquiring how the house becomes a legal title. We
discover this only after we have examined, as I did, the economic nature
of house rent, instead of getting angry at the legal expression under which
the ruling class sanctions it. Whoever proposes the taking of economic
steps to abolish rent ought surely, first of all, to know more about house
rent than that it is “the tribute which the tenant must pay to the perpetual
title of capital.” But to this Mülberger answers, “a description is one
thing, an explanation another.” 
We have, therefore, converted the house, although it is by no
means everlasting, into a perpetual legal title to house rent. We find
no matter how “it thus comes about,” that by virtue of this legal title,
the house brings in its original value several times over in the form of
rent. By the translation into legal phraseology we are happily so far removed
from economics that we can see no more than the phenomenon that a house
can gradually get paid for in gross rent several times over. As we are
thinking and talking in legal terms, we apply to this phenomenon the measure
of equality and justice, and we discover that it is unjust, that it is
not in accordance with the “conception of justice of the revolution,” whatever
kind of a thing that may be, and that therefore the legal title is no good.
We find further that the same holds good for interest-bearing capital and
leased agricultural land, and we now have the excuse for separating these
classes of property from the others and subjecting them to exceptional
treatment. This consists in the demands: 1. to deprive the owner of the
right to give notice, the right to demand the return of his property; 2.
to give the lessee, borrower or tenant the use without payment of the object
handed over to him, but not belonging to him; and 3. to pay off the owner
in installments over a long period without interest. And with this we have
exhausted the Proudhonist “principles” from this angle. This is Proudhon’s
 “social liquidation.” 
Incidentally, it is obvious that this whole reform plan is to
benefit almost exclusively the petty bourgeois and the small peasants in
that it consolidates them in their position as petty bourgeois and small
peasants. Here we can observe that “the petty bourgeois, Proudhon,” who
is a mythical figure according to Mülberger, suddenly takes on a very tangible
historical existence.
Mülberger continues:
 “When I say with Proudhon that the economic life of society should
 be pervaded by a conception of justice, then I am describing
 present-day society as one in which, it is true, not all
 conceptions of justice are absent, but in which the conception of
 justice of the resolution is absent, a fact which even Engels will
 admit.” 

Unfortunately I am not in a position to do Mülberger this favor. Mülberger
demands that society should be pervaded with a conception of justice, and
calls that a description. If a court sends a bailiff to me with a summons
for the payment of a debt, then, according to Mülberger, it is doing no
more than describing me as a man who does not pay his debts! A description
is one thing, and a presumptuous demand is another. And precisely therein
lies the essential difference between German scientific socialism and Proudhon.
We describe – and despite Mülberger every real description is at the same
time an explanation – economic relationships as they are and as they are
developing, and we provide the proof, strictly economically, that their
development is at the same time the development of the elements of a social
revolution, the development on the one hand of a class whose conditions
of life necessarily drive it to social revolution, the proletariat, and
on the other hand of productive forces which, having grown beyond the framework
of capitalist society, must necessarily burst that framework, and which
at the same time offer the means for abolishing class differences once
and for all in the interests of social progress itself. Proudhon, on the
contrary, demands from present-day society that it shall transform itself
not according to the laws of its own economic development, but according
to the prescriptions of justice (the “conception of justice” does not belong
to him, but to Mülberger). Where we prove, Proudhon, and with him Mülberger,
preaches and laments.
What kind of a thing “the conception of justice of the revolution” 
is, I am quite unable to guess. Proudhon, it is true, makes a sort of goddess
out of “the Revolution,” the bearer and executor of his “Justice” in doing
which he then falls into the peculiar error of mixing up the bourgeois
revolution of 1739-94 with the coming proletarian revolution. He does this
in almost all his works and particularly since 1848; 1 shall quote only
one as an example, namely, the “Idée générale de la révolution,” pages
39 and 40 of the 1868 edition. As, however, Mülberger rejects all and every
responsibility for Proudhon I am not allowed to explain “the conception
of justice of the revolution” from Proudhon and remain therefore in Egyptian
darkness. Mülberger says further:
 “But neither Proudhon nor I appeal to an ‘eternal justice’ in
 order thereby to explain the existing unjust conditions, or even
 expect, as Engels imputes to me, the improvement of these
 conditions from the appeal to this justice.” 

Mülberger apparently reckons on the fact that, “in Germany Proudhon is
as good as unknown.” In all his works Proudhon measures all social, legal,
political and religious propositions by the measure of “justice,” and condemns
or recognizes them according to whether they conform or do not conform
to what he calls “justice.” In the “Contradictions economiques” this justice
is still called “eternal justice,” “justice eternelle.” Later on, nothing
more is said about eternity, but the idea remains in essence. For instance,
in “De la Justice dans la Revolution et dans l’Eglise,” 1858 edition, the
following passage is the text of the whole three-volume sermon (Vol. 1,
page 42):
 “What is the basic principle, the organic, regulating, sovereign
 principle of all societies, the principle which subordinates all
 others to itself, which rules, protects, represses, punishes, and
 in case of need even suppresses all rebellious elements? Is it
 religion, idealism or interest? In my opinion this principle is
 justice. What is justice? It is the essence of humanity itself.
 What has it been since the beginning of the world? Nothing. What
 should it be? Everything.” 

Justice which is the essence of humanity itself, what is that if it is
not eternal justice? Justice which is the organic, regulating, sovereign
basic principle of all societies, which has nevertheless been nothing up
to the present, but which ought to be everything – what is that if it
is not the standard with which to measure all human affairs, if it is not
the final arbiter to be appealed to in all conflicts? And did I assert
anything else than that Proudhon cloaks his economic ignorance and helplessness
by judging all economic conditions not according to economic laws, but
according to whether they conform or do not conform to his conception of
this eternal justice? And what is the difference between Mülberger and
Proudhon when Mülberger demands that “all these exchanges in the life of
modern society” should be “pervaded by a conception of justice, that is
to say, if they took place always according to the strict demands of justice?” 
Is it that I can’t read, or that Mülberger can’t write?
Mülberger says further:
 “Proudhon knows as well as Marx and Engels that the actual driving
 spirit in human society is the economic and not the juridical
 relations; he also knows that the given conceptions of justice of
 a people are only the expression, the impression, the product of
 the economic – and in particular the production relations.... In
 a word, for Proudhon justice is the historically evolved economic
 product.” 

If Proudhon knows all this (I am prepared to let the unclear expressions
used by Mülberger pass and take the good will for the deed), if he knows
it all “as well as Marx and Engels,” what is there left to quarrel about?
However, the situation is in fact somewhat different with regard to Proudhon’s
science. The economic relations of a given society present themselves in
the first place as interests. But in the passage which has just been quoted
from his main work, Proudhon says in so many words that the “regulating,
organic, sovereign basic principle of all societies, the principle which
subordinates all others to itself” is not interest, but justice. And he
repeats the same thing in all the decisive passages of all his works, although
this does not prevent Mülberger from continuing:
 “... the idea of economic justice, as it was developed by Proudhon
 most profoundly of all in La Guerre et la Paix, [War and
 Peace.-Ed.] completely coincides with that basic idea of Lassalle
 so excellently expressed by him in his foreword to the System of
 Acquired Rights.” 

La guerre et la paix is perhaps the most schoolboyish of all the many
schoolboyish works of Proudhon and I would not have expected it to be put
forward as a proof for Proudhon’s alleged understanding of the German materialist
conception of history which explains all historical events and ideas, all
politics, philosophy and religion from the material, economic conditions
of life of the historical period in question. The book is so little materialist
that it cannot even construct its conception of war without calling in
the help of the creator:
“However, the creator who chose this form of life
for us had his aims.” (Vol. II, page 100, 1869 edition.)

On what historical knowledge the book is based can be judged from the fact that it believes
in the historical existence of the Golden Age:
“In the beginning when the
human race was thinly spread over the earth’s surface, nature supplied
its needs without difficulty. It was the Golden Age, the age of peace and
plenty.” (Ibid., page 102.)
Its economic standpoint is that of the crassest
Malthusianism.
“When production is doubled, the population will soon be
doubled also.” (Page 105.)
In what does the materialism of this book consist
then? In that it declares the cause of war to have been always and still
to be: “pauperism” (for instance, page 143). Uncle Brasig was just such
a materialist when in his 1848 speech he launched the great truth into
the world, “the cause of the great impoverishment is the great pauvreté.” 
Lassalle’s System of Acquired Rights is caught in the trammels
not only of the whole illusion of the jurists, but also in that of the
Old-Hegelians. On page VII, Lassalle declares expressly that also “in economics
the conception of acquired right is the driving force of all further development” 
and he seeks to prove that “justice is a reasonable organism developing
out of itself” (and not therefore out of economic prerequisites). (Page
IX.) For Lassalle it is a question of evolving justice not out of economic
relations, but from
 “the concept of will itself of which the philosophy
of law is only the development and exposition.” (Page X.)

What therefore is the point of bringing in the book here? The only difference between
Proudhon and Lassalle is that the latter was really a jurist and Hegelian,
while in both jurisprudence and philosophy, as in all other matters, Proudhon
was merely a dilettante.
I know perfectly well that Proudhon, who notoriously continually
contradicts himself, occasionally made an utterance here and there which
looked as though he explained ideas on the basis of facts, but such utterances
are without any significance as against the basic tendency of his thought,
and where they do occur they are extremely confused and inherently illogical.
At a certain, very primitive stage of the development of society, the need
arises to co-ordinate under a common regulation the daily recurring acts
of production, distribution and exchange of products, to see to it that
the individual subordinates himself to the common conditions of production
and exchange. This regulation, which is at first custom, soon becomes law.
With law, organs necessarily arise which are entrusted with its maintenance
– public authority, the state. With further social development, law develops
into a more or less comprehensive legal system. The more complicated this
legal system becomes, the more its terminology becomes removed from that
in which the usual economic conditions of the life of society are expressed.
It appears as an independent element which derives the justification for
its existence and the reason for its further development not out of the
existing economic conditions, but out of its own inner logic, or, if you
like, out of “the concept of will.” People forget the derivation of their
legal system from their economic conditions of life, just as they have
forgotten their own derivation from the animal world. With the development
of the legal system into a complicated and comprehensive whole the necessity
arises for a new social division of labor; an order of professional jurists
develops and with these legal science comes into being. In its further
development this science compares the legal systems of various peoples
and various times, not as the expression of the given economic relationships,
but as systems which find their justification in themselves. The comparison
assumes something common to them all, and this the jurists find by summing
up that which is more or less common to all these legal systems as natural
law. However, the standard which is taken to determine what is natural
law and what is not, is precisely the most abstract expression of law itself,
namely, justice. From this point on, therefore, the development of law
for the jurists, and for those who believe them uncritically, is nothing
more than the striving to bring human conditions, so far as they are expressed
in legal terms, into closer and closer conformity with the ideal of justice,
eternal justice. And this justice is never anything but the ideologized,
glorified expression of the existing economic relations, at times from
the conservative side, at times from the revolutionary side. The justice
of the Greeks and Romans held slavery to be just. The justice of the bourgeois
of 1789 demanded the abolition of feudalism because it was unjust. For
the Prussian Junker even the miserable Kreisordnung [legislation establishing
distinct local authorities.-Ed.] is a violation of eternal justice. The
conception of eternal justice therefore varies not only according to time
and place, but also according to persons, and it belongs among those things
of which Mülberger correctly says, “everyone understands something different.” 
While in everyday life, in view of the simplicity of the relations which
come into question, expressions like right, wrong, justice, conception
of justice, can be used without misunderstanding even in relation to social
matters, they create, as we have seen, hopeless confusion in any scientific
investigation of economic relations, in fact, much the same confusion as
would be create in modern chemistry if the terminology of the phlogiston
theory were to be retained. The confusion becomes still worse if one, like
Proudhon, believes in this social phlogiston, “justice,” or if one, like
Mülberger, declares that the phlogiston theory no less than the oxygen
theory is perfectly correct.
[Before the discovery of oxygen the chemists explained the burning of
substances in atmospheric air by assuming the existence of a special igneous
substance, phlogiston, which escaped during the process of combustion.
Since they found that simple substances on combustion weighed more after
having been burned than they did before, they declared that phlogiston
had a negative weight so that a substance without its phlogiston weighed
more than one with it. In this way all the main properties of oxygen were
gradually ascribed to phlogiston, but all in an inverted form. The discovery
that combustion consists in a combination of the burning substance with
another substance, oxygen, and the preparation of this oxygen disposed
of the original assumption, but only after long resistance on the part
of the older chemists. – Note by F. Engels.]
III
Mülberger further complains that I called his “emphatic” utterance,

 “that there is no more terrible mockery of the whole culture of our lauded
century than the fact that in the big cities 90 per cent and more of the
population have no place that they can call their own”

 – a reactionary jeremiad. Certainly, I did. If Mülberger had confined himself, as he pretends,
to describing “the horrors of the present time” I should certainly not
have said one ill word about “him and his modest words.” In fact however,
he does something quite different; he describes these “horrors” as the
result of the fact that the workers “have no place that they can call their
own.” Whether one regrets “the horrors of the present time” as a result
of the fact that the workers no longer own their own dwellings, or, as
the Junkers do, as a result of the fact that feudalism and the guilds have
been abolished, in both cases nothing more can come of it than a reactionary
jeremiad, a song of sorrow at the coming of the inevitable, of the historically
necessary. The reactionary character of Mülberger’s attitude lies precisely
in the fact that he wishes to re-establish individual house ownership for
the workers – a matter which history has long ago put an end to – that
he can conceive of the emancipation of the workers in no other way than
by making everyone once again the owner of his own house.
And further:
 “I declare most emphatically, the real struggle is to be waged
 against the capitalist mode of production; only by its
 transformation is an improvement of housing conditions to be hoped
 for. Engels sees nothing of all this.... I presuppose the whole
 solution of the social question in order to be able to proceed to
 the abolition of the rented dwelling.” 

Unfortunately, I still see nothing of all this even now. It is surely impossible
for me to know what someone, whose name I did not even know, presupposes
in the secret recesses of his mind. All I can do is to stick to the printed
articles of Mülberger. And there I find even today (pages 15 and 16 of
the reprint) that Mülberger, in order to be able to proceed to the abolition
of the rented dwelling, presupposes nothing more than the rented dwelling
itself. Only on page 17 does he take “the productivity of capital by the
horns,” and we shall come back to this later. Even in his answer he confirms
this when he says: 

“It was rather a question of showing how under existing
conditions a complete transformation in the housing question can be achieved.” 

Under existing conditions, and by the transformation (it should be abolition)
of the capitalist mode of production, are surely things diametrically opposed.
No wonder Mülberger complains when I regard the philanthropic
efforts of Dollfus and other manufacturers to assist the workers to obtain
houses of their own as the only possible practical realization of his Proudhonist
projects. If he were to realize that Proudhon’s plan for social salvation
is a fantasy resting completely on the basis of bourgeois society, then
he would naturally not believe in it. I have never at any time called his
good will into question. But why then does he praise Dr. Reschauer for
proposing to the Vienna Town Council that it should imitate the projects
of Dollfus?
Mülberger further declares:
 “As far as the antithesis between town and country is particularly
 concerned. It is utopian to want to abolish it. This antithesis
 has become a natural, or more correctly, a historical one. The
 question is not one of abolishing this antithesis, but of finding
 political and social forms in which it would be harmless, indeed
 even fruitful. In this way it would be possible to expect a
 peaceful solution, a gradual balancing of interests.” 

So the abolition of the antithesis between town and country is utopian,
because this antithesis has become a natural, or more correctly, a historical
one. Let us apply this same logic to other antitheses in modern society
and see where we arrive then. For instance:
 “As far as the antithesis between the capitalists and the wage
 workers is particularly concerned, it is utopian to want to
 abolish it. This antithesis has become a natural, or more
 correctly, a historical one. The question is not one of abolishing
 this antagonism, but of finding political and social forms in
 which it would be harmless, indeed even fruitful. In this way it
 would be possible to expect a peaceful solution, a gradual
 balancing of interests.” 

And with this we have once again arrived at Schulze-Delitzsch.
The abolition of the antithesis between town and country is no
more and no less utopian than the abolition of the antithesis between capitalists
and wage workers. From day to day it is becoming more and more a practical
demand of both industrial and agricultural production. No one has demanded
this more energetically then Liebig in his writings on the chemistry of
agriculture, in which his first demand has always been that man shall give
back to the land what he takes from it, and in which he proves that only
the existence of the towns, and in particular the big towns, prevents this.
When one observes how here in London alone a greater quantity of manure
than is produced by the whole kingdom of Saxony is poured away every day
into the sea with an expenditure of enormous sums, and when one observes
what colossal works are necessary in order to prevent this manure from
poisoning the whole of London, then the utopian proposal to abolish the
antithesis between town and country is given a peculiarly practical basis.
And even comparatively insignificant Berlin has been wallowing in its own
filth for at least thirty years.
On the other hand, it is completely utopian to want, like Proudhon,
to transform present-day bourgeois society while maintaining the peasant
as such. Only as uniform a distribution as possible of the population over
the whole country, only an integral connection between industrial and agricultural
production together with the thereby necessary extension of the means of
communication – presupposing the abolition of the capitalist mode of production
 – would be able to save the rural population from the isolation and stupor in which
it has vegetated almost unchanged for thousands of years. It is not utopian
to declare that the emancipation of humanity from the chains which its
historic past has forged will only be complete when the antithesis between
town and country has been abolished; the utopia begins when one undertakes
 “from existing conditions” to prescribe the form in which this or any other
of the antitheses of present-day society is to be solved. And this is what
Mülberger does by adopting the Proudhonist formula for the solution of
the housing question.
Mülberger then complains that I have made him to a certain extent
co-responsible for “the monstrous views of Proudhon on capital and interest” 
and declares:
 “I presuppose the alteration of the production relations as an
 accomplished fact, and the transitional law regulating the rate of
 interest does not refer to production relations, but to the social
 turnover, to the conditions of circulation.... The alteration of
 production relations, or, as the German school says more
 accurately, the abolition of the capitalist mode of production.
 certainly does not result, as Engels tries to make me say, from a
 transitional law abolishing interest, but from the actual seizure
 of all the instruments of labor, from the seizure of industry as a
 whole by the working people. Whether in this the working people
 will pay allegiance (!) more to the idea of gradual redemption or
 immediate expropriation is not for either Engels or myself to
 decide.” 

I rub my eyes in astonishment. I have read Mülberger’s article through
once again from beginning to end in order to find the passage where he
presupposes as an accomplished fact, “the actual seizure of all the instruments
of labor... the seizure of industry as a whole by the working people,” 
as a prerequisite for redemption of the rented dwelling, but I have been
unable to find it. It does not exist. There is nowhere mention of “actual
seizure,” etc., but there is the following:
 “Let us now assume that the productivity of capital is really
 taken by the horns, as it must be sooner or later, for instance by
 a transitional law which fixes the interest on all capitals at one
 per cent, but mark you, with the tendency to make even this rate
 of interest approximate more and more to the zero point.... Like
 all other products, houses and dwellings are naturally also
 included within the framework of this law.... We see, therefore,
 that from this angle the redemption of the rented dwelling is a
 necessary consequence of the abolition of the productivity of
 capital in general.” 

Thus, it is said here in plain words, quite contrary to Mülberger’s latest
about-face, that the productivity of capital, by which confused phrase
he admittedly means the capitalist mode of production, is really “taken
by the horns” by the law abolishing interest, and that precisely as a result
of this law, “the redemption of the rented dwelling is a necessary consequence
of the abolition of the productivity of capital in general.” Not at all,
says Mülberger now. That transitional law “does not refer to production
relations, but to the conditions of circulation.” In view of this crass
contradiction, as Goethe would say, “equally mysterious for wise men as
for fools,” all that is left for me is to assume that I have to do with
two separate and distinct Mülbergers, one of whom complains with justification
that I have “tried to make him say” what the other one caused to be printed.
It is certainly true that the working people will ask neither
me nor Mülberger whether in the actual seizure it will “pay allegiance
more to the idea of gradual redemption or immediate expropriation.” In
all probability it will prefer not to “pay allegiance” at all. However,
there was never any question of the actual seizure of all the instruments
of labor by the working people, but only of Mülberger’s assertion (page
17) that “the whole content of the solution of the housing question is
given in the expression: gradual redemption.” And if he now declares this
gradual redemption to be extremely doubtful, what was the reason for giving
ourselves and our readers all the unnecessary trouble?
For the rest, it must be pointed out that the “actual seizure” 
of all the instruments of labor, the seizure of industry as a whole by
the working people, is the exact contrary of the Proudhonist theory of
 “gradual redemption.” Under the latter the individual worker becomes the
owner of the dwelling, the peasant farm, the instruments of labor; under
the former the “working people” remain the collective owners of the houses,
factories and instruments of labor and would hardly permit their use, at
least in a transitional period, by individuals or associations without
compensation for the cost. Just as the abolition of property in land is
not the abolition of ground rent, but its transfer, although in a modified
form, to society. The actual seizure of all the instruments of labor by
the working people therefore does not at all exclude the retention of the
rent relations.
In general, the question is not whether the proletariat when it
comes to power will simply seize by force the tools of production, the
raw materials and means of subsistence, whether it will pay immediate compensation
for them, or whether it will redeem property therein by installments spread
over a long period. To attempt to answer such a question in advance and
for all cases would be utopia-making, and I leave that to others.
IV
It has been necessary to write very much in order to work our way finally
through Mülberger’s evasions and twistings to the real point at issue,
a point which Mülberger carefully avoids touching on in his answer.
What were Mülberger’s positive statements in his articles?
Firstly: that “the difference between the original cost price
of a house, building site, etc., and its present value” belongs by right
to society. In the language of economics, this difference is called ground
rent Proudhon also wants to appropriate this for society, as one may read
in his “Idée générale de la révolution,” page 219 of the 1868 edition.
Secondly: that the solution of the housing question consists in
everyone being the owner instead of the tenant of his dwelling.
Thirdly: that this solution takes place by the passing of a law
turning rent payments into installment payments on the purchase price of
the dwelling. These points 2 and 3 are both taken from Proudhon as anyone
can see in the “Idée générale de la révolution,” page 199 et seq., where
on page 203 a project of the law in question is to be found already drafted.
Fourthly: that the productivity of capital is taken by the horns
by a transitional law reducing the rate of interest temporarily to one
per cent, subject to reducing it still further later on. This point has
also been taken from Proudhon and can be read in detail on pages 182 to
186 of the Idée générale de la révolution.
With regard to each of these points I have cited the passage of
Proudhon where the original of the Mülberger copy is to be found, and I
ask now whether I was justified in calling the author of a series of articles
containing completely Proudhonist and nothing but Proudhonist views, a
Proudhonist or not? Nevertheless Mülberger complains about nothing more
bitterly than that I call him a Proudhonist because I “came upon a few
expressions such as are peculiar to Proudhon!” Quite the contrary. The
expressions all belong to Mülberger, their content belongs to Proudhon.
And when I then supplement the Proudhonist articles from Proudhon himself,
Mülberger complains that I am ascribing to him “the monstrous ideas” of
Proudhon!
What did I reply to this Proudhonist plan?
Firstly: that the transfer of ground rent to the state is identical
with the abolition of individual property in land.
Secondly: that the gradual redemption of the rented dwelling and
the transfer of property in the dwelling to the tenants does not at all
affect the capitalist mode of production.
Thirdly: that with the present development of large-scale industry
and towns, this proposal is as absurd as it is reactionary, and that the
reintroduction of ownership of his dwelling by each individual would be
a step backward.
Fourthly: that the compulsory reduction of the rate of interest
on capital would by no means attack the capitalist Mode of production,
and that, on the contrary, as the usury laws prove, the idea is as old
as it is impossible.
Fifthly: that the abolition of interest on capital by no means
abolishes the payment of rent for houses.
Mülberger has now admitted points 2 and 4. To the other points
he makes no reply whatever. Nevertheless, these are just the points around
which the whole debate centered. Mülberger’s answer, however, is not a
refutation; it carefully avoids dealing with all economic points, which
are, of course, the decisive ones. It is a personal complaint, nothing
more. For instance, he complains when I anticipate his promised solution
of other questions, for instance, state debts, private debts and credit,
and say that the solution would be the same in each case as his solution
of the housing question, namely, the abolition of interest, the transformation
of interest payments into installments for paying off the capital sum,
and free credit. Nevertheless, I am still ready to bet that if these articles
of Mülberger ever see the light of day, their essential content will coincide
with Proudhon’s Idée générale de la révolution: credit, page 182; state
debts, page 186; private debts, page 196; just as his articles on the housing
question coincided with the passages I have quoted from the same book.
Mülberger takes this opportunity of informing me that questions
such as taxation, state debts, private debts and credit, to which is now
added the question of municipal autonomy, are of the greatest importance
to the peasant and for propaganda in the countryside. To a great extent
I agree, but, 1. up to the moment there has been no mention of the peasant,
and 2. Proudhon’s “solutions” of all these questions are just as absurd
economically and just as essentially bourgeois as his solution of the housing
question. I need hardly defend myself against Mülberger’s suggestion that
I fail to appreciate the necessity of drawing the peasants into the movement.
However, I certainly consider it folly to recommend to them for this purpose
the Proudhonian quackery. There is still very much large-scale landed property
in Germany. According to Proudhon’s theory all this ought to be divided
up into small peasant farms, which, in the present state of agriculture
and after the experience of small landownership in France and in Western
Germany, would be positively reactionary. The large-scale landed estates
which still exist will rather afford us a welcome opportunity of conducting
agriculture on a large scale – the only way which can utilize modern equipment
machinery, etc. – by associated workers, and thus demonstrating to the
small peasants the advantages of large-scale enterprise by means of associations.
The Danish socialists, who in this respect are ahead of all others, have
realized this long ago.
It is equally unnecessary for me to defend myself against the
suggestion that I regard the existing infamous housing conditions as “an
insignificant detail.” As far as I know, I was the first to describe in
German these conditions in their classical form as they exist in England.
I did not do that, as Mülberger suggests, because they “violated my sense
of justice” – whoever insisted on writing books about all the facts which
violated his sense of justice would have a lot to do – but as can be read
in the introduction to my book, by describing the social conditions created
by modern large-scale industry, to provide an actual basis for German socialism,
which was then arising and was expending itself in empty phrases. However,
it does not occur to me to try to solve the so-called housing question
any more than I occupy myself with the details of the still more important
food question. I am satisfied if I can prove that the production of our
modern society is sufficient to provide all its members with enough to
eat, and that there are houses enough in existence to provide the working
masses for the time being with roomy and healthy living accommodation.
To speculate as to how a future society would organize the distribution
of food and dwellings leads directly to utopia. The utmost we can do is
to note, from an understanding of the basic conditions of all modes of
production up to now, that with the downfall of the capitalist mode of
production certain forms of appropriation by society hitherto will become
impossible. Even the transitional measures will everywhere have to be in
accordance with the conditions in existence at the moment; in countries
of small-scale landownership quite different from those in countries where
large-scale landownership prevails, etc. Mülberger himself shows us better
than anyone else where one arrives at if one attempts to find isolated
solutions for so-called practical questions, such as the housing question,
when he takes 28 pages to explain to us that, “the whole content of the
solution of the housing question is given in the expression: gradual redemption,” 
but who, when one presses him hard, begins to stammer in embarrassment
that it is really very doubtful whether, when it comes to a question of
the actual seizure of the houses, “the working people will pay allegiance
more to the idea of gradual redemption” or to some other form of expropriation.
Mülberger demands that we should become practical, that we should
not “come forward merely with dead and abstract formulas” when “faced with
real practical conditions,” that we should, “proceed beyond abstract socialism
and come close to the definite concrete conditions of society.” If Mülberger
had done this himself he might perhaps have rendered great service to
the movement. The first step in coming close to the definite and concrete
conditions of society is surely that one should learn what they are, that
one should examine them according to their existing economic interrelations.
But what do we find in Mülberger’s articles? Two whole sentences, namely:
1. “As the wage worker in relation to the capitalist, so is the
tenant in relation to the house owner.” 

I have already, proved on page six of the reprint that this is totally false, and Mülberger has not a word to say in reply.
2. “However, the bull which” (in any social reform)
 “must be taken by the horns is the productivity of capital, 
 as the liberal school of political
economy calls it, a thing which in reality does not exist, but which in
its apparent existence serves as a cloak for all the inequality which burdens
present-day society.”

Thus, the bull which has to be taken by the horns
 “in reality does not exist,” and therefore also has no “horns.” Not the
bull itself is the ; evil, but, its “apparent existence.” Despite this,
 “the so-called productivity” (of capital) “is able to conjure up houses
and towns” whose existence is anything but “apparent.” And a man who,
although Marx’s Capital “is familiar also to him,” jabbers in this hopelessly confused fashion about the relation of capital and labour, takes on the
task of showing the German workers a new and better path, and presents
himself as the “master builder” who is 

“clear about the architectural structure
of the future society at least in its main outlines!” 

No one has come closer “to the definite and concrete conditions
of society” than Marx in Capital. He spent twenty-five years in investigating
them from all angles, and the results of his criticism contain throughout
the kernels of so-called solutions, in as far as they are possible at all
today. But that is not enough for friend Mülberger. That is all abstract
socialism, dead and abstract formulas. Instead of studying “the definite
and concrete conditions of society” for himself, friend Mülberger contents
himself with reading through a few volumes of Proudhon which, although
they offer him next to nothing concerning the definite concrete conditions
of society, do offer him very definite and concrete miraculous remedies
for all social evils. He then presents this ready-made plan for social
salvation, this Proudhonian system, to the German workers under the pretext
that he wants “to say good-bye to the systems,” 
while I “choose the
opposite path.” In order to grasp this I must assume that I am blind and
Mülberger deaf so that any understanding between us is utterly impossible.
But enough. If this polemic serves for nothing else it has the
value in any case of having provided proof of how impractical these so-called
 “practical” socialists really are. These practical proposals for the abolition
of all social evils, these universal social panaceas, have always and everywhere
been the work of sectarians who appeared at a time when the proletarian
movement was still in its infancy. Proudhon also belongs among them. The
development of the proletariat soon casts aside these swaddling-clothes
and produces in the working class itself the understanding that nothing
is less practical than these “practical solutions,” concocted in advance
and universally applicable, and that practical socialism consists rather
in a correct knowledge of the capitalist mode of production from all its
various sides. A working class which is secure in this knowledge will never
be in doubt in any given case against which social institutions, and in
what manner, its main attacks should be directed.
 


Contents |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## On Authority







On Authority


Works of Frederick Engels 1872
On Authority


Written: 1872;
Published: 1874 in the Italian, Almanacco Republicano;
Source: Marx-Engels Reader, New York: W. W. Norton and Co., second edition, 1978 (first edition, 1972), pp 730-733.;
Translated: Robert C. Tucker;
Transcribed: by Mike Lepore.

A number of Socialists have latterly launched a regular crusade against what they call the principle of authority. It suffices to tell them that this or that act is authoritarian for it to be condemned. This summary mode of procedure is being abused to such an extent that it has become necessary to look into the matter somewhat more closely.

Authority, in the sense in which the word is used here, means: the imposition of the will of another upon ours; on the other hand, authority presupposes subordination. Now, since these two words sound bad, and the relationship which they represent is disagreeable to the subordinated party, the question is to ascertain whether there is any way of dispensing with it, whether — given the conditions of present-day society — we could not create another social system, in which this authority would be given no scope any longer, and would consequently have to disappear.

On examining the economic, industrial and agricultural conditions which form the basis of present-day bourgeois society, we find that they tend more and more to replace isolated action by combined action of individuals. Modern industry, with its big factories and mills, where hundreds of workers supervise complicated machines driven by steam, has superseded the small workshops of the separate producers; the carriages and wagons of the highways have become substituted by railway trains, just as the small schooners and sailing feluccas have been by steam-boats. Even agriculture falls increasingly under the dominion of the machine and of steam, which slowly but relentlessly put in the place of the small proprietors big capitalists, who with the aid of hired workers cultivate vast stretches of land.

Everywhere combined action, the complication of processes dependent upon each other, displaces independent action by individuals. But whoever mentions combined action speaks of organisation; now, is it possible to have organisation without authority?

Supposing a social revolution dethroned the capitalists, who now exercise their authority over the production and circulation of wealth. Supposing, to adopt entirely the point of view of the anti-authoritarians, that the land and the instruments of labour had become the collective property of the workers who use them. Will authority have disappeared, or will it only have changed its form? Let us see.

Let us take by way of example a cotton spinning mill. The cotton must pass through at least six successive operations before it is reduced to the state of thread, and these operations take place for the most part in different rooms. Furthermore, keeping the machines going requires an engineer to look after the steam engine, mechanics to make the current repairs, and many other labourers whose business it is to transfer the products from one room to another, and so forth. All these workers, men, women and children, are obliged to begin and finish their work at the hours fixed by the authority of the steam, which cares nothing for individual autonomy. The workers must, therefore, first come to an understanding on the hours of work; and these hours, once they are fixed, must be observed by all, without any exception. Thereafter particular questions arise in each room and at every moment concerning the mode of production, distribution of material, etc., which must be settled by decision of a delegate placed at the head of each branch of labour or, if possible, by a majority vote, the will of the single individual will always have to subordinate itself, which means that questions are settled in an authoritarian way. The automatic machinery of the big factory is much more despotic than the small capitalists who employ workers ever have been. At least with regard to the hours of work one may write upon the portals of these factories: Lasciate ogni autonomia, voi che entrate! [Leave, ye that enter in, all autonomy behind!]

If man, by dint of his knowledge and inventive genius, has subdued the forces of nature, the latter avenge themselves upon him by subjecting him, in so far as he employs them, to a veritable despotism independent of all social organisation. Wanting to abolish authority in large-scale industry is tantamount to wanting to abolish industry itself, to destroy the power loom in order to return to the spinning wheel.

Let us take another example — the railway. Here too the co-operation of an infinite number of individuals is absolutely necessary, and this co-operation must be practised during precisely fixed hours so that no accidents may happen. Here, too, the first condition of the job is a dominant will that settles all subordinate questions, whether this will is represented by a single delegate or a committee charged with the execution of the resolutions of the majority of persona interested. In either case there is a very pronounced authority. Moreover, what would happen to the first train dispatched if the authority of the railway employees over the Hon. passengers were abolished?

But the necessity of authority, and of imperious authority at that, will nowhere be found more evident than on board a ship on the high seas. There, in time of danger, the lives of all depend on the instantaneous and absolute obedience of all to the will of one.

When I submitted arguments like these to the most rabid anti-authoritarians, the only answer they were able to give me was the following: Yes, that's true, but there it is not the case of authority which we confer on our delegates, but of a commission entrusted! These gentlemen think that when they have changed the names of things they have changed the things themselves. This is how these profound thinkers mock at the whole world.

We have thus seen that, on the one hand, a certain authority, no matter how delegated, and, on the other hand, a certain subordination, are things which, independently of all social organisation, are imposed upon us together with the material conditions under which we produce and make products circulate.

We have seen, besides, that the material conditions of production and circulation inevitably develop with large-scale industry and large-scale agriculture, and increasingly tend to enlarge the scope of this authority. Hence it is absurd to speak of the principle of authority as being absolutely evil, and of the principle of autonomy as being absolutely good. Authority and autonomy are relative things whose spheres vary with the various phases of the development of society. If the autonomists confined themselves to saying that the social organisation of the future would restrict authority solely to the limits within which the conditions of production render it inevitable, we could understand each other; but they are blind to all facts that make the thing necessary and they passionately fight against the word.

Why do the anti-authoritarians not confine themselves to crying out against political authority, the state? All Socialists are agreed that the political state, and with it political authority, will disappear as a result of the coming social revolution, that is, that public functions will lose their political character and will be transformed into the simple administrative functions of watching over the true interests of society. But the anti-authoritarians demand that the political state be abolished at one stroke, even before the social conditions that gave birth to it have been destroyed. They demand that the first act of the social revolution shall be the abolition of authority. Have these gentlemen ever seen a revolution? A revolution is certainly the most authoritarian thing there is; it is the act whereby one part of the population imposes its will upon the other part by means of rifles, bayonets and cannon — authoritarian means, if such there be at all; and if the victorious party does not want to have fought in vain, it must maintain this rule by means of the terror which its arms inspire in the reactionists. Would the Paris Commune have lasted a single day if it had not made use of this authority of the armed people against the bourgeois? Should we not, on the contrary, reproach it for not having used it freely enough?

Therefore, either one of two things: either the anti-authoritarians don't know what they're talking about, in which case they are creating nothing but confusion; or they do know, and in that case they are betraying the movement of the proletariat. In either case they serve the reaction.
 


Works Index |
Bakunin on Authority |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Programme of the Blanquist Commune Emigrants




The Program of the Blanquist Fugitives from the Paris Commune






Works of Frederick Engels 1874
The Program of the Blanquist Fugitives from the Paris Commune


First published: in Der Volksstaat, No.73, 26 June 1874;
Translated: Ernest Untermann for International Socialist Review, Volume IX, No. 2, August 1908;
Transcribed: for marxists@marx.org, May 2002.



AFTER THE FAILURE of every revolution or counter revolution, a feverish activity develops among the fugitives, who have escaped to foreign countries.  The parties of different shades form groups, accuse each other of having driven the cart into the mud, charge one another with treason and every conceivable sin.
   At the same time they remain in close touch with the home country, organise, conspire, print leaflets and newspapers, swear that the trouble will start afresh within twenty-four hours, that victory is certain, and distribute the various government offices beforehand on the strength of this anticipation.
   Of course, disappointment follows disappointment, and since this is not attributed to the inevitable historical conditions, which they refuse to understand, but rather to accidental mistakes of individuals, the mutual accusations multiply, and the whole business winds up with a grand row.  This is the history of all groups of fugitives from the royalist emigrants of 1792 until the present day. Those fugitives, who have any sense and understanding, retire from the fruitless squabble as soon as they can do so with propriety and devote themselves to better things.
   The French emigrants after the Commune did not escape this disagreeable fate.
   Owing to the European campaign of slander, which attacked everybody without distinction, and being compelled particularly in London, where they had a common center in the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, for the time being, to suppress their internal troubles before the world, they had not been able, during the last two years, to conceal the signs of advancing disintegration. The open fight broke out everywhere. In Switzerland a part of them joined the Bakounists, mainly under the influence of Malon, who was himself one of the founders of the secret alliance.  Then the socalled Blanquists in London withdrew
from the International and formed a group of their own under the title of "The Revolutionary Commune". Outside of them numerous other groups arose later, which continue in a state of ceaseless transformation and modulation and have not put out anything essential in the way of manifestos.  But the Blanquists are just making their program known to the world by a proclamation to the "Communeux".
    These Blanquists are not called by this name, because they are a group founded by Blanqui.  Only a few of the thirty-three signers of this program have ever spoken personally to Blanqui. They rather wish to express the fact that they intend to be active in his spirit and according to his traditions.
    Blanqui is essentially a political revolutionist.  He is a socialist only through sentiment, through his sympathy with the sufferings of the people, but he has neither a socialist theory nor any definite practical suggestions for social remedies.   In his political activity he was mainly a "man of action", believing that a small and well organized minority, who would attempt a political stroke of force at the opportune moment, could carry the mass of the people with them by a few successes at the start and thus make a victorious revolution.  Of course, he could organize such a group under Louis Phillippe's reign only as a secret society. Then the thing, which generally happens in the case of conspiracies, naturally took place.  His men, tired of beings held off all the time by the empty promises that the outbreak should soon begin, finally lost all patience, became rebellious, and only the alternative remained of either letting the conspiracy fall to pieces or of breaking loose without any apparent provocation. They made a revolution on May 12th, 1839, and were promptly squelched. By the way, this Blanquist conspiracy was the only one, in which the police could never get a foothold. The blow fell out of a clear sky.
    From Blanqui's assumption, that any revolution may be made by the outbreak of a small revolutionary minority, follows of itself the necessity of a dictatorship after the success of the venture.  This is, of course, a dictatorship, not of the entire revolutionary class, the proletariat, but of the small minority that has made the revolution, and who are themselves previously organized under the dictatorship of one or several individuals.
    We see, then, that Blanqui is a revolutionary of the preceding generation.
    These conceptions of the march of revolutionary events have long become obsolete, at least for the German worker's party, and will not find much sympathy in France, except among the less mature or the more impatient laborers. We shall also note, that they are placed under certain restrictions in the present program. Nevertheless our London Blanquists agree with the principle, that revolutions do not make themselves, but are made; that they are made by a relatively small minority and after a previously conceived plan; and finally, that they may be made at ally time, and that "soon". It is a matter of course that such principles will deliver a man hopelessly into the hands of all the self-deceptions of a fugitive's life and drive him from one folly into another.  He wants above all to play the role of Blanqui, "the man of action".  But little can be accomplished by mere good will.  Not every one has the revolutionary instinct and quick decision of Blanqui. Hamlet may talk ever so much of energy, he will still remain Hamlet.   And if our thirty-three men of action cannot find anything at all to do upon what they call the field of action, then these thirty-three Brutuses come into a more comical than tragic conflict with themselves. The tragic of their situation is by no means increased by the dark men which they assume, as though they were so many slayers of tyrants with stilettos in their bosoms, which they are not.
   What can they do? They prepare the next "outbreak" by drawing up lists of proscription for the future, in order that the line of men, who took part in the Commune, may be purified. For this reason they are called "The Pure" by the other fugitives.  Whether they themselves assume this title, I cannot say. It would fit some of them rather badly. Their meetings are secret, and their resolutions are supposed to he kept secret, although this does not prevent the whole French quarter from ringing with them next morning. And as always happens to men of action that have nothing to do, they became involved first in a personal, then in a literary quarrel with a foe worthy of themselves, one of the most doubtful of the minor Parisian journalists, a certain Vermersch, who published during the Commune the "Pére Duchene", a miserable caricature of the paper published by Hébert in 1793.  This noble creature replies to their moral indignation, by calling all of them thieves or accomplices of thieves in some leaflet, and smothering them with a flood of billingsgate that smells of the dungheap. Every word is an excrement. And is with such opponents that our thirty-three Brutuses wrestle before the public!
   If anything is evident, it is the fact that the Parisian proletariat, after the exhausting war, after the famine in
Paris, and especially after the fearful massacres of May, 1871,
will require a good deal of time to rest, in order to gather new strength, and that every premature attempt at a revolution would bring on merely a new and still more crushing defeat.  Our Blanquists are of a different opinion.
    The route of the royalist majority in Versailles forebodes to them "the fall of Versailles, the revenge of the Commune. For we are approaching one of those great historical moments, one of those great crises, in which the people, while seemingly sunk in misery and doomed to death, resume their revolutionary advance with new strength."
    In other words, another outbreak will "soon" come. This hope for an "immediate revenge of the Commune" is not a mere illusion of the fugitives, but a necessary article of faith with men, who have their mind set upon being "men of action" at a time when there is absolutely nothing to be done in the sense which they represent, that of an immediate outbreak.
    Nevermind. Since a start will be made soon, they hold that "the time has come, when every fugitive, who still has any life in him, should declare himself."
    And so the thirty-three declare that they are: 1) atheists; 2) communists,; 3) revolutionaries.
    Our Blanquists have this in common with the Bakounists, that they wish to represent the most advanced, most extreme line. For this reason they often choose the same means as the Bakounists, although they differ from them in their aims. The point with them is, then, to be more radical in the matter of atheism than all others.  Fortunately it requires no great heroism to be an atheist nowadays.  Atheism is practically accepted by the European working men's parties, although in certain countries it may at times be of the same caliber as that of a certain Bakounist, who declared that it was contrary to all socialism to believe in God, but that it was different with the virgin Mary, in whom every good socialist ought to believe. Of the vast majority of the German socialist working men it may even be said that mere atheism has been outgrown by them.  This purely negative term does not apply to them any more, for they maintain no longer merely a theoretical, but rather a practical opposition to the belief in God.  They are simply done with God, they live and think in the real world, for they are materialists.  This will probably be the case in France also. But if it were not, then nothing would be easier than to see to it that the splendid French materialist literature of the preceding century is widely distributed among the laborers, that literature; in which the French mind has so far accomplished its best in form and content, and which, with due allowance for the condition of the science of their day, still
stands infinitely high in content, while its form has never been equalled since.
    But this cannot suit our Blanquists. In order to show that they are the most radical, God is abolished by them by decree, as in 1793: "May the Commune for ever free humanity from this ghost of past misery (God), from this cause of its present Misery."  (The non-existing God a cause!)  There is no room in the Commune for priests; every religious demonstration, every religious organisation, must be forbidden."
And this demand for a transformation of people into atheists by order of the star chamber is signed by two members of the Commune, who had opportunity enough to learn in the first place, that a multitude of things may be ordered on paper without being carried out, and in the second place, that persecutions are the best means of promoting disliked convictions. So much is certain, that the only service, which may still be rendered to God today, is that of declaring atheism an article of faith to he enforced and of outdoing even Bismarck's anti-Catholic laws by forbidding religion altogether.
The second point of the program is Communism.
    Here we are more at home, for the ship in which we sail here is called "The Manifesto of the Communist Party, published in February 1848." Already in the fall of 1872 the five Blanquists who withdrew from the International had adopted a socialist program, which was in all essential points that of the present German Communism.  They had justified their withdrawal by the fact that the International refused to play at revolution making after the manner of these five.  Now this council of thirty-three adopts this program with its entire materialist conception of history, although its translation into Blanquist French leaves a good deal to desire, in parts where the "Manifesto" has not been almost literally adopted, as it has, for instance, in the following passage:  "As the last expression of all forms of servitude, the bourgeoisie has lifted the mystic veil from the exploitation of labor, by which it was formerly obscured: Governments, religions, family, laws, institutions of the past and the present, finally revealed themselves in this society, reduced to the simple antagonism between capitalist and wage workers, as instruments of oppression, by the help of which the bourgeoisie maintains its rule and holds the proletariat down."
   Compare with this "The Communist Manifesto", Section 1: "In one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.  The bourgeoise has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto honored and looked up to with
reverend awe. It has converted the physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into its paid wage laborers. The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil, and has reduced the family relation to a mere money relation.  Etc."

But as soon as we descend  from theory to  practice, the peculiarity of the thirty-three manifests itself:  "We are Communists, because we want to reach our goal without stopping at any intermediate stations, at compromises, which merely defer the victory and prolong the slavery." The German Communists are communists, because they clearly see the final goal and work towards it through all intermediate stations and compromises, which are created, not by them, but by historical development. And their goal is the abolition of classes, the inauguration of a society, in which no private property in land and means of production shall exist any longer.  The thirty-three, on the other hand, are communists, because they imagine that they can skip intermediate stations and compromises at their sweet will, and if only the trouble begins, as it will soon according to them, and they get hold of affairs, then Communism will be introduced the day after tomorrow. If this is not immediately possible, then they are not communists.
   What a simple hearted childishness, which quotes impatience as a convincing argument in support of a theory! Finally the thirty-three are "revolutionaries." In this line, so far as big words are concerned, we know that the Bakounists have reached the limit; but the Blanquists feel that it is their duty to excel them in this.  And how do they do this? It is well known that the entire socialist proletariat, from Lisbon to New York and Budapest to Belgrade has assumed the responsibility for the actions of the Paris Commune without hesitation. But that is not enough for the Blanquists.  "As for us, we claim our part of the responsibility for the executions of the enemies of the people" (by the Commune), whose names are then enumerated; "we claim our part of the responsibility for those fires, which destroyed the instruments of royal or bourgeois oppression or protected our fighters."
    In every revolution some follies are inevitably committed, just as they are at any other time, and when quiet is finally restored, and calm reasoning comes, people necessarily conclude:  We have done many things which had better been left undone, and we have neglected many things which we should have done, and for this reason things went wrong.

    But what a lack of judgment it requires to declare the Commune sacred, to proclaim it infallible, to claim that every burnt house, every executed hostage, received their just dues to the dot over the i!  Is not that equivalent to saying that during that week in May the people shot just as many opponents as was necessary, and no more, and burnt just those buildings which had to be burnt, and no more? Does not that repeat the saying about the first French Revolution: Every beheaded victim received justice, first those beheaded by order of Robespierre and then Robespierre himself! To such follies are people driven, when they give free rein to the desire to appear formidable, although they are at bottom quite goodnatured.
    Enough.  In spite of all follies of the fugitives, and in spite of all comical efforts to appear terrible, this program shows some progress.  It is the first manifesto, in which French workingmen endorse the present German communism. And these are moreover working men of that caliber, who consider the French as the chosen people of the revolution and Paris as the revolutionary Jerusalem. To have carried them to this point is the undeniable merit of Vaillant, who is one of the signers of the manifesto, and who is well known to be thoroughly familiar with the German language and the German socialist literature. The German socialist working men, on the other hand, who proved in 1870 that they were completely free from jingoism, may regard it as a good sign that French working men adopt correct theoretical principles, even when they come from Germany.
 


V. On Social Relations in Russia
Conflict with Bakunin |
Marx & Engels on Russia
Marx-Engels Archive |
Works by Date
 




==========

## On Social Relations in Russia









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Afterword to the Work. “On Social Relations in Russia”









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Comments on Bakunin’s Statehood and Anarchy








Conspectus of Bakunin's Statism and Anarchy


Works of Karl Marx 1874
Conspectus of Bakunin’s
Statism and Anarchy
[Extract]


Written: April 1874 - January 1875;
Published: in Letopisi marksizma, 1926;


During the latter part of 1874 Marx copied into a notebook, in the Russian, extensive extracts from Bakunin's recent book Statism and Anarchy, interspersing them, in the section reproduced below, with his own comments. This extract of Marx's 'Conspectus' is translated from the German text printed in MEW 18, pp. 630-36. English extracts of Bakunin's book are printed in G. P. Maximoff (ed.), The Political Philosophy of Bakunin

We have already stated our deep opposition to the theory of Lassalle and Marx, which recommends to the workers, if not as final ideal then at least as the next major aim -- the foundation of a people's state, which, as they have expressed it, will be none other than the proletariat organized as ruling class. The question arises, if the proletariat becomes the ruling class, over whom will it rule? It means that there will still remain another proletariat, which will be subject to this new domination, this new state.

It means that so long as the other classes, especially the capitalist class, still exists, so long as the proletariat struggles with it (for when it attains government power its enemies and the old organization of society have not yet vanished), it must employ forcible means, hence governmental means. It is itself still a class and the economic conditions from which the class struggle and the existence of classes derive have still not disappeared and must forcibly be either removed out of the way or transformed, this transformation process being forcibly hastened.
e.g. the krestyanskaya chern, the common peasant folk, the peasant mob, which as is well known does not enjoy the goodwill of the Marxists, and which, being as it is at the lowest level of culture, will apparently be governed by the urban factory proletariat.
i.e. where the peasant exists in the mass as private proprietor, where he even forms a more or less considerable majority, as in all states of the west European continent, where he has not disappeared and been replaced by the agricultural wage-labourer, as in England, the following cases apply: either he hinders each workers' revolution, makes a wreck of it, as he has formerly done in France, or the proletariat (for the peasant proprietor does not belong to the proletariat, and even where his condition is proletarian, he believes himself not to) must as government take measures through which the peasant finds his condition immediately improved, so as to win him for the revolution; measures which will at least provide the possibility of easing the transition from private ownership of land to collective ownership, so that the peasant arrives at this of his own accord, from economic reasons. It must not hit the peasant over the head, as it would e.g. by proclaiming the abolition of the right of inheritance or the abolition of his property. The latter is only possible where the capitalist tenant farmer has forced out the peasants, and where the true cultivator is just as good a proletarian, a wage-labourer, as is the town worker, and so has immediately, not just indirectly, the very same interests as him. Still less should small-holding property be strengthened, by the enlargement of the peasant allotment simply through peasant annexation of the larger estates, as in Bakunin's revolutionary campaign.
Or, if one considers this question from the national angle, we would for the same reason assume that, as far as the Germans are concerned, the Slavs will stand in the same slavish dependence towards the victorious German proletariat as the latter does at present towards its own bourgeoisie.
Schoolboy stupidity! A radical social revolution depends on certain definite historical conditions of economic development as its precondition. It is also only possible where with capitalist production the industrial proletariat occupies at least an important position among the mass of the people. And if it is to have any chance of victory, it must be able to do immediately as much for the peasants as the French bourgeoisie, mutatis mutandis, did in its revolution for the French peasants of that time. A fine idea, that the rule of labour involves the subjugation of land labour! But here Mr Bakunin's innermost thoughts emerge. He understands absolutely nothing about the social revolution, only its political phrases. Its economic conditions do not exist for him. As all hitherto existing economic forms, developed or undeveloped, involve the enslavement of the worker (whether in the form of wage-labourer, peasant etc.), he believes that a radical revolution  is possible in all such forms alike. Still more! He wants the European social revolution, premised on the economic basis of capitalist production, to take place at the level of the Russian or Slavic agricultural and pastoral peoples, not to surpass this level [...] The will, and not the economic conditions, is the foundation of his social revolution.
If there is a state [gosudarstvo], then there is unavoidably domination [gospodstvo], and consequently slavery. Domination without slavery, open or veiled, is unthinkable -- this is why we are enemies of the state.         What does it mean, the proletariat organized as ruling class?
It means that the proletariat, instead of struggling sectionally against the economically privileged class, has attained a sufficient strength and organization to employ general means of coercion in this struggle. It can however only use such economic means as abolish its own character as salariat, hence as class. With its complete victory its own rule thus also ends, as its class character has disappeared.
Will the entire proletariat perhaps stand at the head of the government?
In a trade union, for example, does the whole union form its executive committee? Will all division of labour in the factory, and the various functions that correspond to this, cease? And in Bakunin's constitution, will all 'from bottom to top' be 'at the top'? Then there will certainly be no one 'at the bottom'. Will all members of the commune simultaneously manage the interests of its territory? Then there will be no distinction between commune and territory.
The Germans number around forty million. Will for example all forty million be member of the government?
Certainly! Since the whole thing begins with the self-government of the commune.
The whole people will govern, and there will be no governed.
If a man rules himself, he does not do so on this principle, for he is after all himself and no other.
Then there will be no government and no state, but if there is a state, there will be both governors and slaves.
i.e. only if class rule has disappeared, and there is no state in the present political sense.
This dilemma is simply solved in the Marxists' theory. By people's government they understand (i.e. Bakunin) the government of the people by means of a small number of leaders, chosen (elected) by the people.
Asine! This is democratic twaddle, political drivel. Election is a political form present in the smallest Russian commune and artel. The character of the election does not depend on this name, but on the economic foundation, the economic situation of the voters, and as soon as the functions have ceased to be political ones, there exists 1) no government function, 2) the distribution of the general functions has become a business matter, that gives no one domination, 3) election has nothing of its present political character.
The universal suffrage of the whole people...
Such a thing as the whole people in today's sense is a chimera --
... in the election of people's representatives and rulers of the state -- that is the last word of the Marxists, as also of the democratic school -- [is] a lie, behind which is concealed the despotism of the governing minority, and only the more dangerously in so far as it appears as expression of the so-called people's will.
With collective ownership the so-called people's will vanishes, to make way for the real will of the cooperative.
So the result is: guidance of the great majority of the people by a privileged minority. But this minority, say the Marxists...

Where?

 ... will consist of workers. Certainly, with your permission, of former workers, who however, as soon as they have become representatives or governors of the people, cease to be workers...
As little as a factory owner today ceases to be a capitalist if he becomes a municipal councillor...
and look down on the whole common workers' world from the height of the state. They will no longer represent the people, but themselves and their pretensions to people's government. Anyone who can doubt this knows nothing of the nature of men.
If Mr Bakunin only knew something about the position of a manager in a workers' cooperative factory, all his dreams of domination would go to the devil. He should have asked himself what form the administrative function can take on the basis of this workers' state, if he wants to call it that.
But those elected will be fervently convinced and therefore educated socialists. The phrase 'educated socialism'...
...never was used.
... 'scientific socialism'...
...was only used in opposition to utopian socialism, which wants to attach the people to new delusions, instead of limiting its science to the knowledge of the social movement made by the people itself; see my text against Proudhon.

 ...which is unceasingly found in the works and speeches of the Lasalleans and Marxists, itself indicates that the so-called people's state will be nothing else than the very despotic guidance of the mass of the people by a new and numerically very small aristocracy of the genuine or supposedly educated. The people are not scientific, which means that they will be entirely freed from the cares of government, they will be entirely shut up in the stable of the governed. A fine liberation!         The Marxists sense this (!) contradiction and, knowing that the government of the educated (quelle reverie) will be the most oppressive, most detestable, most despised in the world, a real dictatorship despite all democratic forms, console themselves with the thought that this dictatorship will only be transitional and short.
Non, mon cher! -- That the class rule of the workers over the strata of the old world whom they have been fighting can only exist as long as the economic basis of class existence is not destroyed.
They say that their only concern and aim is to educate and uplift the people (saloon-bar politicians!) both economically and politically, to such a level that all government will be quite useless and the state will lose all political character, i.e. character of domination, and will change by itself into a free organization of economic interests and communes. An obvious contradiction. If their state will really be popular, why not destroy it, and if its destruction is necessary for the real liberation of the people, why do they venture to call it popular? 
Aside from the harping of Liebknecht's Volksstaat, which is nonsense, counter to the Communist Manifesto etc., it only means that, as the proletariat still acts, during the period of struggle for the overthrow of the old society, on the basis of that old society, and hence also still moves within political forms which more or less belong to it, it has not yet, during this period of struggle, attained its final constitution, and employs means for its liberation which after this liberation fall aside. Mr Bakunin concludes from this that it is better to do nothing at all... just wait for the day of general liquidation -- the last judgement.
 


Statism and Anarchy by Bakunin
Conflict with Bakunin |
Bakuninists at Work |
Works Index |
Marx Engels Archive




==========

## Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann









MECW - The requested resource is no longer available





Marxists Internet Archive: MECW File No Longer Available


 
Marx-Engels Archive
“File No Longer Available!”


The file you have tried to access originated from the Marx Engels Collected Works. Lawrence & Wishart, who hold the copyright for the Marx Engels Collected Works, have directed Marxists Internet Archive to delete all texts originating from MECW. Accordingly, from 30th April 2014, no material from MECW is available from marxists.org. English translations of Marx and Engels from other sources will continue to be available.

Marx Engels Archive
Marx Engels Works in Date order
Marx Engels Works Index

 

Try Mirror in Paris
 


Marxists Internet Archive







==========

## Marx to L. Kugelmann










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871
Marx to Dr Kugelmann
Concerning the Paris Commune
Abstract


Written: April 12-17, 1871;
Transcribed: Zodiac;
HTML Markup: S. Ryan.

[London] April 12, 1871
Dear Kugelmann
Your ‘medical advice’ was effective in so far as I have consulted my Dr Maddison and have for the present put myself under his care. He says however that my lungs are in excellent condition and the cough is due to bronchitis, etc. It probably also affects the liver.
Yesterday we received the by no means soothing news that Lafargue (not Laura) was at present in Paris. [1]

If you look at the last chapter of my Eighteenth Brumaire you will
find that I say that the next attempt of the French revolution will be
no longer, as before, to transfer the bureaucratic-military machine from
one hand to another, but to smash it, and this is essential for every
real people's revolution on the Continent. And this is what our
heroic Party comrades in Paris are attempting.  What elasticity, what
historical initiative, what a capacity for sacrifice in these Parisians!
After six months of hunger and ruin, caused rather by internal treachery
than by the external enemy, they rise, beneath Prussian bayonets, as if
there had never been a war between France and Germany and the enemy were
not at the gates of Paris.  History has no like example of a like
greatness.  If they are defeated only their “good nature” will be to
blame.  They should have marched at once on Versailles, after first
Vinoy and then the reactionary section of the Paris National Guard had
themselves retreated.  The right moment was missed because of
conscientious scruples.  They did not want to start the civil war, as
if that mischievous abortion Thiers had not already started the civil
war with his attempt to disarm Paris.  Second mistake: The Central
Committee surrendered its power too soon, to make way for the Commune. 
Again from a too “honorable” scrupulosity! However that may be, the
present rising in Paris – even if it be crushed by the wolves, swine
and vile curs of the old society – is the most glorious deed of our
Party since the June insurrection in Paris.  Compare these Parisians,
storming heaven, with the slave to heaven of the German-Prussian Holy
Roman Empire, with its posthumous masquerades reeking of the barracks,
the Church, cabbage-junkerdom and above all, of the philistine. 

A propos.  In the official publication of the list of those receiving
direct subsidies from Louis Bonaparte's treasury there is a note that
Vogt received 40,000 francs in August 1859.  I have informed Liebknecht
of the fait, for further use. 
You can send me Haxthausen’s [2] book for lately I have been receiving undamaged various pamphlets, etc, not only from Germany but even from Petersburg.
Thanks for the various newspapers you sent me. (Please let me have more of them, for I want to write something about Germany, the Reichstag, etc.)
Best regards to the Countess and Käuzchen. [3]
Yours
KM

Notes
1. Paul Lafargue had come to Paris from Bordeaux, where he was then living, to obtain from the Commune full powers to organise an armed uprising in Bordeaux  –  Progress Publishers.
2. August Haxthausen (1792-1866)  –  Prussian official and writer, author of a book on survival of communal system in land relations in Russia, reactionary feudalist  –  Progress Publishers.
3. Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann  –  Progress Publishers.
 


1871 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871
Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann
In Hanover
Abstract


Written: April 17, 1871;
Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 1999;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

[London] April 17, 1871
Dear Kugelmann
Your letter duly received. Just at present I have my hands full. Hence only a few words.

... How you can compare petty-bourgeois demonstrations à la 13 June[1],
1849, etc., with the present struggle in Paris is quite
incomprehensible to me. 

World history would indeed be very easy to make, if the struggle were
taken up only on condition of infallibly favorable chances.  It would,
on the other hand, be a very mystical nature, if “accidents” played no
part.  These accidents themselves fall naturally into the general course
of development and are compensated again by other accidents.  But
acceleration and delay are very dependent upon such “accidents,” which
included the "accident" of the character of those who at first stand at
the head of the movement. 

The decisive, unfavorable “accident” this time is by no means to be
found in the general conditions of French society, but in the presence
of the Prussians in France and their position right before Paris.  Of
this the Parisians were well aware.  But of this, the bourgeois
canaille of Versailles were also well aware.  Precisely for that
reason they presented the Parisians with the alternative of taking up
the fight of succumbing without a struggle.  In the latter case, the
demoralization of the working class against the capitalist class and its
state has entered upon a new phase with the struggle in paris.  Whatever
the immediate results may be, a new point of departure of world-historic
importance has been gained. ... 
Adieu!
KM
Notes
1. On 13 June 1849, the petty-bourgeois party of the Montagne organised a peaceful demonstration in Paris as a protest against the infringements of the French constitution by the president and the majority of the Legislative Assembly. The demonstration was easily dispersed by troops thus confirming the complete bankruptcy of the petty-bourgeois democrats in France  –  Progress Publishers.
 


1871 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive




==========

## Marx to F. Bolte










Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871



Marx-Engels Correspondence 1871
Marx to Friedrich Bolte
In New York
Abstract


Written: November 23, 1871;
Source: Marx and Engels Correspondence;
Publisher: International Publishers (1968);
First Published: Gestamtausgabe;
Translated: Donna Torr;
Transcribed: Sally Ryan in 1999;
HTML Markup: Sally Ryan.

[London,] November 23, 1871

The International was founded in order to replace the Socialist or semi-Socialist sects by a real organisation of the working class for struggle.  The original Statutes and the Inaugural Address show this at the first glance. On the other hand the Internationalists could not have maintained themselves if the course of history had not already smashed up the sectarian system. The development of the system of Socialist sects and that of the real workers' movement always stand in inverse ratio to each other.  So long as the sects are (historically) justified, the working class is not yet ripe for an independent historic movement. As soon as it has attained this maturity ail sects are essentially reactionary.  Nevertheless what history has shown everywhere was repeated within the International. The antiquated makes an attempt to re-establish and maintain itself within the newly achieved form.
And the history of the International was a continual struggle on the part of the General Council against the sects and amateur experiments which attempted to assert themselves within the International itself against the genuine movement of the working class. This struggle was conducted at the Congresses, but far more in the private dealings of the General Council with the individual sections.

In Paris, as the Proudhonists (Mutualists) were co-founders of the Association, they naturally had the reins in their hands there for the first years. Later, of course, collectivist, positivist, etc., groups were formed in opposition to them.

In Germany – the Lassalle clique. I myself went on corresponding for two years with the notorious Schweitzer and proved irrefutably to him that Lassalle's organisation is nothing but a sectarian organisation and as such hostile to the organisation of the genuine workers' movement striven for by the International.  He had his "reasons" for not understanding this.

At the end of 1868 the Russian, Bakunin, entered the International with the aim of forming inside it a second International called the  “Alliance of Social-Democracy,”  with himself as leader.   He – a  man  devoid of theoretical knowledge – put forward the pretension that this separate body was to represent the scientific propaganda of the International, which was to be made the special function of this second International within the International.

His programme was a superficially scraped together hash of Right and Left – EQUALITY Of CLASSES (!), abolition of the right of inheritance as the starting point of the social movement (St. Simonistic nonsense), atheism as a dogma to be dictated to the members, etc., and as the main dogma (Proudhonist), abstention from the political movement.

This infant's spelling-book found favour (and still has a certain hold) in Italy and Spain, where the real conditions of the workers' movement are as yet little developed, and among a few vain, ambitious and empty doctrinaires in French Switzerland and Belgium.

For Mr. Bakunin the theory (the assembled rubbish he has scraped together from Proudhon, St. Simon, etc.) is a secondary affair – merely a means to his personal self-assertion. If he is a nonentity as a theoretician he is in his element as an intriguer.

For years the General Council had to fight against this conspiracy (which was supported up to a certain point by the French Proudhonists, especially in the south of France). At last, by means of Conference resolutions I  (2)  and (3), IX, XVI, and XVII, it delivered its long prepared blow.

Obviously the General Council does not support in America what it combats in Europe. Resolutions I (2) and (3) and IX now give the New York committee legal weapons with which to put an end to all sectarian formations and amateur groups and if necessary to expel them.

The New York Committee will do well to express its full agreement with the decisions of the Conference in an official communication to the General Council.

Bakunin, personally threatened in addition by Resolution XIV (publication in Égalité of the Netchaev trial) which will bring to light his infamous doings in Russia, is making every possible effort to get a protest started against the Conference among the remnants of his followers.

For this purpose he has got into contact with the demoralised section of the French political refugees in Geneva and London (a numerically weak section, anyway). The slogan given out is that the Geneva Council is dominated by Pan-Germanism (especially Bismarckism). This refers to the unpardonable fact that I am by birth a German and do actually exercise a decisive intellectual influence on the German Council.  (N.B.  The German element on the Council is two-thirds weaker numerically than either the English or the French. The crime therefore consists in the fact that the English and French elements are dominated by the German element where theory is concerned (!) and find this domination, i.e., German science, very useful and indeed indispensable.)

In Geneva, under the patronage of the bourgeois Madame Andrée Léo (who at the Lausanne Congress was shameless enough to denounce Ferré to his executioners in Versailles), they have published a paper, La Révolution Sociale, which conducts arguments against us in almost literally the same words as the Journal de Genève, the most reactionary paper in Europe.

In London they attempted to establish a French section, of whose activities you will find an example in No. 42 of Qui Vive? which I enclose. (Also the number which contains the letter from our French Secretary, Seraillier). This section, consisting of twenty people (including a lot of spies), has not been recognised by the General Council, but another much more numerous section has been.

Actually, despite the intrigues of this bunch of scoundrels, we are carrying on great propaganda in France--and in Russia, where they know what value to place on Bakunin and where my book on capital is just being published in Russian....

N.B. as to political movement: The political movement of the working class has as its object, of course, the conquest of political power for the working class, and for this it is naturally necessary that a previous organisation of the working class, itself arising from their economic struggles, should have been developed up to a certain point.

On the other hand, however, every movement in which the working class comes out as a class against the ruling classes and attempts to force them by pressure from without is a political movement.  For instance, the attempt in a particular factory or even a particular industry to force a shorter working day out of the capitalists by strikes, etc., is a purely economic movement. On the other hand the movement to force an eight-hour day, etc., law is a political movement. And in this way, out of the separate economic movements of the workers there grows up everywhere a political movement, that is to say a movement of the class, with the object of achieving its interests in a general form, in a form possessing a general social force of compulsion. If these movements presuppose a certain degree of previous organisation, they are themselves equally a means of the development of this organisation.

Where the working class is not yet far enough advanced in its organisation to undertake a decisive campaign against the collective power, i.e., the political power of the ruling classes,
it must at any rate be trained for this by continual agitation against and a hostile attitude towards the policy of the ruling classes.  Otherwise it will remain a plaything in their hands, as the September revolution in France showed, and as is also proved up to a certain point by the game Messrs. Gladstone & Co. are bringing off in England even up to the present time.
 


1871 Letters |
Letters Archive |
Marx Engels Internet Archive


