https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/docum
Chinese Communism Subject Archive
Sheng-wu-lien
Whither China?
A Radical Complaint Against the Emerging Establishment
1968
 Author: Originally drafted by Hunanese student Yang Xiguang (also
known as Yang Xiaokai) under the pseudonym of Yi-bing ("A Soldier"). It
was adopted and collectively signed by the Sheng-wu-lien of Hunan
(Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Committee)[], to whom it
has since been generally attributed.
Published: By Sheng-wu-lien of Hunan, 6 January 1968; later reprinted in
Kuang-yin Hung-ch'i [Guandong Red Flag], no. 5, March 1968.
First Published in English: "Whither China?", translated in American
Consulate General, Hong Kong's Survey of China Mainland Press, no.
4190, pp. 1-18.
 Source: Published as "A Radical Complaint Against the Emerging
Establishment, 6 January 1968" in Hinton, Harold C.(Editor) (1980). The
People's Republic of China, 1949-1979: a documentary survey. Volume
4: "1967-1970: The Cultural Revolution Part II." Wilmington, Del. Pages
1853-1863. Taken from the Internet Archive.
 Translation: Office of the American Consulate General, Hong Kong.
 This Online Version: Marxists Internet Archive, November 2021
 Transcription/HTML Markup: Simoun Magsalin.
Public Domain: This work is completely free. You may freely copy,
distribute, display and perform this work. Please credit "Marxists
Internet Archive" as your source for the transcription.
 Transcriber's note: An abridged version of this text was abridged and
published by International Socialism and is available on the Encyclopedia
of Trotskyism. Readers may also want to read the introduction to
"Whitherr China?" byy Tony Clif —  MIA
35
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
=====第1页=====
Whither China?
I. Scientifi c Foresight
II. Storm of January Revolution
III. Revolutionary Committees
IV. February Adverse Current
V. Local Domestic Revolutionary War of August
VI. The Setback in September
VII. Enlightenment of Political Thinking_of the Working_Class
VIII. Refutation of the Reactionary_ "Doctrine of the Second
Revolution"
IX. Refutation of "Leftist" Doctrine of One Revolution
When the struggle to hit back at the February adverse current
reached July, August, and September,the people of the whole country
had a sense of vigorous growth, believing that there was hope of the
Great ProletarianCultural Revolution being "carriedthroughtothe
end, and that all traditional ideas that fettered the mind of the people
would be cast aside." However,
C,an adverse current of
counterrevolutionary reformism appeared after October at the upper
levels and descended below. An atmosphere of class compromise,
calling for an end to the first Cultural Revolution,"suddenly grew in
intensity. Again the people of the whole country were bewildered.
Young intellectuals and students in particular, being extra sensitive,
were the fi rst to feel it. Again questions were asked: What shall we do?
And whither China? The establishment of the Ultra-Left Facion
Commune was fi rst of all for the sake of answering this question.
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
5
=====第2页=====
Whither China?
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document..
in history in 197,principally the experience of great historical
signifi cance created by the "January Storm"and the "August partial
domestic revolutionary war."
1.
Scientifi c Foresight
Contemporary China is thefocus of world contradictions and the
center of the storm of world revolution. Where is China going to? On
this highly important question Comrade Mao Tse-tung—thegreat
teacher of the world proletariat—has apparently only made an abstract
prediction.
Just before the world-shaking Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution
was to rise from the East with the force of a thunderbolt,Chairman
Mao announced to the whole world with the magnifi cent heart of the
proletariat that the fi rst Marxist-Leninist big-character poster of the
country "is the manifesto of the Peking People's Commune of the
1960s." It was these words that announced theoficial beginningof
the vehement development among the masses of the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution. These words also showed that Chairman Mao
"brilliantly and ingeniouslyforesaw the appearance of a brand-new
situation in our state machinery" (editorial of Red Flag no. 3, 1967),
namely, political organs of the Paris Commune type. In the January
revolution, Chairman Mao again proposed the name of "People's
Commune of China." That meant that as an ultimate result of the first
Great Cultural Revolution, China would advance in the direction of the
"People's Commune of China."
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
35
=====第3页=====
Whither China?
https://www.marxists.org/subject/cmma/document..
ultimate object of the first Cultural Revolution as pointed out by
Chairman Mao. People regarded these words of Chairman Mao as
words of general praise and have gradually forgotten them.
Even before the Cultural Revolution officially began, Chairman Mao
had already practically sketched the content of the new political
structure—"People's Commune of China"—in his famous May 7
directive. But people in general regarded the sketch in the May 7
directive as an idealistic "communist utopia."  People think it
impractical to make the May 7 directive the target of our short-range
struggle at present. Only some intellectual youths still keep reciting
the May 7 directive and declare loudly that they would fight for
realization of the May 7 directive, because they realize that only the
new society sketched in the May 7 directive,which is different from
the existing society, is the society in which they may have liberation.
But even among intellectual youths there are many who think it
impractical to realize the kind of society as envisaged in the May 7
directive in the not-too-distant future. It is truer to say that their
energetic propaganda about the May 7 directive is a self-consolation
for their dissatisfaction with reality than that they are fi ghting with full
confi dence for realization of the May 7 directive.
Chairman Mao's  scientifi c prediction leaves in people's mind a
utopian impression. This is in accord with the fact that class struggle
has not yet developed to an acute and high stage. The development of
new productive forces in China today has brought in confl ict the class
that represents the new productive forces and the decaying class that
represents the production relations which impede the progress of
history. It will inevitably lead to a great social revolution, and a new
society will inevitably be born amid the fierce flames. Thisobjective
law is the solid basisfor Chairman Mao's scientific—not utopian
—prediction. As people have not yet known this law, the scientific
prediction naturally leaves people [with] the impressionof a purely
utopian dream about the beautiful future. People believe that China
will pass peacefully into the society depicted in the May 7 directive.
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
35
=====第4页=====
But what happens in reality?"Peaceful transition" is only another
name for "peaceful evolution." It can only cause China to drift farther
and farther away from the "commune" depicted in the May 7 directive
and nearer and nearer to the existing society of the Soviet Union.
What Chairman Mao puts forward, i.e., "the revolution in which one
class overthrows another" and "great alliance of proletarian
revolutionaries to seize power from the capitalist-roaders," solves the
question of practical transition toward the commune. The rule of the
new bureaucratic bourgeoisie must be overthrown by force in order to
solve the problem of political power. Empty shouting about realization
of the May 7 directive without any reference to power seizure and
utter smashing of the old state machinery will of course be an
"utopian" dream.
I1.
Stormof January 
Revolution
Lenin once made this famous statement: "All revolutions provided they
are real revolutions are in the final analysis changes of classes.
Therefore the best means of increasing the awareness of the masses
and exposing the deception of the masses with revolutionary vows is
the analysis of the class changes that have taken place or are taking
place in these revolutions." Let us analyze the class changes that
resulted from the January revolution in accordance with this teaching,
so as to expose the deception of the masses with revolutionary vows.
As everybody knows, the greatest fact from the January revolution is
that 90 percent of the senior cadres were made to stand aside. In
Hunan,Chang P'ing-hua,Chang Po-sen,Hua Kuo-feng, and the like
had their power reduced to zero. At the Center, power seizure was
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第5页=====
I, Tan Chen-lin,and the like as well as thatof Chou En-lai who
represented them, also fell greatly. To whose hands did the assets go
at that time? They went to the hands of the people, who were full of
boundless enthusiasm and who were organized to take over the urban
administrations and the Party, government,financial, and cultural
powers in the industrial, commercial, communications, and other
systems. What the editorial called for, i.e., that the masses should rise
to take control of the destiny of their socialist country, and to manage
the cities, industry, communications, and econo my, was truly realized.
The storm of the January revolution suddenly turned all this from the
hands of the bureaucrats into the hands of the enthusiastic working
class. People suddenly found that without the bureaucrats they not
only could go on living, but could live better and develop quicker and
with greaterfreedom. The bureaucrats had tried to intimidate the
workers before the revolution, saying,"Without us, production would
collapse and the whole society would be in a state of chaos."
But the facts were not like that. As a matter of fact, without the
bureaucrats and bureaucratic organs, productivity was greatly
liberated. After the Ministry of Coal Industry collapsed, production of
coal went on as usual. The Ministry of Railways collapsed, but
transportation was carried on as usual. All departments of the
Provincial Party Committee collapsed, but work went on as usuall.
Moreover, the enthusiasm of the working class for production and its
activism were greatly liberated. The management of industrial plants
by the workers themselves after January was really moving. For the
first time,the workers felt that "it was not the state which managed
them, but they who managed the state." For the first time,they felt
that they were producing for themselves. Their enthusiasm was never
so high and their sense of responsibility as masters of the house was
never So strong. Changsha Weaving and Spinning Mill and other
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
5
=====第6页=====
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document...
not very thoroughly, the content of the "People's Commune of China,"
and society was in a state of "mass dictatorship" similar to that of the
Paris Commune. The storm of the January revolution told people that
China would head for a society free from bureaucrats and that 90
percent of the high-ranking cadres at that time had formed a special
class. The objective law of the development of class struggle caused
most of them to stand aside in January. The fact that 90 percent of the
senior cadres had to stand aside in the storm of the January revolution
was certainly not the fault of the masses. "The masses are the real
heroes." Those of the senior cadres who had perpetrated the most
crimes were duly punished. "Only in very few cases was the
punishment incommensurate with the crimes."
Facts as revealed by the masses and their wrath told people initially
that this class of "Red" capitalists had completely become a decaying
class that hindered the progress of history, and that the relations
between them and the people in general had changed from relations
between the leaders and the led to those between the rulers and the
ruled, the exploiters and  the exploited, from the relations  of
revolutionaries of equal standing to those between the oppressors and
the oppressed. The special privileges and high salaries of the class of
"Red" capitalists were built on the basis of the oppression and
exploitation of the broad masses of the people. In order to realize the
"People's_Commune of China," it was necessary to overthrow this
class.
The storm of the January revolution was a great attempt by the
revolutionary people, led by Chairman Mao,to topple the old world
and build a new world. A program for the first Great Proletarian
Political Revolution was formulated at that great moment. Chairman
Mao pointed out: "This is one class overthrowing another. It is a great
revolution." That shows that the Cultural Revolution is not a revolution
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
35
=====第7页=====
Whither China?
Report," January 25, 1965.)
In the struggle to seize power in these units, the Marxist principle of
smashing the old state machinery must be observed. Here there is no
place for reformism, combining two into one, or peaceful transition.
The old state machinery must be smashed utterly. "The old system of
exploitation, revisionist system, and bureaucratic organs must be
utterly smashed." The program of the first Great Proletarian Political
Revolution was put forward in editorials in an embryonic,not very
concrete state in the final stages of the storm of the January
revolution. The decaying class that should be overthrown, the old state
machinery that should be smashed, and even social problems, in which
people formerly had not dared to express a dissident view, were put
forward. This great development was an inevitable result of the
courage and pioneering spirit demonstrated by the proletariat in the
storm of the January revolution.
Problems of system, policy, and guideline touched upon in the
January revolution were mainly those connected with the capitalist
labor employment system of contract workers and casual workers as
well as the revisionist movement of going to hilly and rural areas.
At present, the "ultra-Left" must organize personnel to sum up and
study properly the multitude of things created during the storm of the
January revolution. These new things are the embryonic form of a
Paris-Commune style new society.
III.
5
1/14/22.10:44PM
=====第8页=====
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document..
Revolutionary Committees
"commune," suddenly oppose the establishment of "Shanghai People's
Commune"in January? This is something which the revolutionary
people fi nd it hard to understand.
Chairman Mao,who foresaw the "commune" as a political structure
which must be realized in the fi rst Cultural Revolution, suddenly put
forward "Revolutionary committees are fi  ne!"
Revolution must progress along a zigzagging way. It must go
through a prolonged course of "struggle—failure struggle again—
failure again—struggle again till fi nal victory."
Why can't communes be established immediately?
This is the first time the revolutionary people tried to overthrow a
powerful enemy. How shallow their knowledge of this revolution was!
They not only failed to realize voluntarily the necessity of thoroughly
smashing the old state machinery and overhauling some of the social
systems, but did not see clearly that the enemy formed a class and the
revolutionary ranks were dominated by ideas of "revolution to dismiss
officials"and "revolution to drag them out." The development of the
wisdom of the masses had not yet attained the degree at which it
would be possible to reform society. As a result, the fruit of revolution
was in the fi nal analysis taken by the capitalist class. (Communist
Manifesto)
Any revolution must necessarily involve the army. Since a Red
capitalist class is already formed in China, the army of course cannot
detach itself from this reality. Yet the January storm has not touched in
any way the vital problem of all revolutions, the problem of the army.
Thus it may be seen that the revolution lacked depth and remained at
a low stage of development. The degree of maturity of the political
thought of the revolutionary people,too,was in conformity with this
low level revolution—it too remained at a very immature stage.
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
35
=====第9页=====
the fruitof revolution by the capitalistclass,the correct strategic
policy (now called strategic plan) is to enable the people to forge their
political and ideological weapon in struggle at a higher stage and,
through the oncoming and ebbing tides of revolution, to prepare
strength for winning the fi nal victory. Otherwise, if "communes'are
established while the masses have not yet really realized that their
interest lies in the realization of "communes" in China, the
"communes"will be "communes" in name only, while in reality they
will be sham communes essentially the same as the present
Revolutionary Committees with powers usurped by the bourgeoisie.
Therefore, Comrade Mao Tse-tung, the great supreme commander of
the proletariat, did not hesitate in the least to go against the dream,
cherished by infantile revolutionaries, of immediate establishmentof
communes, adopted a correct strategic pollicy (i.e., strategic plan), and
at the same time called upon the armed forces to support the Left."
"Support the Left"is in fact Chairman Mao's ingenious means of
carrying out Cultural Revolution in the armed forces. To prevent the
damage to be caused by sabotage and resistance by the capitalist-
roaders in the army against the proletariat, which was bound to take
place if the "four-big"was directly unfolded in the armed forces, he
called upon the army to support the Left. On the surface, "four-big" is
not carried out in the armed forces, but in practice they are made to
take part in the thundering local Cultural Revolution of "four-big." It is
education for the armed forces and Cultural Revolution for the army
rather than support for the Left. Meanwhile, Revolutionary
Committees are gradually established in all parts of the country.
The three-in-one combination is the concrete content of
Revolutionary Committees. The putting forward of  three-in-one
combination amounts to reinstatement of the bureaucrats already
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
of 35
=====第10页=====
ultimate product of the first Cultural Revolution. The ultimate product
of the first Cultural Revolution is the "commune" and notthe
Revolutionary Committee. Chairman Mao's summing up in August-
September of the January revolution and the August revolutionary war
in the country, and his great theory of "mass dictatorship"formulated
from the summing-up, proves that after the fi rst Cultural Revolution it
will be "mass dictatorship," not a three-in-one dictatorship of
bureaucrats with the masses in a supporting role. However, he
aforementioned transitional form is necessary.
Denialof the
transitional form will be Leftist empty talk.
IV.
February Adverse Current
The force and intensity of the January revolution caused the
bureaucrats to carry out a hurried usurpation of power. Unlike their
usual selves, they adopted the most urgent and savage means of
suppression. This proves negatively the intensity of the "redistribution
of assets and power"in the January revolution as a result of the
stepping aside of 90 percent of the senior cadres. The tragic
consequences of the February adverse current also proves the
correctness of Comrade Mao Tse-tung's prediction that "there can be
no immediate victory."
The"Red" capitalist class gained almost overwhelming ascendancy
in February and March. The assets (means of production and power)
were seized from the revolutionary people and returned to the
bureaucrats. In early spring in February, Lung Shu-chin, Liu Tzu-yun,
Chang Po-sen, Hua Kuo-feng, and bureaucrats in all the country and
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
of 35
=====第11页=====
control of the bourgeois state machine—Kung-chien-fa.
Intoxicated by his victory of February March, Chou En-lai-at present
the general representative of China's Red capitalist class-hurriedly
tried to set up Revolutionary Committees in all parts of the country. If
this bourgeois plan had been fulfilled, the proletariat would have
retreated to its grave. Therefore, without waiting for the establishment
of all the Revolutionary Committees,the_ Central Cultural Revolution
Group issued the order to hit back. After that,the great August local
revolutionary war in the country began to ferment.
In the struggle to hit back at the February adverse current, the
important sign of the revolution's entry into a higher stage was that
the problem of the army really began to make itself felt. The
revolutionary people had very childish ideas about the army during the
January revolution, believing that as soon as the local capitalist
roaders were overthrown, the armed forces would unite with the
revolutionary people to suppress the capitalist roaders in accordance
with Chairman Mao's order of union from the upper to the lower
levels. The sanguinary facts of the February adverse current told the
people that the upper-to-lower order alone could not bring about an
implementation of Chairman Mao's intentions in the armed forces,
because unanimity of the interests of the capitalist-roaders in the army
and those of the local capitalist-roaders would prevent the army from
carrying out Chairman Mao's revolutionary line. It was necessary to
carry out Cultural Revolution from the lower level upward in the army
and to rely on the people's revolution—the locomotive of progress of
history—in order to change the state of opposition between the
military and the civilian population brought about by the control of the
army by the bureaucrats.
The struggle since February has placed the grave problem of the
and a small minority). This gradually provides the condition for
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f 35
=====第12页=====
Whither China?
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document...
society of communes"will be different from that of the present-day
army. The struggle since February has enabled this idea of Chairman
Mao to gradually grasp the masses.
V.
Local Domestic
cRevolutionaryWar
of August
There have been innumerable writings about the army since the end of
January. The nationwide, large-scale armed struggle that took place in
the past and the beginning of the new stage with the local wars in
Szechwan and other areas add the color of "war'and armed seizure of
power to writings about the army. This is a gladdening phenomenon of
the gradual maturity of the political idea of thorough social reform by
the proletariat.
Due to historical limitations of the time, many of the writings about
the army are very immature and have great shortcomings. But since
these writings are new things,they will be proved by history to be
signifi  cant things.
How well Engels spoke when he commented on utopian socialism:
"Let the pedlars of the circle of authors solemnly find fault with the
imaginations which at present can only make people laugh. Let them
gratify themselves with the thought that their strict way of thinking is
superior to such mad ideas. What makes us glad is the gifted
breaking through theouter shellof imagination. These things the
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
of 35
=====第13页=====

mediocre people cannot see."
There are two essential points in the writings about the army:
1. It is now seen that the army now is diferent from the people's
army before the liberation. Before the liberation,the army and the
people fought together to overthrow imperialism, bureaucratic
capitalism, and feudalism. The relation between the army and the
people was like that between fish and water. After the liberation,as
the target of revolution has changed from imperialism, bureaucratic
capitalism, and feudalism to capitalist-roaders, and these capitalist-
roaders are power holders in the army, some of the armed forces in the
revolution have not only changed their blood-and-fl esh relations with
the people that obtained before the liberation, but have even become
tools for suppressing revolution. Therefore, if  the first Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution is to succeed, a radical change in the
army will be necessary. The "ultra Left faction" has found the basis for
its thinking in a quotation from Chairman Mao. In the same year after
Chairman Mao issued the order for the armed forces to live in their
barracks, (they are separated from the masses.
2. It is now seen that a revolutionary war in the country is necessary
if therevolutionary people today want to overcome the armed Red
capitalist class. The large-scale armed struggle between the
proletariat and the Red capitalist class in August and the local
revolutionary war in the country bore out the rebel factions' prediction
in August (sic). The experience created by the local revolutionary wars
in August is moreover unparalleled in history and rich and great.
Contrary to the expectations of the mediocrities in general, history
advanced in the direction predicted by the "heretics and evil
advocates." Hitherto unimaginable,large-scale gun-seizing incidents
occurred regularly in accordance with the pace of historical
development. Local wars in the country of varying magnitude, in which
the army took a direct part (in Kiangsi and Hangchow the armed
forces were directly involved in thefighting),erupted. The creative
spirit and revolutionary fervor displayed by the people in August was
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第14页=====
Wnither China?
motive force of the creation of world history."
For a short time, the cities were in a state of "armed mass
dictatorship." The powers of most of the industries, commerce,
communications, and urban administration were again taken away
from Chang Po-sen, Hua Kuo-feng, Lung Shu-chin, Liu Tzu-yun, and
the like and put into the hands of the armed revolutionary people.
Never before had the revolutionary people appeared on the stage of
history in the role of masters of world history as they did in August.
The heroic image of the primary school pupils who volunteered to
work as traf ic police and directed the traf ic, and the pride with which
Hsiang Chiang Feng Lei, Hung Chung Hui, and other mass
organizations  directly exercised some of  the financial-economic
powers, left an unforgettable impression.
August was the month when the power of the revolutionary mass
organizations rapidly grew, while that of the bureaucrats again
dropped to zero. A short lived and unstable redistribution of "assets
and powers" took place for a second time. Once more, society tried to
realize the great "People's_Commune of China."Once more people
tried to solve the problem raised in the May 7 directive, namely, "the
army should be a big school"and "workers,peasants,and students
should all learn military art." This attempt had not been made in the
January revolution. Even before the liberation, the army was already a
big school which maintained excellent relations with the masses and
which combined the roles of soldiers, students, civilians, peasants, and
workers. This was summed up by Chairman Mao just before the
victory of the democratic revolution. But why, after more than ten
years of liberation,the question of improving army civilian relations
and the army should be a big school'" is again raised? As has been said
in the preceding paragraph,this is because after the liberation the
army has undergone changes and is separated from the masses to
greater or lesser degrees. As a result, this question is again put on the
agenda.
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
of35
=====第15页=====
Wnither China?
OTTOTTTNOOY
This force becomes the actual force of the proletarian dictatorship (or
dictatorship over the capitalist-roaders). The force and the people are
in accord and fight together to overthrow the "Red" capitalist class.
The people, instead of lamenting the fall of the military region
command—a bureaucratic organ rejoice at it. Yet formerly they used to
think that they could not go on without it. This fact has enabled the
proletariat to foresee more realistically the direction in which China's
army advances,and envisage the armed strength of the new society,
the "People's Commune of China." It may be said with certainty that
China will be a society in which the army and the people are identical
and united as one,and in which the army will have shaken of the
control of the bureaucrats. If we say the January storm produced a
program for the first Great Proletarian political revolution, then the
August storm has not only enriched the program but also solved the
method of the revolution—relying not only on the "four big," but on
armed seizure and internal revolutionary war.
VI.
The Setback in September
While people were rejoicing, advancing with great impetus, and loudly
and unceasingly talking about a "thorough victory,"the great teacher
of the proletariat saw a new danger on the horizon.
Let us look at the content of this new danger. On the one hand,
owingto the nakedness of the "February suppression of rebellion,"
even the "Red" capitalist class keenly sensed the inevitability of its
own defeat. After May, China's "Red" capitalists changed their tactics.
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
of35
=====第16页=====
Whither China?
appearances." One after another, Red capitalists like Sung Jen-ch'iung
of the Northeast and Chang Po-sen of Hunan-bloodsucking vampires
who used to ride on the backs of the people—suddenly displayed
"fervor" for the slaves' revolutionary struggle. Individually they
declared support for the revolutionary masses in their bombardment
of the military region or district commands. As at that time the
revolutionary people had not yet tried to overthrow the capitalist-
roaders as a class,and as the proletariat and the broad masses of
revolutionary people were still under the infl uence of the doctrine of
"revolution through dragging out people"and "revolution through
dismissal of officials," people bellieved that the purpose of the Cultural
Revolution was the purging of individual capitalist-roaders and that it
was proper to use some of the revolutionary leading cadres (who were
also bureaucrats) for hitting other bureaucrats. As a result, this tactic
of all big and small Chang Po-sens easily deceived the people. This
determined the objective inevitability of usurpation of the fruit of
victory of the August storm by the bourgeoisie. Meanwhile, owingto
the hurried suppression by the bourgeoisie and the proletariat's
speedy hitting back after February, dictatorship by the revolutionary
committee—a power organ during the transition to the "commune"—
had not yet begun. There was no period of transition in which the
"Red"capitalists could fraudulently win the trust of the peopleand
suppress the people. The people therefore could not learn from
sanguinary facts that the capitalist-roaders were a class and did not
accept the program of the first Cultural Revolution a revolution in
which one class overthrew another. Thorough social revolution would
be impossible.
On the other hand, to realize the demand in the May 7 directive for
changes in the army, it was necessary to carry out the Cultural
Revolution in the fi eld armies through to the end. It was also necessary
to let the field armies "support the Left." In fact, in carrying out the
Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in the field armies, it was Leftist
blind action to demand immediate victory before an all-out "support
the Left" movement was developed in the fi eld armies.
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
of35
=====第17页=====
Whither China?
the rural areas,then no power seizure of any kind would really
represent the interests of the peasants. The May 7 directive called for
factories setting up and operating farms and rural villages setting up
and operating factories. It indicated that in the new commune the
differences between industry and farming and between urban and
rural areas would be much smaller than they were at present. This
reduction of the gap should be brought about by launching a peasant
movement—a locomotive of historical progress of the revolutionary
people guided by the thought of Mao Tse tung. To demand thorough
victory of thefirst Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution beforea
peasant movement was launched would be empty talk. While thorough
victory was practically impossible, the task of Marxist Leninists was to
show completely thefalsity of the cry, "Thorough victory!" If the
Marxist-Leninists had power in their hands, they should exercise it in
banning the cry, "Immediate overthrow of the revolutionary committee
and establishment of the commune," and any agitation for this
purpose, so that the splendid name of "commune might not be
tarnished by false practice.
Meanwhile, the capitalist, bureaucrat class in the Party and the army
began to carry out sabotage against the Central Cultural Revolution
Group in August and September. They deliberately created confusion
in the army and caused stagnation in economic and other spheres. A
senior army cadre openly and arrogantly assailed the Central Cultural
Revolution Group, and that was their general policy in August-
September. "Does the Central Cultural Revolution Group still want the
P.L.A.? If it doesn't, then we will pack up and go home,"and "The
Central Cultural Revolution Group has so shifted the veteran army
cadres that they are separated from their wives and children, their
homes broken up and their kin lost!"
In view of this series of developments,where the proletariat had
already made great gains and had ample room for retreat without
having to retreat to its grave,when it was still impossible to win
thorough victory immediately, and to consolidate the gains already
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
of35
=====第18页=====
Tse-tung once more made a big retreat after September, in disregard
of demands by impatient revolutionaries for victory. A political
situation of bourgeois usurpation of power came about with the
establishment of Revolutionary Committees or preparatory groups for
revolutionary committees. But a period of transition toward the
commune—a period of rule by revolutionary committees—also really
began in accordance with the objective law of historical progress.
The extent of this retreat was unprecedented. The unlimited
relaxation of the cadre policy after September was in fact an extensive
concession to the capitalist roaders, who were allowed to mount the
stage again. An outstanding example was the treatment accorded to
Ch'en Tsai-tao. The Chairman went so far as to say that Ch'en studied
very well and could come back to work again.
But because the revolutionary forces of the proletariat have been
greatly strengthened,the retreat has not ended in a "rout" as the
retreat in February had. The bourgeoisie cannot come near to
swallowing the revolution as they did in March. The revolutionary
forces in Hunan which bombarded Chou En-lai were not annihilated.
Instead, they have formed Sheng-wu-lien and have made progress in
certain respects.
To seize the fruit of victory won by the proletariat in August and turn
the mass dictatorship again into bureaucratic rule, the bourgeois in
the revolutionary committees must fi rst disarm the working class. The
guns in the hands of workers have boundlessly increased the power of
the working class. The fact is a mortal threat to the bourgeoisie, who
is afraid of it. Out of spontaneous hatred for the bureaucrats who tried
to snatch the fruit of victory, the revolutionary people shouted a
resounding revolu tionary slogan: "Surrender of arms amounts to
suicide!" They formed a spontaneous, nationwide mass "arms
enew
bureaucratic bourgeoisie.
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第19页=====
Whither China?
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document..
unprecedented in capitalist countries. Moreover,it accomplished the
fact of turning the whole nation into soldiers for the first time in
socialist countries. Before the Cultural Revolution, the bureaucrats
dared not really hand over arms to the people. The militia is only a
facade behind which the bureaucrats control the armed strength of the
people. It is certainly not an armed force of the working class, but a
docile tool in the hands of the bureaucrats. In the arm-seizing
movement, the masses, instead of receiving arms like favors from the
above, for the fi rst time seized arms from the hands of the bureaucrats
by relying on the brute force of the revolutionary people themselves.
For the fi rst time the workers had their "own" arms, Chairman Mao's
rousing call,"Arm the Left!" was an intensive concentration of the
courage of the working class. But the issuance of the September 5
order completely nullifi ed the call to "arm the Left." The working class
was disarmed. The bureaucrats again came back to power.
VII.
Enlightenment
f
Political
Thinking
gof the Working Class
The July1 editorial of_1967 raised the question of Party building.
During theviolent class struggle in July and August, a very small
number of "ultra-Leftists" put forward the demand that the "ultra-Left
should have its own political party." It was felt necessary to have the
basic level organizations of a revolutionary party in order to realize
Comrade Mao Tse-tung's leadership by sic] the Com munist Party,
actuate the people to overthrow the newborn bourgeoisie, and fulfil
the task of the fi rst Cultural Revolution. In this way,the dream of
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f 35
=====第20页=====
revolution, it is necessary to have a revolutionary party!"
Since the past few months, the class struggle has entered a higher
stage. What sort of a stage is it? In this stage, the revolutionary people
have already accumulated the rich experience of "redistribution of
assets and power" twice (the January revolution and August
revolution). This experience is the program for the fi rst Cultural
Revolution produced by the January revolution, for a great revolution
in China in which one class should overthrow another. It is "to
overthrow the newborn bourgeoisie and establish the People's
Commune of China'—a new society free from bureaucrats like the
Paris Commune." There is also the method,suggested in the August
storm, of gradually bringing about revolutionary changes in the army
and armed seizure of power.
The reverses and higher-stage struggle after September also tell the
revolutionary people why neither the January revolution nor the
August revolution ended in thorough victory, why, after such prolonged
struggle, the fruit of victory of revolution was taken away by bourgeois
bureaucrats,why the old order was restored everywhere, why the
bourgeoisie was able to recapture the assets and power which they
had lost in August, and why the courage and pioneering spirit
displayed by the proletariat in the January revolution and the August
storm was almost completely extinguished and submerged. The
appearance of a large-scale adverse current tells people that all
illusions about bourgeois bureaucrats and distrust in the people's own
strength must be thoroughly abandoned, and that the revolution of one
class overthrowing another must be prosecuted.
However, the revolutionary committee is a product of the "revolution
of dismissal of officials." In Hunan, Chang Ping-hua and Liu Tzu-yun
were dismissed from ofice, but that did not remove the acute
antagonism between the new bourgeoisie and the masses of the
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第21页=====
have again appeared,but a thoroughlystable "distributionof assets
and power" has not been realized. The revolution by dismissal of
officers is only bourgeois reformism,which changes in a zigzagging
way the new bureaucratic bourgeois rule before the Cultural
Revolution into another kind of bourgeois rule of bourgeois
bureaucrats and representatives from several supporting mass
organizations. The revolutionary committee is a product of bourgeois
reformism.
Problems cannot be solved by merely dismissing several officials
from office. Bourgeois reformism proves  futile. The result  of
reformism—the revolutionary committee or preparatory group for the
revolutionary committee—again brings about a new bourgeois
dictatorship, which arouses even more violent opposition from the
people.Heilungkiang, Shantung, Shanghai, Kweichow,Hunan, and
other places where revolutionary committees or preparatory groups
for such committees have been established have proved or are proving
that China cannot move in the direction of bourgeois reformism
through revolutionary committees, because that means capitalist
restoration. China can only go in the socialist direction of thorough
revolution of the "People's Commune of China" as proclaimed by the
"People's Commune of Peking' of the 1960s.
The people should be made to understand this truth and should
make the resolution to act, instead of our making the resolution for
them. "He is not a thorough materialist who ignores the role of the
teacher by negative example," because the "various incidents and
changes in the struggle against capital cannot but make people
realize—and more in defeat than in victory—that the panaceas so dear
to them are completely useless. The defeats also enable them to
understand more profoundly the true conditions for the liberation of
the working class."(Engels) Revolutions often take various reformist,
unthorough roads. It is only when all panaceas are proved useless that
the revolutionary people would resolvetoflow the most painful and
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第22页=====
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document..
will inevitably disillusion the masses about the panaceaof bourgeois
reformism which they love so much. Chairman Mao says: "Buddhist
idols are set up by the peasants. When the time comes the peasants
will throw away these idols with their own hands. There is no need for
others to do it too soon." In the not-far-distant future, the
revolutionary people will surely smash to pieces with their own iron
hands the newborn red political power which they have secured with
their own blood and lives.
The stage of struggle since September has been teaching the people
about the newborn stage in this respect.
As a result of the practice of struggle having gained rich experience
and entered a higher stage, the maturity of the political thinking of the
revolutionary people in China has also entered a higher stage. A new
trend of thought (called "ultra-Left trend of thought" by the enemy),
including "overthrow of the new bureaucratic bourgeoisie," "abolition
of bureaucratic organs,""thorough smashing of the state machine,"
etc. wanders among the revolutionary people like a "spectre" in the
eyes of the enemy. The weapon of political thinking with which the
revolutionary masses are to win utter victory in the proletarian
socialist great revolution has begun to appear in a new form in the
"ultra-Left faction." The thought of Mao Tse tung,which is carrying
out a new social revolution in China, will gradually wake up the
masses from all contradictions of the past. The revolutionary people
are beginning to understand gradually in practice why revolution is
necessary, who are to be liquidated in the revolution, and how
revolution is to be carried out. Revolutionary struggle begins to
change from the stage of spontaneity to that of consciousness,from
necessity to freedom.
In the higher stage of the struggle since September, a higher stage
of the fiery intellectual youth movement has also appeared as well as
new struggle by contract workers and casual workers. This plays a
great promotive role so far as muddled thinking in the stage of
enlightenment is concerned. It absorbs the spontaneous, strong
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
35
=====第23页=====
Whither China?
segments of the determined revolutionary forces and for a profound
understanding of social contradictions in China. It also remedies the
shortcomings of extreme lack of understanding of social contradictions
and separation from reality of the "new trend of thought" among
young intellectuals and students.
When the revolutionary people enter from blind ness into the stage
of enlightenment of political thinking, when the formation of the
doctrine of Mao Tse-tung into an independent, positive political trend
of thought and political force among the masses begins gradually to
become a reality, the organization and establishment of basic level
organizations of the Chinese Communist Party—a political party of the
doctrine of Mao Tse-tung—is put on the agenda by Comrade Mao Tse-
tung,the revolutionary teacher of the proletariat. Comrade Mao Tse
tung puts forward the principle of rebuilding the Party and
reorganizing the class ranks under new historical conditions, i.e., "The
Partyorganization shouldbeformed ofadvanced elements ofthe
proletariat. It should be a youthful and vigorous vanguard organization
capable of leading the proletariat and the revolutionary masses in a
fi ght against the class enemy."
The putting forward of the principle for building of a revolutionary
political party—the Mao Tse-tung Doctrine Party (or Chinese
Communist Party), that will lead the people to overthrow today's class
enemy—the new Red bourgeoisie—shows that in order to fulfill the
fi rst true proletarian socialist revolution and build in China the
"commune" as delineated in the May 7 directive, the existing
Communist Party of China must undergo revolutionary changes. The
Ninth National Congress of the Party about to be convened is not
expected to be able to thoroughly settle the question of where the
Chinese Communist Party is going to. The political party that is
produced in accordance with the provisions promulgated by the
Center forrehabilitation,regulation,and rebuildingof the Party (if
such a party can be formed)will necessarily be a partyof bourgeois
reformism that serves the bourgeois usurpers in the revolutionary
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第24页=====
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document.…
in the Center. That decides that the Ninth Congress will not be able to
thoroughly settle the question of where China is going,(the core of
which is where the Chinese Communist Party is going to and where
the Chinese P.L.A. is going to).
When a truly stable victory gradually becomes possible, the
following several questions will take a prominent position.
1. The unevenness of the revolution will assume a prominent
position. The possibility of winning true,thorough victory in one or
several provinces fi rst, overthrowing the product of  bourgeois
reformism—the rule of revolutionary committees, and reestablishing a
political power of the Paris Commune type becomes a crucial question
as to whether the revolution can develop in depth at high speed.
Unlike the preceding stage of blind,spontaneous development, here
unevenness of the revolution no longer plays an immaterial role.
2. To really overthrow the rule of the new aristocracy and thoroughly
smash the old state machinery, it will be necessary to go into the
question of assessment of the past 17 years. This is also a major
problem of teaching the people fundamentally why it is necessary to
carry out the Great Cultural Revolution and what the ultimate object of
the revolution is.
3. To really make the revolution victorious, it will be necessary to
settle the "question of primary importance in revolution"—"Who are
our enemies,and who are our friends?"—and to make a new class
analysis of China's society where "a new situation has arisen as a
result of great class changes," so as to reorganize the class ranks, rally
our friends, and hit at our enemies.
This series of new questions was raised by Comrade Chiang Ch'ing in
her speech on November 12, 1967. This speech of Comrade Chiang
Ch'ing announced the beginning of a new stage, unparalleled in
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f 35
=====第25页=====
their fiery struggle is the direction which China's revolution will take.
Comrade Chiang Ch'ing's speech tells us practically that so far the
revolution—no matter whether it took the form of work teams
criticizing and repudiating the reactionary line or hitting back at the
February adverse current—has basically dealt with only the problems
of the Cultural Revolution and the problem of the 50 days that
shielded the past 17 years, and has only touched the charm that
protects the bourgeoisie. It tells us that the real revolution, the
revolution to negate the past 17 years, has basically not yet begun,
and that we should now enter the stage of tackling the fundamental
questions of China's revolution.
Comrade Chiang Ch'ing's directive in which she raised the question
of unevenness of the revolution, the relationship between the past 17
years and the 50 days, and reorganization of the class ranks (the
vanguard of which is the revolutionary political party), and Vice
Chairman Lin's October 24 directive have concretely indicated where
China should go and where Hunan should go. China must go in the
direction of carrying the fi rst true socialist revolution through to the
end, and must not follow the direction of putting a stop to it and
restoring capitalism. Comrade Chi Pen-yü said, "Comrade Chiang
Ch'ing's speeches of November 9 and November 12 have summed up
the experience of the Great Cultural Revolution of the past year,
greatly promoted the development of the Great Cultural Revolution,
and produced great infl uence on the whole country." This in efect
shows that the great November 12 speech and October 24 directive
form the only general guideline for our revolutionary struggle in 1968.
We shall separately deal with in detail the three problems mentioned
in Comrade Chiang Ch'ing's great November 12 speech. (The third of
the three problems includes the problem of reformation of the Chinese
Communist Party.)
The October 24 directive amounts to a declaration that Hunan is the
vanguard area of revolutionary struggle of the whole country. Thus the
genesis and development of Hunan's Sheng-wu-lien is an outstanding
35
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
=====第26页=====
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document...
September. Sheng-wu-lien was in fact born of the experience of the
people-run)   civil offense  and  armed  defense  command
headquarters—a form of mass dictatorship of the January revolutio. It
is a power organ of mass dictatorship of a higher order than those of
January and August. It may be compared to the soviet of the January
revolution in [the] U.S.S.R. when power was usurped by the
bourgeoisie, while the preparatory group for the provincial
revolutionary committee (Sheng-ko-ch'ou) is comparable to the
bourgeois Provisional Government of that time. The opposition
between Sheng-wu-lien and Sheng-ko-ch'ou is the new situation in
which "power organs of two systems coexist," but in practice power is
in the hands  of  Sheng-ko-ch'ou—the bourgeois
Sprovisional
government.
Sheng-wu-lien is a newborn sprout comparable to the soviets. It is
the embryonic form of a more mature "commune" than that of January
and August. No matter how the bourgeoisie alternately employ
suppression and the reformist tactic of encouraging the activities of a
third force, Sheng-wu-lien as a true newborn Red political power will
surely grow and gather strength continuously amid big gales and
storms.
VIII.
the
Reactionary
Refutation
of
of
the Second
"Doctrine
Revolution"
35
1/14/22,10:44 PM
=====第27页=====
the reactionary "doctrine of second revolution." People's minds are
greatly confused, and they say almost unanimously: "The first Great
Cultural Revolution can only do so much. There is nothing we can do
except wait for a second revolution." After thefailing of the Great
Revolution, open warlordism became the rule of "commanders-in-chief
of the Kuomintang Revolutionary Army." To maintain Chiang Kai-shek's
rule and prevent his demise, Ch'en Tu-hsiu's reactionary "second
revolution" came into being. The "doctrine of second revolution"
deceived the people with superfi cial changes of the political power,
declaring that imperialism, bureaucratic capitalism, and feudalism had
been overthrown; that China's bourgeoisie was in control of political
power; that the democratic revolution was accomplished; and that
there was nothing to do but wait for the socialist revolution. This
reactionary trend of thought not only occupied the ruling position in
thinking circles in the whole country at that time, but enjoyed
considerable popularity even in the Communist Party.
However, the task of China's bourgeois democratic revolution as
prescribed by the basic contradiction of Chinese society—the
contradiction between imperialism, bureaucratic capitalism and
feudalism on the one side and the popular masses on the other—was
not yet fulfi led. Therefore, although the apparently powerful second
revolution prevailed for some time, the more violent and intensive
development of the antiimperialist, antifeudal people's revolution still
remained an objective law that did not change according to man's
wishes. Similarly, the task that has to be accomplished at the "end" of
the first Great Cultural Revolution is prescribed by the social
contradictions that led to the current revolution. Unless the program
of the first Great Cultural Revolution laid down by these soial
contradictions is carried out,the fi rst Great Cultural Revolution will
not be brought to an end.
As has been said in the preceding paragraphs,the basic socal
new
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
F35
=====第28页=====
https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/document...
more thorough change—overthrow of the rule of the new bureaucratic
bourgeoisie, thorough smashing of the old state machinery, realization
of social revolution, realization of a redistribution of assets and power,
and establishment of a new society—"People's Commune of China.."
This is also the basic program and ultimate object of the fi rst Great
Cultural Revolution.
At present, are these basic contradictions of Chinese society
resolved? Is the object of the fi rst Great Cultural Revolution fulfilled?
As has been said above, the form of political power is superficially
changed. The old provincial Party committee and old military district
command have become "the revolutionary committee" or "preparatory
group for revolutionary committee." However, old bureaucrats
continue to play the leading role in the "new political power." The
contradiction between the old provincial Party committee and old
military district command on the one side and the people on the other,
and the contradiction between the capitalist-roaders of the 47th Army
and the people, remain basically unresolved. The contradiction
between the new bureaucratic bourgeoisie and the mass of people is
also basically unresolved, but assumes the new form of contradiction
between Sheng-wu-lien and the "new political power." The overthrow
of the new bureaucratic bourgeoisie, changes in the armed forces,
establishment of communes, and such basic social changes, which the
fi rst Great Cultural Revolution must fulfi ll, are not fulfi lled. Of course,
such"redistribution of assets and power'were temporarily and in a
limited way realized during the January revolution andthe August
storm. But the fruit of victory of both the January revolution and the
August storm has been basically usurped by the bourgeoisie. Social
reforms were aborted, social changes were not consolidated and
thoroughly realized, and the "end" of thefirst Great Cultural
Revolution has not been reached. As the masses have said,
"Everything remains the same after so much ado."
Since the basisocialcontadictionsthatledtotheeruptioof the
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
5
=====第29页=====
more and more acutely in a new form,and although an apparently
powerful, reactionary "doctrine of second revolution" dominates the
thinking circles and the masses are deceived with superfi cial changes
of the form of political power, the more intensive and violent forward
developmentof the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution isstill the
objective law that does not change according to the wishes of man.
The usurping bourgeoisie hope to corrode the resistance of the
revolutionary people with the doctrine of second revolution, but those
who support their rule and sinister scheme will surely go bankrupt,
just as Ch'en Tu-hsiu's "doctrine of second revolution" was unable to
save the life of the Chiang family dynasty and the powerful ruleof
religious thought failed to stop the disintegration and collapse of the
feudal economic base. The new trend of thought (the ultra-Left trend
of thought)is not yet quite mature and is still very weak, but is
overcoming of the apparently powerful traditional ideas and the
rotten, mummifi ed doctrine of second revolution will be an inevitable
tendency of historical development.
The bourgeoisie always represent the form of political power of their
rule as the most perfect,flawless thing in the world that serves the
whole people. The new bureaucratic bourgeoisie and the brutes of the
right wing of the petty bourgeoisie who depend on them are doing
exactly that. They ignore the provisional  character of the
"revolutionary committee" and nauseatingly praise it. Marxist-
Leninists must ruthlessly expose the suppression of the revolutionary
people by the revolutionary committee, energetically declare that the
People's Commune of China is the society that we proletariat and
revolutionary people must bring about in this Cultural Revolution, and
energetically make known the inevitable tendency of the revolutionary
committee to collapse.
The reactionary "doctrine of second revolution" is expressed
concretely in various forms. There is the "doctrine of the new stage"
and "doctrine of transformation of the left' which Comrade Ch'en Po-ta
criticized and refuted long ago. Then there is the naked "doctrine of
return to the origin" and "doctrine of putting an end to the show," as
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f 35
=====第30页=====
WhitherChina
second revolution."
Some people criticize us for wanting to arrive at communism in one
step and immediately abolish class and the three major diferences.
They say that political power of the Paris Commune type as envisaged
by Chairman Mao is a dream, and that all this is unrealistic before the
realization of communism. These people deliberately distort our views.
We certainly do not want to immediately do away with class, the legal
rights of the bourgeoisie, and the three major differences. This is
indeed impossible before the realization of communism. This can only
be our highest program, not our lowest. Our lowest program calls for
the overthrow of the rule of the new bureaucratic bourgeoisie and
narrowing of the three major differences. It is of course impossible to
destroy the exploiting classes. After the victory of the first Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution,there will inevitably be new class
changes. It is these new class changes that again lead to new social
reform and so push history forward.
In the same way, China's bourgeois democratic revolution succeeded
in overthrowing the rule of imperialism, bureaucratic capitalism, and
feudalism in China, but could not destroy the possibility of the birth of
new exploiters.
People who criticize us in this way merely want to assert that all our
eforts will be in vain, that society cannot take a new leap,and that
assets and power cannot be "redistributed," but can only be changed
somewhat. Forgetful gentlemen, the January revolution and the August
storm did bring about(although only temporarily andlocally) a
"redistribution of assets and power"and a qualitative leap of the
whole society. Has that not already picked to pieces the grey
liquidationist views you spread?
Cadres of the proletariat have not yet politically matured and the
revolutionary people have not yet naturally produced cadres who have
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
F35
=====第31页=====
us, saying that we want to set aside all cadres and that we have no use
bureaucrats. People have not raised their perceptual knowledge of the
January revolution and the August storm. They still think that without
the bureaucrats, society will "collapse."
We really believe that 90 percent of the senior cadres should stand
aside, that at most they can only be objects to be educated and united.
This is because they have already constituted a decaying class with its
own particular "interests." Their relation with the people has changed
from the relation between the leaders and the led in the past to that
between the exploiters and the exploited,the oppressors and the
oppressed. Most of them consciously or unconsciously yearn for the
capitalist road, and protect and develop capitalist things. The rule of
their class has completely blocked the development of history. Instead
of overthrowing this class,can they not be persuaded to relinquish
their high salaries and other invested interests of bourgeois legal
rights, and follow the socialist road instead of the capitalist road? The
proletariat have really been making ef orts in that direction. Chairman
Mao's repeated extensive concessions to the bourgeoisie are a
concentrated expression of these efforts. However, they (the
bureaucrats] hit back at and carry out counter reckoning against the
revolutionary people with increasing madness, pushing themselves
nearer and nearer the guillotine. All this proves that no decaying class
in history would voluntarily make an exit from the stage of history.
In the new society of the Paris Commune type,this class will be
overthrown. This was demonstrated by ironbound facts of the great
changes of the January revolution and the August storm so unexpected
by mediocre people. The class (of bureaucrats) will be replaced by
cadres with true proletarian authority naturally produced by the
revolutionary people in the struggle to overthrow this decaying class.
These cadres are members of the commune. They have no special
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第32页=====
https://www.mnal xists.org/subject/china/document..
not yet made their appearance.
But these cadres will be spontaneously producedfollowing the
increasing maturity of the political thinking of the revolutionary
people. This is an inevitable result of the political and ideological
maturity of the proletariat
IX.
Refutation
of
"Leftist"Doctrineof
One
Revolution

Some infantile revolutionaries of the revolutionary ranks suggest that
there is no fi rst or second Cultural Revolution, that the revolution
should go on till communism is realized. This is the "Leftist" doctrine
of one revolution. People who have this idea are very few in number.
Their shortcoming is their low political level. Chairman Mao's theory
that the transitional period will be dividedinto different historical
stages is the best enlightenment for them. The revolution is still
necessary to be divided into stages. We are for continuous revolution,
but also believe in revolution by stages.
Advocates of the "Leftist" one-revolution doctrine have notput
forward a program for the fi rst true socialist revolution. In practice,
they have lowered our task for the present stage, so that the
revolutionary people may fight confi dently for the targets of this stage
which they think they can fulfill. The doctrine is therefore also harmful
and must be corrected. Where China goes to also determines where
the world goes to.
China must necessarily go toward the new society of "People's
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
f35
=====第33页=====
https://www.mal xists.org/subfect/chiha/document...
Commune of China."
If dictatorship by the revolutionary committee is regarded as the
ultimate object of the fi rst Great Cultural Revolution, then China will
inevitably go the way of the Soviet Union and the people may again
return to the fascist bloody rule of the capitalists. The revolutionary
committee's road of bourgeois reformism is impracticable.
This is because the present age is the age of the great banner of the
doctrine of Mao Tse-tung,a great age in which imperialism is going
downhill  toward its debacle while socialism goes uphill toward
worldwide victory. The world today is one in which capitalism is
definitely dying and socialism is definitely prospering. In this great
revolutionary period of unprecedentedly great significance and this
sweeping era, "miracles—at present not yet thought of but completely
conformable to the law of historical development—are bound to
happen in the history of mankind." (Ch'en Po-ta, March 24)
Victory of the Chinese proletariat and the broad masses of
revolutionary people and the extinction of the new bureaucratic
bourgeoisie are likewise inevitable. The world-shaking great festival of
the revolutionary people—the overthrow of the revolutionary
committee and birth of the "People's Commune of China"—will surely
arrive.
The commune of the "ultra-Left faction" will not conceal its
viewpoints and intentions. We publicly declare that our object of
establishing the "People's Commune of China" can be attained only by
overthrowing the bourgeois dictatorship and revisionist system of the
revolutionary committee with brute force. Let the new bureaucratic
bourgeoisie tremble before the true socialist revolution that shakes the
world!What the proletariat can lose in this revolution is only their
chains, what they gain will be the whole world!
The China of tomorrow will be the world of the "Commune."
Long live the doctrine of Mao Tse-tung!
5
1/14/22, 10:44 PM
=====第34页=====
Har xlsts.org/subject/china/document..
[1] Sheng-wu-lien is also translated by some scholars as "Federation
of the Provincial Proletariat",or "Provincial Proletarian Alliance". —
marxists.org
Chinese Document Subject Section
1/14/22, 10:44
=====第35页=====