




From Marx to Mao
M
L
© Digital Reprints
2006
RUSSIAN  EDITION
PUBLISHED  BY  DECISION
OF  THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE
OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY
OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION
(BOLSHEVIKS)
ИНCTИTУT   МАР KCА—ЭНГЕ ЛЬCА —ЛЕНИНА   пpи  ЦK  ВKП(б)
n.b. CTAlnH
СОчИНEНИя
⋆
О  Г  И  З
ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО  ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ  ЛИТЕРАТУ РЫ
М o c к в  a  •  1 9 4 7
FOREIGN  LANGUAGES  PUBLISHING  HOUSE
M  o  s  c  o  w   •   1  9  5  3E 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

J. V.  S TA L I N
w o R k s
VOLUME
§
!(@$


 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

C O N T E N T S
Page
Preface .................. X I I I
THE  DISCUSSION.  Interview  With  a  Rosta  Correspond-
ent, January 9, 1924 ............ 1
THIRTEENTH  CONFERENCE  OF  THE R.C.P.(B.),  Janu-
ary  16-18,  1924 ............. 3
1.   R eport   on   Immediate   Tasks   in   Party   Affairs,
       January 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.   Reply  to  the  Discussion,  January  18 .... 2 7
ON  THE  DEATH  OF  LENIN.  A  Speech  Delivered at  the
Second  All-Union  Congress  of  Soviets,  January  26,  1924 . 4 7
LENIN.  A  Speech  Delivered  at  a  Memorial  Meeting  of  the
Kremlin  Military  School,  January  28,  1924 .... 5 4
The  Mountain  Eagle . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Modesty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Force  of  Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57No  Whining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57No  Boasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58Fidelity  to  Principle . . . . . . . . . . . 59Faith  in  the  Masses . . . . . . . . . . . 62
The  Genius  of  Revolution . . . . . . . . . 63
ON  THE  CONTRADICTIONS  IN  THE  YOUNG  COM-
MUNIST  LEAGUE.  Speech  at  the  C.C.,  R.C.P .(B.)
Conference  on  Work  Among  the  Youth,  April  3,  1924   67
THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF  LENINISM.  Lectures  Delivered
at  the  Sverdlov  University .......... 7 1
I. The  Historical  Roots  of  Leninism . . . . . 74
II. Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
III. Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91
IV. The  Dictatorship  of  the  Proletariat . . . . 111
V. The  Peasant  Question. . . . . . . . . 126
VI. The  National  Question . . . . . . . . 143
VII. Strategy  and  Tactics ......... 1 5 5
VIII. The  Party. . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
IX. Style  in  Work . . . . . . . . . . . 193
THIRTEENTH  CONGRESS  OF  THE  R.C.P.(B.),  May
23-31, 1924 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 197
Organisational Report of the Central Committee, May 24 199
1.The  Mass  Organisations  That  Link  the  Party  With  the
Class . ............... 2 0 0
2. The  State  Apparatus ........... 2 0 6
3. The  Composition  of  the  Party.  The  Lenin  Enrolment 210
4.The  composition  of  Leading  Party  Bodies,  Cadres  and
the  Younger  Party  Element ......... 2 1 2
5. The  Work  of  the  Party   in  the  Sphere   or  Agitation   and
Propaganda ............. 2 1 5
6. The  Work  of  the  Party  in  the  Registration,  Alloca-
tion  and  Promotion  of  Forces ....... 2 1 8
7.Inner-Party  Life ............ 2 1 8
8.Conclusions ............. 2 2 1
Reply  to  the  Discussion,  May  27 ....... 231
THE  RESULTS  OF  THE  THIRTEENTH  CONGRESS  OF
THE  R.C.P.(B.).  Report Delivered at the C. C., R. C.P .(B.)
Courses for Secretaries of Uyezd Party Committees, June 17,
1924 ................. 2 4 6
Foreign Affairs . . . . . . . . . . . . 247Questions  of  the  Bond  Between  Town  and  Country  252
Questions  of  the  Education  and  Re-education  of  the
Working  Masses . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260
T h e   P ar t y ............... 2 6 5
The  Tasks  of  Party  Workers  in  the  Uyezds . . . .  272
WORKER  CORRESPONDENTS.  Interview  With  a  Repre-
sentative of the Magazine “Rabochy Korrespondent ” . . 274
THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY  OF  POLAND.  Speech  Delivered
at a Meeting of the Polish Commission of the Comintern,
July  3,  1924 .............. 2 7 6
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  DEMYAN  BEDNY.  July
15,  1924 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     285
Y .  M.  SVERDLOV .............  2 8 9
CONCERNING  THE  INTERNATIONAL  SITUATION . . 292
1. The  Period  of  Bourgeois-Democratic  “Pacifism” 292
2. The Intervention of America in European Affairs and
the Entente’s London Agreement on Reparations 298
3. Strengthening of  the  Revolutionary  Elements  in
the  European  Labour  Movement.  Growth  of  the
International  Popularity  of  the  Soviet  Union 304
THE  PARTY’S  IMMEDIATE   TASKS  IN  THE  COUNTRY-
SIDE.   Speech  Delivered  at  a  Conference  of  Secretaries  of
Rural Party Units, Called by the Central Committee of
the R.C.P .(B.),  October  22,  1924 ........ 3 1 5
Defects  in  the  Reports  From  the  Localities . . 315
The  Party’s  Chief  Defect—the  Weakness  of  Party
Work in the Countryside . . . . . . . .   317
Wherein Lies the Strength of Our Party in the Towns? 317
Wherein   Lies  the  Weakness   of  Our  Work  in  the  Coun-
tryside? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
The Chief Task Is to Create a Peasant Active Around
t h e   P ar t y .............   3 1 9
The  Soviets  Must  Be  Revitalised . . . . . . . 319
The  Approach  to  the  Peasantry  Must  Be  Changed . 320The  Lessons  of  the  Revolt  in  Georgia. . . . . 321
A  Tactful  Approach  to  the  Peasantry  Is  Needed . .  323
The  Party’s  Chief  Tasks . . . . . . . . . . 324Conditions  for  the  Work . . . . . . . . . . 324
The  Chief  Thing   Is  To  Maintain  Contact   With  the
    Millions  of  Non-Party  People . . . . . . . . 325
THE  PARTY’S  TASKS  IN  THE   COUNTRYSIDE .  Speech
Delivered  at  the  Plenum  of  the  Central  Committee  of
the  R.C.P .(B.), October  26,  1924 ....... 3 2 7
ENTRY  IN  THE  RED  BOOK  OF  THE  DYNAMO  FAC-
TORY,  November  7,  1924 ......... 3 3 5
TO  THE  FIRST  CA VALRY  ARMY . . . . . . . . 336
TO  KRESTYANSKAYA  GAZETA . ....... 3 3 7
TROTSKYISM  OR  LENINISM?  Speech  Delivered  at  the
Plenum  of  the  Communist  Group  in  the  A.U.C.C.T.U.,
November  19,  1924 ............ 3 3 8
I. The  Facts  About  the  October  Uprising . . . 338
II.The  Party  and  the  Preparation  for  October . . 346
III. T rotskyism  or  Leninism? . . . . . . . . 363
THE  OCTOBER  REVOLUTION  AND  THE  TACTICS
OF  THE  RUSSIAN  COMMUNISTS.  Preface  to  the  Book
“On  the  Road  to  October ” ..........  3 7 4
I.The  External  and  Internal  Setting  for  the  October
Revolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . 374
II. Two  Specific  Features  of  the  October  Revolu-
tion—or  October  and  Trotsky’s  Theory  of  “Per-
manent”  Revolution . . . . . . . . . . 378
III.Certain  Specific  Features  of  the  Tactics  of  the
Bolsheviks  During  the   Period   of  Preparation
for October . . . . . . . . . . . . 398
IV. The   October   Revolution   as  the  Beginning   of
and  the  Pre-condition  for  the  World  Revolution  414
Notes .................. 4 2 1
Biographical  Chronicle  (1924) ......... 4 3 9

PREFACE
The sixth volume of J. V . Stalin’s Works  contains
writings and speeches of the year 1924.
This was the first year without V . I. Lenin. The Bol-
shevik Party and Soviet people continued their creativework of building socialism under Comrade Stalin’s lead-
ership. Comrade Stalin rallied the Party around its
Central Committee and mobilised it for the struggle tobuild socialism in the U.S.S.R.
The works of Comrade Stalin included in the present
volume played a cardinal part in the ideological defeatof Trotskyism and other anti-Leninist groups, in the
defence, substantiation and development of Leninism.
The sixth volume opens with Comrade Stalin’s in-
terview with a Rosta* correspondent entitled “The Dis-
cussion,” and with his report to the Thirteenth Con-
ference of the R.C.P.(B.) on “Immediate Tasks in PartyAffairs,” which are devoted to the exposure of Trotskyism
and the struggle for the ideological and organisational
unity of the Bolshevik Party.
In his speech at the Second All-Union Congress of
Soviets, On the Death of Lenin , Comrade Stalin on
*
 Russian Telegraph Agency.— Tr.
behalf of the Bolshevik Party made his great vow sacredly
to cherish and fulfil Lenin’s behests.
The volume includes J. V. Stalin’s well-known work
The Foundations of Leninism , in which he gives a
masterly exposition and theoretical substantiation of
Leninism.
The “Organisational Report of the Central Committee
to the Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P. (B.),” “The Re-
sults of the Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P. (B.),” “Con-cerning the International Situation,” “The Party’s Imme-
diate Tasks in the Countryside,” and other articles and
speeches are devoted to questions of the internationalsituation, the internal life and consolidation of the
Party, the alliance of the working class and peasantry,
and the education and re-education of the masses inthe spirit of socialism.
The volume concludes with The October Revolution
and the Tactics of the Russian Communists , which gives
a theoretical summing up of the experience of the Great
October Socialist Revolution and substantiates and devel-
ops Lenin’s teaching on the victory of socialism in onecountry.
A Letter to Comrade Demyan Bedny  is published for
the first time in this volume.
Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute
  of the C.P ., C.P .S.U.(B.)
!(@$


THE  DISCUSSION
Interview  With  a  Rosta  Correspondent
January  9,  1924
The discussion which has extensively developed in
the R.C.P.(B.) and its press will be conclusively summed
up only by the All-Union Party Conference that is to
take place in a week's time. But the resolutions that havealready been received from local Party organisations
leave no room for doubt that the Central Committee's
position has the endorsement of over 90 per cent of theentire R.C.P.(B.) membership.
The Party is well aware that our enemies are trying
to make use of the discussion in order to spread all man-ner of fabrications about the supposed disintegration of
the R.C.P.(B.), the weakening of Soviet power, etc.
Such an appraisal of our discussion is, to say the least,ludicrous. In actual fact the discussions which have re-
peatedly arisen in our Party have invariably resulted
in the elimination of differences. The Party has alwaysemerged from these discussions still stronger and more
united. The present discussion has revealed the extreme-
ly high degree of political maturity of the working-class masses, who have in their hands the state power in
the U.S.S.R. I must say—and anyone acquainted with
the discussion can convince himself of this—that completeunanimity of opinion prevails among the overwhelming
majority of the Party on all basic political and economic
questions. The fundamentals of our foreign and home
policy remain inviolable.
The issues which are being so passionately debated
at all meetings of Party organisations without exception
are essentially the following:
1) Ought our Party to be a united, independently
acting organism with a united will; or, on the contrary,
should we allow the formation of various factions andgroups as contracting parties within the Party?
2) Has the so-called New Economic Policy been justi-
fied in the main, or does it need to be reconsidered?
Together with the overwhelming majority of the
Party, the Central Committee is of the opinion that the
Party must be united, and that the NEP does not requirereconsideration. A small opposition group, which includes
a couple of well-known names, holds a view different
from that of the Party as a whole.
By an exhaustive and, moreover, absolutely open
discussion the Party is trying to elucidate all the details
of this question. The Party conference will give its author-itative decision on it, and that decision will be binding
on all Party members.
I am convinced—Comrade Stalin said in conclusion—
that as a result of the discussion the Party will be strong-
er and more united than ever and will be able to cope
still more successfully with the task of directing the lifeof our vast country in the conditions of the rapid eco-
nomic and cultural progress that has begun.
Newspaper  Zarya  Vostoka ,  No.  473,
January  10,  1924
THIRTEENTH  CONFERENCE
OF  THE  R. C. P. (B.) 1
January  16-18,  1924
Thirteenth  Conference
of  the  Russian  Communist
Party  (Bolsheviks).
Bulletin.  Moscow, 1924

1.  REPORT  ON  IMMEDIATE  TASKS
IN  PARTY  AFFAIRS
January  17
Comrades, it is customary for our speakers at dis-
cussion meetings to begin with the history of the ques-
tion: how the issue of inner-Party democracy arose, whowas the first to say “A,” who followed by saying “B,”
and so on. This method, I think, is not suitable for us, for
it introduces an element of squabbling and mutual re-crimination and leads to no useful results. I think that it
will be much better to begin with the question of how
the Party reacted to the Political Bureau resolution ondemocracy
2 that was subsequently confirmed by the
C.C. plenum.
    I must place on record that this resolution is the only
one, I believe, in the whole history of our Party to have
received the full—I would say the absolutely unani-
mous—approval of the entire Party, following a vehementdiscussion on the question of democracy. Even the opposi-
tion organisations and units, whose general attitude has
been one of hostility to the Party majority and theC.C., even they, for all their desire to find fault, have
not found occasion or grounds for doing so. Usually
in their resolutions these organisations and units, whileacknowledging the correctness of the basic provisions
of the Political Bureau resolution on inner-Party
democracy, have attempted to distinguish themselves in
some way from the other Party organisations by adding
some sort of appendage to it. For example: yes, yoursis a very good resolution, but don’t offend Trotsky, or:
your resolution is quite correct, but you are a little late,
it would have been better to have done all this earlier.I shall not go into the question here of who is offending
whom. I think that if we look into the matter properly,
we may well find that the celebrated remark about TitTitych fits Trotsky fairly well: “Who would offend
you, Tit Titych? You yourself will offend everyone!”
(Laughter. ) But as I have said, I shall not go into this
question. I am even prepared to concede that someone
really is offending Trotsky. But is that the point? What
principles are involved in this question of offence? Afterall, it is a question of the principles of the resolution,
not of who has offended whom. By this I want to say
that even units and organisations that are open andsharp in their opposition, even they have not had the
hardihood to raise any objections in principle to the res-
olution of the Political Bureau of the C.C. and Presid-ium of the Central Control Commission. I record this
fact in order to note once more that it would be hard to
find in the whole history of our Party another such in-stance of a resolution which, after the trials and tribula-
tions of a vehement discussion, has met with such unani-
mous approval, and not only of the majority, but virtual-ly of the entire Party membership.
I draw two conclusions from this. The first is that
the resolution of the Political Bureau and C.C.C. fullyaccords with the needs and requirements of the Party at
the present time. The second is that the Party will emerge
from this discussion on inner-Party democracy stronger
and more united. This conclusion is, one might say,
a well-aimed thrust at those of our ill wishers abroadwho have long been rubbing their hands in glee over
our discussion, in the belief that our Party would be
weakened as a result of it, and Soviet power dis-integrated.
I shall not dwell on the essence of inner-Party de-
mocracy. Its fundamentals have been set forth in theresolution, and the resolution has been discussed from
A to Z by the entire Party. Why should I go over the
same ground here? I shall only say one thing: evidentlythere will not be all-embracing, full democracy. What
we shall have, evidently, will be democracy within the
bounds outlined by the Tenth, Eleventh and TwelfthCongresses. You know very well what these bounds are
and I shall not repeat them here. Nor shall I dilate on
the point that the principal guarantee that inner-Partydemocracy becomes part of the flesh and blood of our
Party is to strengthen the activity and understanding
of the Party masses. This, too, is dealt with fairly exten-sively in our resolution.
I pass to the subject of how some comrades among us,
and some organisations, make a fetish of democracy, re-garding it as something absolute, without relation to
time or space. What I want to point out is that democracy
is not something constant for all times and conditions;for there are times when its implementation is neither
possible nor advisable. Two conditions, or two groups
of conditions, internal and external, are required to makeinner-Party democracy possible. Without them it is vain
to speak of democracy.
It is necessary, firstly, that industry should develop,
that there should be no deterioration in the material
conditions of the working class, that the working classincrease numerically, that its cultural standards advance,
and that it advance qualitatively as well. It is necessary
that the Party, as the vanguard of the working class,should likewise advance, above all qualitatively, and
above all through recruitment among the country’s
proletarian elements. These conditions of an internalnature are absolutely essential if we are to pose the ques-
tion of genuine, and not merely paper, implementation
of inner-Party democracy.
But these conditions alone are not enough. I have
already said that there is another group of conditions,
of an external nature, and in the absence of these democ-racy in the Party is impossible. I have in mind certain
international conditions that would more or less ensure
peace and peaceful development, without which democ-racy in the Party is inconceivable. In other words, if
we are attacked and have to defend the country with
arms in hand, there can be no question of democracy,for it will have to be suspended. The Party mobilises,
we shall probably have to militarise it, and the question
of inner-Party democracy will disappear of itself.
That is why I believe that democracy must be regard-
ed as dependent on conditions, that there must be no
fetishism in questions of inner-Party democracy, for itsimplementation, as you see, depends on the specific
conditions of time and place at each given moment.
To obviate undesirable infatuation and unfounded ac-
cusations in future, I must also remind you of the obstacles
confronting the Party in the exercise of democracy—ob-
stacles which hinder the implementation of democracy
even when the two basic favourable conditions outlined
above, internal and external, obtain. Comrades, theseobstacles exist, they profoundly influence our Party’s
activities, and I have no right to pass them over in si-
lence. What are these obstacles? These obstacles, comrades, consist, firstly, in the
fact that in the minds of a section of our Party func-
tionaries there still persist survivals of the old, war pe-riod, when the Party was militarised. And these survivals
engender certain un-Marxist views: that our Party is
not an independently acting organism, independent inits ideological and practical activities, but something in
the nature of a system of institutions—lower, interme-
diate and higher. This absolutely un-Marxist view hasnowhere, it is true, been given final form and has nowhere
been expressed definitely, but elements of it exist among
a section of our Party functionaries and deter them fromthe consistent implementation of inner-Party democracy.
That is why the struggle against such views, the struggle
against survivals of the war period, both at the centreand in the localities, is an immediate task of the Party.
The second obstacle to the implementation of democ-
racy in the Party is the pressure of the bureaucraticstate apparatus on the Party apparatus, on our Party
workers. The pressure of this unwieldy apparatus on our
Party workers is not always noticeable, not always doesit strike the eye, but it never relaxes for an instant. The
ultimate effect of this pressure of the unwieldy bureaucrat-
ic state apparatus is that a number of our functionaries,both at the centre and in the localities, often involun-
tarily and quite unconsciously, deviate from inner-Party
democracy, from the line which they believe to be cor-
rect, but which they are often unable to carry out com-
pletely. You can well visualise it: the bureaucratic stateapparatus with not less than a million employees, large-
ly elements alien to the Party, and our Party appara-
tus with not more than 20,000-30,000 people, who arecalled upon to bring the state apparatus under the Party’s
sway and make it a socialist apparatus. What would
our state apparatus be worth without the support of theParty? Without the assistance and support of our Party
apparatus, it would not be worth much, unfortunately.
And every time our Party apparatus extends its feelersinto the various branches of the state administration,
it is quite often obliged to adapt Party activities there to
those of the state apparatus. Concretely: the Party has tocarry on work for the political education of the working
class, to heighten the latter’s political understanding, but
at the same time there is the tax in kind to be collected,some campaign or other that has to be carried out; for
without these campaigns, without the assistance of the
Party, the state apparatus cannot cope with its duties.And here our Party functionaries find themselves between
two fires—they must rectify the line of the state appara tus,
which still works according to old patterns, and at thesame time they must retain contact with the workers. And
often enough they themselves become bureaucratised.
Such is the second obstacle, which is a difficult one to
surmount, but which must be surmounted at all costs to
facilitate the implementation of inner-Party democracy.
Lastly, there is yet a third obstacle in the way of
realising democracy. It is the low cultural level of a
number of our organisations, of our units, particularly
in the border regions (no offence to them meant), which
hampers our Party organisations in fully implementing
inner-Party democracy. You know that democracy re-quires a certain minimum of cultural development on the
part of the members of the unit, and of the organisation as
a whole; it requires a certain minimum of active memberswho can be elected and placed in executive posts. And
if there is no such minimum of active members in the
organisation, if the cultural level of the organisationitself is low, what then? Naturally, in that case we are
obliged to deviate from democracy, resorting to appoint-
ment of officials and so on.
Such are the obstacles that have confronted us, which
will continue to confront us, and which we must over-
come if inner-Party democracy is to be implementedsincerely and completely.
I have reminded you of the obstacles that confront
us, and of the external and internal conditions withoutwhich democracy becomes an empty, demagogic phrase,
because some comrades make a fetish, an absolute, of
the question of democracy. They believe that democracyis possible always, under all conditions, and that its
implementation is prevented only by the “evil” will of
the “apparatus men.” It is to oppose this idealisticview, a view that is not ours, not Marxist, not Leninist,
that I have reminded you, comrades, of the conditions
necessary for the implementation of democracy, and ofthe obstacles confronting us at the present time.
Comrades, I could conclude my report with this,
but I consider that it is our duty to sum up the dis-cussion and to draw from this summing-up certain
conclusions which may prove of great importance for us.
I could divide our whole struggle in the field of the
discussion, on the question of democracy, into three
periods.
The first period, when the opposition attacked the
C.C., with the accusation that in these past two years,
in fact throughout the NEP period, the whole line ofthe C.C. has been wrong. This was the period prior to
the publication of the Political Bureau and C.C.C.
Presidium resolution. I shall not deal here with thequestion of who was right and who wrong. The attacks
were violent ones, and as you know, not always warrant-
ed. But one thing is clear: this period can be describedas one in which the opposition levelled its bitterest
attacks on the C.C.
The second period began with the publication of the
Political Bureau and C.C.C. resolution, when the opposi-
tion was faced with the necessity of advancing something
comprehensive and concrete against the C.C. resolution,and when it was found that the opposition had nothing
either comprehensive or concrete to offer. That was a
period in which the C.C. and the opposition came closesttogether. To all appearances the whole thing was coming
to an end, or could have come to an end, through some
reconciliation of the opposition to the C.C. line.I well remember a meeting in Moscow, the centre of the
discussion struggle—I believe it was on December 12
in the Hall of Columns—when Preobrazhensky submitteda resolution which for some reason was rejected, but which
had little to distinguish it from the C.C. resolution. In
fundamentals, and even in certain minor points, it didnot differ at all from the C.C. resolution. And at that
time it seemed to me that, properly speaking, there was
nothing to continue fighting over. We had the C.C. reso-
lution, which satisfied everyone, at least as regards
nine-tenths of it; the opposition itself evidently realisedthis and was prepared to meet us halfway; and with this,
perhaps, we would put an end to the disagreements.
This was the second, reconciliation period.
But then came the third period. It opened with
Trotsky’s pronouncement, his appeal to the districts,
which, at one stroke, wiped out the reconciliation tenden-cies and turned everything topsy-turvy. Trotsky’s pro-
nouncement opened a period of most violent inner-Party
struggle—a struggle which would not have occurred hadTrotsky not come out with his letter on the very next day
after he had voted for the Political Bureau resolution. You
know that this first pronouncement of Trotsky’s was fol-lowed by a second, and the second by a third, with the re-
sult that the struggle grew still more acute.
I think, comrades, that in these pronouncements
Trotsky committed at least six grave errors. These errors
aggravated the inner-Party struggle. I shall proceed to
analyse them.
Trotsky’s first error lies in the very fact that he came
out with an article on the next day after the publication
of the C.C. Political Bureau and C.C.C. resolution; withan article which can only be regarded as a platform
advanced in opposition to the C.C. resolution. I repeat
and emphasise that this article can only be regardedas a new platform, advanced in opposition to the
unanimously adopted C.C. resolution. Just think of
it, comrades: on a certain date the Political Bureauand the Presidium of the C.C.C. meet and discuss
a resolution on inner-Party democracy. The resolution
is adopted unanimously, and only a day later, independ-
ently of the C.C., disregarding its will and over its
head, Trotsky’s article is circulated to the districts.It is a new platform and raises anew the issues of the
apparatus and the Party, cadres and youth, factions and
Party unity, and so on and so forth—a platform immedi-ately seized upon by the entire opposition and advanced
as a counterblast to the C.C. resolution. This can only
be regarded as opposing oneself to the Central Commit-tee. It means that Trotsky puts himself in open and
outright opposition to the entire C.C. The Party was
confronted with the question: have we a C.C. as ourdirecting body, or does it no longer exist; is there a
C.C. whose unanimous decisions are respected by its
members, or is there only a superman standing abovethe C.C., a superman for whom no laws are valid and
who can permit himself to vote for the C.C. resolution
today, and to put forward and publish a new platform inopposition to this resolution tomorrow? Comrades, we
cannot demand that workers submit to Party discipline if
a C.C. member, openly, in the sight of all, ignores theCentral Committee and its unanimously adopted deci-
sion. We cannot apply two disciplines: one for workers,
the other for big-wigs. There must be a single discipline.
Trotsky’s error consists in the fact that he has set
himself up in opposition to the C.C. and imagines him-
self to be a superman standing above the C.C., aboveits laws, above its decisions, thereby providing a certain
section of the Party with a pretext for working to under-
mine confidence in the C.C.
Some comrades have expressed dissatisfaction that
Trotsky’s anti-Party action was treated as such in cer-
tain Pravda  articles and in articles by individual members
of the C.C. To these comrades I must reply that no party
could respect a C.C. which at this difficult time failedto uphold the Party’s dignity, when one of its members
attempted to put himself above the entire C.C. The
C.C. would have committed moral suicide had it passedover this attempt of Trotsky’s.
Trotsky’s second error is his ambiguous behaviour
during the whole period of the discussion. He has grosslyignored the will of the Party, which wants to know what
his real position is, and has diplomatically evaded an-
swering the question put point-blank by many organi-sations: for whom, in the final analysis, does Trotsky
stand—for the C.C. or for the opposition? The discussion
is not being conducted for evasions but in order that thewhole truth may be placed frankly and honestly before
the Party, as Ilyich does and as every Bolshevik is
obliged to do. We are told that Trotsky is seriously ill. Letus assume he is; but during his illness he has written
three articles and four new chapters of the pamphlet
which appeared today. Is it not clear that Trotsky couldperfectly well write a few lines in reply to the question
put to him by various organisations and state whether
he is for the opposition or against  the opposition? It need
hardly be said that this ignoring of the will of a number
of organisations was bound to aggravate the inner-Party
struggle.
Trotsky’s third error is that in his pronouncements
he puts the Party apparatus in opposition to the Party
and advances the slogan of combating the “apparatusmen.” Bolshevism cannot accept such contrasting of
the Party to the Party apparatus. What, actually, does
our Party apparatus consist of? It consists of the Central
Committee, the Regional Committees, the Gubernia
Committees, the Uyezd Committees. Are these subordinat-ed to the Party? Of course they are, for to the extent of 90
per cent they are elected by the Party. Those who say that
the Gubernia Committees have been appointed are wrong.They are wrong, because, as you know, comrades, our
Gubernia Committees are elected, just as the Uyezd
Committees and the C.C. are. They are subordinated tothe Party. But once elected, they must direct the work,
that is the point. Is Party work conceivable without
direction from the Central Committee, after its electionby the congress, and from the Gubernia Committee,
after its election by the Gubernia conference? Surely,
Party work is inconceivable without this. Surely, this isan irresponsible anarcho-Menshevik view which re-
nounces the very principle of direction of Party activi-
ties. I am afraid that by contrasting the Party apparatusto the Party, Trotsky, whom, of course, I have no inten-
tion of putting on a par with the Mensheviks, im-
pels some of the inexperienced elements in our Party to-wards the standpoint of anarcho-Menshevik indiscip-
line and organisational laxity. I am afraid that this
error of Trotsky’s may expose our entire Party ap-paratus—the apparatus without which the Party is
inconceivable—to attack by the inexperienced members
of the Party.
Trotsky’s fourth error consists in the fact that he
has put the young members of the Party in opposition to
its cadres, that he has unwarrantedly accused our cadresof degeneration. Trotsky put our Party on a par with the
Social-Democratic Party in Germany. He referred to
examples how certain disciples of Marx, veteran Social-
Democrats, had degenerated, and from this he concluded
that the same danger of degeneration faces our Partycadres. Properly speaking, one might well laugh at the
sight of a C.C. member who only yesterday fought Bolshe-
vism hand in hand with the opportunists and Mensheviks,attempting now, in this seventh year of Soviet power,
to assert, even if only as an assumption, that our Party
cadres, born, trained and steeled in the struggle againstMenshevism and opportunism—that these cadres are faced
with the prospect of degeneration. I repeat, one might
well laugh at this attempt. Since, however, this assertionwas made at no ordinary time but during a discussion,
and since we are confronted here with a certain contrast-
ing of the Party cadres, who are alleged to be suscepti-ble to degeneration, to the young Party members, who
are alleged to be free, or almost free, of such a danger,
this assumption, though essentially ridiculous and frivo-lous, may acquire, and already has acquired, a definite
practical significance. That is why I think we must stop
to look into it.
It is sometimes said that old people must be respect-
ed, for they have lived longer than the young, know
more and can give better advice. I must say, comrades,that this is an absolutely erroneous view. It is not every
old person we must respect, and it is not every experience
that is of value to us. What matters is the kind of expe-rience. German Social-Democracy has its cadres, very
experienced ones too: Scheidemann, Noske, Wels and
the rest; men with the greatest experience, men who knowall the ins and outs of the struggle. . . . But struggle
against what, and against whom? What matters is the
kind of experience. In Germany these cadres were trained
in the struggle against the revolutionary spirit, not in
the struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat, butagainst it. Their experience is vast; but it is the wrong
kind of experience. Comrades, it is the duty of the youth
to explode this experience, demolish it and oust theseold ones. There, in German Social-Democracy, the youth,
being free of the experience of struggle against the revolu-
tionary spirit, is closer to this revolutionary spirit orcloser to Marxism, than the old cadres. The latter are
burdened with the experience of struggle against the
revolutionary spirit of the proletariat, they are burdenedwith the experience of struggle for opportunism, against
revolutionism. Such cadres must be routed, and all our
sympathies must be with that youth which, I repeat, isfree of this experience of struggle against the revolution-
ary spirit and for that reason can the more easily assim-
ilate the new ways and methods of struggle for the dic-tatorship of the proletariat, against opportunism. There,
in Germany, I can understand the question being put
in that way. If Trotsky were speaking of German Social-Democracy and the cadres of such a party, I would
be wholeheartedly prepared to endorse his statement.
But we are dealing with a different party, the CommunistParty, the Bolshevik Party, whose cadres came into being
in the struggle against opportunism, gained strength in
that struggle, and which matured and captured power inthe struggle against imperialism, in the struggle against
all the opportunist hangers-on of imperialism. Is it not
clear that there is a fundamental difference here? Ourcadres matured in the struggle to assert the revolution-
ary spirit; they carried that struggle through to the end,
they came to power in battles against imperialism, and
they are now shaking the foundations of world imperi-
alism. How can these cadres—if one approaches the mat-ter honestly, without duplicity—how can these cadres be
put on a par with those of German Social-Democracy,
which in the past worked hand in glove with Wilhelmagainst the working class, and is now working hand in
glove with Seeckt; a party which grew up and was formed
in the struggle against the revolutionary spirit of the pro-letariat? How can these cadres, fundamentally different
in nature, be put on a par, how can they be confused?
Is it so difficult to realise that the gulf between the twois unbridgeable? Is it so difficult to see that Trotsky’s
gross misrepresentation, his gross confusion, are calcu-
lated to undermine the prestige of our revolutionarycadres, the core of our Party? Is it not clear that this
misrepresentation could only inflame passions and ren-
der the inner-Party struggle more acute?
Trotsky’s fifth error is to raise in his letters the
argument and slogan that the Party must march in step
with the student youth, “our Party’s truest barometer.”“The youth—the Party’s truest barometer—react most
sharply of all against Party bureaucracy,” he says in
his first article. And in order that there be no doubtas to what youth he has in mind, Trotsky adds in his
second letter: “Especially sharply, as we have seen, does
the student youth react against bureaucracy.” If we wereto proceed from this proposition, an absolutely incorrect
one, theoretically fallacious and practically harmful,
we should have to go further and issue the slogan: “Morestudent youth in our Party; open wide the doors of our
Party to the student youth.”
Hitherto the policy has been to orientate ourselves
on the proletarian section of our Party, and we have said:
“Open wide the doors of the Party to proletarian ele-ments; our Party must grow by recruiting proletarians.”
Now Trotsky turns this formula upside down.
The question of intellectuals and workers in our Par-
ty is no new one. It was raised as far back as the Second
Congress of our Party when it was a question of the formu-
lation of paragraph 1 of the Rules, on Party membership.As you know, Martov demanded at the time that the
framework of the Party be expanded to include non-prole-
tarian elements, in opposition to Comrade Lenin, whoinsisted that the admission of such elements into the
Party be strictly limited. Subsequently, at the Third
Congress of our Party, the issue arose again, with newforce. I recall how sharply, at that congress, Comrade
Lenin put the question of workers and intellectuals in
our Party. This is what Comrade Lenin said at the time:
“It has been pointed out that usually splits have been
headed by intellectuals. This is a very important point, but it
is not decisive. . . . I believe we must take a broader view of thematter. The bringing of workers on to the committees is not only
a pedagogical, but also a political task. Workers have class in-
stinct, and given a little political experience they fairly soondevelop into staunch Social-Democrats. I would be very much in
sympathy with the idea that our committees should contain eight
workers to every two intellectuals” (see Vol. VII, p. 282*).
That is how the question stood as early as 1905. Ever
since, this injunction of Comrade Lenin’s has been
* In this and other references to Lenin’s Works , Roman nu-
merals indicate volumes of the Third Russian Edition of
V. I. Lenin’s Works .—Tr.
our guiding principle in building the Party. But now
Trotsky proposes, in effect, that we break with the or-
ganisational line of Bolshevism.
And, finally, Trotsky’s sixth error lies in his pro-
claiming freedom of groups. Yes, freedom of groups!
I recall that already in the sub-commission which drewup the draft resolution on democracy we had an argu-
ment with Trotsky on groups and factions. Trotsky
raised no objection to the prohibition of factions, butvehemently defended the idea of permitting groups with-
in the Party. That view is shared by the opposition.
Evidently, these people do not realise that by permittingfreedom of groups they open a loophole for the Myas-
nikov elements, and make it easier for them to mislead
the Party and represent factions as groups. Indeed, isthere any difference between a group and a faction?
Only an outward one. This is how Comrade Lenin defines
factionalism, identifying it with groups:
“Even before the general Party discussion on the trade unions,
certain signs of factionalism were apparent in the Party, namely,the formation of groups with separate platforms, striving to a cer-
tain degree to segregate themselves and to establish a group disci-
pline of their own” (see Stenographic Report of the Tenth Con-
gress, R.C.P.(B.), p. 309).
As you see, there is essentially no difference here
between factions and groups. And when the oppositionset up its own bureau here in Moscow, with Serebryakov
as its head; when it began to send out speakers with in-
structions to address such and such meetings and raisesuch and such objections; and when, in the course of
the struggle, these oppositionists were compelled to
retreat and changed their resolutions by command; this,
of course, was evidence of the existence of a group and of
group discipline. But we are told that this was not a fac-tion; well, let Preobrazhensky explain what a faction is.
Trotsky’s pronouncements, his letters and articles on
the subject of generations and of factions, are designedto induce the Party to tolerate groups within its midst.
This is an attempt to legalise factions, and Trotsky’s
faction above all.
Trotsky affirms that groups arise because of the bu-
reaucratic regime instituted by the Central Committee,
and that if there were no bureaucratic regime, therewould be no groups either. This is an un-Marxist ap-
proach, comrades. Groups arise, and will continue to arise,
because we have in our country the most diverse formsof economy—from embryonic forms of socialism down
to medievalism. That in the first place. Then we have the
NEP, that is, we have allowed capitalism, the revivalof private capital and the revival of the ideas that go
with it, and these ideas are penetrating into the Party.
That in the second place. And, in the third place, ourParty is made up of three component parts: there are work-
ers, peasants and intellectuals in its ranks. These then,
if we approach the question in a Marxist way, are thecauses why certain elements are drawn from the Party
for the formation of groups, which in some cases we must
remove by surgical action, and in others dissolve byideological means, through discussion.
It is not a question of regime here. There would be
many more groups under a regime of maximum freedom.So it is not the regime that is to blame, but the condi-
tions in which we live, the conditions that exist in our
country, the conditions governing the development of
the Party itself.
 If we were to allow groups in this situation, under
these complex conditions, we would ruin the Party, con-
vert it from the monolithic, united organisation that it is
into a union of groups and factions contracting with oneanother and entering into temporary alliances and agree-
ments. That would not be a party. It would be the col-
lapse of the Party. Never, for a single moment, have theBolsheviks conceived of the Party as anything but a
monolithic organisation, hewed from a single block,
possessing a single will and in its work uniting allshades of thought into a single current of practical ac-
tivities.
But what Trotsky suggests is profoundly erroneous;
it runs counter to Bolshevik organisational principles,
and would inevitably lead to the disintegration of the
Party, making it lax and soft, converting it from aunited party into a federation of groups. Living as we
do in a situation of capitalist encirclement, we need not
only a united party, not only a solid party, but a veri-table party of steel, one capable of withstanding the
assault of the enemies of the proletariat, capable of lead-
ing the workers to the final battle.
What are the conclusions?
The first conclusion is that we have produced a con-
crete, clear-cut resolution summing up the present discus-sion. We have declared: groups and factions cannot be
tolerated, the Party must be united, monolithic, the Party
must not be put in opposition to the apparatus, there mustbe no idle talk of our cadres being in danger of degenera-
tion, for they are revolutionary cadres, there must be no
searching for cleavages between these revolutionary cad res
and the youth, which is marching in step with these cadres
and will continue to do so in future.
There are also certain positive conclusions. The first
and fundamental one is that henceforth the Party must
resolutely orientate itself on, and take as its criterion,the proletarian section of our Party, that it must narrow
and reduce, or eliminate altogether, the possibility of
entry of non-proletarian elements, and open the doorswider to proletarian elements.
As for groups and factions, I believe that the time
has come when we must make public the clause in theunity resolution which on Comrade Lenin’s proposal was
adopted by the Tenth Congress of our Party and was not
intended for publication. Party members have forgottenabout this clause. I am afraid not everyone remembers
it. This clause, which has hitherto remained secret, should
now be published and incorporated in the resolution whichwe shall adopt on the results of the discussion. With your
permission I shall read it. Here is what it says:
“In order to ensure strict discipline within the Party and in
all Soviet work and to secure the maximum unanimity, doing
away with all factionalism, the congress authorises the Central
Committee, in case (cases) of breach of discipline or of a revivalor toleration of factionalism, to apply all Party penalties, up to
and including expulsion from the Party and, in regard to members
of the Central Committee, to reduce them to the status of candidatemembers and even, as an extreme measure, to expel them from
the Party. A condition for the application of such an extreme
measure (to members and candidate members of the C.C. andmembers of the Control Commission) must be the convocation of a
plenum of the Central Committee, to which all candidate members
of the Central Committee and all members of the Control Commis sion
shall be invited. If such a general assembly of the most respon-
sible leaders of the Party, by a two-thirds majority, considersit necessary to reduce a member of the Central Committee to the
status of a candidate member, or to expel him from the Party,
this measure shall be put into effect immediately.”
I think that we must incorporate this clause in the
resolution on the results of the discussion, and make it
public.
Lastly, a question which the opposition keeps raising
and to which, apparently, they do not always receive a
satisfactory reply. The opposition often asks: Whosesentiments do we, the opposition, express? I believe that
the opposition expresses the sentiments of the non-pro-
letarian section of our Party. I believe that the opposi-tion, perhaps unconsciously and involuntarily, serves as
the unwitting vehicle of the sentiments of the non-pro-
letarian elements in our Party. I believe that the oppo-sition, in its unrestrained agitation for democracy, which
it so often makes into an absolute and a fetish, is unleash-
ing petty-bourgeois elemental forces.
Are you acquainted with the sentiments of such com-
rades as the students Martynov, Kazaryan and the rest?
Have you read Khodorovsky’s article in Pravda  which
cites passages from the speeches of these comrades? Here,
for instance, is a speech by Martynov (he is a Party mem-
ber, it appears): “It is our business to make decisions, andthe business of the C.C. to carry them out and to indulge
less in argument.” This refers to a Party unit in a college
of the People’s Commissariat of Transport. But, com-rades, the Party has a total of at least 50,000 units and
if each of them is going to regard the C.C. in this way,
holding that it is the business of the units to decide,
and of the C.C. not to argue, I am afraid that we shall
never arrive at any decision. Whence comes this sentiment
of the Martynovs? What is there proletarian aboutit? And the Martynovs, mind you, support the opposi-
tion. Is there any difference between Martynov and
Trotsky? Only in the fact that Trotsky launched the attackon the Party apparatus, while Martynov is driving that
attack home.
And here is another college student, Kazaryan, who,
it appears, is also a Party member. “What have we got,”
he demands, “a dictatorship of the proletariat or a dic-
tatorship of the Communist Party over the proletariat?”This, comrades, comes not from the Menshevik Martov
but from the “Communist” Kazaryan. The difference
between Trotsky and Kazaryan is that according toTrotsky our cadres are degenerating, but according to
Kazaryan they should be driven out, for in his opinion
they have saddled themselves on the proletariat.
I ask: Whose sentiments do the Martynovs and Kaza-
ryans express? Proletarian sentiments? Certainly not.
Whose then? The sentiments of the non-proletarian ele-ments in the Party and in the country. And is it an ac-
cident that these exponents of non-proletarian sentiments
vote for the opposition? No, it is no accident. ( Applause. )
2.  REPLY  TO  THE  DISCUSSION
January  18
I said in my report that I did not wish to touch on
the history of the question because that would introduce
an element of squabbling, as I put it, and mutual recrim-
ination. But since Preobrazhensky wishes it, since heinsists, I am prepared to comply and say a few words on
the history of the question of inner-Party democracy.
How did the question of inner-Party democracy arise
in the C.C.? It came up for the first time at the C.C.
plenum in September, in connection with the conflicts
that had developed in the factories and the fact, thenbrought out by us, that certain Party and trade-union
organisations had become isolated from the masses. The
C.C. took the view that this was a serious matter, thatshortcomings had accumulated in the Party and that a
special authoritative commission ought to be set up to
look into the matter, study the facts and submit con-crete proposals on how to improve the situation in the
Party. The same thing applies to the marketing crisis,
the price “scissors.” The opposition took no part at allin raising those questions or in electing the commissions
on the inner-Party situation and on the “scissors” prob-
lem. Where was the opposition at the time? If I am notmistaken, Preobrazhensky was then in the Crimea and
Sapronov in Kislovodsk. Trotsky, then in Kislovodsk, was
finishing his articles on art and was about to return to
Moscow. They had not yet returned when the CentralCommittee raised this question at its meeting. They came
back to find a ready decision and did not intervene with
a single word, nor did they raise a single objection tothe C.C. plan. The situation in the Party was the subject
of a report read by Comrade Dzerzhinsky at a conference
of Gubernia Committee secretaries in September. I af-firm that neither at the September plenum, nor at the
secretaries’ conference, did the present members of the
opposition so much as hint by a single word at a “severeeconomic crisis,” or a “crisis in the Party,” or the “de-
mocracy” issue.
So you see that the questions of democracy and of
the “scissors” were raised by the Central Committee it-
self; the initiative was entirely in the hands of the C.C.,
while the members of the opposition remained silent—they were absent.
That, so to speak, was Act I, the initial stage in the
history of the issue.
Act II began with the plenum of the C.C. and C.C.C.
in October. The opposition, headed by Trotsky, seeing
that the question of shortcomings in the Party was inthe air, that the C.C. had already taken the matter in
hand and had formed commissions, and lest—God for-
bid—the initiative would remain with the C.C., tried,took as its aim, to wrest the initiative from the C.C. and
get astride the hobby-horse of democracy. As you know,
it is a spry sort of horse and could be used in an attemptto outride the C.C. And so there appeared the documents
on which Preobrazhensky spoke here at such length—the
document of the 463 and Trotsky’s letter. That same
Trotsky, who in September, a few days before his faction-
al pronouncement, had been silent at the plenum, atany rate had not objected to the C.C. decisions, two weeks
later suddenly discovered that the country and the Party
were going to rack and ruin and that he, Trotsky, this pa-triarch of bureaucrats, could not live without democracy.
It was rather amusing for us to hear Trotsky hold
forth on the subject of democracy, the same Trotsky whoat the Tenth Party Congress had demanded that the
trade unions be shaken up from above . But we knew that
no great difference separates the Trotsky of the TenthCongress period from the Trotsky of today, for now, as
then, he advocates shaking up the Leninist cadres. The
only difference is that at the Tenth Congress he wantedto shake up the Leninist cadres from the top, in the sphere
of the trade unions , whereas now he wants to shake up the
same Leninist cadres from the bottom, in the sphere of
the Party.  He needs democracy as a hobby-horse, as a
strategic manoeuvre. That’s what all the clamour is
about.
For, if the opposition really wanted to help matters,
to approach the issue in a business-like and comradely
way, it should have submitted its statement first ofall to the commissions set up by the September plenum,
and should have said something like this: “We consider
your work unsatisfactory; we demand a report on itsresults to the Political Bureau, we demand a plenum
of the C.C., to which we have new proposals of ours to pre-
sent,” etc. And if the commissions had refused to givethem a hearing, or if the Political Bureau had refused
to hear their case, if it had ignored the opinion of the
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

opposition, or refused to call a plenum to examine
Trotsky’s proposals and the opposition proposals gener-
ally, then—and only then—would the opposition havebeen fully justified in coming out openly, over the head
of the C.C., with an appeal to the Party membership and
in saying to the Party: “The country is facing disaster;economic crisis is developing; the Party is on the road
to ruin. We asked the C.C. commissions to go into these
questions, but they refused to give us a hearing, we triedto lay the matter before the Political Bureau, but noth-
ing came of that either. We are now forced to appeal
to the Party, in order that the Party itself maytake things in hand.” I do not doubt that the response
of the Party would have been: “Yes, these are practical
revolutionaries, for they place the essence of the matterabove the form.”
But did the opposition act like that? Did it attempt,
even once, to approach the C.C. commissions with itsproposals? Did it ever think of, did it make any attempt
at, raising and settling the issues within the C.C. or the
organs of the C.C.? No, the opposition made no such at-tempt. Evidently, its purpose was not to improve the
inner-Party situation, or to help the Party to improve the
economic situation, but to anticipate the work of thecommissions and plenum of the C.C., to wrest the initia-
tive from the C.C., get astride the hobby-horse of democra-
cy and, while there was still time, raise a hue and cry inan attempt to undermine confidence in the C.C. Clearly,
the opposition was in a hurry to concoct “documents”
against the C.C., in the shape of Trotsky’s letter and thestatement of the 46, so that it could circulate them among
the Sverdlov University students and to the districts
and assert that it, the opposition, was for democracy
and for improving the economic situation, while the
C.C. was hindering, that assistance was needed againstthe C.C., and so on.
Such are the facts.
I demand that Preobrazhensky refute these state-
ments of mine. I demand that he refute them, in the press
at least. Let Preobrazhensky try to refute the fact that
the commissions were set up in September by the C.C.plenum without the opposition, before the opposition
took up the issue. Let Preobrazhensky try to refute the
fact that neither Trotsky nor the other oppositionistsattempted to present their proposals to the commissions.
Let Preobrazhensky try to refute the fact that the oppo-
sition knew of the existence of these commissions,ignored their work and made no effort to settle the mat-
ter within the C.C.
That is why, when Preobrazhensky and Trotsky de-
clared at the October plenum that they wanted to save
the Party through democracy, but that the C.C. was
blind and saw nothing, the C.C. laughed at them andreplied: No, comrades, we, the C.C., are wholeheartedly
for democracy, but we do not believe in your democracy,
because we feel that your “democracy” is simply a strate-gic move against the C.C. motivated by your factionalism.
    What did the C.C. and C.C.C. plenums decide at
the time on inner-Party democracy? This is what they
decided:
    “The plenums fully endorse the Political Bureau’s timely
course of promoting inner-Party democracy and also its proposal
to intensify the struggle against extravagance and the corruptinginfluence of the NEP on some elements in the Party.
“The plenums instruct the Political Bureau to do everything
necessary to expedite the work of the commissions appointed by
the Political Bureau and the September plenum: 1) the commis-
sion on the ‘scissors,’ 2) on wages, 3) on the inner-Party situation.
“When the necessary measures on these questions have been
worked out, the Political Bureau must immediately begin to put
them into effect and report to the next plenum of the C.C.”
In one of his letters to the C.C. Trotsky wrote that
the October plenum was the “supreme expression of the
apparatus-bureaucratic line of policy.” Is it not clear thatthis statement of Trotsky’s is a slander against the C.C.?
Only a man who has completely lost his head and is
blinded by factionalism can, after the adoption of thedocument I have just read, maintain that the October
plenum was the supreme expression of bureaucracy.
And what did the C.C. and C.C.C. plenums decide
at the time on the “democratic” manoeuvres of Trotsky
and the 46? This is what they decided:
“The plenums of the C.C. and C.C.C., attended also by repre-
sentatives of ten Party organisations, regard Trotsky’s pronounce-
ment, made at the present highly important moment for theworld revolution and the Party, as a grave political error, espe-cially because his attack on the Political Bureau has, objectively,assumed the character of a factional move which threatens tostrike a blow at Party unity and creates a crisis in the Party. The
plenums note with regret that, in order to raise the questions
touched on by him, Trotsky chose the method of appealing toindividual Party members, instead of the only permissible method,—that of first submitting these questions for discussion by thebodies of which Trotsky is a member.
“The method chosen by Trotsky served as the signal for the
appearance of a factional group (statement of the 46).
“The plenums of the C.C. and C.C.C., and representatives
of ten Party organisations, resolutely condemn the statement ofthe 46 as a factional and schismatic step; for that is its nature,
whatever the intentions of those who signed it. That statement
threatens to subject the entire Party in the coming months to an
inner-Party struggle and thereby weaken the Party at a supreme-
ly important moment for the destinies of the world revolution.”
As you see, comrades, these facts completely refute
the picture of the situation presented here by Preobra-
zhensky.
Act III, or the third stage, in the history of the
issue was the period following the October plenum. The
October plenum had voted to instruct the Political Bu-
reau that it take every measure to ensure harmony in itswork. I must state here, comrades, that in the period
following the October plenum we took every measure to
work in harmony with Trotsky, although I must say thatthis proved anything but an easy task. We had two pri-
vate conferences with Trotsky, went into all questions of
economic and Party matters and arrived at certain viewson which there were no disagreements. As I reported yes-
terday, a sub-commission of three was set up as a contin-
uation of these private conferences and of these effortsto ensure harmony in the work of the Political Bureau.
This sub-commission drew up the draft resolution which
subsequently became the C.C. and C.C.C. resolution ondemocracy.
 That is how things stood.
It seemed to us that after the unanimous adoption of
the resolution there were no further grounds for contro-
versy, no grounds for an inner-Party struggle. And, in-
deed, this was so until Trotsky’s new pronouncement,his appeal to the districts. But Trotsky’s pronouncement
on the day after the publication of the C.C. resolution,
undertaken independently of the C.C. and over its head,
upset everything, radically changed the situation, and
hurled the Party back into a fresh controversy and a
fresh struggle, more acute than before. It is said that theC.C. should have forbidden the publication of Trotsky’s
article. That is wrong, comrades. It would have been a
highly dangerous step for the C.C. to take. Try and pro-hibit an article of Trotsky’s, already made public in the
Moscow districts! The Central Committee could not take
so rash a step.
That is the history of the issue.
It follows from what has been said that the opposi-
tion has been concerned not so much with democracy aswith using the idea of democracy to undermine the C.C.;
that in the case of the opposition we are dealing not with
people who want to help the Party, but with a factionwhich has been stealthily watching the C.C. in the hope
that “it may slip up, or overlook something, and then
we’ll pounce on it.” For it is a faction when one groupof Party members tries to trap the central agencies of the
Party in order to exploit a crop failure, a depreciation of
the chervonets or any other difficulty confronting theParty, and then to attack the Party unexpectedly, from
ambush, and to hit it on the head. Yes, the C.C. was
right when in October it said to you, comrades of theopposition, that democracy is one thing and intriguing
against the Party quite another; that democracy is one
thing and exploiting clamour about democracy againstthe Party majority quite another.
That, Preobrazhensky, is the history of the issue,
about which I did not want to speak here, but which,nevertheless, I have been obliged to recount in deference
to your persistent desire.
The opposition has made it a rule to extol Comrade
Lenin as the greatest of geniuses. I am afraid that this
praise is insincere and that behind it, too, is a craftystratagem: the clamour about Comrade Lenin’s genius
is meant to cover up their departure from Lenin, and at
the same time to emphasise the weakness of his disci-ples. Certainly, it is not for us, Comrade Lenin’s disciples,
to fail to appreciate that Comrade Lenin is the greatest
of geniuses, and that men of his calibre are born once inmany centuries. But permit me to ask you, Preobrazhen-
sky, why did you differ with this greatest of geniuses on
the issue of the Brest Peace? Why did you abandon andrefuse to heed this greatest of geniuses at a difficult
moment? Where, in which camp, were you then?
And Sapronov, who now insincerely and hypocriti-
cally lauds Comrade Lenin, that same Sapronov who had
the impudence, at one congress, to call Comrade Lenin
an “ignoramus” and “oligarch”! Why did he not supportthe genius Lenin, say at the Tenth Congress, and why,
if he really thinks that Comrade Lenin is the greatest of
geniuses, has he invariably appeared in the oppositecamp at difficult moments? Does Sapronov know that
Comrade Lenin, in submitting to the Tenth Congress
the unity resolution, which calls for the expulsion offactionalists from the Party, had in mind Sapronov among
others?
Or again: why was Preobrazhensky found to be in
the camp of the opponents of the great genius Lenin,
not only at the time of the Brest Peace, but subsequently
too, in the period of the trade-union discussion? Is allthis accidental? Is there not a definite logic in it? ( Pre-
obrazhensky : “I tried to use my own brains.”)
It is very praiseworthy, Preobrazhensky, that you
should have wanted to use your own brains. But just
look at the result: on the Brest issue you used your ownbrains, and came a cropper; then in the trade-union dis-
cussion you again tried to use your own brains, and again
you came a cropper; and now, I do not know whetheryou are using your own brains or borrowing someone
else’s, but it appears that you have come a cropper this
time too. ( Laughter. ) Nevertheless, I think that if
Preobrazhensky were now to use his own brains more,
rather than Trotsky’s—which resulted in the letter of
October 8—he would be closer to us than to Trotsky.
Preobrazhensky has reproached the C.C., asserting that
as long as Ilyich stood at our head questions were solved
in good time, not belatedly, for Ilyich was able to dis-cern new events in the embryo, and give slogans that
anticipated events; whereas now, he claims, with Ilyich
absent, the Central Committee has begun to lag behindevents. What does Preobrazhensky wish to imply? That
Ilyich is superior to his disciples? But does anyone doubt
that? Does anyone doubt that, compared with his disci-ples, Ilyich stands out as a veritable Goliath? If we are
to speak of the Party’s leader, not a press-publicised
leader receiving a heap of congratulatory messages, butits real leader, then there is only one—Comrade Lenin.
That is precisely why it has been stressed time and again
that in the present circumstances, with Comrade Lenintemporarily absent, we must keep to the line of collective
leadership. As for Comrade Lenin’s disciples, we might
point, for example, to the events connected with theCurzon ultimatum,
4 which were a regular test, an exami-
nation, for them. The fact that we emerged from our diffi-
culties then without detriment to our cause undoubtedly
shows that Comrade Lenin’s disciples had already
learned a thing or two from their teacher.
Preobrazhensky is wrong in asserting that our Party
did not lag behind events in previous years. He is wrong
because this assertion is untrue factually and incorrecttheoretically. Several examples can be cited. Take, for
instance, the Brest Peace. Were we not late in concluding
it? And did it not require such facts as the German offen-sive and the wholesale flight of our soldiers to make
us realise, at last, that we had to have peace? The disin-
tegration of the front, Hoffmann’s offensive,
5 his approach
to Petrograd, the pressure exerted on us by the peas-
ants—did it not take all these developments to make us
realise that the tempo of the world revolution was notas rapid as we would have liked, that our army was not
as strong as we had thought, that the peasantry was not
as patient as some of us had thought, and that it wantedpeace, and would achieve it by force?
Or take the repeal of the surplus-appropriation system.
Were we not late in repealing the surplus-appropriationsystem? Did it not require such developments as Kronstadt
and Tambov
6 to make us understand that it was no long-
er possible to retain the conditions of War Communism?Did not Ilyich himself admit that on this front we had
sustained a more serious defeat than any we had suffered
at the Denikin or Kolchak fronts?
Was it accidental that in all these instances the
Party lagged behind events and acted somewhat belatedly?
No, it was not accidental. There was a natural law at workhere. Evidently, in so far as it is a matter not of general
theoretical predictions, but of direct practical leadership,
the ruling party, standing at the helm and involved in
the events of the day, cannot immediately perceive and
grasp processes taking place below the surface of life.It requires some impulse from outside and a defi-
nite degree of development of the new processes for the
Party to perceive them and orientate its work according-ly. For that very reason our Party lagged somewhat
behind events in the past, and will lag behind them in
future too. But the point here does not at all concernlagging behind, but understanding the significance of
events, the significance of new processes, and then skil-
fully directing them in accordance with the generaltrend of development. That is how the matter stands
if we approach things as Marxists and not as factionalists
who go about searching everywhere for culprits.
Preobrazhensky is indignant that representatives of
the C.C. speak of Trotsky’s deviations from Leninism.
He is indignant, but has presented no arguments to thecontrary and has made no attempt at all to substantiate
his indignation, forgetting that indignation is no argu-
ment. Yes, it is true that Trotsky deviates from Leninismon questions of organisation. That has been, and still is,
our contention. The articles in Pravda  entitled “Down
With Factionalism,” written by Bukharin, are entirelydevoted to Trotsky’s deviations from Leninism. Why
has not Preobrazhensky challenged the basic ideas of
these articles? Why has he not tried to support his indigna-tion by arguments, or a semblance of arguments? I said
yesterday, and I must repeat it today, that such actions
of Trotsky’s as setting himself up in opposition to theCentral Committee; ignoring the will of a number of
organisations that are demanding a clear answer from
him; contrasting the Party to the Party apparatus, and
the young Party members to the Party cadres; his at-
tempt to orientate the Party on the student youth, andhis proclamation of freedom of groups—I say that these
actions are incompatible with the organisational prin-
ciples of Leninism. Why then has Preobrazhensky nottried to refute this statement of mine?
It is said that Trotsky is being baited. Preobrazhen-
sky and Radek have spoken of this. Comrades, I mustsay that the statements of these comrades about baiting
are altogether at variance with the facts. Let me recall
two facts so that you may be able to judge for yourselves.First, the incident which occurred at the September
plenum of the C.C. when, in reply to the remark by C.C.
member Komarov that C.C. members cannot refuse tocarry out C.C. decisions, Trotsky jumped up and left the
meeting. You will recall that the C.C. plenum sent a “del-
egation” to Trotsky with the request  that he return to the
meeting. You will recall that Trotsky refused to comply
with this request of the plenum, thereby demonstrating
that he had not the slightest respect for his CentralCommittee.
There is also the other fact, that Trotsky definitely
refuses to work in the central Soviet bodies, in the Coun-cil of Labour and Defence and the Council of People’s
Commissars, despite the twice-adopted C.C. decision
that he at last take up his duties in the Soviet bodies.You know that Trotsky has not as much as moved a fin-
ger to carry out this C.C. decision. But, indeed, why
should not Trotsky work in the Council of Labour andDefence, or in the Council of People’s Commissars? Why
should not Trotsky—who is so fond of talking about
planning—why should he not have a look into our State
Planning Commission? Is it right and proper for a C.C.
member to ignore a decision of the C.C.? Do not all thesefacts show that the talk about baiting is no more than
idle gossip, and that if anyone is to be blamed, it is
Trotsky himself, for his behaviour can only be regardedas mocking at the C.C.?
Preobrazhensky’s arguments about democracy are
entirely wrong. This is how he puts the question: eitherwe have groups, and in that case there is democracy,
or you prohibit groups, and in that case there is no de-
mocracy. In his conception, freedom of groups and democ-racy are inseparably bound up. That is not how we un-
derstand democracy. We understand democracy to
mean raising the activity and political understandingof the mass of Party members; we understand it to mean
the systematic enlistment of the Party membership not
only in the discussion of questions, but also in the lead-ership of the work. Freedom of groups, that is, freedom
of factions—they are one and the same thing—represents
an evil which threatens to splinter the Party and turn itinto a discussion club. You have exposed yourself, Pre-
obrazhensky, by defending freedom of factions. The mass
of Party members understand democracy to mean creatingconditions that will ensure active participation of the
Party members in the leadership of our country, whereas
a couple of oppositionist intellectuals understandit to mean that the opposition must be given freedom
to form a faction. You stand exposed, Preobrazhensky.
And why are you so frightened by point seven, on
Party unity? What is there to be frightened about?
Point seven reads: “In order to ensure strict discipline
within the Party and in all Soviet work and to secure
the maximum unanimity, doing away with all faction-
alism. . . .” But are you against “strict discipline withinthe Party and in Soviet work”? Comrades of the opposi-
tion, are you against all this? Well, I did not know, com-
rades, that you were opposed to this. Are you, Sapronovand Preobrazhensky, opposed to securing maximum unan-
imity and “doing away with factionalism”? Tell us frank-
ly, and perhaps we shall introduce an amendment ortwo. ( Laughter. )
Further: “The congress authorises the Central Com-
mittee, in case of breach of Party discipline or of a reviv-al of factionalism, to apply Party penalties. . . .” Are
you afraid of this too? Can it be that you, Preobrazhensky,
Radek, Sapronov, are thinking of violating Party disci-pline, of reviving factionalism? Well, if that is not your
intention, then what are you afraid of? Your panic
shows you up, comrades. Evidently, if you are afraidof point seven of the unity resolution, you must be for
factionalism, for violating discipline, and against unity.
Otherwise, why all the panic? If your conscience is clear,if you are for unity and against factionalism and viola-
tion of discipline, then is it not clear that the punishing
hand of the Party will not touch you? What is there tofear then? ( Voice :  “But why do you include the point,
if there is nothing to fear?”)
To remind  you. ( Laughter, applause. Preobrazhensky :
“You are intimidating the Party.”)
We are intimidating the factionalists, not the Party.
Do you really think, Preobrazhensky, that the Partyand the factionalists are identical? Apparently it is a
case of the cap fitting. ( Laughter. )
Further: “And, in regard to members of the Central
Committee, to reduce them to the status of candidate
members and even, as an extreme measure, to expelthem from the Party. A condition for the application
of such an extreme measure to members and candidate
members of the C.C. and members of the Central ControlCommission must be the convocation of a plenum of
the Central Committee.”
What is there terrible in that? If you are not faction-
alists, if you are against freedom of groups, and if you
are for unity, then you, comrades of the opposition,
should vote for point seven of the Tenth Congress reso-lution, for it is directed solely against factionalists,
solely against those who violate the Party’s unity, its
strength and discipline. Is that not clear?
I now pass to Radek. There are people who can master
and manage their tongues; these are ordinary people.
There are also people who are slaves of their tongues;their tongues manage them. These are peculiar people.
And it is to this category of peculiar people that Radek
belongs. A man who has a tongue he cannot manage andwho is the slave of his own tongue, can never know what
and when his tongue is liable to blurt out. If you
had been able to hear Radek’s speeches at various meet-ings, you would have been astonished by what he said
today. At one discussion meeting Radek asserted that
the question of inner-Party democracy was a trivial one,that actually he, Radek, was against democracy, that,
at bottom the issue now was not one of democracy, but
of what the C.C. intended to do with Trotsky. At anotherdiscussion meeting this same Radek declared that de-
mocracy within the Party was not a serious matter, but
that democracy within the C.C. was a matter of the ut-
most importance, for in his opinion a Directory had
been set up inside the C.C. And today this same Radektells us in all innocence that inner-Party democracy is
as indispensable as air and water, for without democracy,
it appears, leadership of the Party is impossible. Whichof these three Radeks are we to believe—the first, second
or third? And what guarantee is there that Radek, or
rather his tongue, will not in the immediate future makenew unexpected statements that refute all his previous
ones? Can one rely on a man like Radek? Can one, after
all this, attach any value to Radek’s statement, forinstance, about Boguslavsky and Antonov being re-
moved from certain posts out of “factional considera-
tions”?
I have already spoken, comrades, about Boguslav-
sky. . . . As for Antonov-Ovseyenko, permit me to
report the following. Antonov was removed from thePolitical Department of the Red Army by decision of
the Organising Bureau of the Central Committee, a de-
cision confirmed by a plenum of the Central Committee.He was removed, first of all, for having issued a circu-
lar about a conference of Party units in military col-
leges and the air fleet, with the international situation,Party affairs, etc., as items on the agenda, without the
knowledge and agreement of the C.C., although Antonov
knew that the status of the Political Department of theRed Army is that of a department of the C.C. He was
removed from the Political Department, in addition,
for having sent to all Party units of the army a circularconcerning the forms in which inner-Party democracy
was to be applied, doing so against the will of the C.C.
and in spite of its warning that the circular must be co-
ordinated with the plans of the C.C. He was removed,
lastly, for having sent to the C.C. and C.C.C. a letter,altogether indecent in tone and absolutely impermis-
sible in content, threatening the C.C. and C.C.C. that
the “overweening leaders” would be called to account.
Comrades, oppositionists can and should be allowed
to hold posts. Heads of C.C. departments can and should
be allowed to criticise the Central Committee’s activ-ities. But we cannot allow the head of the Political
Department of the Red Army, which has the status of
a department of the C.C., systematically to refuse toestablish working contact with his Central Committee.
We cannot allow a responsible official to trample under-
foot the elementary rules of decency. Such a comradecannot be entrusted with the education of the Red Army.
That is how matters stand with Antonov.
Finally, I must say a few words on the subject of
whose are the sentiments that are expressed in the pro-
nouncements of the comrades of the opposition. I must
return to the “incident” of Comrades Kazaryan and Mar-tynov, students at the People’s Commissariat of Transport
college. This “incident” is evidence that all is not well
among a certain section of our students, that what theyhad of the Party spirit in them has already become rotten,
that intrinsically they have already broken with the Party
and precisely for that reason willingly vote for the oppo-sition. You will forgive me, comrades, but such people,
rotten through and through from the Party standpoint,
are not to be found, and could not possibly be found,among those who voted for the C.C. resolution. There
are no such people on our side, comrades. There are
none in our ranks who would ask: “What have we got,
a dictatorship of the proletariat or a dictatorship of
the Communist Party over the proletariat?” That is aphrase of Martov and Dan; it is a phrase of the Socialist-
Revolutionary Dni,
7 and if among you, in your ranks,
there are those who take this line, then what is yourposition worth, comrades of the opposition? Or there is,
for instance, the other comrade, Comrade Martynov,
who thinks that the C.C. should keep quiet while theParty units decide. He says in effect: You, the C.C., can
carry out what we, the units, decide. But we have 50,000
Party units, and if they are going to decide, say, thequestion of the Curzon ultimatum, then we shall not
arrive at a decision in two years. That is indeed anarcho-
Menshevism of the first water. These people have losttheir heads; from the Party standpoint they are rotten
through and through, and if you have them in your
faction, then I ask you, what is this faction of yoursworth? ( Voice :  “Are they Party members?”)
Yes, unfortunately they are, but I am prepared to
take every measure to ensure that such people cease to bemembers of our Party. ( Applause. ) I have said that the
opposition voices the sentiments and aspirations of the
non-proletarian elements in the Party and outside it.Without being conscious of it, the opposition is unleash-
ing petty-bourgeois elemental forces. Its factional activ-
ities bring grist to the mill of the enemies of our Party,to the mill of those who want to weaken, to overthrow
the dictatorship of the proletariat. I said this yesterday
and I re-affirm it today.
But perhaps you would like to hear other, fresh wit-
nesses? I can give you that pleasure. Let me cite, for
instance, the evidence of S. Ivanovich, a name you have
all heard. Who is this S. Ivanovich? He is a Menshevik,
a former Party member, of the days when we and theMensheviks comprised a single party. Later on he dis-
agreed with the Menshevik C.C. and became a Right-
wing Menshevik. The Right-wing Mensheviks are a groupof Menshevik interventionists, and their immediate ob-
ject is to overthrow Soviet power, even if with the aid
of foreign bayonets. Their organ is Zarya
8 and its edi-
tor is S. Ivanovich. How does he regard our opposition,
this Right-wing Menshevik? What sort of testimonial
has he given it? Listen to this:
“Let us be thankful to the opposition for having so luridly
depicted that horrifying moral cesspool that goes by the nameof the R.C.P. Let us be thankful to it for having dealt a se-rious blow, morally and organisationally, to the R.C.P. Let usbe thankful to it for its activities, because they help all thosewho regard the overthrow of Soviet power as the task of the
Socialist parties.”
    There you have your testimonial, comrades of theopposition!
     In conclusion, I would like nevertheless to wish the
comrades of the opposition that this kiss of S. Ivanovichwill not stick to them too closely. ( Prolonged applause. )
ON  THE  DEATH  OF  LENIN
A  Speech  Delivered  at
the  Second  All-Union  Congress  of  Soviets 9
January  26,  1924
Comrades, we Communists are people of a special
mould. We are made of a special stuff. We are those who
form the army of the great proletarian strategist, the
army of Comrade Lenin. There is nothing higher thanthe honour of belonging to this army. There is nothing
higher than the title of member of the Party whose found-
er and leader was Comrade Lenin. It is not given toeveryone to be a member of such a party. It is not given
to everyone to withstand the stresses and storms that
accompany membership in such a party. It is the sonsof the working class, the sons of want and struggle, the
sons of incredible privation and heroic effort who before
all should be members of such a party. That is why theParty of the Leninists, the Party of the Communists,
is also called the Party of the working class.
DEPARTING  US, COMRADE LENIN ENJOINED US
TO HOLD HIGH AND GUARD THE PURITY OF THE GREAT
TITLE OF MEMBER OF THE PARTY . WE VOW TO YOU,
COMRADE LENIN, THAT WE SHALL FULFIL YOUR BEHEST
WITH  HONOUR!
For twenty-five years Comrade Lenin tended our
Party and made it into the strongest and most highly
steeled workers’ party in the world. The blows of
tsarism and its henchmen, the fury of the bourgeoisie
and the landlords, the armed attacks of Kolchak andDenikin, the armed intervention of Britain and France,
the lies and slanders of the hundred-mouthed bourgeois
press—all these scorpions constantly chastised ourParty for a quarter of a century. But our Party stood
firm as a rock, repelling the countless blows of its ene-
mies and leading the working class forward, to victory.In fierce battles our Party forged the unity and soli-
darity of its ranks. And by unity and solidarity it
achieved victory over the enemies of the working class.
DEPARTING  US, COMRADE LENIN ENJOINED US
TO GUARD THE UNITY OF OUR PARTY AS THE APPLE
OF OUR EYE. WE VOW TO YOU, COMRADE LENIN, THATTHIS BEHEST, TOO, WE SHALL FULFIL WITH HONOUR!
Burdensome and intolerable has been the lot of the
working class. Painful and grievous have been the suf-ferings of the labouring people. Slaves and slaveholders,
serfs and serf-owners, peasants and landlords, workers
and capitalists, oppressed and oppressors—so the world
has been built from time immemorial, and so it re-mains to this day in the vast majority of countries.
Scores and indeed hundreds of times in the course of
the centuries the labouring people have striven to throw
off the oppressors from their backs and to become the
masters of their own destiny. But each time, defeatedand disgraced, they have been forced to retreat, har-
bouring in their breasts resentment and humiliation,
anger and despair, and lifting up their eyes to aninscrutable heaven where they hoped to find deliverance.
The chains of slavery remained intact, or the old chains
were replaced by new ones, equally burdensome and
degrading. Ours is the only country where the oppressedand downtrodden labouring masses have succeeded in
throwing off the rule of the landlords and capitalists
and replacing it by the rule of the workers and peasants.You know, comrades, and the whole world now admits
it, that this gigantic struggle was led by Comrade Lenin
and his Party. The greatness of Lenin lies above all inthis, that by creating the Republic of Soviets he gave
a practical demonstration to the oppressed masses of
the whole world that hope of deliverance is not lost,that the rule of the landlords and capitalists is short-
lived, that the kingdom of labour can be created by the
efforts of the labouring people themselves, and that thekingdom of labour must be created not in heaven, buton earth . He thus fired the hearts of the workers and
peasants of the whole world with the hope of liberation.
That explains why Lenin’s name has become the namemost beloved of the labouring and exploited masses.
DEPARTING  US, COMRADE LENIN ENJOINED US TO
GUARD AND STRENGTHEN THE DICTATORSHIP OFTHE PROLETARIAT. WE VOW TO YOU, COMRADE LENIN,THAT WE SHALL SPARE NO EFFORT TO FULFIL THISBEHEST, TOO, WITH HONOUR!
The dictatorship of the proletariat was established
in our country on the basis of an alliance between the
workers and peasants. This is the first and fundamental
basis of the Republic of Soviets. The workers and peas-ants could not have vanquished the capitalists and
landlords without such an alliance. The workers could
not have defeated the capitalists without the supportof the peasants. The peasants could not have defeated
the landlords without the leadership of the workers.
This is borne out by the whole history of the civil war
in our country. But the struggle to consolidate the Repub-lic of Soviets is by no means at an end—it has only
taken on a new form. Before, the alliance of the workers
and peasants took the form of a military alliance, be-cause it was directed against Kolchak and Denikin.
Now, the alliance of the workers and peasants must
assume the form of economic co-operation between townand country, between workers and peasants, because
it is directed against the merchant and the kulak, and
its aim is the mutual supply by peasants and workers ofall they require. You know that nobody worked for
this more persistently than Comrade Lenin.
DEPARTING  US, COMRADE LENIN ENJOINED US
TO STRENGTHEN WITH ALL OUR MIGHT THE AL-
LIANCE OF THE WORKERS AND PEASANTS. WE VOW
TO YOU, COMRADE, LENIN, THAT THIS BEHEST, TOO,
WE SHALL FULFIL WITH HONOUR!
The second basis of the Republic of Soviets is the
union of the working people of the different national-
ities of our country. Russians and Ukrainians, Bash-kirs and Byelorussians, Georgians and Azerbaijanians,
Armenians and Daghestanians, Tatars and Kirghiz,
Uzbeks and Turkmenians are all equally interested instrengthening the dictatorship of the proletariat. Not
only does the dictatorship of the proletariat deliver these
peoples from fetters and oppression, but these peopleson their part deliver our Republic of Soviets from the in-
trigues and assaults of the enemies of the working class
by their supreme devotion to the Republic of Sovietsand their readiness to make sacrifices for it. That is
why Comrade Lenin untiringly urged upon us the ne-
cessity of the voluntary union of the peoples of our
country, the necessity of their fraternal co-operationwithin the framework of the Union of Republics.
DEPARTING  US, COMRADE LENIN ENJOINED
US TO STRENGTHEN AND EXTEND THE UNION OF RE-
PUBLICS. WE VOW TO YOU, COMRADE LENIN, THAT
THIS BEHEST, TOO, WE SHALL FULFIL WITH HONOUR!
    The third basis of the dictatorship of the proletariat
is our Red Army and our Red Navy. More than once didLenin impress upon us that the respite we had won from
the capitalist states might prove a short one. More than
once did Lenin point out to us that the strengthening of
the Red Army and the improvement of its condition
is one of the most important tasks of our Party. The
events connected with Curzon’s ultimatum and the cri-
sis in Germany
10 once more confirmed that, as always,
Lenin was right. Let us vow then, comrades, that we
shall spare no effort to strengthen our Red Army and
our Red Navy.
Like a huge rock, our country stands out amid an
ocean of bourgeois states. Wave after wave dashes
against it, threatening to submerge it and wash it away.But the rock stands unshakable. Wherein lies its strength?
Not only in the fact that our country rests on an alliance
of the workers and peasants, that it embodies a unionof free nationalities, that it is protected by the mighty
arm of the Red Army and the Red Navy. The strength,
the firmness, the solidity of our country is due to theprofound sympathy and unfailing support it finds in
the hearts of the workers and peasants of the whole world.
The workers and peasants of the whole world want to
preserve the Republic of Soviets as an arrow shot by the
sure hand of Comrade Lenin into the camp of the enemy,as the pillar of their hopes of deliverance from oppres-
sion and exploitation, as a reliable beacon pointing the
path to their emancipation. They want to preserve it,and they will not allow the landlords and capitalists
to destroy it. Therein lies our strength. Therein lies the
strength of the working people of all countries. And there-in lies the weakness of the bourgeoisie all over the world.
Lenin never regarded the Republic of Soviets as an
end in itself. He always looked on it as an essential linkfor strengthening the revolutionary movement in the
countries of the West and the East, an essential link
for facilitating the victory of the working people of thewhole world over capitalism. Lenin knew that this was the
only right conception, both from the international stand-
point and from the standpoint of preserving the Republicof Soviets itself. Lenin knew that this alone could fire
the hearts of the working people of the whole world with
determination to fight the decisive battles for their eman-cipation. That is why, on the very morrow of the establish-
ment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, he, the great-
est of the geniuses who have led the proletariat, laidthe foundation of the workers’ International. That is
why he never tired of extending and strengthening the
union of the working people of the whole world—theCommunist International.
You have seen during the past few days the pilgrim-
age of scores and hundreds of thousands of workingpeople to Comrade Lenin’s bier. Before long you will
see the pilgrimage of representatives of millions of work-
ing people to Comrade Lenin’s tomb. You need not
doubt that the representatives of millions will be followed
by representatives of scores and hundreds of millions
from all parts of the earth, who will come to testify thatLenin was the leader not only of the Russian proletariat,
not only of the European workers, not only of the colo-
nial East, but of all the working people of the globe.
DEPARTING  US, COMRADE LENIN ENJOINED US
TO REMAIN FAITHFUL TO THE PRINCIPLES OF THE
COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL. WE VOW TO YOU, COM-
RADE LENIN, THAT WE SHALL NOT SPARE OUR LIVES TOSTRENGTHEN AND EXTEND THE UNION OF THE WORK-
ING PEOPLE OF THE WHOLE WORLD—THE COMMUNIST
INTERNATIONAL!
Pravda ,  No.  23,
January  30,  1924
LENIN
A  Speech  Delivered  at  a  Memorial  Meeting
of  the  Kremlin  Military  School
January  28,  1924
Comrades, I am told that you have arranged a Lenin
memorial meeting here this evening and that I havebeen invited as one of the speakers. I do not think there
is any need for me to deliver a set speech on Lenin’s
activities. It would be better, I think, to confine myselfto a few facts to bring out certain of Lenin’s character-
istics as a man and a leader. There may, perhaps, be
no inherent connection between these facts, but that isnot of vital importance as far as gaining a general idea
of Lenin is concerned. At any rate, I am unable on this
occasion to do more than what I have just prom-
ised.
THE  MOUNTAIN  EAGLE
I first became acquainted with Lenin in 1903. True,
it was not a personal acquaintance, but was by corre-
spondence. But it made an indelible impression uponme, one which has never left me throughout all my work
in the Party. I was in exile in Siberia at the time. My
knowledge of Lenin’s revolutionary activities since theend of the nineties, and especially after 1901, after the
appearance of Iskra ,
11 had convinced me that in Lenin
we had a man of extraordinary calibre. At that time
I did not regard him merely as a leader of the Party, but
as its actual founder, for he alone understood the inner
essence and urgent needs of our Party. When I comparedhim with the other leaders of our Party, it always seemed
to me that he was head and shoulders above his col-
leagues—Plekhanov, Martov, Axelrod and the others;that, compared with them, Lenin was not just one of
the leaders, but a leader of the highest rank, a mountain
eagle, who knew no fear in the struggle, and who boldlyled the Party forward along the unexplored paths of the
Russian revolutionary movement. This impression took
such a deep hold of me that I felt impelled to write aboutit to `a close friend of mine who was living as a political
exile abroad, requesting him to give me his opinion.
Some time later, when I was already in exile in Sibe-ria—this was at the end of 1903—I received an enthu-
siastic reply from my friend and a simple, but profoundly
expressive letter from Lenin, to whom, it turned out,my friend had shown my letter. Lenin’s note was com-
paratively short, but it contained a bold and fearless
criticism of the practical work of our Party, and a re-markably clear and concise account of the entire plan
of work of the Party in the immediate future. Only
Lenin could write of the most intricate things so simplyand clearly, so concisely and boldly, that every sentence
did not so much speak as ring out like a rifle shot. This
simple and bold letter still further strengthened me inmy opinion that Lenin was the mountain eagle of our
Party. I cannot forgive myself for having, from the habit
of an old underground worker, consigned this letter ofLenin’s, like many other letters, to the flames.
My acquaintance with Lenin dates from that time.
MODESTY
I first met Lenin in December 1905 at the Bolshevik
conference in Tammerfors (Finland). I was hoping to
see the mountain eagle of our Party, the great man,great not only politically, but, if you will, physically,
because in my imagination I had pictured Lenin as a
giant, stately and imposing. What, then, was my disap-pointment to see a most ordinary-looking man, below
average height, in no way, literally in no way, distin-
guishable from ordinary mortals. . . .
It is accepted as the usual thing for a “great man”
to come late to meetings so that the assembly may await
his appearance with bated breath; and then, just beforethe “great man” enters, the warning whisper goes up:
“Hush! . . . Silence! . . . He’s coming.” This ritual
did not seem to me superfluous, because it creates animpression, inspires respect. What, then, was my disap-
pointment to learn that Lenin had arrived at the con-
ference before the delegates, had settled himself some-where in a corner, and was unassumingly carrying on
a conversation, a most ordinary conversation with the
most ordinary delegates at the conference. I will notconceal from you that at that time this seemed to me
to be something of a violation of certain essential rules.
Only later did I realise that this simplicity and mod-
esty, this striving to remain unobserved, or, at least,
not to make himself conspicuous and not to emphasise
his high position, this feature was one of Lenin’s strong-est points as the new leader of the new masses, of the
simple and ordinary masses of the “rank and file”
of humanity.
FORCE  OF  LOGIC
The two speeches Lenin delivered at this conference
were remarkable: one was on the current situation and
the other on the agrarian question. Unfortunately, they
have not been preserved. They were inspired, and theyroused the whole conference to a pitch of stormy enthu-
siasm. The extraordinary power of conviction, the sim-
plicity and clarity of argument, the brief and easilyunderstood sentences, the absence of affectation, of diz-
zying gestures and theatrical phrases aiming at effect
—all this made Lenin’s speeches a favourable contrast tothe speeches of the usual “parliamentary” orators.
But what captivated me at the time was not this
aspect of Lenin’s speeches. I was captivated by thatirresistible force of logic in them which, although some-
what terse, gained a firm hold on his audience, grad-
ually electrified it, and then, as one might say, complete-ly overpowered it. I remember that many of the dele-
gates said: “The logic of Lenin’s speeches is like a mighty
tentacle which twines all round you and holds you as ina vice and from whose grip you are powerless to tear
yourself away: you must either surrender or resign your-
self to utter defeat.”
I think that this characteristic of Lenin’s speeches
was the strongest feature of his art as an orator.
NO  WHINING
The second time I met Lenin was in 1906 at the Stock-
holm Congress12 of our Party. You know that the Bolshe-
viks were in the minority at this congress and suffered
defeat. This was the first time I saw Lenin in the role of
the vanquished. But he was not in the least like those lead-
ers who whine and lose heart after a defeat. On the con-
trary, defeat transformed Lenin into a spring of com-pressed energy which inspired his supporters for new bat-
tles and for future victory. I said that Lenin was defeat-
ed. But what sort of defeat was it? You had only to lookat his opponents, the victors at the Stockholm Congress—
Plekhanov, Axelrod, Martov and the rest. They had
little of the appearance of real victors, for Lenin’smerciless criticism of Menshevism had not left one whole
bone in their body, so to speak. I remember that we,
the Bolshevik delegates, huddled together in a group, gaz-ing at Lenin and asking his advice. The speeches of some
of the delegates betrayed a note of weariness and de-
jection. I recall that to these speeches Lenin bitinglyreplied through clenched teeth: “Don’t whine, com-
rades, we are bound to win, for we are right.” Hatred of
the whining intellectual, faith in our own strength, con-fidence in victory—that is what Lenin impressed upon
us. It was felt that the Bolsheviks’ defeat was temporary,
that they were bound to win in the very near future.     “No whining over defeat”—this was the feature of
Lenin’s activities that helped him to rally around him-
self an army faithful to the end and confident in itsstrength.
NO  BOASTING
    At the next congress, held in 1907 in London,13 the
Bolsheviks proved victorious. This was the first timeI saw Lenin in the role of victor. Victory turns the heads
of some leaders and makes them haughty and boast-
ful. They begin in most cases to be triumphant, to rest
on their laurels. But Lenin did not in the least re-
semble such leaders. On the contrary, it was preciselyafter a victory that he became especially vigilant and
cautious. I recall that Lenin insistently impressed on
the delegates: “The first thing is not to become intox-icated by victory and not to boast; the second thing
is to consolidate the victory; the third is to give the
enemy the finishing stroke, for he has been beaten, butby no means crushed.” He poured withering scorn on
those delegates who frivolously asserted: “It is all
over with the Mensheviks now.” He had no difficultyin showing that the Mensheviks still had roots in the
working-class movement, that they had to be fought
with skill, and that all overestimation of one’s ownstrength and, especially, all underestimation of the
strength of the enemy had to be avoided.
“No boasting in victory”—this was the feature of
Lenin’s character that helped him soberly to weigh the
strength of the enemy and to insure the Party against
possible surprises.
FIDELITY  TO  PRINCIPLE
    Party leaders cannot but prize the opinion of the
majority of their party. A majority is a power with
which a leader cannot but reckon. Lenin understoodthis no less than any other party leader. But Lenin
never became a captive of the majority, especially when
that majority had no basis of principle. There have beentimes in the history of our Party when the opinion of
the majority or the momentary interests of the Party
conflicted with the fundamental interests of the prole-
tariat. On such occasions Lenin would never hesitate
and resolutely took his stand in support of principle asagainst the majority of the Party. Moreover, he did not
fear on such occasions literally to stand alone against
all, considering—as he would often say—that “a policybased on principle is the only correct policy.”
Particularly characteristic in this respect are the
two following facts.
First fact.   It was in the period 1909-11, when the
Party, smashed by the counter-revolution, was in proc-
ess of complete disintegration. It was a period of dis-belief in the Party, of wholesale desertion from the Party,
not only by the intellectuals, but partly even by the work-
ers; a period when the necessity for illegal organi-sation was being denied, a period of Liquidationism and
collapse. Not only the Mensheviks, but even the Bolshe-
viks then consisted of a number of factions and trends,for the most part severed from the working-class move-
ment. You know that it was just at that period that the
idea arose of completely liquidating the illegal organi-sation and organising the workers into a legal, liberal
Stolypin party. Lenin at that time was the only one not
to succumb to the widespread epidemic and to hold highthe banner of Party principle, assembling the scattered
and shattered forces of the Party with astonishing patience
and extraordinary persistence, combating each and everyanti-Party trend within the working-class movement
and defending the Party principle with unusual courage
and unparalleled perseverance.
We know that in this fight for the Party principle,
Lenin later proved the victor.
Second fact.   It was in the period 1914-17, when the
imperialist war was in full swing, and when all, or
nearly all, the Social-Democratic and Socialist partieshad succumbed to the general patriotic frenzy and had
placed themselves at the service of the imperialism of
their respective countries. It was a period when the Sec-ond International had hauled down its colours to capi-
talism, when even people like Plekhanov, Kautsky,
Guesde and the rest were unable to withstand the tideof chauvinism. Lenin at that time was the only one,
or almost the only one, to wage a determined strug-
gle against social-chauvinism and social-pacifism, todenounce the treachery of the Guesdes and Kautskys,
and to stigmatise the half-heartedness of the betwixt
and between “revolutionaries.” Lenin knew thathe was backed by only an insignificant minority,
but to him this was not of decisive moment, for he
knew that the only correct policy with a future beforeit was the policy of consistent internationalism,
that a policy based on principle is the only correct
policy.
We know that in this fight for a new International,
too, Lenin proved the victor.
“A policy based on principle is the only correct
policy”—this was the formula by means of which Lenin
took new “impregnable” positions by assault and won
over the best elements of the proletariat to revolutionaryMarxism.
FAITH  IN  THE  MASSES
Theoreticians and leaders of parties, men who are
acquainted with the history of nations and who have
studied the history of revolutions from beginning to
end, are sometimes afflicted by a shameful disease.This disease is called fear of the masses, disbelief in the
creative power of the masses. This sometimes gives
rise in the leaders to a kind of aristocratic attitudetowards the masses, who, although not versed in
the history of revolutions, are destined to destroy the
old order and build the new. This kind of aristocraticattitude is due to a fear that the elements may break
loose, that the masses may “destroy too much”; it is
due to a desire to play the part of a mentor who triesto teach the masses from books, but who is averse to
learning from the masses.
Lenin was the very antithesis of such leaders. I do
not know of any other revolutionary who had so pro-
found a faith in the creative power of the proletariat
and in the revolutionary efficacy of its class instinct asLenin. I do not know of any other revolutionary who could
scourge the smug critics of the “chaos of revolution”
and the “riot of unauthorised actions of the masses” soruthlessly as Lenin. I recall that when in the course of
a conversation one comrade said that “the revolution
should be followed by the normal order of things,” Leninsarcastically remarked: “It is a pity that people who want
to be revolutionaries forget that the most normal order
of things in history is the revolutionary order of things.”    Hence, Lenin’s contempt for all who superciliously
looked down on the masses and tried to teach them from
books. And hence, Lenin’s constant precept: learn
from the masses, try to comprehend their actions, care-
fully study the practical experience of the struggle ofthe masses.
Faith in the creative power of the masses—this was
the feature of Lenin’s activities which enabled him tocomprehend the spontaneous process and to direct its
movement into the channel of the proletarian revolution.
THE  GENIUS  OF  REVOLUTION
Lenin was born for revolution. He was, in truth, the
genius of revolutionary outbreaks and the greatest master
of the art of revolutionary leadership. Never did he feelso free and happy as in a time of revolutionary upheav-
als. I do not mean by this that Lenin approved equally
of all revolutionary upheavals, or that he was in favourof revolutionary outbreaks at all times and under all
circumstances. Not at all. What I do mean is that never
was the genius of Lenin’s insight displayed so fully anddistinctly as in a time of revolutionary outbreaks. In
times of revolution he literally blossomed forth, became
a seer, divined the movement of classes and the prob-able zigzags of the revolution, seeing them as if they
lay in the palm of his hand. It was with good reason that
it used to be said in our Party circles: “Lenin swims inthe tide of revolution like a fish in water.”
Hence the “amazing” clarity  of Lenin’s tactical
slogans and the “breath-taking” boldness  of his revo-
lutionary plans.
I recall two facts which are particularly characteris-
tic of this feature of Lenin.
First fact . It was in the period just prior to the Octo-
ber Revolution, when millions of workers, peasants
and soldiers, impelled by the crisis in the rear and at thefront, were demanding peace and liberty; when the gener-
als and the bourgeoisie were working for a military
dictatorship for the sake of “war to a finish”; when thewhole of so-called “public opinion” and all the so-called
“Socialist parties” were hostile to the Bolsheviks and
were branding them as “German spies”; when Ke-rensky was trying—already with some success—to drive
the Bolshevik Party underground; and when the still
powerful and disciplined armies of the Austro-Germancoalition confronted our weary, disintegrating armies,
while the West-European “Socialists” lived in bliss-
ful alliance with their governments for the sake of “warto complete victory.”. . .
What did starting an uprising at such a moment
mean? Starting an uprising in such a situation meantstaking everything. But Lenin did not fear the risk,
for he knew, he saw with his prophetic eye, that an up-
rising was inevitable, that it would win; that an upris-ing in Russia would pave the way for ending the im-
perialist war, that it would rouse the war-weary masses
of the West, that it would transform the imperialistwar into a civil war; that the uprising would usher in
a Republic of Soviets, and that the Republic of Soviets
would serve as a bulwark for the revolutionary move-ment throughout the world.
We know that Lenin’s revolutionary foresight was
subsequently confirmed with unparalleled exactness.
Second fact.   It was in the first days of the October
Revolution, when the Council of People’s Commissars
was trying to compel General Dukhonin, the mutinous
Commander-in-chief, to terminate hostilities and open
negotiations for an armistice with the Germans. I recallthat Lenin, Krylenko (the future Commander-in-Chief)
and I went to General Staff Headquarters in Petrograd
to negotiate with Dukhonin over the direct wire. It wasa ghastly moment. Dukhonin and Field Headquarters
categorically refused to obey the order of the Council
of People’s Commissars. The army officers were com-pletely under the sway of Field Headquarters. As for
the soldiers, no one could tell what this army of four-
teen million would say, subordinated as it was to theso-called army organisations, which were hostile to the
Soviet power. In Petrograd itself, as we know, a mutiny of
the military cadets was brewing. Furthermore, Kerenskywas marching on Petrograd. I recall that after a pause
at the direct wire, Lenin’s face suddenly shone with an
extraordinary light. Clearly he had arrived at a decision.“Let’s go to the wireless station,” he said, “it will stand
us in good stead. We shall issue a special order dismiss-
ing General Dukhonin, appoint Comrade KrylenkoCommander-in-Chief in his place and appeal to the
soldiers over the heads of the officers, calling upon them
to surround the generals, to cease hostilities, to establishcontact with the Austro-German soldiers and take
the cause of peace into their own hands.”
This was “a leap in the dark.” But Lenin did not
shrink from this “leap”; on the contrary, he made it
eagerly, for he knew that the army wanted peace and
would win peace, sweeping every obstacle from its path;he knew that this method of establishing peace was
bound to have its effect on the Austro-German soldiers
and would give full rein to the yearning for peace on
every front without exception.
We know that here, too, Lenin’s revolutionary
foresight was subsequently confirmed with the utmost
exactness.
The insight of genius, the ability rapidly to grasp
and divine the inner meaning of impending events this
was the quality of Lenin which enabled him to lay down
the correct strategy and a clear line of conduct at turningpoints of the revolutionary movement.
Pravda ,  No.  34,
February  12,  1924
ON  THE  CONTRADICTIONS
IN  THE  YOUNG  COMMUNIST  LEAGUE
Speech  at  the  C.C.,  R.C.P .(B.)
Conference  on  Work  Among the  Youth14
April  3,  1924
I must first of all say something about the attitude
of the Central Committee of the Russian Young Commu-
nist League to the Party discussion. It was a mistake forthe Central Committee of the League to continue its
stubborn silence after the local organisations had stated
their views. But it would be wrong to attribute thissilence of the League’s Central Committee to a policy
of neutrality. They were just over-cautious.
Now a few words about the debate. I think that
among you there are no disagreements based on prin-
ciple. I have studied your theses and articles and have
failed to find any such disagreements. But there is con-fusion and a heap of imaginary “irreconcilable” con-
tradictions.
The first contradiction: contrasting the League
as a “reserve” to the League as an “instrument” of the
Party. What is the League—a reserve or an instrument?
Both. This is obvious, and it was stated by the comradesthemselves in their speeches. The Young Communist
League is a reserve, a reserve of peasants and workers
from which the Party augments its ranks. But it is, atthe same time, an instrument, an instrument in the hands
of the Party, bringing the masses of the youth under
its influence. More specifically, it could be said that
the League is an instrument of the Party, an auxiliary
weapon of the Party, in the sense that the active League
membership is an instrument of the Party for influenc-ing the youth not organised in the League. These con-
ceptions do not contradict one another, and cannot be
put in contrast to one another.
A second so-called irreconcilable contradiction: some
comrades think that the “class policy of the League
is determined not by its composition, but by the staunch-ness of the people who stand at its head.” Staunchness
is contrasted to composition. This contradiction, too, is
imaginary, because the class policy of the R.Y .C.L.is determined by both factors—composition and staunch-
ness of the top leadership. If staunch people are sub-
jected to the influence of a League membership that isalien to them in spirit, all the League members enjoying
equal rights, then a membership of this kind cannot
but leave its imprint on the League’s activity and pol-icy. Why does the Party regulate the composition of
its membership? Because it knows that the composition
of the membership influences its activities.
Lastly, one more contradiction, similarly imaginary,
concerning the role of the League and its work among
the peasants. Some take the view that the task of theLeague is to “consolidate” its influence among the peas-
ants, but not to extend that influence; others, appar-
ently, want to “extend the influence,” but do not agreewith the need for consolidation. There is an attempt
to make this an issue in the discussion. It is clear that
to draw a contrast between these two tasks is artificial,for everyone understands quite well that the League
must, at one and the same time, consolidate and extend
its influence in the countryside. True, in one place in
the League Central Committee’s theses there is an awk-
ward expression on work among the peasants. But nei-ther Tarkhanov nor the other representatives of the
League Central Committee majority have insisted on
it, and they are prepared to correct it. That being the
case, is it worth while disputing over minor points?
But there is one real, not imaginary, contradiction
in the life and work of the Young Communist Leagueabout which I should like to say a few words. I have in
mind the existence of two tendencies in the League: the
worker tendency and the peasant tendency. I have inmind the contradiction between these tendencies, which
is making itself felt, and which we cannot afford to
ignore. Discussion of this contradiction has been theweakest point in the speeches. All the speakers declared
that the League must grow by recruiting workers, but
they all stumbled as soon as they turned to the peasantry,to the question of recruiting peasants. Even those who
spoke simply and straightforwardly stumbled on this
point.
Obviously, two problems confront the R.Y .C.L.: the
worker problem and the peasant problem. It is obvious
that, since the Y .C.L. is a workers’ and peasants’league, these two tendencies, these contradictions within
the League, will remain in future too. Some will stress
the need to recruit workers, saying nothing about thepeasantry; others will stress the need to recruit peasants,
underestimating the importance of the proletarian ele-
ment as the leading element in the League. It is thisinternal contradiction, inherent in the very nature of
the League, that makes the speakers stumble. In their
speeches, some drew a parallel between the Party and
the Y .C.L., but the fact of the matter is that no such
parallel can exist, because our Party is a workers’ party,not a workers’ and peasants’ party, while the Y .C.L.
is a workers’ and peasants’ league. That is why the
Y .C.L. cannot be only a workers’ league, but must, atone and the same time, be a workers’ league and a peas-
ants’ league. One thing is clear: with the present struc-
ture of the League, internal contradictions and the strug-gle of tendencies are inevitable in future too.
Those who say that the middle-peasant youth should
be recruited into the Party are correct, but we shouldbe careful not to slip into the conception of a workers’
and peasants’ party, as even some responsible function-
aries are prone to do at times. Many have loudly de-manded: “You are recruiting workers into the Party,
why not recruit peasants on the same scale? Let us bring
in a hundred thousand peasants, or two hundred thou-sand.” The Central Committee is opposed to this, for
our Party must be a workers’ party. The ratio in the
Party should be approximately 70 or 80 per cent work-ers to 20-25 per cent non-workers. The position is some-
what different with regard to the Y .C.L. The Young
Communist League is a voluntary, free organisationof the revolutionary elements of the worker and peas-
ant youth. Without peasants, without the mass of the
peasant youth, it will cease to be a workers’ and peas-ants’ league. But its work should be so organised that
the leading role remains with the proletarian element.
First published  in  the  book:
J.  Stalin,  On  the  Young  Communist  League ,
Moscow,  1926
THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF  LENINISM15
Lectures  Delivered  at  the  Sverdlov  Universit y
The foundations of Leninism is a big subject. To ex-
haust it a whole volume would be required. Indeed,a number of volumes would be required. Naturally,
therefore, my lectures cannot be an exhaustive exposi-
tion of Leninism; at best they can only offer a concisesynopsis of the foundations of Leninism. Nevertheless,
I consider it useful to give this synopsis, in order to lay
down some basic points of departure necessary for thesuccessful study of Leninism.
Expounding the foundations of Leninism still does
not mean expounding the basis of Lenin’s world outlook.Lenin’s world outlook and the foundations of Leninism
are not identical in scope. Lenin was a Marxist, and Marx-
ism is, of course, the basis of his world outlook. Butfrom this it does not at all follow that an exposition
of Leninism ought to begin with an exposition of the
foundations of Marxism. To expound Leninism means toexpound the distinctive and new in the works of Lenin
that Lenin contributed to the general treasury of Marxism
and that is naturally connected with his name. Onlyin this sense will I speak in my lectures of the founda-
tions of Leninism.   D E D I C A T E D  
TO  THE  LENIN  ENROLMENT
J.  S T A L I N
And so, what is Leninism?
Some say that Leninism is the application of Marxism
to the conditions that are peculiar to the situationin Russia. This definition contains a particle of truth,
but not the whole truth by any means. Lenin, indeed,
applied Marxism to Russian conditions, and appliedit in a masterly way. But if Leninism were only the
application of Marxism to the conditions that are pe-
culiar to Russia it would be a purely national andonly a national, a purely Russian and only a Russian,
phenomenon. We know, however, that Leninism is not
merely a Russian, but an international phenomenonrooted in the whole of international development. That
is why I think this definition suffers from one-sided-
ness.
Others say that Leninism is the revival of the revo-
lutionary elements of Marxism of the forties of the nine-
teenth century, as distinct from the Marxism of sub-sequent years, when, it is alleged, it became moderate,
non-revolutionary. If we disregard this foolish and vul-
gar division of the teachings of Marx into two parts,revolutionary and moderate, we must admit that even
this totally inadequate and unsatisfactory definition
contains a particle of truth. This particle of truth isthat Lenin did indeed restore the revolutionary con-
tent of Marxism, which had been suppressed by the oppor-
tunists of the Second International. Still, that is buta particle of the truth. The whole truth about Leninism
is that Leninism not only restored Marxism, but also
took a step forward, developing Marxism further underthe new conditions of capitalism and of the class strug-
gle of the proletariat.
What, then, in the last analysis, is Leninism?
Leninism is Marxism of the era of imperialism and
the proletarian revolution. To be more exact, Leninismis the theory and tactics of the proletarian revolution
in general, the theory and tactics of the dictatorship
of the proletariat in particular. Marx and Engels pursuedtheir activities in the pre-revolutionary period (we have
the proletarian revolution in mind), when developed
imperialism did not yet exist, in the period of the pro-letarians’ preparation for revolution, in the period when
the proletarian revolution was not yet an immediate
practical inevitability. But Lenin, the disciple of Marxand Engels, pursued his activities in the period of devel-
oped imperialism, in the period of the unfolding prole-
tarian revolution, when the proletarian revolution hadalready triumphed in one country, had smashed bourgeois
democracy and had ushered in the era of proletarian de-
mocracy, the era of the Soviets.
That is why Leninism is the further development
of Marxism.
It is usual to point to the exceptionally militant and
exceptionally revolutionary character of Leninism. This
is quite correct. But this specific feature of Leninism
is due to two causes: firstly, to the fact that Leninismemerged from the proletarian revolution, the imprint
of which it cannot but bear; secondly, to the fact that it
grew and became strong in clashes with the opportunismof the Second International, the fight against which
was and remains an essential preliminary condition for
a successful fight against capitalism. It must not beforgotten that between Marx and Engels, on the one
hand, and Lenin, on the other, there lies a whole period
of undivided domination of the opportunism of the Sec-
ond International, and the ruthless struggle against
this opportunism could not but constitute one of themost important tasks of Leninism.
I
THE  HISTORICAL  ROOTS  OF  LENINISM
    Leninism grew up and took shape under the condi-
tions of imperialism, when the contradictions of capital-
ism had reached an extreme point, when the proletarianrevolution had become an immediate practical question,
when the old period of preparation of the working class
for revolution had come up and passed over to a newperiod, that of direct assault on capitalism.
    Lenin called imperialism “moribund capitalism.”
Why? Because imperialism carries the contradictions ofcapitalism to their last bounds, to the extreme limit,
beyond which revolution begins. Of these contradictions,
there are three which must be regarded as the most im-portant.
    The first contradiction  is the contradiction between
labour and capital. Imperialism is the omnipotence ofthe monopolist trusts and syndicates, of the banks
and the financial oligarchy, in the industrial countries. In
the fight against this omnipotence, the customarymethods of the working class—trade unions and co-
operatives, parliamentary parties and the parlia-
mentary struggle—have proved to be totally inadequate.Either place yourself at the mercy of capital, eke out
a wretched existence as of old and sink lower and lower,
or adopt a new weapon—this is the alternative im-
perialism puts before the vast masses of the proletar-
iat. Imperialism brings the working class to revolution.
The second contradiction  is the contradiction among
the various financial groups and imperialist Powers in
their struggle for sources of raw materials, for foreign
territory. Imperialism is the export of capital to thesources of raw materials, the frenzied struggle for monop-
olist possession of these sources, the struggle for a re-
division of the already divided world, a struggle wagedwith particular fury by new financial groups and Powers
seeking a “place in the sun” against the old groups and
Powers, which cling tenaciously to what they have seized.This frenzied struggle among the various groups of
capitalists is notable in that it includes as an inevitable
element imperialist wars, wars for the annexation offoreign territories. This circumstance, in its turn, is
notable in that it leads to the mutual weakening of the
imperialists, to the weakening of the position of capital-ism in general, to the acceleration of the advent of the
proletarian revolution and to the practical necessity of
this revolution.
The third contradiction  is the contradiction between
the handful of ruling, “civilised” nations and the hun-
dreds of millions of the colonial and dependent peoplesof the world. Imperialism is the most barefaced exploi-
tation and the most inhuman oppression of hundreds of
millions of people inhabiting vast colonies and depend-ent countries. The purpose of this exploitation and of
this oppression is to squeeze out super-profits. But in
exploiting these countries imperialism is compelled tobuild there railways, factories and mills, industrial and
commercial centres. The appearance of a class of
proletarians, the emergence of a native intelligentsia, the
awakening of national consciousness, the growth of the
liberation movement—such are the inevitable resultsof this “policy.” The growth of the revolutionary move-
ment in all colonies and dependent countries without
exception clearly testifies to this fact. This circumstanceis of importance for the proletariat inasmuch as it saps
radically the position of capitalism by converting the
colonies and dependent countries from reserves of impe-rialism into reserves of the proletarian revolution.
    Such, in general, are the principal contradictions of
imperialism which have converted the old, “flourishing”capitalism into moribund capitalism.
    The significance of the imperialist war which broke
out 10 years ago lies, among other things, in the factthat it gathered all these contradictions into a single
knot and threw them on to the scales, thereby accelerat-
ing and facilitating the revolutionary battles of the pro-letariat.
    In other words, imperialism was instrumental not
only in making the revolution a practical inevitability,but also in creating favourable conditions for a direct
assault on the citadels of capitalism.
    Such was the international situation which gavebirth to Leninism.
    Some may say: This is all very well, but what has it
to do with Russia, which was not and could not be aclassical land of imperialism? What has it to do with
Lenin, who worked primarily in Russia and for Russia?
Why did Russia, of all countries, become the home ofLeninism, the birthplace of the theory and tactics of
the proletarian revolution?
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

Because Russia was the focus of all these contradic-
tions of imperialism.
Because Russia, more than any other country, was
pregnant with revolution, and she alone, therefore, was
in a position to solve those contradictions in a revolution-
ary way.
To begin with, tsarist Russia was the home of every
kind of oppression—capitalist, colonial and militarist—
in its most inhuman and barbarous form. Who doesnot know that in Russia the omnipotence of capital was
combined with the despotism of tsarism, the aggres-
siveness of Russian nationalism with tsarism’s role ofexecutioner in regard to the non-Russian peoples, the ex-
ploitation of entire regions—Turkey, Persia, China -- with
the seizure of these regions by tsarism, with wars of con-quest? Lenin was right in saying that tsarism was “mil-
itary-feudal imperialism.” Tsarism was the concentra-
tion of the worst features of imperialism, raised toa high pitch.
To proceed. Tsarist Russia was a major reserve of
Western imperialism, not only in the sense that it gavefree entry to foreign capital, which controlled such basic
branches of Russia’s national economy as the fuel and
metallurgical industries, but also in the sense that it couldsupply the Western imperialists with millions of soldiers.
Remember the Russian army,  fourteen million strong,
which shed its blood on the imperialist fronts to safe-guard the staggering profits of the British and French
capitalists.
Further. Tsarism was not only the watchdog of im-
perialism in the east of Europe, but, in addition, it was
the agent of Western imperialism for squeezing out of
the population hundreds of millions by way of interest
on loans obtained in Paris and London, Berlin and
Brussels.
Finally, tsarism was a most faithful ally of Western
imperialism in the partition of Turkey, Persia, China,
etc. Who does not know that the imperialist war waswaged by tsarism in alliance with the imperialists of
the Entente, and that Russia was an essential element
in that war?
That is why the interests of tsarism and of Western
imperialism were interwoven and ultimately became
merged in a single skein of imperialist interests.
Could Western imperialism resign itself to the loss
of such a powerful support in the East and of such a rich
reservoir of manpower and resources as old, tsarist, bour-geois Russia was without exerting all its strength to
wage a life-and-death struggle against the revolution
in Russia, with the object of defending and preservingtsarism? Of course not.
But from this it follows that whoever wanted to
strike at tsarism necessarily raised his hand againstimperialism, who ever rose against tsarism had to rise
against imperialism as well; for whoever was bent on
overthrowing tsarism had to overthrow imperialism too,if he really intended not merely to defeat tsarism, but
to make a clean sweep of it. Thus the revolution against
tsarism verged on and had to pass into a revolution againstimperialism, into a proletarian revolution.
Meanwhile, in Russia a tremendous popular revolu-
tion was rising, headed by the most revolutionary pro-letariat in the world, which possessed such an important
ally as the revolutionary peasantry of Russia. Does it
need proof that such a revolution could not stop half-
way, that in the event of success it was bound to ad-
vance further and raise the banner of revolt against im-perialism?
That is why Russia was bound to become the focus
of the contradictions of imperialism, not only in thesense that it was in Russia that these contradictions
were revealed most plainly, in view of their particularly
repulsive and particularly intolerable character, and notonly because Russia was a highly important prop of
Western imperialism, connecting Western finance capi-
tal with the colonies in the East, but also because Russiawas the only country in which there existed a real force
capable of resolving the contradictions of imperialism
in a revolutionary way.
From this it follows, however, that the revolution
in Russia could not but become a proletarian revolu-
tion, that from its very inception it could not but as-sume an international character, and that, therefore, it
could not but shake the very foundations of world im-
perialism.
Under these circumstances, could the Russian Com-
munists confine their work within the narrow national
bounds of the Russian revolution? Of course not. Onthe contrary, the whole situation, both internal (the
profound revolutionary crisis) and external (the war), im-
pelled them to go beyond these bounds in their work,to transfer the struggle to the international arena, to
expose the ulcers of imperialism, to prove that the
collapse of capitalism was inevitable, to smash social-chauvinism and social-pacifism, and, finally, to over-
throw capitalism in their own country and to forge a new
fighting weapon for the proletariat—the theory and tac-
tics of the proletarian revolution—in order to facilitate
the task of overthrowing capitalism for the proletariansof all countries. Nor could the Russian Communists act
otherwise; for only this path offered the chance of pro-
ducing certain changes in the international situationwhich could safeguard Russia against the restoration of
the bourgeois order.
That is why Russia became the home of Leninism,
and why Lenin, the leader of the Russian Communists,
became its creator.
The same thing, approximately, “happened” in the
case of Russia and Lenin as in the case of Germany and
Marx and Engels in the forties of the last century. Ger-
many at that time was pregnant with bourgeois rev-olution just like Russia at the beginning of the twentieth
century. Marx wrote at that time in th e Communist
Manifesto :
“The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany,
because that country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that
is bound to be carried out under more advanced conditions ofEuropean civilisation, and with a much more developed prole-
tariat than that of England was in the seventeenth, and of France
in the eighteenth century, and because the bourgeois revolutionin Germany will be but the prelude to an immediately following
proletarian revolution.”
16
In other words, the centre of the revolutionary move-
ment was shifting to Germany.
There can hardly be any doubt that it was this very
circumstance, noted by Marx in the above-quoted passage,
that served as the probable reason why it was preciselyGermany that became the birthplace of scientific social-
ism and why the leaders of the German proletariat,
Marx and Engels, became its creators.
The same, only to a still greater degree, must be
said of Russia at the beginning of the twentieth century.
Russia was then on the eve of a bourgeois revolution;
she had to accomplish this revolution at a time whenconditions in Europe were more advanced, and with
a proletariat that was more developed than that of
Germany in the forties of the nineteenth century (letalone Britain and France); moreover, all the evidence
went to show that this revolution was bound to serve
as a ferment and as a prelude to the proletarian rev-olution.
We cannot regard it as accidental that as early as
1902, when the Russian revolution was still in an embry-onic state, Lenin wrote the prophetic words in his
pamphlet What Is To Be Done? :
“History has now confronted us (i.e., the Russian Marxists—
J. St. ) with an immediate task which is the most revolutionary
of all the immediate  tasks that confront the proletariat of any
country, ”
and that . . . “fulfilment of this task, the destruction of the
most powerful bulwark, not only of European, but also (it may
now be said) of Asiatic reaction, would make the Russian prole-
tariat the vanguard of the international revolutionary proletariat”
(See Vol. IV ,  p. 382).
In other words, the centre of the revolutionary move-
ment was bound to shift to Russia.
As we know, the course of the revolution in Russia
has more than vindicated Lenin’s prediction.
Is it surprising, after all this, that a country which
has accomplished such a revolution and possesses such
a proletariat should have been the birthplace of the
theory and tactics of the proletarian revolution?
 Is it surprising that Lenin, the leader of Russia’s
proletariat, became also the creator of this theory andtactics and the leader of the international proletariat?
II
METHOD
I have already said that between Marx and Engels,
on the one hand, and Lenin, on the other, there lies
a whole period of domination of the opportunism of the
Second International. For the sake of exactitude I mustadd that it is not the formal domination of opportunism
I have in mind, but only its actual domination. Formal-
ly, the Second International was headed by “faithful”Marxists, by the “orthodox”—Kautsky and others. Ac-
tually, however, the main work of the Second Internation-
al followed the line of opportunism. The opportunistsadapted themselves to the bourgeoisie because of their
adaptive, petty-bourgeois nature; the “orthodox,” in
their turn adapted themselves to the opportunists inorder to “preserve unity” with them, in the interests
of “peace within the party.” Thus the link between the
policy of the bourgeoisie and the policy of the “ortho-dox” was closed, and, as a result, opportunism reigned
supreme.
This was the period of the relatively peaceful de-
velopment of capitalism, the pre-war period, so to speak,
when the catastrophic contradictions of imperialism had
not yet become so glaringly evident, when workers’economic strikes and trade unions were developing more
or less “normally,” when election campaigns and parlia-
mentary groups yielded “dizzying” successes, when legalforms of struggle were lauded to the skies, and when itwas thought that capitalism would be “killed” by legalmeans—in short, when the parties of the Second Inter-
national were living in clover and had no inclination to
think seriously about revolution, about the dictatorshipof the proletariat, about the revolutionary education ofthe masses.
Instead of an integral revolutionary theory, there
were contradictory theoretical postulates and fragments
of theory, which were divorced from the actual revolu-
tionary struggle of the masses and had been turned intothreadbare dogmas. For the sake of appearances, Marx’stheory was mentioned, of course, but only to rob it of itsliving, revolutionary spirit.
Instead of a revolutionary policy, there was flabby
philistinism and sordid political bargaining, parliamen-
tary diplomacy and parliamentary scheming. For thesake of appearances, of course, “revolutionary” resolutionsand slogans were adopted, but only to be pigeonholed.
Instead of the party being trained and taught correct
revolutionary tactics on the basis of its own mistakes,
there was a studied evasion of nagging questions, which
were glossed over and veiled. For the sake of appear-ances, of course, there was no objection to talking aboutnagging questions, but only in order to wind up with somesort of “elastic” resolution.
Such was the physiognomy of the Second Interna-
tional, its method of work, its arsenal.
    Meanwhile, a new period of imperialist wars and ofrevolutionary battles of the proletariat was approaching.
The old methods of fighting were proving obviously in-
adequate and impotent in face of the omnipotence of
finance capital.
It became necessary to overhaul the entire activity
of the Second International, its entire method of work,
and to drive out all philistinism, narrow-mindedness,politicians’ tricks, renegacy, social-chauvinism and
social-pacifism. It became necessary to examine the entire
arsenal of the Second International, to throw out all thatwas rusty and antiquated, to forge new weapons. With-
out this preliminary work it was useless embarking
upon war against capitalism. Without this work the pro-letariat ran the risk of finding itself inadequately armed,
or even completely unarmed, in the future revolutionary
battles.
The honour of bringing about this general overhaul-
ing and general cleansing of the Augean stables of the
Second International fell to Leninism.
Such were the conditions under which the method of
Leninism was born and hammered out.
What are the requirements of this method?Firstly, the testing  of the theoretical dogmas of the
Second International in the crucible of the revolution-
ary struggle of the masses, in the crucible of living prac-tice—that is to say, the restoration of the broken unity
between theory and practice, the healing of the rift
between them; for only in this way can a truly pro-letarian party armed with revolutionary theory be
created.
Secondly, the testing  of the policy of the parties of the
Second International, not by their slogans and resolu-
tions (which cannot be trusted), but by their deeds, by
their actions; for only in this way can the confidence of
the proletarian masses be won and deserved.
Thirdly, the reorganisation  of all Party work on new
revolutionary lines, with a view to training and preparingthe masses for the revolutionary struggle; for only in
this way can the masses be prepared for the proletarian
revolution.
Fourthly, self-criticism  within the proletarian parties,
their education and training on the basis of their own
mistakes; for only in this way can genuine cadres andgenuine leaders of the Party be trained.
Such is the basis and substance of the method of
Leninism.
How was this method applied in practice?
The opportunists of the Second International have
a number of theoretical dogmas to which they alwaysrevert as their starting point. Let us take a few of these.
First dogma: concerning the conditions for the sei-
zure of power by the proletariat. The opportunists assertthat the proletariat cannot and ought not to take power
unless it constitutes a majority in the country. No proofs
are brought forward; for there are no proofs, either theo-retical or practical, that can bear out this absurd thesis.
Let us assume that this is so, Lenin replies to the gen-
tlemen of the Second International; but suppose a histor-ical situation has arisen (a war, an agrarian crisis, etc.)
in which the proletariat, constituting a minority of the
population, has an opportunity to rally around itselfthe vast majority of the labouring masses; why should
it not take power then? Why should the proletariat not
take advantage of a favourable international and inter-nal situation to pierce the front of capital and hasten the
general denouement? Did not Marx say as far back as
the fifties of the last century that things could go “splen-
didly” with the proletarian revolution in Germany wereit possible to back it by, so to speak, a “second edi-
tion of the Peasants’ War”
17? Is it not a generally known
fact that in those days the number of proletarians inGermany was relatively smaller than, for example, in
Russia in 1917? Has not the practical experience of the
Russian proletarian revolution shown that this favouritedogma of the heroes of the Second International is devoid
of all vital significance for the proletariat? Is it not clear
that the practical experience of the revolutionary struggleof the masses refutes and smashes this obsolete dogma?
Second dogma: The proletariat cannot retain power
if it lacks an adequate number of trained cultural andadministrative cadres capable of organising the admin-
istration of the country; these cadres must first be trained
under capitalist conditions, and only then can powerbe taken. Let us assume that this is so, replies Lenin;
but why not turn it this way: first take power, create
favourable conditions for the development of the prole-tariat, and then proceed with seven-league strides to
raise the cultural level of the labouring masses and
train numerous cadres of leaders and administratorsfrom among the workers? Has not Russian experience
shown that the cadres of leaders recruited from the ranks
of the workers develop a hundred times more rapidly andeffectually under the rule of the proletariat than un-
der the rule of capital? Is it not clear that the practical
experience of the revolutionary struggle of the massesruthlessly smashes this theoretical dogma of the oppor-
tunists too?
Third dogma: The proletariat cannot accept the meth-
od of the political  general strike because it is unsound
in theory (see Engels’ criticism) and dangerous in prac-tice (it may disturb the normal course of economic life
in the country, it may deplete the coffers of the trade
unions), and cannot serve as a substitute for parlia-mentary forms of struggle, which are the principal form
of the class struggle of the proletariat. Very well, reply
the Leninists; but, firstly, Engels did not criticise everykind of general strike. He only criticised a certain kind
of general strike, namely, the economic  general strike
advocated by the Anarchists
18 in place of  the political
struggle of the proletariat. What has this to do with the
method of the political  general strike? Secondly, where
and by whom has it ever been proved that the parlia-mentary form of struggle is the principal form of struggle
of the proletariat? Does not the history of the revolution ary
movement show that the parliamentary struggle is onlya school for, and an auxiliary in, organising the extra-
parliamentary struggle of the proletariat, that under
capitalism the fundamental problems of the working-class movement are solved by force, by the direct strug-
gle of the proletarian masses, their general strike, their
uprising? Thirdly, who suggested that the method ofthe political general strike be substituted for the parlia-
mentary struggle? Where and when have the supporters
of the political  general strike sought to substitute extra-
parliamentary forms of struggle for parliamentary forms?
Fourthly, has not the revolution in Russia shown that
the political general strike is a highly important schoolfor the proletarian revolution and an indispensable means
of mobilising and organising the vast masses of the
proletariat on the eve of storming the citadels of capital-
ism? Why then the philistine lamentations over the
disturbance of the normal course of economic life andover the coffers of the trade unions? Is it not clear that
the practical experience of the revolutionary struggle
smashes this dogma of the opportunists too?
And so on and so forth.
That is why Lenin said that “revolutionary theory
. . . is not a dogma,” that it “assumes final shape only inclose connection with the practical activity of a truly
mass and truly revolutionary movement” (“ Left-Wing ”
Communism
19); for theory must serve practice, for “the-
ory must answer the questions raised by practice” ( What
the “Friends of the People ” Ar e20), for it must be tested
by practical results.
As to the political slogans and political resolu-
tions of the parties of the Second International, it is
sufficient to recall the history of the slogan “war againstwar” to realise how utterly false and utterly rotten are
the political practices of these parties, which use pompous
revolutionary slogans and resolutions to cloak their anti-revolutionary deeds. We all remember the pompous
demonstration of the Second International at the Basle
Congress,
21 at which it threatened the imperialists with
all the horrors of insurrection if they should dare to start
a war, and with the menacing slogan “war against war.”
But who does not remember that some time after, onthe very eve of the war, the Basle resolution was pigeon-
holed and the workers were given a new slogan—to exter-
minate each other for the glory of their capitalist father-lands? Is it not clear that revolutionary slogans and reso-
lutions are not worth a farthing unless backed by deeds?
One need only contrast the Leninist policy of trans-
forming the imperialist war into civil war with the
treacherous policy of the Second International duringthe war to understand the utter baseness of the opportu-
nist politicians and the full grandeur of the method of
Leninism.
I cannot refrain from quoting at this point a passage
from Lenin’s book The Proletarian Revolution and the
Renegade Kautsky , in which Lenin severely castigates
an opportunist attempt by the leader of the Second
International, K. Kautsky, to judge parties not by their
deeds, but by their paper slogans and documents:
“Kautsky is pursuing a typically petty-bourgeois, phil-
istine policy by pretending . . . that putting forward a slogan
alters the position. The entire history of bourgeois democracy
refutes this illusion; the bourgeois democrats have always advancedand still advance all sorts of ‘slogans’ in order to deceive the people.
The point is to  test  their sincerity, to compare their words with
their deeds , not to be satisfied with idealistic or charlatan phrases ,
but to get down to class reality ” (see Vol. XXIII,  p. 377).
There is no need to mention the fear the parties of the
Second International have of self-criticism, their habit of
concealing their mistakes, of glossing over nagging ques-tions, of covering up their shortcomings by a deceptive
show of well-being which blunts living thought and
prevents the Party from deriving revolutionary trainingfrom its own mistakes—a habit which was ridiculed and
pilloried by Lenin. Here is what Lenin wrote about self-
criticism in proletarian parties in his pamphlet “ Left-
Wing ” Communism :
    “The attitude of a political party towards its own mistakes
is one of the most important and surest ways of judging how
earnest the party is and how it in practice  fulfils its obligations
towards its class  and the toiling masses . Frankly admitting a
mistake, ascertaining the reasons for it, analysing the cir-cumstances which gave rise to it, and thoroughly discussing the
means of correcting it—that is the earmark of a serious party;
that is the way it should perform its duties, that is the wayit should educate and train the class , and then the masses ” (see
Vol. XXV ,  p. 200).
Some say that the exposure of its own mistakes and
self-criticism are dangerous for the Party because theymay be used by the enemy against the party of the prole-
tariat. Lenin regarded such objections as trivial and en-
tirely wrong. Here is what he wrote on this subject as farback as 1904, in his pamphlet One Step Forward , when
our Party was still weak and small:
“They (i.e., the opponents of the Marxists— J. St. ) gloat and
grimace over our controversies; and, of course, they will try topick isolated passages from my pamphlet, which deals with the
defects and shortcomings of our Party, and to use them for their
own ends. The Russian Social-Democrats are already steeledenough in battle not to be perturbed by these pinpricks and to
continue, in spite of them, their work of self-criticism and ruthless
 exposure of their own shortcomings, which will unquestionablyand inevitably be overcome as the working-class movement
grows” (see Vol. VI,  p. 161).
Such, in general, are the characteristic features of
the method of Leninism.
What is contained in Lenin’s method was in the main
already contained in the teachings of Marx, which, ac-
cording to Marx himself, were “in essence critical andrevolutionary.”
22 It is precisely this critical and revolu-
tionary spirit that pervades Lenin’s method from
beginning to end. But it would be wrong to suppose that
Lenin’s method is merely the restoration of the method
of Marx. As a matter of fact, Lenin’s method is not onlythe restoration, but also the concretisation and further
development of the critical and revolutionary method of
Marx, of his materialist dialectics.
III
THEORY
From this theme I take three questions:
a) the importance of theory for the proletarian
movement;
b) criticism of the “theory” of spontaneity;c) the theory of the proletarian revolution.
1) The importance of theory . Some think that Leninism
is the precedence of practice over theory in the sensethat its main point is the translation of the Marxist
theses into deeds, their “execution”; as for theory, it is
alleged that Leninism is rather unconcerned about it.We know that Plekhanov time and again chaffed Lenin
about his “unconcern” for theory, and particularly for
philosophy. We also know that theory is not held ingreat favour by many present-day Leninist practical
workers, particularly in view of the immense amount of
practical work imposed upon them by the situation.I must declare that this more than odd opinion about
Lenin and Leninism is quite wrong and bears no relation
whatever to the truth; that the attempt of practical work-ers to brush theory aside runs counter to the whole
spirit of Leninism and is fraught with serious dangers
to the work.
    Theory is the experience of the working-class move-
ment in all countries taken in its general aspect. Of
course, theory becomes purposeless if it is not connectedwith revolutionary practice, just as practice gropes in
the dark if its path is not illumined by revolutionary
theory. But theory can become a tremendous force inthe working-class movement if it is built up in indis-
soluble connection with revolutionary practice; for the-
ory, and theory alone, can give the movement confi-dence, the power of orientation, and an understanding
of the inner relation of surrounding events; for it, and
it alone, can help practice to realise not only how andin which direction classes are moving at the present
time, but also how and in which direction they will
move in the near future. None other than Lenin utteredand repeated scores of times the well-known thesis
that:
    “Without a revolutionary theory there can be no revo-
lutionary movement”* (see V ol. IV , p. 380).
    Lenin, better than anyone else, understood the great
importance of theory, particularly for a party such asours, in view of the role of vanguard fighter of the inter-
national proletariat which has fallen to its lot, and in
view of the complicated internal and international situ-ation in which it finds itself. Foreseeing this special role
of our Party as far back as 1902, he thought it necessary
even then to point out that:    “ The role of vanguard fighter can be fulfilled only
by a party that is guided by the most advanced theory ” (see
V ol. IV , p. 380).
*  My italics.— J. St.
It scarcely needs proof that now, when Lenin’s
prediction about the role of our Party has come true,
this thesis of Lenin’s acquires special force and specialimportance.
Perhaps the most striking expression of the great im-
portance which Lenin attached to theory is the fact thatnone other than Lenin undertook the very serious task
of generalising, on the basis of materialist philosophy, the
most important achievements of science from the timeof Engels down to his own time, as well as of subjecting
to comprehensive criticism the anti-materialistic trends
among Marxists. Engels said that “materialism mustassume a new aspect with every new great discovery.”
23
It is well known that none other than Lenin accom-plished this task for his own time in his remarkable workMaterialism and Empirio-Criticism .
24 It is well known
that Plekhanov, who loved to chaff Lenin about his “un-
concern” for philosophy, did not even dare to make aserious attempt to undertake such a task.
2) Criticism of the “theory ” of spontaneity, or the role
of the vanguard in the movement . The “theory” of sponta-
neity is a theory of opportunism, a theory of worship-
ping the spontaneity of the labour movement, a theory
which actually repudiates the leading role of the van-guard of the working class, of the party of the work-
ing class.
The theory of worshipping spontaneity is decidedly
opposed to the revolutionary character of the working-
class movement; it is opposed to the movement taking
the line of struggle against the foundations of capital-ism; it is in favour of the movement proceeding
exclusively along the line of “realisable” demands, of
demands “acceptable” to capitalism; it is wholly in favour
of the “line of least resistance.” The theory of sponta-
neity is the ideology of trade-unionism.
The theory of worshipping spontaneity is decidedly
opposed to giving the spontaneous movement a politi-
cally conscious, planned character. It is opposed tothe Party marching at the head of the working
class, to the Party raising the masses to the level of po-
litical consciousness, to the Party leading the movement;it is in favour of the politically conscious elements
of the movement not hindering the movement from
taking its own course; it is in favour of the Partyonly heeding the spontaneous movement and dragging
at the tail of it. The theory of spontaneity is the theory
of belittling the role of the conscious element in the move-ment, the ideology of “khvostism,” the logical basis of
all opportunism.
In practice this theory, which appeared on the scene
even before the first revolution in Russia, led its adher-
ents, the so-called “Economists,” to deny the need for
an independent workers’ party in Russia, to oppose therevolutionary struggle of the working class for the over-
throw of tsarism, to preach a purely trade-unionist
policy in the movement, and, in general, to surrenderthe labour movement to the hegemony of the liberal
bourgeoisie.
The fight of the old Iskra  and the brilliant criti-
cism of the theory of “khvostism” in Lenin’s pamphlet
What Is To Be Done?  not only smashed so-called “Econ-
omism,” but also created the theoretical foundations fora truly revolutionary movement of the Russian work-
ing class.
Without this fight it would have been quite useless
even to think of creating an independent workers’ party
in Russia and of its playing a leading part in therevolution.
But the theory of worshipping spontaneity is not an
exclusively Russian phenomenon. It is extremely wide-spread—in a somewhat different form, it is true—in
all the parties of the Second International, without ex-
ception. I have in mind the so-called “productive forces”theory as debased by the leaders of the Second Interna-
tional, which justifies everything and conciliates every-
body, which records facts and explains them aftereveryone has become sick and tired of them, and, hav-
ing recorded them, rests content. Marx said that the mate-
rialist theory could not confine itself to explaining theworld, that it must also change it.
25 But Kautsky and Co.
are not concerned with this; they prefer to rest content
with the first part of Marx’s formula.
Here is one of the numerous examples of the applica-
tion of this “theory.” It is said that before the imperial-
ist war the parties of the Second International threa-ened to declare “war against war” if the imperialists
should start a war. It is said that on the very eve of the
war these parties pigeon-holed the “war against war”slogan and applied an opposite one, viz., “war for the
imperialist fatherland.” It is said that as a result of
this change of slogans millions of workers were sent totheir death. But it would be a mistake to think that
there were some people to blame for this, that
someone was unfaithful to the working class or betrayedit. Not at all! Everything happened as it should have
happened. Firstly, because the International, it seems,
is “an instrument of peace,” and not of war. Secondly,
because, in view of the “level of the productive forces”
which then prevailed, nothing else could be done. The“productive forces” are “to blame.” That is the precise
explanation vouchsafed to “us” by Mr. Kautsky’s “theory
of the productive forces.” And whoever does not believein that “theory” is not a Marxist. The role of the parties?
Their importance for the movement? But what can a
party do against so decisive a factor as the “level of theproductive forces”? . . .
One could cite a host of similar examples of the falsi-
fication of Marxism.
It scarcely needs proof that this spurious “Marxism,”
designed to hide the nakedness of opportunism, is
merely a European variety of the selfsame theoryof “khvostism” which Lenin fought even before the first
Russian revolution.
It scarcely needs proof that the demolition of this
theoretical falsification is a preliminary condition for
the creation of truly revolutionary parties in the West.
3) The theory of the proletarian revolution . Lenin’s
theory of the proletarian revolution proceeds from three
fundamental theses.
First thesis : The domination of finance capital in
the advanced capitalist countries; the issue of stocks
and bonds as one of the principal operations of finance
capital; the export of capital to the sources of raw mate-rials, which is one of the foundations of imperialism;
the omnipotence of a financial oligarchy, which is the
result of the domination of finance capital—all thisreveals the grossly parasitic character of monopolist
capitalism, makes the yoke of the capitalist trusts and
syndicates a hundred times more burdensome, intensi-
fies the indignation of the working class with the founda-
tions of capitalism, and brings the masses to the pro-letarian revolution as their only salvation (see Lenin,
Imperialism
26).
Hence the first conclusion: intensification of the revo-
lutionary crisis within the capitalist countries and growth
of the elements of an explosion on the internal, proletar-
ian front in the “metropolises.”
Second thesis : The increase in the export of capital
to the colonies and dependent countries; the expansion
of “spheres of influence” and colonial possessions untilthey cover the whole globe; the transformation of capi-
talism into a world system  of financial enslavement
and colonial oppression of the vast majority of thepopulation of the world by a handful of “advanced”
countries—all this has, on the one hand, converted the
separate national economies and national territories intolinks in a single chain called world economy, and, on
the other hand, split the population of the globe into
two camps: a handful of “advanced” capitalist countrieswhich exploit and oppress vast colonies and dependencies,
and the huge majority consisting of colonial and depen dent
countries which are compelled to wage a struggle for lib-eration from the imperialist yoke (see Imperialism ).
Hence the second conclusion: intensification of the
revolutionary crisis in the colonial countries and growthof the elements of revolt  against imperialism on the ex-
ternal, colonial front.
Third thesis : The monopolistic possession of “spheres
of influence” and colonies; the uneven development of
the capitalist countries, leading to a frenzied struggle
for the redivision of the world between the countries
which have already seized territories and those claiming
their “share”; imperialist wars as the only means ofrestoring the disturbed “equilibrium”—all this leads to
the intensification of the struggle on the third front, the
inter-capitalist front, which weakens imperialism andfacilitates the union of the first two fronts against im-
perialism: the front of the revolutionary proletariat and
the front of colonial emancipation (see Imperialism ).
Hence the third conclusion: that under imperialism
wars cannot be averted, and that a coalition between the
proletarian revolution in Europe and the colonial revolu-tion in the East in a united world front of revolution
against the world front of imperialism is inevitable.
Lenin combines all these conclusions into one general
conclusion that “ imperialism is the eve of the socialist
revolution ”* (see V ol. XIX, p. 71).
The very approach to the question of the proletarian
revolution, of the character of the revolution, of itsscope, of its depth, the scheme of the revolution in gen-
eral, changes accordingly.
Formerly, the analysis of the pre-requisites for
the proletarian revolution was usually approached from the
point of view of the economic state of individual coun-
tries. Now, this approach is no longer adequate. Nowthe matter must be approached from the point of view
of the economic state of all or the majority of countries,
from the point of view of the state of world economy; forindividual countries and individual national economies
have ceased to be self-sufficient units, have become links
* My italics.— J. St.
in a single chain called world economy; for the old “cul-
tured” capitalism has evolved into imperialism, and
imperialism is a world system of financial enslave-ment and colonial oppression of the vast majority of
the population of the world by a handful of “advanced”
countries.
Formerly it was the accepted thing to speak of the
existence or absence of objective conditions for the pro-
letarian revolution in individual countries, or, to bemore precise, in one or another developed country. Now
this point of view is no longer adequate. Now we must
speak of the existence of objective conditions for therevolution in the entire system of world imperialist
economy as an integral whole; the existence within this
system of some countries that are not sufficiently devel-oped industrially cannot serve as an insuperable obstacle
to the revolution, if the system as a whole or, more cor-
rectly, because  the system as a whole is already ripe for
revolution.
Formerly it was the accepted thing to speak of the
proletarian revolution in one or another developed coun-try as of a separate and self-sufficient entity opposing
a separate national front of capital as its antipode. Now,
this point of view is no longer adequate. Now we mustspeak of the world proletarian revolution; for the sepa-
rate national fronts of capital have become links in a
single chain called the world front of imperialism, whichmust be opposed by a common front of the revolution-
ary movement in all countries.
Formerly the proletarian revolution was regarded
exclusively as the result of the internal development
of a given country. Now, this point of view is no longer
adequate. Now the proletarian revolution must be regard-
ed primarily as the result of the development of the
contradictions within the world system of imperialism,as the result of the breaking of the chain of the world
imperialist front in one country or another.
Where will the revolution begin? Where, in what
country, can the front of capital be pierced first?
    Where industry is more developed, where the prole-
tariat constitutes the majority, where there is more cul-ture, where there is more democracy—that was the reply
usually given formerly.
    No, objects the Leninist theory of revolution, not
necessarily where industry is more developed , and so forth.
The front of capital will be pierced where the chain of
imperialism is weakest, for the proletarian revolution isthe result of the breaking of the chain of the world impe-
rialist front at its weakest link; and it may turn out that
the country which has started the revolution, which hasmade a breach in the front of capital, is less developed in
a capitalist sense than other, more developed, countries,
which have, however, remained within the frameworkof capitalism.
    In 1917 the chain of the imperialist world front proved
to be weaker in Russia than in the other countries.It was there that the chain broke and provided an
outlet for the proletarian revolution. Why? Because in
Russia a great popular revolution was unfolding, and atits head marched the revolutionary proletariat, which had
such an important ally as the vast mass of the peasantry,
which was oppressed and exploited by the landlords.Because the revolution there was opposed by such a hid-
eous representative of imperialism as tsarism, which
lacked all moral prestige and was deservedly hated by
the whole population. The chain proved to be weaker
in Russia, although Russia was less developed in a cap-italist sense than, say, France or Germany, Britain or
America.
Where will the chain break in the near future?
Again, where it is weakest. It is not precluded that the
chain may break, say, in India. Why? Because that
country has a young, militant, revolutionary proletar-iat, which has such an ally as the national liberation
movement—an undoubtedly powerful and undoubtedly
important ally. Because there the revolution is con-fronted by such a well-known foe as foreign imperial-
ism, which has no moral credit and is deservedly hated
by all the oppressed and exploited masses of India.
It is also quite possible that the chain will break in
Germany. Why? Because the factors which are operat-
ing, say, in India are beginning to operate in Germanyas well, but, of course, the enormous difference in the
level of development between India and Germany cannot
but stamp its imprint on the progress and outcomeof a revolution in Germany.
That  is  why  Lenin  said:
“The West-European capitalist countries will consummate
their development towards socialism . . . not by the even ‘maturing’of socialism in them, but by the exploitation of some countriesby others, by the exploitation of the first of the countries to bevanquished in the imperialist war combined with the exploi-tation of the whole of the East. On the other hand, precisely as
a result of the first imperialist war, the East has definitely
come into the revolutionary movement, has been definitely drawninto the general maelstrom of the world revolutionary movement”(see Vol. XXVII, pp. 415-16).
Briefly, the chain of the imperialist front must, as
a rule, break where the links are weaker and, at all
events, not necessarily where capitalism is more devel-oped, where there is such and such a percentage of pro-
letarians and such and such a percentage of peas-
ants, and so on.
That is why in deciding the question of proletarian
revolution statistical estimates of the percentage of the
proletarian population in a given country lose the excep-tional importance so eagerly attached to them by the
doctrinaires of the Second International, who have not
understood imperialism and who fear revolution likethe plague.
To proceed. The heroes of the Second International
asserted (and continue to assert) that between the bour-geois-democratic revolution and the proletarian revolu-
tion there is a chasm, or at any rate a Chinese Wall,
separating one from the other by a more or less protract-ed interval of time, during which the bourgeoisie, hav-
ing come into power, develops capitalism, while the
proletariat accumulates strength and prepares for the“decisive struggle” against capitalism. This interval
is usually calculated to extend over many decades, if
not longer. It scarcely needs proof that this ChineseWall “theory” is totally devoid of scientific meaning un-
der the conditions of imperialism, that it is and can be
only a means of concealing and camouflaging the counter-revolutionary aspirations of the bourgeoisie. It scarcely
needs proof that under the conditions of imperialism,
fraught as it is with collisions and wars; under theconditions of the “eve of the socialist revolution,” when
“flourishing” capitalism becomes “moribund” capi-
talism ( Lenin ) and the revolutionary movement is grow-
ing in all countries of the world; when imperialism is
allying itself with all reactionary forces without excep-tion down to and including tsarism and serfdom, thus
making imperative the coalition of all revolutionary
forces, from the proletarian movement of the Westto the national liberation movement of the East; when
the overthrow of the survivals of the regime of feudal
serfdom becomes impossible without a revolutionarystruggle against imperialism—it scarcely needs proof
that the bourgeois-democratic revolution, in a more or
less developed country, must under such circumstancesverge upon the proletarian revolution, that the form-
er must pass into the latter. The history of the revolu-
tion in Russia has provided palpable proof that thisthesis is correct and incontrovertible. It was not without
reason that Lenin, as far back as 1905, on the eve of
the first Russian revolution, in his pamphlet Two Tac-
tics depicted the bourgeois-democratic revolution and
the socialist revolution as two links in the same chain,
as a single and integral picture of the sweep of the Rus-
sian revolution:
“The proletariat must carry to completion the democratic revo-
lution by allying to itself the mass of the peasantry in order to crush
by force the resistance of the autocracy and to paralyse the instabil ity
of the bourgeoisie. The proletariat must accomplish the socialist revo-
lution, by allying to itself the mass of the semi-proletarian elements
of the population in order to crush by force the resistance of thebourgeoisie and to paralyse the instability of the peasantry and the
petty bourgeoisie.  Such are the tasks of the proletariat, which
the new Iskra -ists present so narrowly in all their arguments
and resolutions about the sweep of the revolution” (see Lenin,
Vol. VIII, p. 96).
There is no need to mention other, later works of
Lenin’s, in which the idea of the bourgeois revolution
passing into the proletarian revolution stands out ingreater relief than in Two Tactics  as one of the cor-
nerstones of the Leninist theory of revolution.
Some comrades believe, it seems; that Lenin
arrived at this idea only in 1916, that up to that time
he had thought that the revolution in Russia would re-
main within the bourgeois framework, that power,consequently, would pass from the hands of the organ
of the dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry into
the hands of the bourgeoisie and not of the proletariat.It is said that this assertion has even penetrated into
our Communist press. I must say that this assertion is
absolutely wrong, that it is totally at variance withthe facts.
I might refer to Lenin’s well-known speech at the
Third Congress of the Party (1905),
27 in which he defined
the dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry, i.e.,
the victory of the democratic revolution, not as the “or-
ganisation of ‘order’” but as the “organisation ofwar” (see V ol. VII, p. 264).
Further, I might refer to Lenin’s well-known articles
“On the Provisional Government” (1905),
27 where, out-
lining the prospects of the unfolding Russian revolution,
he assigns to the Party the task of “ensuring that the
Russian revolution is not a movement of a few months,but a movement of many years, that it leads, not
merely to slight concessions on the part of the powers
that be, but to the complete overthrow of those powers”;where, enlarging further on these prospects and linking
them with the revolution in Europe, he goes on to say:
“And if we succeed in doing that, then . . . then the revolu-
tionary conflagration will spread all over Europe; the European
worker, languishing under bourgeois reaction, will rise in histurn and will show us ‘how it is done’; then the revolutionary
wave in Europe will sweep back again into Russia and will con-
vert an epoch of a few revolutionary years into an epoch of sev-eral revolutionary decades . . .” ( ibid. , p. 191).
I might further refer to a well-known article by Lenin
published in November 1915, in which he writes:
“The proletariat is fighting, and will fight valiantly, to cap-
ture power, for a republic, for the confiscation of the land . . .
for the participation of the ‘ non-proletarian masses of the people’
in liberating bourgeois  Russia from military-feudal  ‘imperialism’
(=tsarism). And the proletariat will immediately * take advantage
of this liberation of bourgeois Russia from tsarism, from the agrar-ian power of the landlords, not to aid the rich peasants in their
struggle against the rural worker, but to bring about the socialist
revolution in alliance with the proletarians of Europe” (seeVol. XVIII, p. 318).
Finally, I might refer to the well-known passage in
Lenin’s pamphlet The Proletarian Revolution and the
Renegade Kautsky , where, referring to the above-quoted
passage in Two Tactics ** on the sweep of the Russian
revolution, he arrives at the following conclusion:
“Things turned out just as we said they would. The
course taken by the revolution confirmed the correctness ofour reasoning. First , with the ‘whole’ of the peasantry against
the monarchy, against the landlords, against the mediaeval regime
(and to that extent the revolution remains bourgeois, bourgeois-
* My italics.— J. St.
** See this volume, p. 103.— Ed.
democratic), Then , with the poor peasantry, with the semi-
proletarians, with all the exploited, against capitalism , includ-
ing the rural rich, the kulaks, the profiteers, and to that extentthe revolution becomes a socialist  one. To attempt to raise an
artificial Chinese Wall between the first and the second, to separate
them by anything else than  the degree of preparedness of the pro-
letariat and the degree of its unity with the poor peasants, means
monstrously to distort Marxism, to vulgarise it, to replace it
by liberalism” (see V ol. XXIII, p. 391).
That is sufficient, I think.
Very well, we may be told; but if that is the case,
why did Lenin combat the idea of “permanent (uninter-rupted) revolution”?
Because Lenin proposed that the revolutionary ca-
pacities of the peasantry be “exhausted” and that thefullest use be made of their revolutionary energy
for the complete liquidation of tsarism and for the
transition to the proletarian revolution, whereas theadherents of “permanent revolution” did not understand
the important role of the peasantry in the Russian revo-
lution, underestimated the strength of the revolutionaryenergy of the peasantry, underestimated the strength and
ability of the Russian proletariat to lead the peasantry,
and thereby hampered the work of emancipating thepeasantry from the influence of the bourgeoisie, the work
of rallying the peasantry around the proletariat.
Because Lenin proposed that the revolution be
crowned  with the transfer of power to the pro-
letariat, whereas the adherents of “permanent” revolu-
tion wanted to begin  at once with the establishment of
the power of the proletariat, failing to realise that in
so doing they were closing their eyes to such a “minor
detail” as the survivals of serfdom and were leaving out
of account so important a force as the Russian peasantry,
failing to understand that such a policy could only retardthe winning of the peasantry over to the side of the pro-
letariat.
    Consequently, Lenin fought the adherents of “perma-nent” revolution, not over the question of uninterrupted-
ness, for Lenin himself maintained the point of view
of uninterrupted revolution, but because they underesti-mated the role of the peasantry, which is an enormous
reserve of the proletariat, because they failed to under-
stand the idea of the hegemony of the proletariat.    The idea of “permanent” revolution should not be
regarded as a new idea. It was first advanced by Marx
at the end of the forties in his well-known Address  to the
Communist League  (1850). It is from this document that
our “permanentists” took the idea of uninterrupted rev-
olution. It should be noted that in taking it from Marxour “permanentists” altered it somewhat, and in alter-
ing it “spoilt” it and made it unfit for practical use.
The experienced hand of Lenin was needed to rectifythis mistake, to take Marx’s idea of uninterrupted revo-
lution in its pure form and make it a cornerstone of his
theory of revolution.
Here is what Marx says in his Address  about uninter-
rupted (permanent) revolution, after enumerating a
number of revolutionary-democratic demands which hecalls upon the Communists to win:
“While the democratic petty bourgeois wish to bring the
revolution to a conclusion as quickly as possible, and with the
achievement, at most, of the above demands, it is our interest
and our task to make the revolution permanent, until all more
or less possessing classes have been forced out of their position
of dominance, until the proletariat has conquered state power,
and the association of proletarians, not only in one country butin all the dominant countries of the world, has advanced so far
that competition among the proletarians of these countries has
ceased and that at least the decisive productive forces are con-centrated in the hands of the proletarians.”
28
In other words:
a) Marx did not at all propose to begin  the revolu-
tion in the Germany of the fifties with the immediate
establishment of proletarian power— contrary  to the plans
of our Russian “permanentists.”
b) Marx proposed only that the revolution be crowned
with the establishment of proletarian state power, byhurling, step by step, one section of the bourgeoisie after
another from the heights of power, in order, after the
attainment of power by the proletariat, to kindle the fireof revolution in every country—and everything that
Lenin taught and carried out in the course of our revo-
lution in pursuit of his theory of the proletarian revolu-tion under the conditions of imperialism was fully in
line with that proposition.
It follows, then, that our Russian “permanentists”
have not only underestimated the role of the peasantry
in the Russian revolution and the importance of the
idea of the hegemony of the proletariat, but have altered(for the worse) Marx’s idea of “permanent” revolution
and made it unfit for practical use.
That is why Lenin ridiculed the theory of our “per-
manentists,” calling it “original” and “fine,” and accus-
ing them of refusing to “think why, for ten whole
years, life has passed by this fine theory.” (Lenin’s article
was written in 1915, 10 years after the appearance of
the theory of the “permanentists” in Russia. See V ol.
XVIII, p. 317.)
    That is why Lenin regarded this theory as a semi-
Menshevik theory and said that it “borrows from
the Bolsheviks their call for a resolute revolutionary struggle
by the proletariat and the conquest of political powerby the latter, and from the Mensheviks the ‘repudiation’
of the role of the peasantry.” (See Lenin’s article
“Two Lines of the Revolution,”  ibid. ).
    This, then, is the position in regard to Lenin’s idea
of the bourgeois-democratic revolution passing into the
proletarian revolution, of utilising the bourgeois revolu-tion for the “immediate” transition to the proletarian
revolution.
    To proceed. Formerly, the victory of the revolutionin one country was considered impossible, on the assump-
tion that it would require the combined action of the
proletarians of all or at least of a majority of the ad-vanced countries to achieve victory over the bourgeoisie.
Now this point of view no longer fits in with the facts.
Now we must proceed from the possibility of such a vic-tory; for the uneven and spasmodic character of the devel-
opment of the various capitalist countries under the
conditions of imperialism, the development within im-perialism of catastrophic contradictions leading to in-
evitable wars, the growth of the revolutionary movement
in all countries of the world—all this leads, not only tothe possibility, but also to the necessity of the victory
of the proletariat in individual countries. The history
of the revolution in Russia is direct proof of this. At thesame time, however, it must be borne in mind that the
overthrow of the bourgeoisie can be successfully accom-
plished only when certain absolutely necessary conditions
exist, in the absence of which there can be even no ques-tion of the proletariat taking power.
Here is what Lenin says about these conditions in
his pamphlet “ Left-Wing ” Communism :
“The fundamental law of revolution, which has been con-
firmed by all revolutions, and particularly by all three Russianrevolutions in the twentieth century, is as follows: It is not enoughfor revolution that the exploited and oppressed masses should
understand the impossibility of living in the old way and demand
changes; it is essential for revolution that the exploiters shouldnot be able to live and rule in the old way. Only when the  ‘lower
classes ’ do not want  the old way, and when the ‘upper classes’
cannot carry on in the old way —only then can revolution triumph.
This truth may be expressed in other words: revolution is impos-
sible without a nationwide crisis  (affecting both the exploited and
the exploiters ).* It follows that for revolution it is essential, first,
that a majority of the workers (or at least a majority of the classconscious, thinking, politically active workers) should fully un-derstand that revolution is necessary and be ready to sacrificetheir lives for it; secondly, that the ruling classes should be pass-
ing through a governmental crisis, which draws even the most
backward masses into politics, . . . weakens the government andmakes it possible for the revolutionaries to overthrow it rapidly”
(see Vol. XXV , p. 222).
But the overthrow of the power of the bourgeoisie
and establishment of the power of the proletariat in onecountry does not yet mean that the complete victory of
socialism has been ensured. After consolidating its power
and leading the peasantry in its wake the proletariat ofthe victorious country can and must build a socialist
* My italics.— J. St.
society. But does this mean that it will thereby achieve
the complete and final victory of socialism, i.e., does
it mean that with the forces of only one country it can
finally consolidate socialism and fully guarantee that
country against intervention and, consequently, also
against restoration? No, it does not. For this the victory
of the revolution in at least several countries is needed.
Therefore, the development and support of revolution in
other countries is an essential task of the victorious rev-
olution. Therefore, the revolution which has been victo-
rious in one country must regard itself not as a self-
sufficient entity, but as an aid, as a means for hasten-
ing the victory of the proletariat in other countries.
Lenin expressed this thought succinctly when he said
that the task of the victorious revolution is to do “the
utmost possible in one country  f o r   the development,
support and awakening of the revolution in all countries ”
(see V ol. XXIII, p. 385).
These, in general, are the characteristic features of
Lenin’s theory of proletarian revolution.
IV
THE  DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT
From this theme I take three fundamental ques-
tions:
a) the dictatorship of the proletariat as the instru-
ment of the proletarian revolution;
b) the dictatorship of the proletariat as the rule of
the proletariat over the bourgeoisie;
c) Soviet power as the state form of the dictatorship
of the proletariat.
1) The dictatorship of the proletariat as the instrument
of the proletarian revolution . The question of the proletar ian
dictatorship is above all a question of the main contentof the proletarian revolution. The proletarian revolution,
its movement, its sweep and its achievements acquire flesh
and blood only through the dictatorship of the proletar-iat. The dictatorship of the proletariat is the instrument
of the proletarian revolution, its organ, its most impor-
tant mainstay, brought into being for the purpose of,firstly, crushing the resistance of the overthrown exploit-
ers and consolidating the achievements of the proletarian
revolution, and, secondly, carrying the proletarian revo-lution to its completion, carrying the revolution to the
complete victory of socialism. The revolution can defeat
the bourgeoisie, can overthrow its power, even withoutthe dictatorship of the proletariat. But the revolution
will be unable to crush the resistance of the bourgeoisie,
to maintain its victory and to push forward to the finalvictory of socialism unless, at a certain stage in its
development, it creates a special organ in the form
of the dictatorship of the proletariat as its principalmainstay.
“The fundamental question of every revolution is
the question of power.” ( Lenin. ) Does this mean that all
that is required is to assume power, to seize it? No, it
does not. The seizure of power is only the beginning.
For many reasons, the bourgeoisie that is overthrownin one country remains for a long time stronger than the
proletariat which has overthrown it. Therefore, the whole
point is to retain power, to consolidate it, to make itinvincible. What is needed to attain this? To attain this
it is necessary to carry out at least three main tasks that
confront the dictatorship of the proletariat “on the mor-
row” of victory:
a) to break the resistance of the landlords and capital-
ists who have been overthrown and expropriated by the
revolution, to liquidate every attempt on their part to
restore the power of capital;
b) to organise construction in such a way as to rally
all the working people around the proletariat, and to
carry on this work along the lines of preparing for theelimination, the abolition of classes;
c) to arm the revolution, to organise the army of
the revolution for the struggle against foreign enemies,for the struggle against imperialism.
The dictatorship of the proletariat is needed to carry
out, to fulfil these tasks.
“The transition from capitalism to communism,” says Lenin,
“represents an entire historical epoch. Until this epoch has ter-
minated, the exploiters inevitably cherish the hope of restoration,
and this hope  is converted into attempts  at restoration. And after
their first serious defeat, the overthrown exploiters -- who had not
expected their overthrow, never believed it possible, never con-
ceded the thought of it—throw themselves with energy grown ten-fold, with furious passion and hatred grown a hundredfold, into
the battle for the recovery of the ‘paradise’ of which they have
been deprived, on behalf of their families, who had been leadingsuch a sweet and easy life and whom now the ‘common herd’ is
condemning to ruin and destitution (or to ‘common’ labour . . .).
In the train of the capitalist exploiters follow the broad masses ofthe petty bourgeoisie, with regard to whom decades of historical
experience of all countries testify that they vacillate and hesitate,
one day marching behind the proletariat and the next daytaking fright at the difficulties of the revolution; that they become
panic stricken at the first defeat or semi-defeat of the workers,
grow nervous, rush about, snivel, and run from one camp intothe other” (see V ol. XXIII, p. 355).
The bourgeoisie has its grounds for making attempts
at restoration, because for a long time after its over-
throw it remains stronger than the proletariat which hasoverthrown it.
“If the exploiters are defeated in one country only,” says
Lenin, “and this, of course, is the typical case, since a simulta-neous revolution in a number of countries is a rare exception,
they still remain stronger  than the exploited” ( ibid. , p. 354).
Wherein lies the strength of the overthrown bour-
geoisie?
    Firstly, “in the strength of international capital, in the
strength and durability of the international connections of thebourgeoisie” (see V ol. XXV , p. 173).
    Secondly, in the fact that “for a long time after the revolu-
tion the exploiters inevitably retain a number of great practicaladvantages: they still have money (it is impossible to abolish
money all at once); some movable property—often fairly consid-
erable; they still have various connections, habits of organi-sation and management, knowledge of all the ‘secrets’ (customs,
methods, means and possibilities) of management, superior
education, close connections with the higher technical personnel(who live and think like the bourgeoisie), incomparably greater
experience in the art of war (this is very important), and so on,
and so forth” (see V ol. XXIII, p. 354).
Thirdly, “in the force of habit , in the strength of small pro-
duction . For, unfortunately, small production is still very, very
widespread in the world, and small production engenders  capital-
ism and the bourgeoisie continuously, daily, hourly, sponta-
neously, and on a mass scale” . . . for “the abolition of classes
means not only driving out the landlords and capitalists—thatwe accomplished with comparative ease—it also means abolishing
the small commodity producers , and they cannot be driven out ,
or crushed; we must live in harmony  with them, they can (and
must) be remoulded and re-educated only by very prolonged,
slow, cautious organisational work” (see Vol. XXV ,  pp. 173 and 189).
That is why Lenin says:
“The dictatorship of the proletariat is a most determined
and most ruthless war waged by the new class against a  more
powerful enemy, the bourgeoisie, whose resistance is increased
tenfold  by its overthrow,”
that “the dictatorship of the proletariat is a stubborn strug-
gle—bloody and bloodless, violent and peaceful, military and
economic, educational and administrative—against the forces
and traditions of the old society” ( ibid.,  pp. 173 and 190).
It scarcely needs proof that there is not the slight-
est possibility of carrying out these tasks in a shortperiod, of accomplishing all this in a few years. There-fore, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the transitionfrom capitalism to communism, must not be regarded asa fleeting period of “super-revolutionary” acts and de-
crees, but as an entire historical era, replete with civil
wars and external conflicts, with persistent organisation-al work and economic construction, with advances andretreats, victories and defeats. This historical era isneeded not only to create the economic and cultural pre-requisites for the  complete victory of socialism, but also
to enable the proletariat, firstly, to educate itself and
become steeled as a force capable of governing the coun-try, and, secondly, to re-educate and remould the petty-bourgeois strata along such lines as will assure the or-ganisation of socialist production.
“You will have to go through fifteen, twenty, fifty years
of civil wars and international conflicts,” Marx said to the work-
ers, “not only to change existing conditions, but also to change
yourselves and to make yourselves capable of wielding politicalpower” (see K. Marx and F. Engels, Works , V ol. VIII,  p. 506).
Continuing and developing Marx’s idea still further,
Lenin wrote:
“It will be necessary under the dictatorship of the proletariat
to re-educate millions of peasants and small proprietors, hundredsof thousands of office employees, officials and bourgeois intel-lectuals, to subordinate them all to the proletarian state and toproletarian leadership, to overcome their bourgeois habits andtraditions,” just as we must “—in a protracted struggle waged on
the basis of the dictatorship of the proletariat—re-educate the
proletarians themselves, who do not abandon their petty-bour-geois prejudices at one stroke, by a miracle, at the bidding ofthe Virgin Mary, at the bidding of a slogan, resolution or decree,but only in the course of a long and difficult mass struggleagainst mass petty-bourgeois influences” (see V ol. XXV , pp. 248
and 247).
2) The dictatorship of the proletariat as the rule of
the proletariat over the bourgeoisie . From the foregoing
it is evident that the dictatorship of the proletariat isnot a mere change of personalities in the government,
a change of the “cabinet,” etc., leaving the old economic
and political order intact. The Mensheviks and opportu-nists of all countries, who fear dictatorship like fire and
in their fright substitute the concept “conquest of power”
for the concept dictatorship, usually reduce the “con-quest of power” to a change of the “cabinet,” to the ac-
cession to power of a new ministry made up of people
like Scheidemann and Noske, MacDonald and Hender-son. It is hardly necessary to explain that these and sim-
ilar cabinet changes have nothing in common with the
dictatorship of the proletariat, with the conquest ofreal power by the real proletariat. With the MacDonalds
and Scheidemanns in power, while the old bourgeois
order is allowed to remain, their so-called governments
cannot be anything else than an apparatus serving the
bourgeoisie, a screen to conceal the ulcers of imperi-
alism, a weapon in the hands of the bourgeoisie againstthe revolutionary movement of the oppressed and ex-
ploited masses. Capital needs such governments as a
screen when it finds it inconvenient, unprofitable, diffi-cult to oppress and exploit the masses without the
aid of a screen. Of course, the appearance of such gov-
ernments is a symptom that “over there” (i.e., in the
capitalist camp) all is not quiet “at the Shipka Pass”;
nevertheless, governments of this kind inevitably remain
governments of capital in disguise. The government of
a MacDonald or a Scheidemann is as far removed fromthe conquest of power by the proletariat as the sky from
the earth. The dictatorship of the proletariat is not a
change of government, but a new state, with new organsof power, both central and local; it is the state of the
proletariat, which has arisen on the ruins of the old
state, the state of the bourgeoisie.
The dictatorship of the proletariat arises not on
the basis of the bourgeois order, but in the process of
the breaking up of this order, after the overthrow of thebourgeoisie, in the process of the expropriation of the
landlords and capitalists, in the process of the socialisa-
tion of the principal instruments and means of production,in the process of violent proletarian revolution. The dic-
tatorship of the proletariat is a revolutionary power
based on the use of force against the bourgeoisie.
The state is a machine in the hands of the ruling class
for suppressing the resistance of its class enemies. In
this respect  the dictatorship of the proletariat does not
differ essentially from the dictatorship of any other class;
for the proletarian state is a machine for the suppression
of the bourgeoisie. But there is one substantial differ-
ence. This difference consists in the fact that all hithertoexisting class states have been dictatorships of an exploit-
ing minority over the exploited majority, whereas the
dictatorship of the proletariat is the dictatorship of theexploited majority over the exploiting minority.
Briefly: the dictatorship of the proletariat is the rule—
unrestricted by law and based on force—of the proletariatover the bourgeoisie, a rule enjoying the sympathy and
support of the labouring and exploited masses . (Lenin, The
State and Revolution .)
From this follow two main conclusions:
First conclusion : The dictatorship of the proletariat
cannot be “complete” democracy, democracy for all, for
the rich as well as for the poor; the dictatorship of the
proletariat “must be a state that is democratic in a new way
(for* the proletarians and the non-propertied in general)
and dictatorial in a new way  (against * the bourgeoisie)”
(see V ol. XXI, p. 393). The talk of Kautsky and Co.
about universal equality, about “pure” democracy, about“perfect” democracy, and the like, is a bourgeois disguise
of the indubitable fact that equality between the exploited
and exploiters is impossible. The theory of “pure” de-mocracy is the theory of the upper stratum of the working
class, which has been broken in and is being fed by the
imperialist robbers. It was brought into being for thepurpose of concealing the ulcers of capitalism, of em-
bellishing imperialism and lending it moral strength in
the struggle against the exploited masses. Under capi-
* My italics.— J. St.
talism there are no real “liberties” for the exploited, nor
can there be, if for no other reason than that the prem-
ises, printing plants, paper supplies, etc., indispensablefor the enjoyment of “liberties” are the privilege of
the exploiters. Under capitalism the exploited masses
do not, nor can they ever, really participate in govern-ing the country, if for no other reason than that,
even under the most democratic regime, under condi-
tions of capitalism, governments are not set up by thepeople but by the Rothschilds and Stinneses, the Rocke-
fellers and Morgans. Democracy under capitalism is
capitalist  democracy, the democracy of the exploiting
minority, based on the restriction of the rights of the
exploited majority and directed against this majority.
Only under the proletarian dictatorship are real liber-ties for the exploited and real participation of the
proletarians and peasants in governing the country pos-
sible. Under the dictatorship of the proletariat, democ-racy is proletarian  democracy, the democracy of the ex-
ploited majority, based on the restriction of the rights
of the exploiting minority and directed against thisminority.
Second conclusion : The dictatorship of the proletariat
can not arise as the result of the peaceful developmentof bourgeois society and of bourgeois democracy; it can
arise only as the result of the smashing of the bourgeois
state machine, the bourgeois army, the bourgeois bureau-cratic apparatus, the bourgeois police.
“The working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made
state machinery, and wield it for its own purposes,” say Marx
and Engels in a preface to the  Communist Manifesto .—The
task of the proletarian revolution is “. . . no longer, as before,
to transfer the bureaucratic-military machine from one hand to
another, but to smash  it and this is the preliminary condition
for every real people’s revolution on the continent,” says Marxin his letter to Kugelmann in 1871.
29
Marx’s qualifying phrase about the continent gave
the opportunists and Mensheviks of all countries a pre-
text for clamouring that Marx had thus conceded the pos-sibility of the peaceful evolution of bourgeois democracy
into a proletarian democracy, at least in certain coun-
tries outside the European continent (Britain, America).Marx did in fact concede that possibility, and he had
good grounds for conceding it in regard to Britain and
America in the seventies of the last century, when monop-oly capitalism and imperialism did not yet exist, and
when these countries, owing to the particular conditions
of their development, had as yet no developed militarismand bureaucracy. That was the situation before the ap-
pearance of developed imperialism. But later, after a
lapse of thirty or forty years, when the situation in thesecountries had radically changed, when imperialism had
developed and had embraced all capitalist countries
without exception, when militarism and bureaucracyhad appeared in Britain and America also, when the
particular conditions for peaceful development in Brit-
ain and America had disappeared—then the qualifica-tion in regard to these countries necessarily could no
longer hold good.
“Today,” said Lenin, “in 1917, in the epoch of the first great
imperialist war, this qualification made by Marx is no longer val-id. Both Britain and America, the biggest and the last represent-atives—in the whole world—of Anglo-Saxon ’liberty’ in thesense that they had no militarism and bureaucracy, have
completely sunk into the all-European filthy, bloody morass of
 bureaucratic-military institutions which subordinate everythingto themselves and trample everything underfoot. Today, in Brit-ain and in America, too, ‘the preliminary condition for everyreal people’s revolution’ is the  s m a s h i n g , the  d e s t r u c-
t i o n   of the ‘ready-made state machinery’ (perfected in those
countries, between 1914 and 1917, up to the ‘European’ generalimperialist standard)” (see V ol. XXI, p. 395).
In other words, the law of violent proletarian revo-
lution, the law of the smashing of the bourgeois state
machine as a preliminary condition for such a revolution,
is an inevitable law of the revolutionary movement inthe imperialist countries of the world.
Of course, in the remote future, if the proletariat is
victorious in the principal capitalist countries, and ifthe present capitalist encirclement is replaced by a so-
cialist encirclement, a “peaceful” path of development
is quite possible for certain capitalist countries, whosecapitalists, in view of the “unfavourable” international
situation, will consider it expedient “voluntarily” to
make substantial concessions to the proletariat. Butthis supposition applies only to a remote and possible
future. With regard to the immediate future, there is
no ground whatsoever for this supposition.
Therefore, Lenin is right in saying:
“The proletarian revolution is impossible without the for-
cible destruction of the bourgeois state machine and the substi-
tution for it of a new one ” (see V ol. XXIII, p. 342).
3) Soviet power as the state form of the dictatorship
of the proletariat.  The victory of the dictatorship of the
proletariat signifies the suppression of the bourgeoisie,
the smashing of the bourgeois state machine, and the
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

substitution of proletarian democracy for bourgeois de-
mocracy. That is clear. But by means of what organisa-
tions can this colossal work be carried out? The old formsof organisation of the proletariat, which grew up on the
basis of bourgeois parliamentarism, are inadequate for
this work—of that there can hardly be any doubt. What,then, are the new forms of organisation of the proletariat
that are capable of serving as the gravediggers of the
bourgeois state machine, that are capable not only ofsmashing this machine, not only of substituting proletar-
ian democracy for bourgeois democracy, but also of be-
coming the foundation of the proletarian state power?
This new form of organisation of the proletariat is
the Soviets.
Wherein lies the strength of the Soviets as compared
with the old forms of organisation?
In that the Soviets are the most all-embracing  mass
organisations of the proletariat, for they and they aloneembrace all workers without exception.
In that the Soviets are the only  mass organisations
which unite all the oppressed and exploited, workersand peasants, soldiers and sailors, and in which the van-
guard of the masses, the proletariat, can, for this reason,
most easily and most completely exercise its politicalleadership of the mass struggle.
In that the Soviets are the most powerful organs  o f
the revolutionary struggle of the masses, of the politicalactions of the masses, of the uprising of the masses
—organs capable of breaking the omnipotence of finance
capital and its political appendages.
In that the Soviets are the immediate  organisations of
the masses themselves, i.e., they are the most democratic
and therefore the most authoritative organisations of
the masses, which facilitate to the utmost their partic-
ipation in the work of building up the new state andin its administration, and which bring into full play
the revolutionary energy, initiative and creative abil-
ities of the masses in the struggle for the destructionof the old order, in the struggle for the new, proletarian
order.
Soviet power is the union and constitution of the
local Soviets into one common state organisation, into
the state organisation of the proletariat as the vanguard
of the oppressed and exploited masses and as the rulingclass—their union in the Republic of Soviets.
The essence of Soviet power consists in the fact
that these most all-embracing and most revolutionarymass organisations of precisely those classes that were
oppressed by the capitalists and landlords are now the
“permanent and sole  basis of the whole power of the state,
of the whole state apparatus”; that “precisely those
masses which even in the most democratic bourgeois
republics,” while being equal in law, “have in fact beenprevented by thousands of tricks and devices from tak-
ing part in political life and from enjoying democratic
rights and liberties, are now drawn unfailingly into con-
stant  and, more over, decisive  participation in the dem-
ocratic administration of the state”* (see Lenin, V ol.
XXIV , p. 13).
That is why Soviet power is a new form  of state organ-
isation different in principle from the old bourgeois-
democratic and parliamentary form, a new type  of state,
* All italics mine.—J. St.
adapted not to the task of exploiting and oppressing the
labouring masses, but to the task of completely eman-
cipating them from all oppression and exploitation, tothe tasks facing the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Lenin is right in saying that with the appearance
of Soviet power “the era of bourgeois-democratic par-liamentarism has drawn to a close and a new chapter in
world history—the era of proletarian dictatorship—has
been opened.”
Wherein lie the characteristic features of Soviet
power?
In that Soviet power is the most all-embracing and
most democratic state organisation of all possible state
organisations while classes continue to exist; for, being
the arena of the bond and collaboration between the work-ers and the exploited peasants in their struggle against
the exploiters, and basing itself in its work on this
bond and on this collaboration, Soviet power is thusthe power of the majority of the population over the
minority, it is the state of the majority, the expression
of its dictatorship.
In that Soviet power is the most internationalist of
all state organisations in class society; for, by destroying
every kind of national oppression and resting on the collab-oration of the labouring masses of the various na-
tionalities, it facilitates the uniting of these masses into
a single state union.
In that Soviet power, by its very structure, facil-
itates the task of leading the oppressed and exploited
masses by the vanguard of these masses—by the prole-tariat, as the most united and most politically conscious
core of the Soviets.
“The experience of all revolutions and of all move-
ments of the oppressed classes, the experience of
the world socialist movement teaches us,” says Lenin,“that the proletariat alone is able to unite and lead the
scattered and backward strata of the toiling and ex-
ploited population” (see Vol. XXIV , p. 14). The pointis that the structure of Soviet power facilitates the
practical application of the lessons drawn from this
experience.
In that Soviet power, by combining legislative and
executive power in a single state organisation and replac-
ing territorial electoral constituencies by industrialunits, factories and mills thereby directly links the
workers and the labouring masses in general with the
apparatus of state administration, teaches them howto govern the country.
In that Soviet power alone is capable of releasing
the army from its subordination to bourgeois commandand of converting it from the instrument of oppression
of the people which it is under the bourgeois order,
into an instrument for the liberation of the people fromthe yoke of the bourgeoisie, both native and foreign.
In that “the Soviet organisation of the state alone
is capable of immediately and effectively smashing andfinally destroying the old, i.e., the bourgeois, bureau-
cratic and judicial apparatus” ( ibid. ).
In that the Soviet form of state alone, by drawing
the mass organisations of the toilers and exploited into
constant and unrestricted participation in state admin-
istration, is capable of preparing the ground for the with-ering away of the state, which is one of the basic ele-
ments of the future stateless communist society.
The Republic of Soviets is thus the political form,
so long sought and finally discovered, within the frame-
work of which the economic emancipation of the prole-tariat, the complete victory of socialism, must be ac-
complished.
The Paris Commune was the embryo of this form;
Soviet power is its development and culmination.
That is why Lenin says:
“The Republic of Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’, and Peas-
ants’ Deputies is not only the form of a higher type of democratic
 institution . . . , but is the only * form capable of ensuring the most
 painless transition to socialism” (see Vol. XXII, p. 131).
V
THE  PEASANT  QUESTION
From this theme I take four questions:
a) the presentation of the question;
b) the peasantry during the bourgeois-democratic
revolution;
c) the peasantry during the proletarian revolution;d) the peasantry after the consolidation of Soviet
power.
1) The presentation of the question . Some think that
the fundamental thing in Leninism is the peasant question,
that the point of departure of Leninism is the question of
the peasantry, of its role, its relative importance. Thisis absolutely wrong. The fundamental question of Lenin-
ism, its point of departure, is not the peasant question,
but the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat,
* My italics.— J. St.
of the conditions under which it can be achieved, of the
conditions under which it can be consolidated. The peas-
ant question, as the question of the ally of the proletar-iat in its struggle for power, is a derivative question.
This circumstance, however, does not in the least
deprive the peasant question of the serious and vital im-portance it unquestionably has for the proletarian revo-
lution. It is known that the serious study of the peasant
question in the ranks of Russian Marxists began precisely
on the eve of the first revolution (1905), when the ques tion
of overthrowing tsarism and of realising the hegemony of
the proletariat confronted the Party in all its magnitude,and when the question of the ally of the proletariat in
the impending bourgeois revolution became of vital im-
portance. It is also known that the peasant question inRussia assumed a still more urgent character during the
proletarian revolution, when the question of the dicta-
torship of the proletariat, of achieving and maintainingit, led to the question of allies for the proletariat in the
impending proletarian revolution. And this was natural.
Those who are marching towards and preparing to assumepower cannot but be interested in the question of who
are their real allies.
In this sense the peasant question is part of the gen-
eral question of the dictatorship of the proletariat,
and as such it is one of the most vital problems of
Leninism.
The attitude of indifference and sometimes even of
outright aversion displayed by the parties of the Second
International towards the peasant question is to be ex-plained not only by the specific conditions of develop-
ment in the West. It is to be explained primarily by the
fact that these parties do not believe in the proletarian
dictatorship, that they fear revolution and have no in-
tention of leading the proletariat to power. And thosewho are afraid of revolution, who do not intend to lead
the proletarians to power, cannot be interested in the
question of allies for the proletariat in the revolution—to them the question of allies is one of indifference, of
no immediate significance. The ironical attitude of the
heroes of the Second International towards the peasantquestion is regarded by them as a sign of good breeding,
a sign of “true” Marxism. As a matter of fact, there is
not a grain of Marxism in this; for indifference towardsso important a question as the peasant question on the
eve of the proletarian revolution is the other side of
the coin of repudiation of the dictatorship of the proletariat,it is an unmistakable sign of downright betrayal of
Marxism.
The question is as follows: Are the revolutionary
potentialities latent in the peasantry by virtue of
certain conditions of its existence already exhausted,
or not; and if not, is there any hope, any basis , for util-
ising these potentialities for the proletarian revolu-
tion, for transforming the peasantry, the exploited major-
ity of it, from the reserve of the bourgeoisie which itwas during the bourgeois revolutions in the West and
still is even now, into a reserve of the proletariat, into
its ally?
Leninism replies to this question in the affirmative,
i.e., it recognises the existence of revolutionary ca-
pacities in the ranks of the majority of the peasantry, andthe possibility of using these in the interests of the
proletarian dictatorship.
The history of the three revolutions in Russia fully
corroborates the conclusions of Leninism on this score.
Hence the practical conclusion that the toiling masses
of the peasantry must be supported in their struggle
against bondage and exploitation, in their struggle for
deliverance from oppression and poverty. This does notmean, of course, that the proletariat must support every
peasant movement. What we have in mind here is sup-
port for a movement or struggle of the peasantry which,directly or indirectly, facilitates the emancipation move-
ment of the proletariat, which, in one way or another,
brings grist to the mill of the proletarian revolution,and which helps to transform the peasantry into a
reserve and ally of the working class.
2) The peasantry during the bourgeois-democratic rev-
olution . This period extends from the first Russian revo-
lution (1905) to the second revolution (February 1917),
inclusive. The characteristic feature of this period is theemancipation of the peasantry from the influence of the
liberal bourgeoisie, the peasantry’s desertion  of the
Cadets, its turn  towards the proletariat, towards the
Bolshevik Party. The history of this period is the history
of the struggle between the Cadets (the liberal bourgeoi-
sie) and the Bolsheviks (the proletariat) for the peasantry.The outcome of this struggle was decided by the Duma
period; for the period of the four Dumas served as an
object lesson to the peasantry, and this lesson broughthome to the peasantry the fact that they would receive
neither land nor liberty at the hands of the Cadets, that
the tsar was wholly in favour of the landlords and thatthe Cadets were supporting the tsar, that the only force
they could rely on for assistance was the urban workers,
the proletariat. The imperialist war merely confirmed
the lessons of the Duma period and consummated the
peasantry’s desertion of the bourgeoisie, consummated
the isolation of the liberal bourgeoisie; for the years ofthe war revealed the utter futility, the utter deceptive-
ness of all hopes of obtaining peace from the tsar and
his bourgeois allies. Without the object lessons of theDuma period, the hegemony of the proletariat would
have been impossible.
That is how the alliance between the workers and
the peasants in the bourgeois-democratic revolution took
shape. That is how the hegemony (leadership) of the
proletariat in the common struggle for the overthrowof tsarism took shape—the hegemony which led to
the February Revolution of 1917.
The bourgeois revolutions in the West (Britain,
France, Germany, Austria) took, as is well known, a
different road. There, hegemony in the revolution be-
longed not to the proletariat, which by reason of itsweakness did not and could not represent an independent
political force, but to the liberal bourgeoisie. There the
peasantry obtained its emancipation from feudal regimes,not at the hands of the proletariat, which was numerically
weak and unorganised, but at the hands of the bourgeoisie.
There the peasantry marched against the old order sideby side with the liberal bourgeoisie. There the peasantry
acted as the reserve of the bourgeoisie. There the revolu-
tion, in consequence of this, led to an enormous increasein the political weight of the bourgeoisie.
In Russia, on the contrary, the bourgeois revolution
produced quite opposite results. The revolution in Russialed not to the strengthening, but to the weakening of the
bourgeoisie as a political force, not to an increase in its
political reserves, but to the loss of its main reserve, to
the loss of the peasantry. The bourgeois revolution inRussia brought to the forefront not the liberal bourgeoi-
sie but the revolutionary proletariat, rallying around the
latter the millions of the peasantry.
Incidentally, this explains why the bourgeois revolu-
tion in Russia passed into a proletarian revolution in a
comparatively short space of time. The hegemony of theproletariat was the embryo of, and the transitional stage
to, the dictatorship of the proletariat.
How is this peculiar phenomenon of the Russian revo-
lution, which has no precedent in the history of the bour-
geois revolutions of the West, to be explained? Whence
this peculiarity?
It is to be explained by the fact that the bourgeois
revolution unfolded in Russia under more advanced con-
ditions of class struggle than in the West; that the Rus-sian proletariat had at that time already become an inde-
pendent political force, whereas the liberal bourgeoisie,
frightened by the revolutionary spirit of the proletariat,lost all semblance of revolutionary spirit (especially
after the lessons of 1905) and turned towards an alliance
with the tsar and the landlords against the revolution,against the workers and peasants.
We should bear in mind the following circumstances,
which determined the peculiar character of the Russianbourgeois revolution.
a) The unprecedented concentration of Russian in-
dustry on the eve of the revolution. It is known, forinstance, that in Russia 54 per cent of all the workers
were employed in enterprises employing over 500 work ers
each, whereas in so highly developed a country as the
United States of America no more than 33 per cent of
all the workers were employed in such enterprises. Itscarcely needs proof that this circumstance alone,
in view of the existence of a revolutionary party like
the Party of the Bolsheviks, transformed the workingclass of Russia into an immense force in the political
life of the country.
b) The hideous forms of exploitation in the factories,
coupled with the intolerable police regime of the tsarist
henchmen—a circumstance which transformed every
important strike of the workers into an imposingpolitical action and steeled the working class as a force
that was revolutionary to the end.
c) The political flabbiness of the Russian bourgeoi-
sie, which after the Revolution of 1905 turned into
servility to tsarism and downright counter-revolution—
a fact to be explained not only by the revolutionaryspirit of the Russian proletariat, which flung the Russian
bourgeoisie into the embrace of tsarism, but also by
the direct dependence of this bourgeoisie upon govern-ment contracts.
d) The existence in the countryside of the most hid-
eous and most intolerable survivals of serfdom, coupledwith the unlimited power of the landlords—a circum-
stance which threw the peasantry into the embrace of
the revolution.
e) Tsarism, which stifled everything that was alive,
and whose tyranny aggravated the oppression of the capi-
talist and the landlord—a circumstance which united thestruggle of the workers and peasants into a single torrent
of revolution.
f) The imperialist war, which fused all these contra-
dictions in the political life of Russia into a profound rev-
olutionary crisis, and which lent the revolution tremen-dous striking force.
To whom could the peasantry turn under these cir-
cumstances? From whom could it seek support againstthe unlimited power of the landlords, against the tyranny
of the tsar against the devastating war which was ruining
it? From the liberal bourgeoisie? But it was an enemy,as the long years of experience of all four Dumas had
proved. From the Socialist-Revolutionaries? The Social-
ist-Revolutionaries were “better” than the Cadets, ofcourse, and their programme was “suitable,” almost a
peasant programme; but what could the Socialist-Revolu-
tionaries offer, considering that they thought of relyingonly on the peasants and were weak in the towns from
which the enemy primarily drew its forces? Where was
the new force which would stop at nothing either in townor country, which would boldly march in the front ranks
to fight the tsar and the landlords, which would help
the peasantry to extricate itself from bondage, from landhunger, from oppression, from war? Was there such
a force in Russia at all? Yes, there was. It was the
Russian proletariat, which had shown its strength, itsability to fight to the end, its boldness and revolutionary
spirit, as far back as 1905.
At any rate, there was no other such force; nor could
any other be found anywhere.
That is why the peasantry, when it turned its back
on the Cadets and attached itself to the Socialist-Revolutionaries, at the same time came to realise the
necessity of submitting to the leadership of such a
courageous leader of the revolution as the Russian
proletariat.
Such were the circumstances which determined the
peculiar character of the Russian bourgeois revolution.
3) The peasantry during the proletarian revolution.
This period extends from the February Revolution of1917 to the October Revolution of 1917. This period is
comparatively short, eight months in all; but from the
point of view of the political enlightenment and revo-lutionary training of the masses these eight months can
safely be put on a par with whole decades of ordinary
constitutional development, for they were eight months ofrevolution.  The characteristic feature of this period was
the further revolutionisation of the peasantry, its disillu-
sionment with the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the peasant-ry’s desertion  of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, its new
turn towards a direct rally  around the proletariat as the
only consistently revolutionary force, capable of leadingthe country to peace. The history of this period is the
history of the struggle between the Socialist-Revolution-
aries (petty-bourgeois democracy) and the Bolsheviks(proletarian democracy) for the peasantry, to win over
the majority of the peasantry. The outcome of this struggle
was decided by the coalition period, the Kerensky pe-riod, the refusal of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
Mensheviks to confiscate the landlords’ land, the fight
of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks tocontinue the war, the June offensive at the front, the
introduction of capital punishment for soldiers, the Kor-
nilov revolt.
Whereas before, in the preceding period, the basic
question of the revolution had been the overthrow of the
tsar and of the power of the landlords, now, in the period
following the February Revolution, when there was no
longer any tsar, and when the interminable war hadexhausted the economy of the country and utterly
ruined the peasantry, the question of liquidating the war
became the main problem of the revolution. The centreof gravity had manifestly shifted from purely internal
questions to the main question—the war. “End the
war,” “Let’s get out of the war”—such was the generaloutcry of the war-weary nation and primarily of the
peasantry.
But in order to get out of the war it was necessary to
overthrow the Provisional Government, it was necessary
to overthrow the power of the bourgeoisie, it was neces-
sary to overthrow the power of the Socialist-Revolution-aries and the Mensheviks, for they, and they alone, were
dragging out the war to a “victorious finish.” Practically,
there was no way of getting out of the war except by over-throwing the bourgeoisie.
This was a new revolution, a proletarian revolution,
for it ousted from power the last group of the imperial-ist bourgeoisie, its extreme Left wing, the Socialist-Revo-
lutionary Party and the Mensheviks, in order to set up a
new, proletarian power, the power of the Soviets, in orderto put in power the party of the revolutionary proletariat,
the Bolshevik Party, the party of the revolutionary strug-
gle against the imperialist war and for a democraticpeace. The majority of the peasantry supported the
struggle of the workers for peace, for the power of the
Soviets.
There was no other way out for the peasantry. Nor
could there be any other way out.
Thus, the Kerensky period was a great object lesson
for the toiling masses of the peasantry; for it showed
clearly that with the Socialist-Revolutionaries andthe Mensheviks in power the country would not extricate
itself from the war, and the peasants would never get
either land or liberty; that the Mensheviks and the Social-ist-Revolutionaries differed from the Cadets only in
their honeyed phrases and false promises, while they ac-
tually pursued the same imperialist, Cadet policy; thatthe only power that could lead the country on to the prop-
er road was the power of the Soviets. The further prolon-
gation of the war merely confirmed the truth of thislesson, spurred on the revolution, and drove millions of
peasants and soldiers to rally directly  around the prole-
tarian revolution. The isolation of the Socialist-Revolu-
tionaries and the Mensheviks became an incontrovertible fact.
Without the object lessons of the coalition period the
dictatorship of the proletariat would have been im-possible.
Such were the circumstances which facilitated the
process of the bourgeois revolution passing into the prole-tarian revolution.
That is how the dictatorship of the proletariat took
shape in Russia.
4) The peasantry after the consolidation of Soviet
power.  Whereas before, in the first period of the revolu-
tion, the main objective was the overthrow of tsarism,and later, after the February Revolution, the primary
objective was to get out of the imperialist war by over-
throwing the bourgeoisie, now, after the liquidation ofthe civil war and the consolidation of Soviet power,
questions of economic construction came to the forefront.
Strengthen and develop the nationalised industry; for this
purpose link up industry with peasant economy through
state-regulated trade; replace the surplus-appropriationsystem by the tax in kind so as, later on, by gradually
lowering the tax in kind, to reduce matters to the exchange
of products of industry for the products of peasant farm-ing; revive trade and develop the co-operatives, drawing
into them the vast masses of the peasantry—this is how
Lenin outlined the immediate tasks of economic con-struction on the way to building the foundations of
socialist economy.
It is said that this task may prove beyond the strength
of a peasant country like Russia. Some sceptics even say
that it is simply utopian, impossible; for the peasantry
is a peasantry—it consists of small producers, and there-fore cannot be of use in organising the foundations of
socialist production.
But the sceptics are mistaken; for they fail to take into
account certain circumstances which in the present case
are of decisive significance. Let us examine the most im-
portant of these:
Firstly.  The peasantry in the Soviet Union must not
be confused with the peasantry in the West. A peasantry
that has been schooled in three revolutions, that foughtagainst the tsar and the power of the bourgeoisie side by
side with the proletariat and under the leadership of the
proletariat, a peasantry that has received land and peaceat the hands of the proletarian revolution and by reason
of this has become the reserve of the proletariat—such a
peasantry cannot but be different from a peasantry whichduring the bourgeois revolution fought under the leader-
ship of the liberal bourgeoisie, which received land at
the hands of that bourgeoisie, and in view of this became
the reserve of the bourgeoisie. It scarcely needs proof
that the Soviet peasantry, which has learnt to appre-
ciate its political friendship and political collaboration
with the proletariat and which owes its freedom to this
friendship and collaboration, cannot but represent excep-
tionally favourable material for economic collaboration
with the proletariat.
Engels said that “the conquest of political power by
the Socialist Party has become a matter of the not too
distant future,” that “in order to conquer political power
this party must first go from the towns to the country,
must become a power in the countryside.” (See Engels,
The Peasant Question , 1922 ed.30). He wrote this in the
nineties of the last century, having in mind the Western
peasantry. Does it need proof that the Russian Commu-
nists, after accomplishing an enormous amount of workin this field in the course of three revolutions, have
already succeeded in gaining in the countryside an in-
fluence and backing the like of which our Western com-
rades dare not even dream of? How can it be denied that
this circumstance must decidedly facilitate the organisa-
tion of economic collaboration between the working class
and the peasantry of Russia?
The sceptics maintain that the small peasants are a
factor that is incompatible with socialist construction.
But listen to what Engels says about the small peasants
of the West:
“We are decidedly on the side of the small peasant; we shall
do everything at all permissible to make his lot more bearable,
to facilitate his transition to the co-operative should he decide
to do so, and even to make it possible for him to remain on his
small holding for a protracted length of time to think the matter
over, should he still be unable to bring himself to this decision.
We do this not only because we consider the small peasant whodoes his own work as virtually belonging to us, but also in the
direct interest of the Party. The greater the number of peasants
whom we can save from being actually hurled down into the pro-letariat, whom we can win to our side while they are still peasants,
the more quickly and easily the social transformation will be ac-
complished. It will serve us nought to wait with this transforma-tion until capitalist production has developed everywhere to its
utmost consequences, until the last small handicraftsman and the
last small peasant have fallen victim to capitalist large-scaleproduction. The material sacrifice to be made for this pur-
pose in the interest of the peasants and to be defrayed out of
public funds can, from the point of view of capitalist economy,be viewed only as money thrown away, but it is nevertheless
an excellent investment because it will effect a perhaps tenfold
saving in the cost of the social reorganisation in general. In thissense we can, therefore, afford to deal very liberally with the
peasants” ( ibid.).
That is what Engels said, having in mind the Western
peasantry. But is it not clear that what Engels said cannowhere be realised so easily and so completely as in
the land of the dictatorship of the proletariat? Is it not
clear that only in Soviet Russia is it possible at onceand to the fullest extent for “the small peasant who does
his own work” to come over to our side, for the “ma-
terial sacrifice” necessary for this to be made, andfor the necessary “liberality towards the peasants” to be
displayed? Is it not clear that these and similar measures
for the benefit of the peasantry are already being carriedout in Russia? How can it be denied that this circum-
stance, in its turn, must facilitate and advance the work
of economic construction in the land of the Soviets?
Secondly.  Agriculture in Russia must not be confused
with agriculture in the West. There, agriculture is devel-
oping along the ordinary lines of capitalism, underconditions of profound differentiation among the peasant-
ry, with large landed estates and private capitalist lat-
ifundia at one extreme and pauperism, destitution andwage slavery at the other. Owing to this, disintegration
and decay are quite natural there. Not so in Russia.
Here agriculture cannot develop along such a path, iffor no other reason than that the existence of Soviet pow-
er and the nationalisation of the principal instruments
and means of production preclude such a development.In Russia the development of agriculture must proceed
along a different path, along the path of organising mil-
lions of small and middle peasants in co-operatives, alongthe path of developing in the countryside a mass co-oper-
ative movement supported by the state by means of
preferential credits. Lenin rightly pointed out in hisarticles on co-operation that the development of agricul-
ture in our country must proceed along a new path, along
the path of drawing the majority of the peasants intosocialist construction through the co-operatives, along
the path of gradually introducing into agriculture the
principles of collectivism, first in the sphere of market-ing and later in the sphere of production of agricultural
products.
Of extreme interest in this respect are several new phe-
nomena observed in the countryside in connection with
the work of the agricultural co-operatives. It is well
known that new, large organisations have sprung up with-in the Selskosoyuz,
31 in different branches of agriculture,
such as production of flax, potatoes, butter, etc., which
have a great future before them. Of these, the Flax
Centre, for instance, unites a whole network of peasant
flax growers’ associations. The Flax Centre supplies thepeasants with seeds and implements; then it buys all the
flax produced by these peasants, disposes of it on the
market on a large scale, guarantees the peasants a sharein the profits, and in this way links peasant economy
with state industry through the Selskosoyuz. What shall
we call this form of organisation of production? In myopinion, it is the domestic system of large-scale state-
socialist production in the sphere of agriculture. In
speaking of the domestic system of state-socialist produc-tion I do so by analogy with the domestic system under
capitalism, let us say, in the textile industry, where the
handicraftsmen received their raw material and toolsfrom the capitalist and turned over to him the entire
product of their labour, thus being in fact semi-wage
earners working in their own homes. This is one of nu-merous indices showing the path along which our agri-
culture must develop. There is no need to mention here
similar indices in other branches of agriculture.
It scarcely needs proof that the vast majority of
the peasantry will eagerly take this new path of devel-
opment, rejecting the path of private capitalist lat-ifundia and wage slavery, the path of destitution
and ruin.
Here is what Lenin says about the path of develop-
ment of our agriculture:
“State power over all large-scale means of production, state
power in the hands of the proletariat, the alliance of this prole-
tariat with the many millions of small and very small peasants,
the assured leadership of the peasantry by the proletariat,
etc.—is not this all that is necessary for building a complete
socialist society from the co-operatives, from the co-opera-tives alone, which we formerly looked down upon as hucksteringand which from a certain aspect we have the right to look down
upon as such now, under NEP? Is this not all that is neces-
sary for building a complete socialist society? This is not yetthe building of socialist society, but it is all that is necessaryand sufficient for this building” (see Vol. XXVII, p. 392).
Further on, speaking of the necessity of giving fi-
nancial and other assistance to the co-operatives, as a
“new principle of organising the population” and a new
“social system” under the dictatorship of the proletariat,Lenin continues:
“Every social system arises only with the financial assistance
of a definite class. There is no need to mention the hundreds and
hundreds of millions of rubles that the birth of ‘free’ capitalism
cost. Now we must realise, and apply in our practical work, thefact that the social system which we must now give more than
usual assistance is the co-operative system. But it must be assisted
in the real sense of the word, i.e., it will not be enough to interpret assistance to mean assistance for any kind of co-operative trade;
by assistance we must mean assistance for co-operative trade in
which really large masses of the population really take part ” (ibid. ,
p. 393).
What do all these facts prove?
That the sceptics are wrong.
That Leninism is right in regarding the masses of
labouring peasants as the reserve of the proletariat.
That the proletariat in power can and must use this
reserve in order to link industry with agriculture, toadvance socialist construction, and to provide for the
dictatorship of the proletariat that necessary foundation
without which the transition to socialist economy isimpossible.
VI
THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION
From this theme I take two main questions:
a) the presentation of the question;
b) the liberation movement of the oppressed peoples
and the proletarian revolution.
1) The presentation of the question . During the last
two decades the national question has undergone a num-ber of very important changes. The national question
in the period of the Second International and the national
question in the period of Leninism are far from beingthe same thing. They differ profoundly from each other,
not only in their scope, but also in their intrinsic
character.
Formerly, the national question was usually confined
to a narrow circle of questions, concerning, primarily,
“civilised” nationalities. The Irish, the Hungarians, thePoles, the Finns, the Serbs, and several other European
nationalities—that was the circle of unequal peoples
in whose destinies the leaders of the Second Internationalwere interested. The scores and hundreds of millions
of Asian and African peoples who are suffering national
oppression in its most savage and cruel form usuallyremained outside of their field of vision. They hesitated
to put white and black, “civilised” and “uncivilised”
on the same plane. Two or three meaningless, lukewarmresolutions, which carefully evaded the question of the lib-
eration of the colonies—that was all the leaders of the
Second International could boast of. Now we can say thatthis duplicity and half-heartedness in dealing with the
national question has been brought to an end. Leninism
laid bare this crying incongruity, broke down the wall
between whites and blacks, between Europeans and Asiat-
ics, between the “civilised” and “uncivilised” slavesof imperialism, and thus linked the national question
with the question of the colonies. The national question
was thereby transformed from a particular and internalstate problem into a general and international problem,
into a world problem of the liberation of the oppressed
peoples in the dependent countries and colonies from theyoke of imperialism.
Formerly, the principle of self-determination of na-
tions was usually misinterpreted, and not infrequentlyit was narrowed down to the idea of the right of nations
to autonomy. Certain leaders of the Second International
even went so far as to turn the right to self-determi-nation into the right to cultural autonomy, i.e., the
right of oppressed nations to have their own cultural
institutions, leaving all political power in the handsof the ruling nation. As a consequence, the idea of self-
determination stood in danger of being transformed from
an instrument for combating annexations into an instru-ment for justifying them. Now we can say that this con-
fusion has been cleared up. Leninism broadened the con-
ception of self-determination, interpreting it as the rightof the oppressed peoples of the dependent countries and
colonies to complete secession, as the right of nations
to independent existence as states. This precluded thepossibility of justifying annexations by interpreting the
right to self-determination as the right to autonomy.
Thus, the principle of self-determination itself was trans-formed from an instrument for deceiving the masses,
which it undoubtedly was in the hands of the social-
chauvinists during the imperialist war, into an instru-
ment for exposing all imperialist aspirations and chauvin-
ist machinations, into an instrument for the politi-cal education of the masses in the spirit of interna-
tionalism.
Formerly, the question of the oppressed nations was
usually regarded as purely a juridical question. Solemn
proclamations about “national equality of rights,”
innumerable declarations about the “equality of nations”—that was the stock in trade of the parties of the Second
International, which glossed over the fact that “equality
of nations” under imperialism, where one group of na-tions (a minority) lives by exploiting another group of
nations, is sheer mockery of the oppressed nations. Now
we can say that this bourgeois-juridical point of viewon the national question has been exposed. Leninism
brought the national question down from the lofty heights
of high-sounding declarations to solid ground, and de-clared that pronouncements about the “equality of
nations” not backed by the direct support of the proletar ian
parties for the liberation struggle of the oppressed nationsare meaningless and false. In this way the question of
the oppressed nations became one of supporting the
oppressed nations, of rendering real and continuous assist-ance to them in their struggle against imperialism for
real equality of nations, for their independent existence
as states.
Formerly, the national question was regarded from a
reformist point of view, as an independent question hav-
ing no connection with the general question of the powerof capital, of the overthrow of imperialism, of the prole-
tarian revolution. It was tacitly assumed that the victory
of the proletariat in Europe was possible without a di-
rect alliance with the liberation movement in the colo-
nies, that the national-colonial question could be solvedon the quiet, “of its own accord,” off the highway of
the proletarian revolution, without a revolutionary strug-
gle against imperialism. Now we can say that this anti-revolutionary point of view has been exposed. Leninism
has proved, and the imperialist war and the revolution
in Russia have confirmed, that the national question canbe solved only in connection with and on the basis of
the proletarian revolution, and that the road to victory
of the revolution in the West lies through the revolution-ary alliance with the liberation movement of the colo-
nies and dependent countries against imperialism. The
national question is a part of the general question ofthe proletarian revolution, a part of the question of the
dictatorship of the proletariat.
The question is as follows: Are the revolutionary
potentialities latent in the revolutionary liberation
movement of the oppressed countries already exhausted,
or not; and if not, is there any hope, any basis, forutilising these potentialities for the proletarian revolution,
for transforming the dependent and colonial countries
from a reserve of the imperialist bourgeoisie into areserve of the revolutionary proletariat, into an ally
of the latter?
Leninism replies to this question in the affirmative,
i.e., it recognises the existence of revolutionary capac-
ities in the national liberation movement of the oppressed
countries, and the possibility of using these for over-throwing the common enemy, for overthrowing im-
perialism. The mechanics of the development of impe-
rialism, the imperialist war and the revolution in Russia
wholly confirm the conclusions of Leninism on this
score.
Hence the necessity for the proletariat of the “domi-
nant” nations to support—resolutely and actively to
support—the national liberation movement of the op-pressed and dependent peoples.
This does not mean, of course, that the proletariat must
support every  national movement, everywhere and al-
ways, in every individual concrete case. It means that
support must be given to such national movements as
tend to weaken, to overthrow imperialism, and not tostrengthen and preserve it. Cases occur when the national
movements in certain oppressed countries come into con-
flict with the interests of the development of the prole-tarian movement. In such cases support is, of course,
entirely out of the question. The question of the rights
of nations is not an isolated, self-sufficient question;it is a part of the general problem of the proletarian
revolution, subordinate to the whole, and must be con-
sidered from the point of view of the whole. In the fortiesof the last century Marx supported the national movement
of the Poles and the Hungarians and was opposed to the na-
tional movement of the Czechs and the South Slavs.Why? Because the Czechs and the South Slavs were
then “reactionary nations,” “Russian outposts” in
Europe, outposts of absolutism; whereas the Poles and theHungarians were “revolutionary nations,” fighting against
absolutism. Because support of the national movement
of the Czechs and the South Slavs was at that time equiv-alent to indirect support for tsarism, the most dangerous
enemy of the revolutionary movement in Europe.
“The various demands of democracy,” writes Lenin, “includ-
ing self-determination, are not an absolute, but a small part
of the general democratic (now: general socialist) world  movement.
In individual concrete cases, the part may contradict the whole;
if so, it must be rejected” (See V ol. XIX, pp. 257-58).
This is the position in regard to the question of
particular national movements, of the possible reaction-
ary character of these movements—if, of course, they
are appraised not from the formal point of view, notfrom the point of view of abstract rights, but concretely,
from the point of view of the interests of the revolu-
tionary movement.
The same must be said of the revolutionary character
of national movements in general. The unquestionably
revolutionary character of the vast majority of nation-al movements is as relative and peculiar as is the
possible reactionary character of certain particular
national movements. The revolutionary character of anational movement under the conditions of imperialist
oppression does not necessarily presuppose the existence
of proletarian elements in the movement, the existenceof a revolutionary or a republican programme of the move-
ment, the existence of a democratic basis of the move-
ment. The struggle that the Emir of Afghanistan iswaging for the independence of Afghanistan is objectively
a revolutionary  struggle, despite the monarchist views
of the Emir and his associates, for it weakens, disinte-grates and undermines imperialism; whereas the struggle
waged by such “desperate” democrats and “socialists,”
“revolutionaries” and republicans as, for example, Ke-
rensky and Tsereteli, Renaudel and Scheidemann, Cher-
nov and Dan, Henderson and Clynes, during the imperial-
ist war was a reactionary  struggle, for its result was the
embellishment, the strengthening, the victory, of imperial-
ism. For the same reasons, the struggle that the Egyptianmerchants and bourgeois intellectuals are waging for
the independence of Egypt is objectively a revolutionary
struggle, despite the bourgeois origin and bourgeois titleof the leaders of the Egyptian national movement, de-
spite the fact that they are opposed to socialism; whereas
the struggle that the British “Labour” government iswaging to preserve Egypt’s dependent position is for the
same reasons a reactionary  struggle, despite the proletar-
ian origin and the proletarian title of the members ofthat government, despite the fact that they are “for”
socialism. There is no need to mention the national move-
ment in other, larger, colonial and dependent countries,such as India and China, every step of which along the
road to liberation, even if it runs counter to the de-
mands of formal democracy, is a steam-hammer blowat imperialism, i.e., is undoubtedly a revolutionary
step.
Lenin was right in saying that the national move-
ment of the oppressed countries should be appraised not
from the point of view of formal democracy, but from
the point of view of the actual results, as shown by thegeneral balance sheet of the struggle against imperialism,
that is to say, “not in isolation, but on a world scale”
(see V ol. XIX, p. 257).
2) The liberation movement of the oppressed peoples
and the proletarian revolution . In solving the national
question Leninism proceeds from the following theses:
a) The world is divided into two camps: the camp
of a handful of civilised nations, which possess finance
capital and exploit the vast majority of the population
of the globe; and the camp of the oppressed and exploit-
ed peoples in the colonies and dependent countries,which constitute that majority;
b) The colonies and dependent countries, oppressed
and exploited by finance capital, constitute a vast re-serve and a very important source of strength for impe-
rialism;
c) The revolutionary struggle of the oppressed peo-
ples in the dependent and colonial countries against im-
perialism is the only road that leads to their emancipa-
tion from oppression and exploitation;
d) The most important colonial and dependent coun-
tries have already taken the path of the national libera-
tion movement, which cannot but lead to the crisis ofworld capitalism;
e) The interests of the proletarian movement in the
developed countries and of the national liberationmovement in the colonies call for the union of these
two forms of the revolutionary movement into a com-
mon front against the common enemy, against impe-rialism;
f) The victory of the working class in the developed
countries and the liberation of the oppressed peoplesfrom the yoke of imperialism are impossible without
the formation and consolidation of a common revo-
lutionary front;
g) The formation of a common revolutionary front
is impossible unless the proletariat of the oppressor
nations renders direct and determined support tothe liberation movement of the oppressed peoples
against the imperialism of its “own country,” for “no
nation can be free if it oppresses other nations”
(Engels );
h) This support implies the upholding, defence and
implementation of the slogan of the right of nations to
secession, to independent existence as states;
i) Unless this slogan is implemented, the union and
collaboration of nations within a single world economic
system, which is the material basis for the victory of
world socialism, cannot be brought about;
j) This union can only be voluntary, arising on the
basis of mutual confidence and fraternal relations
among peoples.
Hence the two sides, the two tendencies in the national
question: the tendency towards political emancipation
from the shackles of imperialism and towards the for-mation of an independent national state—a tendency
which arose as a consequence of imperialist oppression
and colonial exploitation; and the tendency towardscloser economic relations among nations, which arose
as a result of the formation of a world market and a
world economic system.
“Developing capitalism,” says Lenin, “knows two histori-
cal tendencies in the national question. First: the awakening ofnational life and national movements, struggle against all na-
tional oppression, creation of national states. Second: develop-
ment and acceleration of all kinds of intercourse betweennations, breakdown of national barriers, creation of the interna-
tional unity of capital, of economic life in general, of politics,
science, etc.
“Both tendencies are a world-wide law of capitalism. The
first predominates at the beginning of its development, the second
characterises mature capitalism that is moving towards its trans-formation into socialist society” (see V ol. XVII, pp. 139-40).
For imperialism these two tendencies represent irrecon-
cilable contradictions; because imperialism cannot exist
without exploiting colonies and forcibly retaining themwithin the framework of the “integral whole”; because
imperialism can bring nations together only by means
of annexations and colonial conquest, without whichimperialism is, generally speaking, inconceivable.
For communism, on the contrary, these tendencies
are but two sides of a single cause—the cause of the eman-cipation of the oppressed peoples from the yoke of impe-
rialism; because communism knows that the union of peo-
ples in a single world economic system is possible onlyon the basis of mutual confidence and voluntary agree-
ment, and that the road to the formation of a voluntary
union of peoples lies through the separation of the colo-nies from the “integral” imperialist “whole,” through
the transformation of the colonies into independent
states.
Hence the necessity for a stubborn, continuous and
determined struggle against the dominant-nation chau-
vinism of the “Socialists” of the ruling nations (Britain,France, America, Italy, Japan, etc.), who do not want to
fight their imperialist governments, who do not want
to support the struggle of the oppressed peoples in“their” colonies for emancipation from oppression, for
secession.
Without such a struggle the education of the working
class of the ruling nations in the spirit of true internation-
alism, in the spirit of closer relations with the toiling
masses of the dependent countries and colonies, in thespirit of real preparation for the proletarian revolution,
is inconceivable. The revolution would not have been
victorious in Russia, and Kolchak and Denikin would
not have been crushed, had not the Russian proletariat
enjoyed the sympathy and support of the oppressed peo-ples of the former Russian Empire. But to win the sym-
pathy and support of these peoples it had first of all to
break the fetters of Russian imperialism and free thesepeoples from the yoke of national oppression.
Without this it would have been impossible to consoli-
date Soviet power, to implant real internationalism andto create that remarkable organisation for the collabora-
tion of peoples which is called the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, and which is the living prototypeof the future union of peoples in a single world economic
system.
Hence the necessity of fighting against the national
isolationism, narrowness and aloofness of the Socialists
in the oppressed countries, who do not want to rise above
their national parochialism and who do not under-stand the connection between the liberation movement
in their own countries and the proletarian movement in
the ruling countries.
Without such a struggle it is inconceivable that the
proletariat of the oppressed nations can maintain an
independent policy and its class solidarity with the pro-letariat of the ruling countries in the fight for the over-
throw of the common enemy, in the fight for the over-
throw of imperialism.
Without such a struggle, internationalism would be
impossible.
Such is the way in which the toiling masses of the
dominant and the oppressed nations must be educated
in the spirit of revolutionary internationalism.
Here is what Lenin says about this twofold task of
communism in educating the workers in the spirit of
internationalism:
“Can such education . . . be concretely identical  in great,
oppressing nations and in small, oppressed nations, in annexing
nations and in annexed nations?
“Obviously not. The way to the one goal—to complete equal-
ity, to the closest relations and the subsequent amalgamation
of all  nations—obviously proceeds here by different routes in
each concrete case; in the same way, let us say, as the route toa point in the middle of a given page lies towards the left fromone edge and towards the right from the opposite edge. If a Social-
Democrat belonging to a great, oppressing, annexing nation,
while advocating the amalgamation of nations in general, wereto forget even for one moment that ‘his’ Nicholas II, ‘his’ Wil-helm, George, Poincaré, etc., also stands for amalgamation  with
small nations (by means of annexations)—Nicholas II being for‘amalgamation’ with Galicia, Wilhelm II for ‘amalgamation’
with Belgium, etc.—such a Social-Democrat would be a ridiculous
doctrinaire in theory and an abettor of imperialism in practice.
“The weight of emphasis in the internationalist education
of the workers in the oppressing countries must necessarily con-sist in their advocating and upholding freedom of secession foroppressed countries. Without this there can be no internation-
alism. It is our right and duty to treat every Social-Democrat
of an oppressing nation who fails  to conduct such propaganda as
an imperialist and a scoundrel. This is an absolute demand, evenif the chance  of secession being possible and ‘feasible’ before
the introduction of socialism be only one in a thousand. . . .
“On the other hand, a Social-Democrat belonging to a small
nation must emphasise in his agitation the second  word of our
general formula: ‘voluntary union ’ of nations, He may, without
violating his duties as an internationalist, be in favour of either
the political independence of his nation or its inclusion in a neigh-
bouring state X, Y , Z, etc. But in all cases he must fight against
small-nation narrow-mindedness, isolationism and aloofness, he
must fight for the recognition of the whole and the general, for
the subordination of the interests of the particular to the inter-
ests of the general.
“People who have not gone thoroughly into the question
think there is a ‘contradiction’ in Social-Democrats of oppressing
nations insisting on ‘freedom of secession ,’ while Social-Demo-
crats of oppressed nations insist on ‘freedom of union .’ However,
a little reflection will show that there is not, and cannot be, any
other  road leading from the given  situation to internationalism
and the amalgamation of nations, any other road to this goal” (see
Vol. XIX, pp. 261-62).
VII
STRATEGY  AND  TACTICS
From this theme I take six questions:
a) strategy and tactics as the science of leadership
in the class struggle of the proletariat;
b) stages of the revolution, and strategy;
c) the flow and ebb of the movement, and tactics;
d) strategic leadership;e) tactical leadership;
f) reformism and revolutionism.
1) Strategy and tactics as the science of leadership in
the class struggle of the proletariat . The period of the
domination of the Second International was mainly a
period of the formation and training of the proletarianpolitical armies under conditions of more or less peaceful
development. It was the period of parliamentarism as
the predominant form of the class struggle. Questionsof great class conflicts, of preparing the proletariat for
revolutionary clashes, of the means of achieving the dic-
tatorship of the proletariat, did not seem to be on theorder of the day at that time. The task was confined to
utilising all means of legal development for the purpose
of forming and training the proletarian armies, to uti-
lising parliamentarism in conformity with the condi-
tions under which the status of the proletariat remained,and, as it seemed, had to remain, that of an opposition.
It scarcely needs proof that in such a period and
with such a conception of the tasks of the proletariatthere could be neither an integral strategy nor any elab-
orated tactics. There were fragmentary and detached
ideas about tactics and strategy, but no tactics or strat-egy as such.
The mortal sin of the Second International was not
that it pursued at that time the tactics of utilising par-liamentary forms of struggle, but that it overestimated
the importance of these forms, that it considered them
virtually the only forms; and that when the period ofopen revolutionary battles set in and the question of
extra-parliamentary forms of struggle came to the fore,
the parties of the Second International turned their backson these new tasks, refused to shoulder them.
Only in the subsequent period, the period of direct
action by the proletariat, the period of proletarian revo-lution, when the question of overthrowing the bourgeoi-
sie became a question of immediate practical action;
when the question of the reserves of the proletariat(strategy) became one of the most burning questions;
when all forms of struggle and of organisation, parliamen-
tary and extra-parliamentary (tactics), had quite clearlymanifested themselves—only in this period could an
integral strategy and elaborated tactics for the struggle
of the proletariat be worked out. It was precisely in thisperiod that Lenin brought out into the light of day the
brilliant ideas of Marx and Engels on tactics and strategy
that had been suppressed by the opportunists of the
Second International. But Lenin did not confine himself
to restoring particular tactical propositions of Marx andEngels. He developed them further and supplemented
them with new ideas and propositions, combining them
all into a system of rules and guiding principles forthe leadership of the class struggle of the proletariat.
Lenin’s pamphlets, such as What Is To Be Done?, Two
Tactics, Imperialism, The State and Revolution, The Prole-tarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky, “Left Wing ”
Communism , undoubtedly constitute priceless contri-
butions to the general treasury of Marxism, to its rev-olutionary arsenal. The strategy and tactics of Leninism
constitute the science of leadership in the revolutionary
struggle of the proletariat.
2) Stages of the revolution, and strategy . Strategy is the
determination of the direction of the main blow of the
proletariat at a given stage of the revolution, the elabora-tion of a corresponding plan for the disposition of the
revolutionary forces (main and secondary reserves), the
fight to carry out this plan throughout the given stage ofthe revolution.
Our revolution had already passed through two stages,
and after the October Revolution it entered a third one.Our strategy changed accordingly.
First stage . 1903 to February 1917. Objective: to
overthrow tsarism and completely wipe out the survivalsof mediaevalism. The main force of the revolution: the
proletariat. Immediate reserves: the peasantry. Direction
of the main blow: the isolation of the liberal-monarchistbourgeoisie, which was striving to win over the peasant-
ry and liquidate the revolution by a compromise  with
tsarism. Plan for the disposition of forces: alliance of
the working class with the peasantry. “The proletariat
must carry to completion the democratic revolution, byallying to itself the mass of the peasantry in order to
crush by force the resistance of the autocracy and to
paralyse the instability of the bourgeoisie” (see Lenin,V ol. VIII, p. 96).
Second stage . March 1917 to October 1917. Objective:
to overthrow imperialism in Russia and to withdrawfrom the imperialist war. The main force of the revolu-
tion: the proletariat. Immediate reserves: the poor peas-
antry. The proletariat of neighbouring countries as prob-able reserves. The protracted war and the crisis of im-
perialism as a favourable factor. Direction of the main
blow: isolation of the petty-bourgeois democrats (Menshe-viks and Socialist-Revolutionaries), who were striving
to win over the toiling masses of the peasantry and to
put an end to the revolution by a compromise  with
imperialism. Plan for the disposition of forces: al-
liance of the proletariat with the poor peasantry. “The
proletariat must accomplish the socialist revolution, byallying to itself the mass of the semi-proletarian ele-
ments of the population in order to crush by force the
resistance of the bourgeoisie and to paralyse the in-stability of the peasantry and the petty bourgeoisie”
(ibid.).
Third stage . Began after the October Revolution.
Objective: to consolidate the dictatorship of the prole-
tariat in one country, using it as a base for the defeat of
imperialism in all countries. The revolution spreadsbeyond the confines of one country; the epoch of
world revolution has begun. The main forces of the rev-
olution: the dictatorship of the proletariat in one coun-
try, and the revolutionary movement of the proletariat
in all countries. Main reserves: the semi-proletarian and
small-peasant masses in the developed countries, and the lib-
eration movement in the colonies and dependent coun-
tries. Direction of the main blow: isolation of the petty-bourgeois democrats, and isolation of the parties of the Sec-
ond International, which constitute the main support
of the policy of compromise  with imperialism. Plan for
the disposition of forces: alliance of the proletarian rev-
olution with the liberation movement in the colonies
and dependent countries.
Strategy deals with the main forces of the revolution
and their reserves. It changes with the passing of the rev-
olution from one stage to another, but remains basical-ly unchanged throughout a given stage.
3) The flow and ebb of the movement, and tactics . Tac-
tics are the determination of the line of conduct of theproletariat in the comparatively short period of the flow
or ebb of the movement, of the rise or decline of the revo-
lution, the fight to carry out this line by means of replac-ing old forms of struggle and organisation by new ones,
old slogans by new ones, by combining these forms, etc.
While the object of strategy is to win the war againsttsarism, let us say, or against the bourgeoisie, to carry
through the struggle against tsarism or against the bour-
geoisie to its end, tactics pursue less important objects,for their aim is not the winning of the war as a
whole, but the winning of some particular engagements
or some particular battles, the carrying through success-fully of some particular campaigns or actions corre-
sponding to the concrete circumstances in the given period
of rise or decline of the revolution. Tactics are a part of
strategy, subordinate to it and serving it.
Tactics change according to flow and ebb. While the
strategic plan remained unchanged during the first stage
of the revolution (1903 to February 1917), tactics changed
several times during that period. In the period from1903 to 1905 the Party pursued offensive tactics, for the
tide of the revolution was rising, the movement was on
the upgrade, and tactics had to proceed from this fact.Accordingly, the forms of struggle were revolutionary,
corresponding to the requirements of the rising tide of
the revolution. Local political strikes, political demon-strations, the general political strike, boycott of the
Duma, uprising, revolutionary fighting slogans—such
were the successive forms of struggle during that period.These changes in the forms of struggle were accom-
panied by corresponding changes in the forms of organisa-
tion. Factory committees, revolutionary peasant commit-tees, strike committees, Soviets of workers’ deputies, a
workers’ party operating more or less openly—such were
the forms of organisation during that period.
In the period from 1907 to 1912 the Party was com-
pelled to resort to tactics of retreat; for we then experi-
enced a decline in the revolutionary movement, the ebbof the revolution, and tactics necessarily had to take this
fact into consideration. The forms of struggle, as well as
the forms of organisation, changed accordingly: insteadof the boycott of the Duma—participation in the Duma;
instead of open revolutionary actions outside the
Duma—actions and work in the Duma; instead ofgeneral political strikes—partial economic strikes, or
simply a lull in activities. Of course, the Party had to go
underground during that period, while the revolutionary
mass organisations were replaced by cultural, educational,
co-operative, insurance and other legal organisations.
The same must be said of the second and third stages
of the revolution, during which tactics changed dozens of
times, whereas the strategic plans remained unchanged.
Tactics deal with the forms of struggle and the forms
of organisation of the proletariat, with their changes and
combinations. During a given stage of the revolutiontactics may change several times, depending on the flow
or ebb, the rise or decline, of the revolution.
4) Strategic leadership . The reserves of the revolu-
tion can be:
direct : a) the peasantry and in general the interme-
diate strata of the population within the country; b) theproletariat of neighbouring countries; c) the revolu-
tionary movement in the colonies and dependent coun-
tries; d) the conquests and gains of the dictatorshipof the proletariat—part of which the proletariat may give
up temporarily, while retaining superiority of forces,
in order to buy off a powerful enemy and gain arespite; and
indirect : a) the contradictions and conflicts among
the non-proletarian classes within the country, whichcan be utilised by the proletariat to weaken the enemy
and to strengthen its own reserves; b) contradictions,
conflicts and wars (the imperialist war, for instance)among the bourgeois states hostile to the proletarian
state, which can be utilised by the proletariat in its of-
fensive or in manoeuvring in the event of a forced retreat.
There is no need to speak at length about the reserves
of the first category, as their significance is clear to
everyone. As for the reserves of the second-category, whose
significance is not always clear, it must be said that
sometimes they are of prime importance for the progressof the revolution. One can hardly deny the enormous
importance, for example, of the conflict between the
petty-bourgeois democrats (the Socialist-Revolutionaries)and the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie (the Cadets)
during and after the first revolution, which undoubt-
edly played its part in freeing the peasantry fromthe influence of the bourgeoisie. Still less reason is
there for denying the colossal importance of the fact
that the principal groups of imperialists were engaged in adeadly war during the period of the October Revolution,
when the imperialists, engrossed in war among them-
selves, were unable to concentrate their forces against theyoung Soviet power, and the proletariat, for this very
reason, was able to get down to the work of organising
its forces and consolidating its power, and to preparethe rout of Kolchak and Denikin. It must be presumed
that now, when the contradictions among the imperial-
ist groups are becoming more and more profound, andwhen a new war among them is becoming inevitable,
reserves of this description will assume ever greater im-
portance for the proletariat.
The task of strategic leadership is to make proper use
of all these reserves for the achievement of the main
object of the revolution at the given stage of its develop-ment.
What does making proper use of reserves mean?
It means fulfilling certain necessary conditions, of
which the following must be regarded as the principal
ones:
Firstly. The concentration of the main forces of the
revolution at the enemy’s most vulnerable spot at the
decisive moment, when the revolution has already be-come ripe, when the offensive is going full-steam ahead,
when insurrection is knocking at the door, and when bring-
ing the reserves up to the vanguard is the decisive con-dition of success. The Party’s strategy during the period
from April to October 1917 can be taken as an example
of this manner of utilising reserves. Undoubtedly, theenemy’s most vulnerable spot at that time was the war.
Undoubtedly, it was on this question, as the fundamen-
tal one, that the Party rallied the broadest masses ofthe population around the proletarian vanguard. The
Party’s strategy during that period was, while training
the vanguard for street action by means of manifesta-tions and demonstrations, to bring the reserves up to the
vanguard through the medium of the Soviets in the rear
and the soldiers’ committees at the front. The outcomeof the revolution has shown that the reserves were prop-
erly utilised.
Here is what Lenin, paraphrasing the well-known
theses of Marx and Engels on insurrection, says about this
condition of the strategic utilisation of the forces of the
revolution:
“1) Never play  with insurrection, but when beginning it
firmly realise that you must  go to the end.
“2) Concentrate a great superiority of forces  at the decisive
point, at the decisive moment, otherwise the enemy, who has the
advantage of better preparation and organisation, will destroy
the insurgents.
“3) Once the insurrection has begun, you must act with the
greatest determination , and by all means, without fail, take the
offensive.  ‘The defensive is the death of every armed rising.’
“4) You must try to take the enemy by surprise and seize
the moment when his forces are scattered.
“5) You must strive for daily  successes, even if small (one
might say hourly, if it is the case of one town), and at all costs
retain the  ‘moral ascendancy ’” (see Vol. XXI, pp. 319-20).
Secondly.  The selection of the moment for the deci-
sive blow, of the moment for starting the insurrection,
so timed as to coincide with the moment when the cri-
sis has reached its climax, when it is already the casethat the vanguard is prepared to fight to the end, the
reserves are prepared to support the vanguard, and
maximum consternation reigns in the ranks of theenemy.
The decisive battle, says Lenin, may be deemed to have fully
matured if “(1) all the class forces hostile to us have become
sufficiently entangled, are sufficiently at loggerheads, have
sufficiently weakened themselves in a struggle which is beyond
their strength”; if “(2) all the vacillating, wavering, unstable,
intermediate elements—the petty bourgeoisie, the petty-bourgeoisdemocrats as distinct from the bourgeoisie—have sufficientlyexposed themselves in the eyes of the people, have sufficientlydisgraced themselves through their practical bankruptcy”; if
“(3) among the proletariat a mass sentiment in favour of
supporting the most determined, supremely bold, revolutionaryaction against the bourgeoisie has arisen and begun vigorouslyto grow. Then revolution is indeed ripe; then, indeed, if we havecorrectly gauged all the conditions indicated above . . . and if wehave chosen the moment rightly, our victory is assured” (see
Vol. XXV , p. 229).
The manner in which the October uprising was
carried out may be taken as a model of such strat-
egy.
Failure to observe this condition leads to a dan-
gerous error called “loss of tempo,” when the Party
lags behind the movement or runs far ahead of it, court-ing the danger of failure. An example of such “loss of
tempo,” of how the moment for an uprising should not
be chosen, may be seen in the attempt made by a sec-tion of our comrades to begin the uprising by arrest-
ing the Democratic Conference in September 1917,
when wavering was still apparent in the Soviets, whenthe armies at the front were still at the crossroads,
when the reserves had not yet been brought up to the
vanguard.
Thirdly . Undeviating pursuit of the course adopted,
no matter what difficulties and complications are en-
countered on the road towards the goal; this is necessaryin order that the vanguard may not lose sight of the main
goal of the struggle and that the masses may not stray
from the road while marching towards that goal andstriving to rally around the vanguard. Failure to observe
this condition leads to a grave error, well known to sail-
ors as “losing one’s bearings.” As an example of this “los-ing one’s bearings” we may take the erroneous conduct of
our Party when, immediately after the Democratic Confer-
ence, it adopted a resolution to participate in the Pre-parliament. For the moment the Party, as it were, forgot
that the Pre-parliament was an attempt of the bourgeoisie
to switch the country from the path of the Soviets to thepath of bourgeois parliamentarism, that the Party’s par-
ticipation in such a body might result in mixing every-
thing up and confusing the workers and peasants, whowere waging a revolutionary struggle under the slogan:
“All power to the Soviets.” This mistake was rectified
by the withdrawal of the Bolsheviks from the Pre-par-
liament.
Fourthly.  Manoeuvring the reserves with a view to
effecting a proper retreat when the enemy is strong, when
retreat is inevitable, when to accept battle forced uponus by the enemy is obviously disadvantageous, when,
with the given relation of forces, retreat becomes the
only way to escape a blow against the vanguard and toretain the reserves for the latter.
“The revolutionary parties,” says Lenin, “must complete
their education. They have learnt to attack. Now they have to
realise that this knowledge must be supplemented with the knowl-
edge how to retreat properly. They have to realise—and the revo-lutionary class is taught to realise it by its own bitter experience—
that victory is impossible unless they have learnt both how to
attack and how to retreat properly” (see Vol. XXV , p. 177).
The object of this strategy is to gain time, to disrupt
the enemy, and to accumulate forces in order later
to assume the offensive.
The signing of the Brest Peace may be taken as a
model of this strategy; for it enabled the Party to gain
time, to take advantage of the conflicts in the camp of
the imperialists, to disrupt the forces of the enemy,to retain the support of the peasantry, and to ac-
cumulate forces in preparation for the offensive against
Kolchak and Denikin.
“In concluding a separate peace,” said Lenin at that time,
“we free ourselves as much as is possible at the present moment
from both warring imperialist groups, we take advantage of their
mutual enmity and warfare, which hinder them from making
a deal against us, and for a certain period have our hands
free to advance and to consolidate the socialist revolution” (see
Vol. XXII, p. 198).
“Now even the biggest fool,” said Lenin three years after
the Brest Peace, “can see that the ‘Brest Peace’ was a concession
that strengthened us and broke up the forces of international
imperialism” (see V ol. XXVII, p. 7).
Such are the principal conditions which ensure cor-
rect strategic leadership.
5) Tactical leadership . Tactical leadership is a part of
strategic leadership, subordinated to the tasks and therequirements of the latter. The task of tactical leader-
ship is to master all forms of struggle and organisation
of the proletariat and to ensure that they are used prop-erly so as to achieve, with the given relation of forces, the
maximum results necessary to prepare for strategic
success.
What is meant by making proper use of the forms of
struggle and organisation of the proletariat?
    It means fulfilling certain necessary conditions, ofwhich the following must be regarded as the principal
ones:
Firstly . To put in the forefront precisely those forms
of struggle and organisation which are best suited to theconditions prevailing during the flow or ebb of the move-ment at a given moment, and which therefore can facili-
tate and ensure the bringing of the masses to the revolu-
tionary positions, the bringing of the millions to the rev-olutionary front, and their disposition at the revolution-ary front.
The point here is not that the vanguard should realise
the impossibility of preserving the old regime and the in-
evitability of its overthrow. The point is that the masses,
the millions, should understand this inevitability and
display their readiness to support the vanguard. But
the masses can understand this only from their own ex-perience. The task is to enable the vast masses to realise
from their own experience the inevitability of the over-
throw of the old regime, to promote such methods ofstruggle and forms of organisation as will make it easier
for the masses to realise from experience the correctness
of the revolutionary slogans.
The vanguard would have become detached from the
working class, and the working class would have lost
contact with the masses, if the Party had not decided atthe time to participate in the Duma, if it had not decided
to concentrate its forces on work in the Duma and to
develop a struggle on the basis of this work, in order tomake it easier for the masses to realise from their own
experience the futility of the Duma, the falsity of the
promises of the Cadets, the impossibility of compromisewith tsarism, and the inevitability of an alliance between
the peasantry and the working class. Had the masses
not gained their experience during the period of theDuma, the exposure of the Cadets and the hegemony of
the proletariat would have been impossible.
The danger of the “Otzovist” tactics was that they
threatened to detach the vanguard from the millions of
its reserves.
The Party would have become detached from the
working class, and the working class would have lost its
influence among the broad masses of the peasants and
soldiers, if the proletariat had followed the “Left” Com-munists, who called for an uprising in April 1917,
when the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries had
not yet exposed themselves as advocates of war and
imperialism, when the masses had not yet realised from
their own experience the falsity of the speeches ofthe Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries about
peace, land and freedom. Had the masses not gained this
experience during the Kerensky period, the Mensheviksand the Socialist-Revolutionaries would not have been
isolated and the dictatorship of the proletariat would
have been impossible. Therefore, the tactics of “pa-tiently explaining” the mistakes of the petty-bourgeois
parties and of open struggle in the Soviets were the only
correct tactics.
The danger of the tactics of the “Left” Communists
was that they threatened to transform the Party from the
leader of the proletarian revolution into a handful offutile conspirators with no ground to stand on.
“Victory cannot be won with the vanguard alone,” says
Lenin. “To throw the vanguard alone into the decisive battle,before the whole class, before the broad masses have taken up
a position either of direct support of the vanguard, or at least
of benevolent neutrality towards it . . . would be not merely follybut a crime. And in order that actually the whole class, that actual-
ly the broad masses of the working people and those oppressed
by capital may take up such a position, propaganda and agitationalone are not enough. For this the masses must have their own
political experience. Such is the fundamental law of all great
revolutions, now confirmed with astonishing force and vividnessnot only in Russia but also in Germany. Not only the uncultured,
often illiterate masses of Russia, but the highly cultured, entire-
ly literate masses of Germany had to realise through their ownpainful experience the absolute impotence and spinelessness, the
absolute helplessness and servility to the bourgeoisie, the utter
vileness, of the government of the knights of the Second Inter-national, the absolute inevitability of a dictatorship of the
extreme reactionaries (Kornilov in Russia, Kapp and Co. in Ger-
many) as the only alternative to a dictatorship of the proletar-
iat, in order to turn resolutely towards communism” (see V ol. XXV ,
p. 228).
    Secondly . To locate at any given moment the partic-
ular link in the chain of processes which, if grasped,
will enable us to keep hold of the whole chain and toprepare the conditions for achieving strategic success.
    The point here is to single out from all the tasks con-
fronting the Party the particular immediate task, thefulfilment of which constitutes the central point, and the
accomplishment of which ensures the successful fulfilment
of the other immediate tasks.     The importance of this thesis may be illustrated by
two examples, one of which could be taken from the
remote past (the period of the formation of the Party)and the other from the immediate present (the period
of the NEP).
    In the period of the formation of the Party, whenthe innumerable circles and organisations had not yet
been linked together, when amateurishness and the pa-
rochial outlook of the circles were corroding the Partyfrom top to bottom, when ideological confusion was the
characteristic feature of the internal life of the Party,
the main link and the main task in the chain of linksand in the chain of tasks then confronting the Party proved
to be the establishment of an all-Russian illegal newspa per
(Iskra ). Why? Because, under the conditions then pre-
vailing, only by means of an all-Russian illegal newspaper
was it possible to create a solid core of the Party ca-
pable of uniting the innumerable circles and organ-isations into one whole, to prepare the conditions for
ideological and tactical unity, and thus to build the
foundations for the formation of a real party.
During the period of transition from war to economic
construction, when industry was vegetating in the grip of
disruption and agriculture was suffering from a shortage
of urban manufactured goods, when the establishmentof a bond between state industry and peasant economy
became the fundamental condition for successful socialist
construction—in that period it turned out that the mainlink in the chain of processes, the main task among a
number of tasks, was to develop trade. Why? Because
under the conditions of the NEP the bond between in-dustry and peasant economy cannot be established ex-
cept through trade; because under the conditions of the
NEP production without sale is fatal for industry; be-cause industry can be expanded only by the expansion
of sales as a result of developing trade; because only
after we have consolidated our position in the sphereof trade, only after we have secured control of trade,
only after we have secured this link can there be any hope
of linking industry with the peasant market and success-fully fulfilling the other immediate tasks in order to
create the conditions for building the foundations of
socialist economy.
“It is not enough to be a revolutionary and an adherent of
socialism or a Communist in general,” says Lenin. “One must be
able at each particular moment to find the particular link in
the chain which one must grasp with all one’s might in order to
keep hold of the whole chain and to prepare firmly for the
transition to the next link.” . . .
“At the present time . . . this link is the revival of internal
trade  under proper state regulation (direction). Trade—that is the
‘link’ in the historical chain of events, in the transitional forms
of our socialist construction in 1921-22, ‘ which we must grasp
with all our might ’. . .” (see V ol. XXVII, p. 82).
    Such are the principal conditions which ensure cor-
rect tactical leadership.
    6) Reformism and revolutionism . What is the dif-
ference between revolutionary tactics and reformisttactics?
     Some think that Leninism is opposed to reforms,
opposed to compromises and agreements in general.This is absolutely wrong. Bolsheviks know as well as
anybody else that in a certain sense “every little helps,”
that under certain conditions reforms in general, and com-promises and agreements in particular, are necessary
and useful.
    “To carry on a war for the overthrow of the international
bourgeoisie,” says Lenin, “a war which is a hundred times more
difficult, protracted and complicated than the most stubbornof ordinary wars between states, and to refuse beforehand to
manoeuvre, to utilise the conflict of interests (even though tem-
porary) among one’s enemies, to reject agreements and compro-mises with possible (even though temporary, unstable, vacillating
and conditional) allies—is not this ridiculous in the extreme?
Is it not as though, when making a difficult ascent of an unexploredand hitherto inaccessible mountain, we were to refuse be-
forehand ever to move in zigzags, ever to retrace our steps, ever
to abandon the course once selected and to try others?” (see
V ol. XXV , p. 210).
Obviously, therefore, it is not a matter of reforms or
of compromises and agreements, but of the use people
make of reforms and agreements.
To a reformist, reforms are everything, while revolu-
tionary work is something incidental, something just to
talk about, mere eyewash. That is why, with reformist
tactics under the conditions of bourgeois rule, reforms are
inevitably transformed into an instrument for strength-ening that rule, an instrument for disintegrating the
revolution.
To a revolutionary, on the contrary, the main thing
is revolutionary work and not reforms; to him reforms
are a by-product of the revolution. That is why, with rev-
olutionary tactics under the conditions of bourgeois rule,reforms are naturally transformed into an instrument
for disintegrating that rule, into an instrument for
strengthening the revolution, into a strongpoint for thefurther development of the revolutionary movement.
The revolutionary will accept a reform in order to
use it as an aid in combining legal work with illegalwork and to intensify, under its cover, the illegal work for
the revolutionary preparation of the masses for the over-
throw of the bourgeoisie.
That  is the essence of making revolutionary use of
reforms and agreements under the conditions of impe-
rialism.
The reformist, on the contrary, will accept reforms in
order to renounce all illegal work, to thwart the prepa-
ration of the masses for the revolution and to rest in theshade of “bestowed” reforms.
That  is the essence of reformist tactics.
Such is the position in regard to reforms and agree-
ments under the conditions of imperialism.
The situation changes somewhat, however, after the
overthrow of imperialism, under the dictatorship of theproletariat. Under certain conditions, in a certain sit-
uation, the proletarian power may find itself compelled
temporarily to leave the path of the revolutionary
reconstruction of the existing order of things and to take
the path of its gradual transformation, the “reformistpath,” as Lenin says in his well-known article “The
Importance of Gold,”
32 the path of flanking movements,
of reforms and concessions to the non-proletarian classes—in order to disintegrate these classes, to give the revolu-
tion a respite, to recuperate one’s forces and prepare the
conditions for a new offensive. It cannot be denied thatin a sense this is a “reformist” path. But it must be borne
in mind that there is a fundamental distinction here,
which consists in the fact that in this case the reformemanates from the proletarian power, it strengthens the
proletarian power, it procures for it a necessary respite,
and its purpose is to disintegrate, not the revolution, but the
 non-proletarian classes.
Under such conditions a reform is thus transformed
into its opposite.
The proletarian power is able to adopt such a policy
because, and only because, the sweep of the revolution in
the preceding period was great enough and thereforeprovided a sufficiently wide expanse within which to
retreat, substituting for offensive tactics the tactics of
temporary retreat, the tactics of flanking movements.
Thus, while formerly, under bourgeois rule, reforms
were a by-product of revolution, now, under the
dictatorship of the proletariat, the source of reformsis the revolutionary gains of the proletariat, the reserves
accumulated in the hands of the proletariat and consist-
ing of these gains.
“Only Marxism,” says Lenin, “has precisely and correctly
defined the relation of reforms to revolution. However, Marx
was able to see this relation only from one aspect, namely, under
the conditions preceding the first to any extent permanent and
lasting victory of the proletariat, if only in a single country. Under
those conditions, the basis of the proper relation was: reforms area by-product of the revolutionary class struggle of the proletar-iat. . . . After the victory of the proletariat, if only in a singlecountry, something new enters into the relation between reformsand revolution. In principle, it is the same as before, but a change
in form takes place, which Marx himself could not foresee, but
which can be appreciated only on the basis of the philosophy andpolitics of Marxism. . . . After the victory (while still remaininga ‘by-product’ on an international scale) they (i.e., reforms—J. St. ) are, in addition, for the country in which victory has been
achieved, a necessary and legitimate respite in those cases when,
after the utmost exertion of effort, it becomes obvious that suf-
ficient strength is lacking for the revolutionary accomplishmentof this or that transition. Victory creates such a ‘reserve of strength’that it is possible to hold out even in a forced retreat, to hold outboth materially and morally” (see Vol. XXVII, pp. 84-85).
VIII
THE  PARTY
In the pre-revolutionary period, the period of more
or less peaceful development, when the parties of the
Second International were the predominant force in the
working-class movement and parliamentary forms ofstruggle were regarded as the principal forms -- under
these conditions the Party neither had nor could have had
that great and decisive importance which it acquiredafterwards, under conditions of open revolutionary
clashes. Defending the Second International against
attacks made upon it, Kautsky says that the partiesof the Second International are an instrument of peace
and not of war, and that for this very reason they were
powerless to take any important steps during the war,
during the period of revolutionary action by the proletar-
iat. That is quite true. But what does it mean? It meansthat the parties of the Second International are unfit for
the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat, that they
are not militant parties of the proletariat, leading theworkers to power, but election machines adapted for
parliamentary elections and parliamentary struggle.
This, in fact, explains why, in the days when the oppor-tunists of the Second International were in the ascendancy,
it was not the party but its parliamentary group that
was the chief political organisation of the proletariat. Itis well known that the party at that time was really an
appendage and subsidiary of the parliamentary group. It
scarcely needs proof that under such circumstances andwith such a party at the helm there could be no ques-
tion of preparing the proletariat for revolution.
But matters have changed radically with the dawn of
the new period. The new period is one of open class colli-
sions, of revolutionary action by the proletariat, of pro-
letarian revolution, a period when forces are being di-rectly mustered for the overthrow of imperialism and the
seizure of power by the proletariat. In this period the
proletariat is confronted with new tasks, the tasks ofreorganising all party work on new, revolutionary lines;
of educating the workers in the spirit of revolutionary
struggle for power; of preparing and moving up re-serves; of establishing an alliance with the proletarians of
neighbouring countries; of establishing firm ties with
the liberation movement in the colonies and dependentcountries, etc., etc. To think that these new tasks can be
performed by the old Social-Democratic Parties, brought
up as they were in the peaceful conditions of parlia-
mentarism, is to doom oneself to hopeless despair, to
inevitable defeat. If, with such tasks to shoulder, theproletariat remained under the leadership of the old
parties, it would be completely unarmed. It scarcely
needs proof that the proletariat could not consent to sucha state of affairs.
Hence the necessity for a new party, a militant party,
a revolutionary party, one bold enough to lead the prole-tarians in the struggle for power, sufficiently experienced
to find its bearings amidst the complex conditions
of a revolutionary situation, and sufficiently flexibleto steer clear of all submerged rocks in the path to its
goal.
Without such a party it is useless even to think of
overthrowing imperialism, of achieving the dictatorship
of the proletariat.
This new party is the party of Leninism.What are the specific features of this new party?
1) The Party as the advanced detachment of the work-
ing class.  The Party must be, first of all, the advanced
detachment of the working class. The Party must absorb
all the best elements of the working class, their expe-
rience, their revolutionary spirit, their selfless devotionto the cause of the proletariat. But in order that it may
really be the advanced detachment, the Party must
be armed with revolutionary theory, with a knowledgeof the laws of the movement, with a knowledge of the
laws of revolution. Without this it will be incapable of
directing the struggle of the proletariat, of leading theproletariat. The Party cannot be a real party if it limits
itself to registering what the masses of the working class
feel and think, if it drags at the tail of the spontaneous
movement, if it is unable to overcome the inertia and
political indifference of the spontaneous movement,if it is unable to rise above the momentary interests of the
proletariat, if it is unable to raise the masses to the level
of understanding the class interests of the proletariat.The Party must stand at the head of the working class;
it must see farther than the working class, it must lead
the proletariat, and not drag at the tail of the spon-taneous movement. The parties of the Second Internation-
al, which preach “khvostism,” are vehicles of bourgeois
policy, which condemns the proletariat to the role of atool in the hands of the bourgeoisie. Only a party
which adopts the standpoint of the advanced detachment of
the proletariat and is able to raise the masses to thelevel of understanding the class interests of the pro-
letariat -- only such a party can divert the working class
from the path of trade-unionism and convert it into anindependent political force.
The Party is the political leader of the working class.
I have already spoken of the difficulties of the strug-
gle of the working class, of the complicated conditions
of the struggle, of strategy and tactics, of reserves and
manoeuvring, of attack and retreat. These conditionsare no less complicated, if not more so, than the condi-
tions of war. Who can see clearly in these conditions, who
can give correct guidance to the proletarian millions? Noarmy at war can dispense with an experienced General
Staff if it does not want to be doomed to defeat. Is it not
clear that the proletariat can still less dispense withsuch a General Staff if it does not want to allow itself
to be devoured by its mortal enemies? But where is
this General Staff? Only the revolutionary party of the
proletariat can serve as this General Staff. The working
class without a revolutionary party is an army withouta General Staff.
The Party is the General Staff of the proletariat.
But the Party cannot be only an advanced  detachment.
It must at the same time be a detachment of the class,
part of the class, closely bound up with it by all the fibres
of its being. The distinction between the advanced detach-ment and the rest of the working class, between Party mem-
bers and non-Party people, cannot disappear until classes
disappear; it will exist as long as the ranks of the prole-tariat continue to be replenished with former members of
other classes, as long as the working class as a whole is
not in a position to rise to the level of the advanceddetachment. But the Party would cease to be a party if
this distinction developed into a gap, if the Party turned in
on itself and became divorced from the non-Party masses.The Party cannot lead the class if it is not connected
with the non-Party masses, if there is no bond between
the Party and the non-Party masses, if these masses donot accept its leadership, if the Party enjoys no moral
and political credit among the masses.
Recently two hundred thousand new members from
the ranks of the workers were admitted into our Party.
The remarkable thing about this is the fact that these
people did not merely join the Party themselves, butwere rather sent there by all the rest of the non-Party
workers, who took an active part in the admission of
the new members, and without whose approval no newmember was accepted. This fact shows that the broad
masses of non-Party workers regard our Party as their
Party, as a Party near  and dear  to them, in whose ex-
pansion and consolidation they are vitally interested and
to whose leadership they voluntarily entrust their destiny.It scarcely needs proof that without these intangible
moral threads which connect the Party with the non-Party
masses, the Party could not have become the decisiveforce of its class.
The Party is an inseparable part of the working class.
“We,” says Lenin, “are the Party of a class, and therefore
almost the whole class  (and in times of war, in the period of civil
war, the whole class) should act under the leadership of our
Party, should adhere to our Party as closely as possible. But itwould be Manilovism and ‘khvostism’ to think that at any time
under capitalism almost the whole class, or the whole class, would
be able to rise to the level of consciousness and activity of itsadvanced detachment, of its Social-Democratic Party. No sensible
Social-Democrat has ever yet doubted that under capitalism even
the trade union organisations (which are more primitive and more comprehensible to the undeveloped strata) are unable to embrace
almost the whole, or the whole, working class. To forget the distinc-
tion between the advanced detachment and the whole of the masseswhich gravitate towards it, to forget the constant duty of the ad-
vanced detachment to  raise  ever wider strata to this advanced
level, means merely to deceive oneself, to shut one’s eyes to the im-mensity of our tasks, and to narrow down these tasks” (See V ol. VI,
pp. 205-06).
2) The Party as the organised detachment of the work-
ing class.  The Party is not only the advanced  detachment
of the working class. If it desires really to direct the
struggle of the class it must at the same time be the or-
ganised  detachment of its class. The Party’s tasks un-
der the conditions of capitalism are immense and ex-
tremely varied. The Party must direct the struggle of
the proletariat under the exceptionally difficult condi-
tions of internal and external development; it must
lead the proletariat in the offensive when the situationcalls for an offensive; it must lead the proletariat so
as to escape the blow of a powerful enemy when
the situation calls for retreat; it must imbue themillions of unorganised non-Party workers with the
spirit of discipline and system in the struggle, with the
spirit of organisation and endurance. But the Partycan fulfil these tasks only if it is itself the embodiment
of discipline and organisation, if it is itself the organised
detachment of the proletariat. Without these conditionsthere can be no question of the Party really leading the
vast masses of the proletariat.
The Party is the organised detachment of the working
class.
The conception of the Party as an organised whole
is embodied in Lenin’s well-known formulation of thefirst paragraph of our Party Rules, in which the Party
is regarded as the sum total  of its organisations, and the
Party member as a member of one of the organisationsof the Party. The Mensheviks, who objected to this
formulation as early as 1903, proposed to substitute for
it a “system” of self-enrolment in the Party, a “system”of conferring the “title” of Party member upon every
“professor” and “high-school student,” upon every “sym-
pathiser” and “striker” who supported the Party in oneway or another, but who did not join and did not want
to join any one of the Party organisations. It scarcely
needs proof that had this singular “system” becomeentrenched in our Party it would inevitably have led to
our Party becoming inundated with professors and
high-school students and to its degeneration into a loose,
amorphous, disorganised “formation,” lost in a sea of
“sympathisers,” that would have obliterated the divid-ing line between the Party and the class and would
have upset the Party’s task of raising the unorganised
masses to the level of the advanced detachment. Needlessto say, under such an opportunist “system” our Party
would have been unable to fulfil the role of the organising
core of the working class in the course of our revo-
lution.
“From the point of view of Comrade Martov,” says Lenin,
“the border line of the Party remains quite indefinite, for ‘everystriker’ may ‘proclaim himself a Party member.’ What is the use
of this vagueness? A wide extension of the ‘title.’ Its harm is that
it introduces a disorganising  idea, the confusing of class and Party”
(see Vol. VI, p. 211).
But the Party is not merely the sum total  of Party
organisations. The Party is at the same time a single
system  of these organisations, their formal union
into a single whole, with higher and lower leadingbodies, with subordination of the minority to the
majority, with practical decisions binding on all
members of the Party. Without these conditions theParty cannot be a single organised whole capable of
exercising systematic and organised leadership in the
struggle of the working class.
“Formerly ,” says Lenin, “our Party was not a formally organ-
ised whole, but only the sum of separate groups, and thereforeno other relations except those of ideological influence were
possible between these groups. Now  we have become an organised
party, and this implies the establishment of authority, the trans-
formation of the power of ideas into the power of authority, the
 subordination of lower Party bodies to higher Party bodies”
(see Vol. VI, p. 291).
The principle of the minority submitting to the ma-
jority, the principle of directing Party work from a
centre, not infrequently gives rise to attacks on the partof wavering elements, to accusations of “bureaucracy,”
“formalism,” etc. It scarcely needs proof that system-
atic work by the Party as one whole, and the directingof the struggle of the working class, would be impos-
sible without putting these principles into effect.
Leninism in questions of organisation is the unswerv-ing application of these principles. Lenin terms the
fight against these principles “Russian nihilism” and “aris-
tocratic anarchism,” which deserves to be ridiculed andswept aside.
Here is what Lenin says about these wavering ele-
ments in his book One Step Forward :
“This aristocratic anarchism is particularly characteristic
of the Russian nihilist. He thinks of the Party organisation as
a monstrous ‘factory’, he regards the subordination of the partto the whole and of the minority to the majority as ‘serfdom’ . . . ,
division of labour under the direction of a centre evokes from
him a tragi-comical outcry against people being transformed into‘wheels and cogs’. . . , mention of the organisational rules of
the Party calls forth a contemptuous grimace and the disdainful . . .
remark that one could very well dispense with rules alto-gether.”
    “It is clear, I think, that the cries about this celebrated bu-
reaucracy are just a screen for dissatisfaction with the personalcomposition of the central bodies, a figleaf. . . . You are a bureau-
crat because you were appointed by the congress not by my
will, but against it; you are a formalist because you rely
on the formal decisions of the congress, and not on my con-
sent; you are acting in a grossly mechanical way because you
plead the ‘mechanical’ majority at the Party Congress and payno heed to my wish to be co-opted; you are an autocrat because
you refuse to hand over the power to the old gang”* (see Vol. VI,
pp. 310, 287).
3) The Party as the highest form of class organisation
of the proletariat.  The Party is the organised detachment
of the working class. But the Party is not the only organ-
isation of the working class. The proletariat has alsoa number of other organisations, without which it
cannot wage a successful struggle against capital: trade
unions, co-operatives, factory organisations, parlia-mentary groups, non-Party women’s associations, the
press, cultural and educational organisations, youth
leagues, revolutionary fighting organisations (in timesof open revolutionary action), Soviets of deputies as the
form of state organisation (if the proletariat is in power),
etc. The overwhelming majority of these organisationsare non-Party, and only some of them adhere directly
to the Party, or constitute offshoots from it. All these
organisations, under certain conditions, are absolutelynecessary for the working class; for without them it
would be impossible to consolidate the class positions of
the proletariat in the diverse spheres of struggle; forwithout them it would be impossible to steel the prole-
tariat as the force whose mission it is to replace the
bourgeois order by the socialist order. But how can
* The “gang” here referred to is that of Axelrod, Martov,
Potresov and others, who would not submit to the decisions
of the Second Congress and who accused Lenin of being a “bureau-crat.”— J. St.
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

single leadership be exercised with such an abundance
of organisations? What guarantee is there that this
multiplicity of organisations will not lead to diver-gency in leadership? It may be said that each of
these organisations carries on its work in its own spe-
cial field, and that therefore these organisations cannothinder one another. That, of course, is true. But it is
also true that all these organisations should work in one
direction for they serve one class, the class of the proletar-
ians. The question then arises: Who is to determine the line,
the general direction, along which the work of all these
organisations is to be conducted? Where is the centralorganisation which is not only able, because it has
the necessary experience, to work out such a general
line, but, in addition, is in a position, because it hassufficient prestige, to induce all these organisations
to carry out this line, so as to attain unity of leader-
ship and to make hitches impossible?
That organisation is the Party of the proletariat.
The Party possesses all the necessary qualifications
for this because, in the first place, it is the rallyingcentre of the finest elements in the working class, who
have direct connections with the non-Party organisa-
tions of the proletariat and very frequently lead them;because, secondly, the Party, as the rallying centre
of the finest members of the working class, is the best
school for training leaders of the working class, capableof directing every form of organisation of their class;
because, thirdly, the Party, as the best school for train-
ing leaders of the working class, is, by reason of itsexperience and prestige, the only organisation capable
of centralising the leadership of the struggle of the
proletariat, thus transforming each and every non-
Party organisation of the working class into an auxiliary
body and transmission belt linking the Party with theclass.
The Party is the highest form of class organisation of
the proletariat.
This does not mean, of course, that non-Party organ-
isations, trade unions, co-operatives, etc., should be
officially subordinated to the Party leadership. Itonly means that the members of the Party who belong
to these organisations and are doubtlessly influential
in them should do all they can to persuade these non-Party organisations to draw nearer to the Party of the
proletariat in their work and voluntarily accept its
political leadership.
That is why Lenin says that the Party is “the highest
form of proletarian class association,” whose political
leadership must extend to every other form of organisa-tion of the proletariat (see V ol. XXV , p. 194).
That is why the opportunist theory of the “independ-
ence” and “neutrality” of the non-Party organisations,which breeds independent  members of parliament and
journalists isolated  from the Party, narrow-minded  trade
union leaders and philistine  co-operative officials, is
wholly incompatible with the theory and practice
of Leninism.
4) The Party as an instrument of the dictatorship of
the proletariat.  The Party is the highest form of organisa-
tion of the proletariat. The Party is the principal guiding
force within the class of the proletarians and among theorganisations of that class. But it does not by any means
follow from this that the Party can be regarded as an end
in itself, as a self-sufficient force. The Party is not only
the highest form of class association of the proletarians;
it is at the same time an instrument  in the hands of the
proletariat for achieving the dictatorship when that has
not yet been achieved and for consolidating and expand-
ing the dictatorship when it has already been achieved.The Party could not have risen so high in importance and
could not have established its influence over all other forms of
organisation of the proletariat, if the latter had not beenconfronted with the question of power, if the conditions of
imperialism, the inevitability of wars, and the existence
of a crisis had not demanded the concentration of allthe forces of the proletariat at one point, the gathering
of all the threads of the revolutionary movement in one
spot in order to overthrow the bourgeoisie and to achievethe dictatorship of the proletariat. The proletariat needs
the Party first of all as its General Staff, which it must
have for the successful seizure of power. It scarcelyneeds proof that without a party capable of rallying
around itself the mass organisations of the proletariat,
and of centralising the leadership of the entire movementduring the progress of the struggle, the proletariat in
Russia could not have established its revolutionary
dictatorship.
But the proletariat needs the Party not only to achieve
the dictatorship; it needs it still more to maintain the
dictatorship, to consolidate and expand it in order toachieve the complete victory of socialism.
“Certainly, almost everyone now realises,” says Lenin, “that
the Bolsheviks could not have maintained themselves in power
for two and a half months, let alone two and a half years, withoutthe strictest, truly iron discipline in our Party, and without
the fullest and unreserved support of the latter by the whole mass
of the working class, that is, by all its thinking, honest, self-
sacrificing and influential elements, capable of leading or ofcarrying with them the backward strata” (see V ol. XXV ,
p. 173).
Now, what does to “maintain” and “expand” the
dictatorship mean? It means imbuing the millions ofproletarians with the spirit of discipline and organi-
sation; it means creating among the proletarian masses
a cementing force and a bulwark against the corrosiveinfluences of the petty-bourgeois elemental forces and
petty-bourgeois habits; it means enhancing the organising
work of the proletarians in re-educating and remouldingthe petty-bourgeois strata; it means helping the masses
of the proletarians to educate themselves as a force
capable of abolishing classes and of preparing the con-ditions for the organisation of socialist production. But
it is impossible to accomplish all this without a party
which is strong by reason of its solidarity and discipline.
“The dictatorship of the proletariat,” says Lenin, “is a
stubborn struggle -- bloody and bloodless, violent and peaceful,military and economic, educational and administrative -- against
the forces and traditions of the old society. The force of habit of
millions and tens of millions is a most terrible force. Without aniron party tempered in the struggle, without a party enjoying
the confidence of all that is honest in the given class, without
a party capable of watching and influencing the mood of themasses, it is impossible to conduct such a struggle successfully”
(see Vol. XXV , p. 190).
The proletariat needs the Party for the purpose
of achieving and maintaining the dictatorship. The
Party is an instrument of the dictatorship of the pro-
letariat.
But from this it follows that when classes disappear
and the dictatorship of the proletariat withers away,the Party also will wither away.
5) The Party as the embodiment of unity of will, unity
incompatible with the existence of factions.  The achieve ment
and maintenance of the dictatorship of the proletariat
is impossible without a party which is strong by reason
of its solidarity and iron discipline. But iron disciplinein the Party is inconceivable without unity of will,without complete and absolute unity of action on thepart of all members of the Party. This does not mean, ofcourse, that the possibility of conflicts of opinion within
the Party is thereby precluded. On the contrary, iron
discipline does not preclude but presupposes criticismand conflict of opinion within the Party. Least of alldoes it mean that discipline must be “blind.” On thecontrary, iron discipline does not preclude but presup-poses conscious and voluntary submission, for only con-
scious discipline can be truly iron discipline. But after
a conflict of opinion has been closed, after criticism hasbeen exhausted and a decision has been arrived at, unityof will and unity of action of all Party members are thenecessary conditions without which neither Party unitynor iron discipline in the Party is conceivable.
    “In the present epoch of acute civil war,” says Lenin, “the Com-
munist Party will be able to perform its duty only if it is organised
in the most centralised manner, if iron discipline borderingon military discipline prevails in it, and if its Party centre is
a powerful and authoritative organ, wielding wide powers and
enjoying the universal confidence of the members of the Party”(see Vol. XXV , pp. 282-83).
This is the position in regard to discipline in the
Party in the period of struggle preceding the achievement
of the dictatorship.
The same, but to an even greater degree, must be
said about discipline in the Party after the dictatorship
has been achieved.
“Whoever,” says Lenin, “weakens in the least the iron
discipline of the party of the proletariat (especially during thetime of its dictatorship), actually aids the bourgeoisie against
the proletariat” (see Vol. XXV , p. 190).
But from this it follows that the existence of factions
is compatible neither with the Party’s unity nor with its
iron discipline. It scarcely needs proof that the exist-ence of factions leads to the existence of a number of
centres, and the existence of a number of centres
means the absence of one common centre in the Party,the breaking up of unity of will, the weakening and
disintegration of discipline, the weakening and disin-
tegration of the dictatorship. Of course, the parties ofthe Second International, which are fighting against
the dictatorship of the proletariat and have no desire to
lead the proletarians to power, can afford such lib-eralism as freedom of factions, for they have no need at
all for iron discipline. But the parties of the Communist
International, whose activities are conditioned by thetask of achieving and consolidating the dictatorship of
the proletariat, cannot afford to be “liberal” or to permit
freedom of factions.
The Party represents unity of will, which pre-
cludes all factionalism and division of authority in the
Party.
Hence Lenin’s warning about the “danger of factional-
ism from the point of view of Party unity and of effect-
ing the unity of will of the vanguard of the proletariatas the fundamental condition for the success of the dicta-
torship of the proletariat,” which is embodied in the
special resolution of the Tenth Congress of our Party“On Party Unity.”
33
Hence Lenin’s demand for the “complete elimination
of all factionalism” and the “immediate dissolution ofall groups, without exception, that have been formed on
the basis of various platforms,” on pain of “uncondi-
tional and immediate expulsion from the Party” (see theresolution “On Party Unity”).
6) The Party becomes strong by purging itself of op-
portunist elements.  The source of factionalism in the
Party is its opportunist elements. The proletariat is not
an isolated class. It is constantly replenished by the
influx of peasants, petty bourgeois and intellectualsproletarianised by the development of capitalism. At
the same time the upper stratum of the proletariat, prin-
cipally trade-union leaders and members of parliamentwho are fed by the bourgeoisie out of the super-profits
extracted from the colonies, is undergoing a process of
decay. “This stratum of bourgeoisified workers, or the‘labour aristocracy,’” says Lenin, “who are quite philis-
tine in their mode of life, in the size of their earnings and
in their entire outlook, is the principal prop of the Sec-ond International, and, in our days, the principal social
(not military) prop of the bourgeoisie . For they are real
agents of the bourgeoisie in the working-class  movement, the
labour lieutenants of the capitalist class, real chan-
nels of reformism and chauvinism” (see V ol. XIX, p. 77).
In one way or another, all these petty-bourgeois
groups penetrate into the Party and introduce into it
the spirit of hesitancy and opportunism, the spirit of
demoralisation and uncertainty. It is they, principally,that constitute the source of factionalism and disinte-gration, the source of disorganisation and disruption ofthe Party from within. To fight imperialism with such
“allies” in one’s rear means to put oneself in the position of
being caught between two fires, from the front and fromthe rear. Therefore, ruthless struggle against suchelements, their expulsion from the Party, is a pre-requi-site for the successful struggle against imperialism.
The theory of “defeating” opportunist elements by
ideological struggle within the Party, the theory of “over-
coming” these elements within the confines of a single
party, is a rotten and dangerous theory, which threatensto condemn the Party to paralysis and chronic infirmity,threatens to make the Party a prey to opportunism,threatens to leave the proletariat without a revolution-ary party, threatens to deprive the proletariat of its
main weapon in the fight against imperialism. Our Party
could not have emerged on to the broad highway, it could
not have seized power and organised the dictatorship of the
proletariat, it could not have emerged victorious fromthe civil war, if it had had within its ranks people likeMartov and Dan, Potresov and Axelrod. Our Party
succeeded in achieving internal unity and unexampled
cohesion of its ranks primarily because it was able ingood time to purge itself of the opportunist pollution,because it was able to rid its ranks of Liquidatorsand Mensheviks. Proletarian parties develop andbecome strong by purging themselves of opportunists
and reformists, social-imperialists and social-chauvinists,
social-patriots and social-pacifists.
The Party becomes strong by purging itself of op-
portunist elements.
“With reformists, Mensheviks, in our ranks,” says Lenin,
“it is impossible  to be victorious in the proletarian revolution, it is
impossible  to defend it. That is obvious in principle, and it
has been strikingly confirmed by the experience of both Russia
and Hungary. . . . In Russia, difficult situations have arisen
many times , when the Soviet regime would most certainly  have
been overthrown had Mensheviks, reformists and petty-bourgeois
democrats remained in our Party. . . . In Italy, where, as is gener-
ally admitted, decisive battles between the proletariat and thebourgeoisie for the possession of state power are imminent. At
such a moment it is not only absolutely necessary to remove the
Mensheviks, reformists, Turatists from the Party, but it mayeven be useful to remove excellent Communists who are liable
to waver, and who reveal a tendency to waver towards ‘unity’
with the reformists, to remove them from all responsible posts. . . .On the eve of a revolution, and at a moment when a most fierce
struggle is being waged for its victory, the slightest wavering
in the ranks of the Party may  wreck everything , frustrate the revo-
lution, wrest the power from the hands of the proletariat; for this
power is not yet consolidated, the attack upon it is still very strong.
The desertion of wavering leaders at such a time does not weakenbut strengthens the Party, the working-class movement and the
revolution” (see V ol. XXV, pp. 462, 463, 464).
IX
STYLE  IN  WORK
I am not referring to literary style. What I have in
mind is style in work, that specific and peculiar featurein the practice of Leninism which creates the special
type of Leninist worker. Leninism is a school of theory
and practice which trains a special type of Party and
state worker, creates a special Leninist style in work.
What are the characteristic features of this style?
What are its peculiarities?
It has two specific features:
a) Russian revolutionary sweep andb) American efficiency.
The style of Leninism consists in combining these two
specific features in Party and state work.
Russian revolutionary sweep is an antidote to
inertia, routine, conservatism, mental stagnation and
slavish submission to ancient traditions. Russian rev-olutionary sweep is the life giving force which stimu-
lates thought, impels things forward, breaks the past and
opens up perspectives. Without it no progress is possible.
But Russian revolutionary sweep has every chance of
degenerating in practice into empty “revolutionary” Ma-
nilovism if it is not combined with American efficiency inwork. Examples of this degeneration are only too nu-
merous. Who does not know the disease of “revolution-
ary” scheme concocting and “revolutionary” plan draft-ing, which springs from the belief in the power of decrees
to arrange everything and remake everything? A Russian
writer, I. Ehrenburg, in his story The Percomman  (The
Perfect Communist Man ), has portrayed the type of a
“Bolshevik” afflicted with this disease, who set him-
self the task of finding a formula for the ideally perfectman and . . . became “submerged” in this “work.” The
story contains a great exaggeration, but it certain-
ly gives a correct likeness of the disease. But no one,I think, has so ruthlessly and bitterly ridiculed those
afflicted with this disease as Lenin. Lenin stigma-
tised this morbid belief in concocting schemes and in
turning out decrees as “Communist vainglory.”
“Communist vainglory,” says Lenin, “means that a man,
who is a member of the Communist Party, and has not yet
been purged from it, imagines that he can solve all his prob-
lems by issuing Communist decrees” (see Vol. XXVII, pp. 50-51).
Lenin usually contrasted hollow “revolutionary”
phrase mongering with plain everyday work, thus empha-
sising that “revolutionary” scheme concocting is repug-
nant to the spirit and the letter of true Leninism.
“Fewer pompous phrases, more plain, everyday  work . . . ,” says
Lenin.
“Less political fireworks and more attention to the simplest
but vital . . . facts of communist construction . . .” (See Vol. XXIV ,pp. 343 and 335).
American efficiency, on the other hand, is an anti-
dote to “revolutionary” Manilovism and fantastic scheme
concocting. American efficiency is that indomitable force
which neither knows nor recognises obstacles; which withits business-like perseverance brushes aside all obstacles;
which continues at a task once started until it is
finished, even if it is a minor task; and without whichserious constructive work is inconceivable.
    But American efficiency has every chance of degener-
ating into narrow and unprincipled practicalism ifit is not combined with Russian revolutionary sweep.
Who has not heard of that disease of narrow empiricism
and unprincipled practicalism which has not infre-quently caused certain “Bolsheviks” to degenerate and
to abandon the cause of the revolution? We find a
reflection of this peculiar disease in a story by B. Pilnyak,
entitled The Barren Year , which depicts types of Russian
“Bolsheviks” of strong will and practical determinationwho “function” very “energetically,” but without vision,
without knowing “what it is all about,” and who, there-
fore, stray from the path of revolutionary work. No onehas ridiculed this disease of practicalism so incisively
as Lenin. He branded it as “narrow-minded empiricism”
and “brainless practicalism.” He usually contrasted itwith vital revolutionary work and the necessity of
having a revolutionary perspective in all our daily
activities, thus emphasising that this unprincipled prac-ticalism is as repugnant to true Leninism as “revolu-
tionary” scheme concocting.
The combination of Russian revolutionary sweep
with American efficiency is the essence of Leninism in
Party and state work.
This combination alone produces the finished type
of Leninist worker, the style of Leninism in work.
Pravda ,  Nos.  96,  97,  103,
105,  107,  108,  111;
April  26  and  30,
May  9,  11,  14,  15  and  18,  1924
THIRTEENTH  CONGRESS
OF  THE  R.C.P. (B.) 34
May  23-31,  1924
Pravda ,  Nos.  118  and  119;
May  27  and  28,  1924

ORGANISATIONAL  REPORT
OF  THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE
May  24
 
 
Comrades, the general situation, as it has developed
in the country and around the Party in the past year,
can be described as favourable. The basic facts: economicprogress, increased activity generally, and especially of
the working class, more vigorous Party life.
In sum and substance, the question is of the extent
to which the Party has succeeded during the year in uti-
lising this situation to enhance its influence in the mass
organisations that surround it; the extent to which it hassucceeded in improving the composition of its member-
ship, its work generally, the registration, allocation and
promotion of responsible workers; and, lastly, the extentto which the Party has succeeded in improving the inter-
nal life of its organisations.
From this follow eight points which I propose to
discuss:
a) the state of the mass organisations that surround
the Party and link it with the class, and the growth ofcommunist influence in these organisations;
b) the condition of the state apparatus—the People’s
Commissariats and organisations functioning on a busi-ness-accounting basis -- and of the lower Soviet appa-
ratus, and the growth of communist influence in this
sphere;
c) the composition of the Party and the Lenin En-
rolment;
d) the composition of leading Party bodies; Party
cadres and the younger Party element;
e) the work of the Party in the sphere of agitation
and propaganda, work in the countryside;
f) the work of the Party in the registration, allo-
cation and promotion of responsible workers, both Party
and non-Party;
g) inner-Party life;
h) conclusions.
I shall have to cite many figures, for without them
the report will be incomplete and unsatisfactory. But
I must make the reservation that I have no faith in their
absolute accuracy, for our statistics are not up to themark, since not all Soviet statisticians, unfortunately,
possess elementary professional pride.
With this necessary reservation, I pass to the figures.
1.  THE  MASS  ORGANISATIONS  THAT  LINK
THE  PARTY  WITH  THE  CLASS
a) The trade unions . Last year, according to the statis-
tical returns, the trade union membership was 4,800,000.
This year it is 5,000,000. There is no doubt about the
increase. Trade union membership in the industries cov-ered by the twelve principal industrial unions is 92 per
cent of all the workers employed. In the basic industries
trade union membership comprises 91-92 per cent of theworking class. That is the position in industry.
The picture is less favourable in agriculture, where
there are some 800,000 workers, and where, if we count
the agricultural workers employed outside state-owned en-
terprises, trade union organisation amounts to 3 per cent.
As for communist influence in the unions, we have
data on the chairmen of gubernia and area trade union
councils. At the time of the Twelfth Congress the pro-
portion of underground-period Party members amongthem was in excess of 57 per cent; at the time of the pres-
ent congress it is only 35 per cent. A decline, but there
has been an increase in the percentage of trade unioncouncil chairmen who joined the Party after February
1917. The explanation is that the trade union membership
has grown, there are not enough underground-periodParty members and the cadres are being augmented by
the younger Party element. The proportion of workers
among these chairmen was 55 per cent; now it hasbecome 61 per cent. The social composition of the lead-
ing trade union bodies has improved.
b) The co-operatives . In this field the figures are
more confused than in any other and inspire no confi-
dence. Last year the consumers’ co-operatives had about
5,000,000 members. This year the number is about7,000,000. God grant us a new year every day, but I have
no faith in these statistics because the consumers’ co-
operatives have not yet completely gone over to volun-tary membership, and no doubt the figures include many
“dead souls.” The agricultural co-operatives had, we
are told, 2,000,000 members last year (though I have fig-ures received last year from the Selskosoyuz giving
the membership as 4,000,000). This year they have
1,500,000. There can be no doubt about the decline inthe agricultural co-operative membership. Party mem-
bership in the central leading bodies of the consumers’
co-operatives was 87 per cent last year, and 86 per cent
now—a decline. For the gubernia and district unions
of co-operatives, the figures are 68 per cent lastyear and 86 per cent this year—an increase of Party
influence. If, however, we examine not the “leading”
bodies, but the responsible workers, the actual lead-ers, we shall find that the proportion of Communists
among all responsible workers is only 26 per cent. I be-
lieve that this figure is closer to the truth. Party member-ship in the leading bodies of the agricultural co-operative
movement was 46 per cent last year and 55 per cent this
year. But if we go into the matter a little deeper andtake the responsible leaders, we shall find that only
13 per cent are Communists.
That is how some of our statisticians embel-
lish the facade, the exterior, and conceal the seamy
side.
c) The Young Communist League . Last year the League
had 317,000 members and candidate members (though I
have figures for last year, signed by a member of the Cen-
tral Committee of the R.Y .C.L., giving the membershipas 400,000); this year the number is 570,000. Although
the figures are somewhat confused, the growth of the or-
ganisation is beyond doubt. Last year the percentage ofworkers in the R.Y .C.L. was 34, this year it is 41; the
percentage of peasants was 42 last year and is 40 this
year. The number of pupils in factory training schoolswas 50,000 last year, this year it is 47,000. The pro-
portion of R.C.P.(B.) members in the Young Com-
munist League was about 10 per cent last year, and is 11per cent this year. Here, tool there has been undoubted
progress.
d) Organisations of working women and peasant women.
The basic organisation in this field is the delegate meet-
ing. There is any amount of confused figures here, buta careful analysis will show that last year there were
37,000 women’s delegates in the towns, while this year
there are somewhat more—46,000. In the villages therewere 58,000 delegates last year, while there are 100,000
this year. I have been unable to obtain anything like
accurate figures on the number of working women andpeasant women these delegates represent.
In view of the special importance of drawing working
women and peasant women into Soviet and Party work,it will not be superfluous to examine their percentage
participation in trade union bodies, Soviets, Guber-
nia and Uyezd Party Committees. The proportion ofwomen in the village Soviets last year was only about
one per cent (terribly small). This year it is 2.9 per
cent (also very small), but nevertheless there has beena definite increase. In the executive committees of the
volost Soviets the percentage was 0.3 last year, and is
0.5 this year, a negligible increase, not worth mention-ing. In the executive committees of the uyezd Soviets
there were about two per cent of women last year, and
a little over two per cent this year (my figures are forthe R.S.F.S.R.; there are no data for all the republics).
The figures for the executive committees of the gubernia
Soviets in the R.S.F.S.R. are: over two per cent last year,and over three per cent this year. Women this year make
up 26 per cent of the trade union membership (no figures
are available for last year), 14 per cent of the membershipof the factory trade union committees, six per cent in the
gubernia committees of the various unions, and over
four per cent in the union central committees. The pro-
portion of women members in the Party was roughly
eight per cent last year, and is about nine per cent this
year. Last year the proportion of women among candi-
date members was about nine per cent, now it is about11 per cent. All these figures refer to the position prior
to the Lenin Enrolment. At the time of the Thirteenth Con-
gress, women make up three per cent of the membershipof the Gubernia Party Committees, and about six per
cent of the Uyezd Committees. The percentage of Commu-
nists in the principal women’s organisations, the dele-gate meetings, has dropped from 10 to 8, the decline being
due to the increase in the number of non-Party delegates.
It must be admitted that half of the population of ourSoviet Union—the women—still stand aside, or practi-
cally stand aside, from the highway of Soviet and Party
affairs.
e) The army . The total number of Communists in the
army, the military colleges and the navy has decreased
from 61,000 to 52,000. This is a defect that must beeliminated. At the same time there has been an increase
in the number of Party members among the commanding
personnel. At the time of the Twelfth Congress 13 percent of the commanding personnel were Communists;
at the present time the figure is 18 per cent. The data on
the Party standing of Communists in the army areof interest. Of the 52,000 Communists in the army,
0.9 per cent—not even one per cent—joined the Party in
its underground period; a little over three per centjoined after February and up to October 1917, 11 per cent
joined prior to 1919, 22 per cent in 1919, 23 per cent
in 1920, and 20 per cent in 1921-23. You will see from
this that our army is served mainly, if not exclusively,
by the younger Party element.
f) Voluntary public initiative organisations.  A note-
worthy development of the past year has been the
appearance of a new type of organisation—voluntary
public initiative organisations—diverse cultural andeducational circles and societies, sports organisations,
auxiliary societies, organisations of worker and peasant
correspondents, etc. The number of these bodies is con-stantly growing, and it should be noted that they include
not only organisations sympathetic to the Soviet power,
but some that are hostile to it. In the R.S.F.S.R. thenumber of public initiative organisations has increased
from about 78-80 last year to more than 300 this year.
If one takes the physical culture organisation inthe R.S.F.S.R., it had 126,000 members last year and
375,000 this year. Its social composition: 35 per cent
workers last year, 42 per cent now. All these organisa-tions are centred around the trade union committees
and clubs in the factories and around the peasant mutual
aid committees
35 in the villages. Especially noteworthy
are the worker and peasant correspondents organisations
the purpose of which is to act as vehicles of proletar-
ian public opinion. The organisations of worker corre-spondents embrace 25,000 members, those of peasant
correspondents—5,000 members. In the R.S.F.S.R. the
proportion of Communists on the gubernia executivesof these organisations has increased from 19 per cent last
year to over 29 per cent this year. Lastly, mention should
be made of a new organisation which held a demonstra-tion yesterday before the Lenin Mausoleum
36—the Young
Pioneers. According to our statistics (which, as I have
said, are not altogether up to the mark) it had 75,000
members last June and over 161,000 this April. Of the
Young Pioneers, 71 per cent are children of workers inthe industrial gubernias and seven per cent are children
of peasants. In the national areas workers’ children ac-
count for 38 per cent of the membership; in the peasantgubernias—for 36 per cent.
That is how matters stand with the mass organisa-
tions that surround the Party and link it with the class.Fundamentally there has been an undoubted growth of
Party influence in these organisations.
2.  THE  STATE  APPARATUS
a) Number of employees.  According to the statistics,
the institutions of the People’s Commissariats, that
is, institutions financed out of the state budget,had over 1,500,000 employees last year, and—so we
are told—1,200,000 this year. The drop is 300,000. But
if we take institutions functioning on a business-account-ing basis, we find that their employees this year number
approximately 200,000 (no figures are available for last
year). In other words, what we gained by reducing thepersonnel in institutions financed by the state budget
has been largely offset by an increase in the personnel
of institutions on a business-accounting basis. This isapart from the fact that part of the employees have
been transferred to the local budgets and, consequently,
are not included in these figures. On balance, the num-ber of employees has remained the same, or has even
increased. Then there are the employees of the co-opera-
tives—103,000 last year, 125,000 this year, an in-
crease; trade union employees—28,000 last year, 27,000
now; and the employees in the Party apparatus—
26,000 last year, 23,000 now. All in all, this makes1,575,000, not counting the employees of institutions
financed out of the local budgets. So you see, there are
no grounds so far for reporting progress in cutting downour office personnel generally, and that of the state
apparatus in particular.
b) Party composition of higher executive bodies.  In 1923,
Communists made up 83 per cent of the members of our
higher executive bodies, members of collegiums, heads
of central departments and their assistants (exclusiveof industry); this year the figure is 86 per cent. Some
progress, undoubtedly, has been made compared with
the state of affairs that prevailed two years ago. Theproportion of workers in these leading bodies was 19 per
cent last year, and is now 21 per cent. This is not much,
but at any rate there has been an increase.
c) Party composition of industrial administrations.
The following is the picture in relation to the industrial
administrations—trusts, syndicates and the larger enter-prises: Communists made up a little over six per cent
of the entire apparatus of the various trusts in the
U.S.S.R. last year, and account for a little over 10 percent this year. The figure for the directing bodies of
trusts, syndicates and the larger enterprises was a little
over 47 per cent last year, and is a little over 52 per centthis year. Among the directors of the larger enterprises,
last year 31 per cent were Communists, and this year 61
per cent. The figures for the entire apparatus of R.S.F.S.R.trusts are 9.5 and over 12 per cent (nearly 13 per cent)
respectively, and for the leading bodies of R.S.F.S.R.
trusts—37 and 49 per cent. For the apparatus of the
syndicates as a whole the figures are 9 and 10 per cent,
and for their executive personnel 42 and 55 per cent.
On the whole, it can be stated that in our economic
organisations, if we take the executive personnel, Com-
munists make up approximately 48-50 per cent.
d) Party composition of trade and credit organisations.
A totally different picture is presented by our trade and
credit organisations, which at the present juncture haveacquired exceptional importance in our entire econ-
omy. Take, for example, the People’s Commissariat of
Internal Trade, which is of the greatest importancefor our entire development. Prior to the last reform,
only four per cent of the executive personnel of its cen-
tral apparatus were Communists. If one takes so vitala department of the People’s Commissariat of Foreign
Trade as Gostorg,* it is found that only 19 per cent of
the responsible officials are Communists, and justwhat kind of Communists these are may be judged from
the fact that 100 per cent of the Communists at the
central Gostorg offices have been purged. ( Laughter .)
Another important organisation, one that plays a big
part in our entire economy, is Khleboprodukt.** This is
the picture we have there: not counting the central office,local representatives and their deputies, its 58 branch
offices employ a total of 9,900 people, of whom 5.9 per
cent are Communists and 0.7 per cent members ofthe R.Y .C.L., the rest are non-Party. In those parts of the
organisation that are most closely in contact with
* The state import and export organisation.— Tr.
** The grain trading organisation.— Tr.
the peasantry—the grain delivery centres and all manner
of auxiliary centres—and among grain buyers, Commu-
nists make up only 17 per cent. The Khleboproduktcentral office has 137 responsible officials, of whom 13,
or 9 per cent, are members of the R.C.P.(B.). It should
be noted that the Party members in Khleboprodukt areutilised in a most irrational way: only 20 per cent are
doing responsible work, while the remaining 80 per
cent are lower-category employees. The situation is nobetter in the State Bank, that key credit centre which
is of such great importance for our entire economic life.
You know what a powerful weapon credit can be—any section of the population can be ruined or made
prosperous depending merely on how the so-called pref-
erential credits are dispensed. Well, in the entire appa-ratus of the State Bank, only seven per cent are Commu-
nists, and of its executive personnel only 12 per cent.
Yet the State Bank decides the destinies of a number
of enterprises and of very many economic institutions.
e) Party composition of the Soviets.  Figures are avail-
able for the R.S.F.S.R. The proportion of Communistsin the village Soviets is now a little over seven per
cent, compared with about six per cent last year. In the
executive committees of the volost Soviets the pro-portion of Communists has increased from a little over
39 per cent to 48 per cent; in the executive committees
of the uyezd Soviets—from a little over 80 per cent to alittle over 87 per cent; in the town Soviets of uyezd towns
the proportion has dropped from 61 per cent to 58 per
cent, in the executive committees of the gubernia Sovietsfrom 90 per cent to 89 per cent, and in the town Soviets
in gubernia towns from 78 per cent to 71 per cent. In
these last three cases—town Soviets in uyezd towns,
executive committees of gubernia Soviets and town Sovi ets
in gubernia towns—the influence of non-Party elements
is insignificant, nevertheless it is growing. As regards
the plenums of the executive committees of guberniaSoviets, we have data about 69 gubernias, with infor-
mation about 2,623 members. What do they show? It
appears that about 11 per cent of the membership ofthese plenums is non-Party. The highest non-Party
percentage is in Siberia and the Far Eastern Region,
where it forms 20 per cent. As for the national repub-lics, the proportion of non-Party members on the execu-
tive committees of gubernia Soviets is seven per cent
—the lowest percentage of all. And this in the nationalrepublics, where Party membership is low generally!
3.  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PARTY.
THE  LENIN  ENROLMENT
a) Membership . The Party had upwards of 485,000
members and candidate members at the time of theTwelfth Congress. The number at present is 472,000,
without the Lenin Enrolment. Counting the Lenin Enrol-
ment, taking the figures as on May 1 (by which date128,000 members had been admitted), our membership
totals 600,000. Considering that in about a fortnight
from now the Lenin Enrolment will have reached atleast 200,000, the membership of the Party can be esti-
mated at 670,000-680,000.
b) Social composition of the Party . Last year workers
accounted for 44.9 per cent of the total membership;
this year, exclusive of the Lenin Enrolment, they ac-
count for 45.75 per cent—an increase of 0.8 per cent.
The proportion of peasants has declined from 25.7 per
cent to 24.6 per cent, or by 1.1 per cent. Office employeesand other categories made up just over 29 per cent
of the membership; now the percentage is somewhat
in excess of 29 per cent, or has slightly increased. Thesocial composition of the R.C.P.(B.), counting members
and candidate members, and including the Lenin Enrol-
ment as on May 1, was as follows: workers 55.4 per cent,peasants 23 per cent, office employees and others 21.6
per cent.
c) Composition as regards Party standing . Mem-
bers who joined the Party prior to 1905 were 0.7 per
cent last year, and 0.6 per cent this year. Members
who joined in the period 1905-16 were two percent last year and the figure is the same this year.
Those who joined in 1917 accounted for slightly over
nine per cent last year, and for slightly under nineper cent this year. The figure for those who joined in
1918 was 16.5 per cent, and is now 15.7 per cent; and
the figures for those who joined in 1920 are 31.5 percent and 30.4 per cent respectively. Members who joined
in 1921 made up 10.5 per cent last year, and 10.1 per
cent this year. Members who joined in 1922 now makeup 3.2 per cent; there are no figures for last year. Mem-
bers who joined in 1923 make up 2.3 per cent. All these
figures are exclusive of the Lenin Enrolment.
d) Composition according to nationality and sex . The
Thirteenth Congress finds Great Russians forming 72
per cent of the Party membership; the proportion willevidently increase as a result of the Lenin Enrolment.
Second come Ukrainians—5.88 per cent, third Jews
5.2 per cent, next come the Tyurk nationalities—up-
wards of four per cent, followed by other nationalities,
such as Latvians, Georgians, Armenians, etc. The per-centage of women members of the Party at the time of the
Twelfth Congress was 7.8 and it is now 8.8. The figures for
women candidate members are nine per cent and 10.5 percent respectively. Thirteen per cent of the new members
admitted in the Lenin Enrolment are women, and this
should somewhat increase the percentages mentionedabove.
Lastly, on December 1, 1923, 17 per cent of all Com-
munists (members and candidate members) were workersat the bench, and with the Lenin Enrolment, taking the
figure as 128,000, the proportion is 35.3 per cent.
e) Degree of Party organisation of the working class.
Taking the number of workers in our Party as on May 1,
plus the number we shall have admitted about two weeks
hence, when the Lenin Enrolment will reach (and prob-ably exceed) the 200,000 mark, we get a total of 410,000
workers in our Party, out of a membership of 672,000.
This makes 10 per cent of the entire industrial and ruralproletariat of the Union, numbering 4,100,000.
We have achieved a degree of organisation in which
10 out of every 100 workers are in the Party.
4.  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  LEADING  PARTY  BODIES.
CADRES  AND  THE  YOUNGER  PARTY  ELEMENT
a) Composition of local bodies . I shall cite data on
the composition of 45 Gubernia and Regional PartyCommittees. Party members from the underground pe-
riod constitute over 32 per cent, the remaining 67 per
cent consisting of members who joined the Party later:
23 per cent in 1917, 33 per cent in 1918-19 and nine per
cent in 1920. In the leading local bodies, both Guberniaand Regional Party Committees, it is not the under-
ground-period members who predominate, but members
who joined after October. Taking the presidiums of 52Gubernia and Regional Party Committees for which
we have statistics on Party standing, we find that 49
per cent of their members joined the Party beforethe revolution, 19 per cent in 1917, after February,
26 per cent in 1918-19, and the remaining six per cent
at later periods. Here we still have a predominance ofParty members who joined after February. Among the
heads of organisational departments of Gubernia and
Regional Party Committees, 27.4 per cent at the time ofthe Twelfth Congress, and 30 per cent at the time of
the Thirteenth Congress, dated their Party membership
from the underground period. The corresponding fig-ures for heads of agitation and propaganda departments
are 31 and 23 per cent. A reverse tendency is to be ob-
served in the case of secretaries of Gubernia and RegionalParty Committees: of these, 62.5 per cent at the time
of the Twelfth Congress, and 71 per cent at the time of
the present congress, joined the Party in the undergroundperiod.
The task is clear—we must lower the requirements
as to Party standing for secretaries of Gubernia PartyCommittees.
Composition of 67 Uyezd Committees: underground-
period Party members—12 per cent, membership dat-ing from 1917—22 per cent, membership dating from
1918-19—43 per cent. Data on secretaries of 248 Uyezd
Committees at the time of the present Thirteenth Congress:
underground-period members—25 per cent, membership
dating from 1917, before October—27 per cent, mem-bership dating from before 1919—37 per cent. Data
on 6,541 secretaries of Party units in 28 gubernias:
underground-period members—a little over three percent, and the largest proportion, 55 per cent, consist-
ing of members who joined the Party after October,
in 1917-18.
Data on the social composition of 45 Gubernia and
Regional Committees this year show that 48 per cent of
their members are workers. Workers constitute 41 percent of the presidiums of 52 Gubernia and Regional Com-
mittees. The proportion of workers among the secreta-
ries of Gubernia and Regional Committees has risenfrom 44.6 per cent at the time of the Twelfth Congress
to 48.6 per cent at the time of the Thirteenth Congress.
Workers make up 63.4 per cent of the Uyezd Committeemembership (67 uyezds), and 50 per cent of Uyezd Com-
mittee secretaries (248 uyezds).
All these statistics relate to the period preceding the
last gubernia and uyezd Party conferences.
But just before the congress I received some statis-
tics on the results of these last conferences. They cover 11gubernias and 16 regions, and indicate that the propor-
tion of underground-period Party members in the Gu-
bernia and Regional Committees has dropped to 27 percent, while the proportion of workers has risen to 53
per cent.
This clearly points to two tendencies: on the one
hand, the introduction of the younger Party element into
the Party cadres and an extension of the cadres, and,
on the other, an improvement in the social composition
of the Party organisations.
b) Composition of the Central Committee and Central
Control Commission .  Of the 56 members and candidate
members of the Central Committee, 44.6 per cent are
workers and 55.3 per cent are peasants or intellectuals.Consequently, we should broaden the Central Committee
by increasing the proportion of workers in it. In the
Central Control Commission, 48 per cent of the membersand candidate members are workers and 52 per cent are
peasants or intellectuals. The same conclusion applies
here too. As regards Party standing, 96 per cent of themembers and candidate members of the Central Com-
mittee joined the Party in the underground period, be-
fore February 1917. Of the 56 members and candidatemembers of the Central Committee, only 2, i.e., four per
cent, joined the Party at later periods. We have the same
picture in the Central Control Commission. Of its 60 mem-bers and candidate members, 57 joined the Party in the
underground period, and 3 (i.e., five per cent) at later
periods. We must, consequently, add younger people.
c) Composition of the present congress . In all, 742
delegates have been registered, of whom 63.2 per cent
are workers, and 48.4 per cent underground-period mem-
bers. The remainder are more or less young members.
5.  THE  WORK  OF  THE  PARTY  IN  THE  SPHERE
OF  AGITATION  AND  PROPAGANDA
a) Communist education.  What stands out here is the
large proportion of political illiteracy among Party mem-bers: in some gubernias it is as high as 70 per cent. The
average for several central Russian gubernias (60,000
people were examined) is 57 per cent; last year it was
about 60 per cent. This is one of the fundamental de-fects in our work. Evidently, the work has proceeded
extensively, rather than intensively. The number of
Soviet-Party schools, or rather their student body,has somewhat contracted owing to the fact that some
of the schools have been transferred to the local budgets.
The Communist Universities have more students thanlast year. We shall, however, have to reduce the number
somewhat, in order, in proportion to available means,
to improve their material position and shift the em-phasis to more profound communist education. Special
stress must be laid on the propaganda of Leninism, which
is of decisive importance in our work of communisteducation.
b) The press . Last year we had 560 newspapers; this
year the number is less—495, but the circulation hasincreased from 1,500,000 to 2,500,000. Noteworthy is
the increase of newspapers in languages other than Rus-
sian. We even have republics without a single newspa-per in Russian—for example Armenia, where all the
papers without exception are published in Armenian.
In Georgia, 91 per cent of the newspapers are publishedin Georgian. In Byelorussia, 88 per cent are published
in languages other than Russian. This increase in the
number of newspapers in the national languages is tobe observed literally in every national region and re-
public. Attention should be drawn to the composition of
the editorial staffs of our periodical publications. A sur-vey of 287 press organs reveals that only 10 per cent
of their editors are underground-period Party members
The greatest proportion of the editors joined the Party
in 1918-19. This is a defect which must be remedied by
assigning older and more experienced newspapermento help the younger ones.
c) Work among the peasants . There are a number of
defects in this sphere. The village and volost Sovietsare so far only tax-collecting bodies and the peasant
regards them primarily as such. Officials well acquainted
with the countryside give the following general opinionof the activities of our rural bodies: our policy is cor-
rect, but it is being incorrectly carried out in the local-
ities. The composition of village and volost Sovietbodies leaves very much to be desired. The fact that our
Party units in the countryside consist too much of admin-
istrative officials adversely affects their work. Still moredetrimental is the ignorance of Soviet laws displayed
by officials closely associated with village affairs and
their inability to explain these laws to the peasant poor,their inability to defend the interests of the poor and
middle peasants against kulak domination on the basis
of Soviet laws and the privileges these laws extend tothe poor peasants. Then there is the general mistake:
the attempt to approach the peasant merely with verbal
agitation, failing to understand that the peasant requiresnot verbal, but concrete agitation, agitation that shows
tangible results. Recruiting into the co-operatives,
utilisation of the privileges extended to the poor peas-ants, agricultural credits, mutual aid organised by the
peasant committees—these, primarily, are the issues
that can interest the peasant.
6.  THE  WORK  OF  THE  PARTY  IN  THE  REGISTRATION,
ALLOCATION  AND  PROMOTION  OF  FORCES
a) Registration and allocation . The number of respon-
sible workers on our register last year was about 5,000;
this year we have on the register about 15,000 respon-sible workers of all categories. There can be no doubt
that our work of registration is improving. The figures
show that last year we allocated 10,000 Party workers ofall kinds, among them over 4,000 responsible Par-
ty workers. This year 6,000 were allocated including
4,000 responsible workers. The main work of theParty in the allocation of forces centred, firstly, on
providing officials for the Party; secondly, for the var-
ious bodies of the Supreme Council of National Econ-omy; and, lastly, for the People’s Commissariat of
Finance—chiefly its tax-collecting apparatus. Alloca-
tion of Communists to all other sectors was on a lesserscale. That is a big mistake in our work. At a time when
the centre of economic life has shifted to trade we
have displayed insufficient initiative and vigour inproviding our trade and credit organisations and their
branches in the U.S.S.R. and abroad with a maximum
number of active workers. I refer in particular to suchbodies as the Gostorg and Khleboprodukt.
7.  INNER-PARTY  LIFE
I shall not enumerate the questions examined by the
Central Committee and its bodies, nor the nature of thesequestions. This is not of decisive importance, and more-
over it has been dealt with in the written report circulated
to you. I would only like to draw your attention to the
following:
Firstly, the internal life of our organisations has,
undoubtedly, improved. The impression one gets is
that the organisations have settled down, there is little
squabbling, and business-like work is going on. Someexceptions will be found in the border regions, where,
side by side with the older Party workers who are not
too well versed in communism, cadres of young Marx-ists are coming to the fore, those trained in the Sverdlov
University and other educational institutions, well
versed in Party work, but terribly weak as regardsSoviet work. It will take some time before these
conflicts between the younger and older workers in
the border regions are eliminated. In this respect theborder regions are an exception. As for the majority
of the central Russian gubernias, it can be taken that
the Party organisations there have settled down, andbusiness-like work has made good headway. In Geor-
gia, the Republic where there was more squabbling than
anywhere else, and which was the subject of so muchtalk at the last congress, Party life has now been brought
into pacific channels. The better elements among the
former deviators, such as Philip Makharadze andOkudzhava, have definitely broken with the extreme
deviators and have announced their readiness to carry on
work in harmony.     Secondly, in the Gubernia Committees, and espe-
cially in the Central Committee of the Party, in the past
year the main emphasis in the work has been shiftedfrom the bureaus or presidiums to the plenums. For-
merly Central Committee plenums would entrust the
decision of cardinal questions to the Political Bureau.
This is no longer the case. Now, cardinal questions
of our policy and economy are decided by the ple-nums. Look through the agendas of our plenums and
the stenographic reports, which are circulated to all
the Gubernia Committees, and you will appreciate thatthe centre of activities has shifted from the Political
and Organising Bureaus to the plenum. This is very
important, for our plenums bring together 100-120 people(members and candidate members of the Central Com-
mittee and of the Central Control Commission), and
since the centre of activity has shifted to the plenum,the latter has become a highly valuable school for
training leaders of the working class, political leaders
of the working class. New people, tomorrow’s leaders ofthe working class, are growing up and coming to full
stature before our very eyes, and in this lies the inesti-
mable value of our extended plenary sessions.
It is noteworthy that the same tendency is to be ob-
served in the localities. Decision of major problems is
passing from the bureaus of the Gubernia Committeesto the plenums. The plenums are being enlarged; they
hold longer sessions, to which all the best forces in the
gubernia are invited, and in this way the plenums arebecoming schools for training local and regional leaders.
This tendency in the localities, in the gubernias and
uyezds, must be made the regular practice.
Thirdly, inner-Party life has in this past year been
exceedingly intense, full-blooded, one might say. We Bol-
sheviks are accustomed to coping with big tasks, andoften we fail to notice the greatness of the tasks we per-
form. Such facts as the discussion and the Lenin Enrol-
ment—and this requires no proof—are developments of
the greatest moment for the country and the Party, and,
obviously, they could not but animate inner-Party life.
What is the significance of these two facts? They
show that our Party, which has gone through a discus-
sion, is as firm as a rock. They show that our Party,which, by the will and with the approval of the entire
working class, has admitted 200,000 new members, is
essentially an elected Party, the elected organ of theworking class.
8.  CONCLUSIONS
1. Of the mass organisations surrounding our Party,
special attention should be paid to the co-operatives andthe organisations of working women and peasant women.
I have singled out these organisations because at the
present juncture they are the weakest points.
a) It is beyond doubt that the apparatus of the con-
sumers’ co-operatives, whose function it is to link state
industry with the peasant economy, has not been ona level with the tasks confronting it. This is borne out
by the irrefutable fact that the peasant sector in the
consumers’ co-operatives accounts for only one-thirdof the total membership. We must bring about a
situation in which the peasants will have their due
place in the consumers’ co-operatives. Communists mustshift the centre of their activities from the guber-
nias to the uyezds and districts in order to build
up contact with the mass of the peasants and in this wayconvert the consumers’ co-operatives into a connecting
link between industry and the peasant economy.
b) Matters are no better in regard to the agricul-
tural co-operatives. Confused figures and a drop in
membership during the past year are facts that call forserious consideration. Here too, as in the consumers’
co-operatives, Communists must shift the centre of their
activities to the uyezds and districts, closer to the peas-ant masses; they must make it their aim to ensure
that the local offices of the Selskosoyuz are not used
as a shield for kulak domination. But that is not enough.We must reinforce the leading bodies of the Selskosoyuz
with communist forces, for of late its work has begun
seriously to deteriorate.
c) The position is worse with regard to work among
women. True, the delegate meetings of working women
and peasant women are growing in number and scope, butwhat our forces active in this field have accomplished by
way of agitation is far from having been consolidated or-
ganisationally. In this respect we have not achieved evena hundredth part of the necessary minimum. This is
irrefutably borne out by the percentage of working
women and peasant women participating in the Soviets,the trade unions and the Party. The Party must
take every measure to make good this deficiency in the
very near future. We cannot tolerate a situation whenhalf of the population of the Soviet Union continues to
stand aside from the highway of Soviet and Party de-
velopment.
d) The voluntary public initiative organisations
merit special attention, particularly the organisations of
worker and peasant correspondents. These have a greatfuture. Given the proper conditions for development,
they can become a highly important and powerful me-
dium for expressing and carrying out the will of prole-
tarian public opinion. You are aware of the power of
proletarian public opinion in exposing and rectify-ing shortcomings in our Soviet public life. It is much
more effective than administrative pressure. That is
why the Party must render these organisations everyassistance.
2. Special attention should be paid to the state appa-
ratus. That the position in this sphere is unsatisfactoryis hardly open to challenge.
a) Lenin’s behests to reduce and simplify the state
apparatus have been fulfilled only in part, to avery minute degree. The reduction of the apparatus of
the People’s Commissariats by 200,000 or 300,000 em-
ployees, while at the same time a new apparatus—thetrusts, syndicates, etc.—has grown up alongside them,
cannot properly be regarded as either a reduction or
a simplification of the apparatus. The Party must takeevery measure to ensure that Lenin’s behests in this
sphere are carried out with an iron hand.
b) I have given you figures showing that the pro-
portion of non-Party people participating in our
Soviets is extremely low. Comrades, this must
not continue; we cannot go on building the new statein this way. Serious constructive work is impossible
without devoting special attention to drawing non-
Party people into Soviet activities in the gubernias anduyezds. Various methods might be suggested. One expe-
dient method might be the following: the organisation,
under the different departments of the gubernia anduyezd Soviets, of groups, or better still, of regularly
convened conferences on concrete questions for non-
Party people—workers in the towns and peasants in
the uyezds—in order to draw non-Party elements into
active participation in the various branches of adminis-tration and subsequently to select the best of these non-
Party workers and peasants, the more capable, and
appoint them to government posts. Without this exten-sion of the base of our town and uyezd Soviets, without
extending the base of Soviet work and drawing non-
Party people into it, the Soviets stand in danger of agrave setback in weight and influence.
c) There is an opinion current in our Party that genuine
Party work is confined to activities in the Gubernia,Regional and Uyezd Party Committees and in the Party
units. As for any other form of work, it is alleged that it
is not genuine Party work. People working in the trustsand syndicates are often ridiculed: “They have lost
contact with the Party,” it is said. ( Voice : “They are
purged.”) Some comrades, in both economic bodiesand Party organisations, should be purged. However, I
am dealing not with the exception, but with the typical
case. It is customary among us to divide Party workinto two categories: a higher category comprising genu-
ine Party work in the Gubernia and Regional Commit-
tees, in the Party units, in the Central Committee; anda lower category referred to as Party work only in quo-
tation marks, which embraces work in all Soviet bodies,
and above all in trading bodies. Comrades, such anattitude to business executives is profoundly contrary
to Leninism. Every such business executive working even
in the most wretched of shops, in the most wretchedof trading establishments, if he advances and improves
its work, is a genuine Party worker and deserves every
support from the Party. We shall not be able to take
a single step forward in our constructive work if this
aristocratic, intelligentsia approach to trade persists.I gave a lecture at the Sverdlov University recently,
and in the course of it I said that we might, perhaps,
have to transfer some 10,000 Communists from Partywork or industry to trade. They laughed. They don’t
want to trade! Yet it should be perfectly clear that all
our discussions on socialist construction may degenerateinto so much empty talk unless we eradicate from the
Party these aristocratic-intelligentsia prejudices about
trade and unless we, Communists, master all aspectsof trade.
d) Comrades, no constructive work, no state activity,
no planning is conceivable without proper accounting.
And accounting is inconceivable without statistics.
Without statistics, accounting cannot advance one inch.
Rykov recently told a conference that during the WarCommunism period he had a statistician working in the
Supreme Council of National Economy who would sub-
mit one set of figures on a given subject one day, anda different set the next day. Unfortunately, we still
have statisticians of that type. The nature of sta-
tistics is such that separate components make up a con-tinuous chain and if one of its links is defective, the en-
tire work may be spoiled. In bourgeois countries the
statistician possesses a certain minimum of professionalpride. He will not lie. Whatever his political beliefs and
leanings, when it comes to facts and figures he is prepared
to lay down his life rather than submit untrue data.We could do with more of such bourgeois statisticians,
people with self-respect and possessing a certain minimum
of professional pride! Unless we have this approach
to our statistical work, our constructive work will not
advance one inch.
The same must be said of bookkeeping . No branch of
economic activity can make headway without proper
bookkeeping. But unfortunately our accountants do notalways possess the elementary merits of the ordinary
honest, bourgeois accountant. I have a high regard for
some of our accountants; among them are honest anddevoted workers. But the fact remains that we have
also worthless accountants capable of concocting any
sort of statement and who are more dangerous thancounter-revolutionaries. Without overcoming these de-
fects, without eliminating them, we cannot advance
either the country’s economy or its trade.
e) The percentage of workers and of Communists
in the directing bodies of some state institutions is
still at a minimum level and inadequate. This defectis very evident in the case of our directing bodies
and of the foreign representations of our trading organ-
isations (foreign trade, home trade, syndicates) andcredit institutions, which at the present time are of de-
cisive importance for the life and development of our
economy, and, above all, of our state industry. The Partymust take every measure to fill this gap. Otherwise there
can be no question of implementing the Party’s economic
and political directives.
f) Up till now a key problem in economic develop-
ment has been to organise the trusts and give them
proper shape. Now that the focus has shifted to trade,questions arise concerning the organisation of mixed
and joint-stock companies
37 for home and foreign
trade. Practice shows that, while we have coped with
the problem of the trusts, our organisations are sadly
lacking when it comes to solving the problems connectedwith mixed and joint-stock companies. There is a tend-
ency to organise trade enterprises of a type that would
reduce the effectiveness of state control in this impor-tant sphere to a minimum. There can be no doubt that
the Party will vigorously combat such tendencies.
3. We must continue to improve the composition of
the Party generally, and of its leading bodies in partic-
ular. Under no circumstances should the Party cadres
be regarded as a sort of closed corporation. They shouldbe widened step by step by drawing in the younger
Party element, which must serve to replenish the cadres.
Otherwise, there is no point in having Party cadres.
4. As regards agitation activities:
a) The position with regard to political literacy among
Party members is bad (60 per cent politically illiterate).The Lenin Enrolment will increase the proportion.
Systematic work is required to eliminate this drawback,
and the task is to go ahead with such work.
b) The position with regard to the cinema is bad. The
cinema is a most valuable means of mass agitation.
The task is to take this matter in hand.
c) The press is making progress, but not enough.
The task is to raise the circulation of Krestyanskaya
Gazeta
38 to one million, of Pravda  to 600,000, and to
start a popular paper for the Lenin Enrolment, building
up its circulation to at least half a million.
d) Publication of wall newspapers is making prog-
ress, but not enough. The task is to support the wall-
newspaper correspondents and to go ahead with the work.
e) Work in the countryside is in a bad state. Agi-
tation in the countryside must be chiefly concrete. It
should consist in rendering all possible assistance tothe poor and middle peasant elements, including
preferential credits; development of rudimentary col-
lective farming (not communes) along the lines of theCommittees of Peasant poor
39 in the Ukraine, where
there are some 5,000 collective farms; in recruiting the
peasantry into the co-operatives, primarily the agricul-tural co-operatives. Gaining a dominant influence in
the peasant committees must be considered a task of
special importance. Nor should we overlook the terri-torial formations,
40 which offer very important oppor-
tunities for agitation in the countryside.
5. As regards registration, allocation and promotion
of Party and non-Party forces:
a) Proper registration has been more or less achieved.
b) Things are somewhat worse with regard to allo-
cation of cadres, for the principal tasks involved in
regrouping our forces in the new situation of internal
development—tasks outlined by Lenin at the EleventhCongress
41—have not yet been fulfilled. The immediate
task of bringing a maximum number of our best
forces into the various trading organisations still awaitssolution.
Properly speaking, in the past year the Registration
and Allocation Department served organisations of theSupreme Council of National Economy and the People’s
Commissariat of Finance, especially its tax-collecting
apparatus, and supplied workers mainly to these organ-isations. The task now is to turn our attention to the
trade and credit organisations and give them priority
over other institutions in the allocation of forces. Some
5,000 Communists may be required here.
Simultaneously, the task is to supplement the exist-
ing method of allocating forces with new methods:
voluntary enlistment, enrolment of volunteers to organ-
ise the work in especially important sectors of Sovietaffairs. This method is directly related to the ques-
tion of organising exemplary work in certain districts,
a thing that cannot be dispensed with at the pres-ent stage. Lenin’s idea concerning exemplary work,
outlined by him in The Tax in Kind ,
42 a must be put into
effect.
c) Special attention must be devoted to the promo-
tion of new forces, Party and non-Party. The method
of advancing new people only by appointment fromabove is not sufficient. It must be supplemented by
methods of promoting people from below, in the course
of practical work, in the course of drawing new forcesinto our practical activities. In this respect, the pro-
duction conferences in the factories and trusts should
play a big part in advancing factory workers to respon-sible posts in industrial plants and trusts. We must
develop the working groups attached to the various
departments of the Soviets in the gubernia and uyezdtowns, converting them into periodical conferences that
discuss concrete questions and drawing into the work of
these conferences both members and, especially, non-members of the Soviets—workers and peasants, both men
and women. Only in the course of these broad practical
activities will we be able to promote new forces fromamong the non-Party workers and peasants. The great wave
of the Lenin Enrolment in the cities and the enhanced
political activity of the peasantry show beyond all doubt
that this method of promoting new forces is bound to
have great results.
6. Two conclusions regarding inner-Party life:
a) The so-called “principle” of broadening the Party
Central Committee has proved correct. Experience hasshown the immense value of broadening the Central
Committee, it has shown that the comrades who upheld
the “principle” of narrowing down the Central Commit-tee were taking a wrong course.
b) It is now clear to all that the opposition was
entirely wrong in asserting, during the discussion, thatthe Party was in a state of disintegration. You are not
likely to find in our Party a single organisation of any
importance which, observing the development of inner-Party life and the Party’s powerful growth, would not say
that the people who only recently were croaking that our
Party was heading for ruin, did not, in actual fact, knowthe Party, were far removed from it, and were very remi-
niscent of people who ought rightly to be described as
aliens in the Party.
To sum up: our Party is growing; it is forging ahead;
it is learning efficient administration; it is becoming
the most influential organ of the working class. TheLenin Enrolment is a direct indication of this. ( Pro-
longed applause .)
REPLY  TO  THE  DISCUSSION
May  27
 
 
Comrades, I found no objections in any of the speeches
to the Central Committee’s organisational report. I take
this to mean that the congress agrees with the conclusionsof that report. ( Applause. )
In my report, I deliberately refrained from discussing
our inner-Party disagreements. I did not touch on thembecause I did not wish to re-open wounds which, so it
seemed, had healed. But since Trotsky and Preobrazhen-
sky have touched on these questions, making a num-ber of inaccurate statements and throwing down a
challenge—it would not be right to be silent. In this
situation silence would not be understood.
Comrade Krupskaya has objected here to repetition
of the debate on our disagreements. I am absolutely
opposed to such repetition and that is precisely whyI did not touch on the disagreements in my report. But
since the comrades of the opposition have brought up
the subject and have thrown down a challenge, we haveno right to be silent.
In speaking of our disagreements, both Trotsky and
Preobrazhensky try to focus the attention of the con-gress on one resolution, that of December 5. They forget
that there is another resolution as well, on the results
of the discussion.43 They forget that there has been a
Party conference and that the Central Committee’s De-
cember 5 resolution was followed by a new wave of dis-cussion, the results of which were appraised in a special
resolution of the Thirteenth Conference. They forget that
hushing up the Thirteenth Conference cannot but haveits repercussions for the opposition.
I draw the attention of the congress to the fact that
the conference adopted one resolution on economic pol-icy and two on Party affairs. Why? There was one reso-
lution, endorsed by the entire Party and adopted by the
Central Committee on December 5, and then it wasfound necessary to adopt a second resolution on the same
question, on the petty-bourgeois deviation. Why this
affliction? What is the explanation? The explanationis that the whole discussion went through two periods.
The first concluded with the unanimously adopted res-
olution of December 5, and the second with the reso-lution on the petty-bourgeois deviation. At that time,
i.e., in the first period, we believed that the December 5
resolution would probably put an end to the controversyin the Party, and that was why last time, in my report
at the Thirteenth Conference, when dealing with this
period, I said that, if the opposition had so wished, theDecember 5 resolution could have terminated the struggle
within the Party. That was what I said, and that was
what we all believed. But the point is that the discus-sion was not brought to a close with that period. After
the December 5 resolution Trotsky’s letters appeared—
a new platform which raised new issues; and this usheredin a fresh wave of discussion, more violent than the pre-
ceding one. It was this that destroyed the opportunity
of establishing peace in the Party. This was the second
period, which the oppositionists now try to hush up and
by-pass.
The point is that there is a vast difference between
the discussion in the second period and that in the first,
where the discussion found its reflection in the December 5
resolution. That resolution did not raise the question
of a degeneration of the cadres. Trotsky, with whom
we jointly framed that resolution, did not so much ashint at a degeneration of the cadres. Evidently, he was
saving this additional issue for his later pronouncements.
Further, the December 5 resolution does not raise thequestion of the student youth being the truest barome-
ter. This question, too, Trotsky was apparently keeping
in reserve for fresh discussion pronouncements. In theDecember 5 resolution there is nothing of the tendency
to attack the apparatus, nor of the demands for punitive
measures against the Party apparatus, about whichTrotsky spoke at such length in his subsequent letters.
Lastly, in the December 5 resolution there is not even a
hint about groups being necessary, although this ques-tion, the question of groups, is one on which Trotsky
spoke at great length in his subsequent letters.
There you have the immense difference between the
stand taken by the opposition prior to December 5 and
the stand its leaders took after December 5.
Now Trotsky and Preobrazhensky try to hush up
and hide their second platform, the one that figured
in the second period of the discussion, in the belief, evi-
dently, that they can outwit the Party. No, you will notsucceed! You cannot deceive the congress with your
none-too-clever stratagems and diplomacy. I do not
doubt that the congress will state its opinion both on
the first stage of the discussion, summed up in the De-
cember 5 resolution, and on the second stage, summedup in the conference resolution on the petty-bourgeois
deviation.
These two resolutions are two parts of a single whole—
the discussion. And whoever thinks he can deceive
the congress by confusing these two parts is mistaken.
The Party has matured; its political understanding isat a higher level, and it is not to be tricked by diplo-
macy. This the opposition fails to understand, and that
is the sum and substance of its mistake.
Let us examine who has proved right on the issues
raised in the opposition platform after December 5. Who
has proved right on the four new issues brought up inTrotsky’s letters?
First issue—degeneration of the cadres. We have
all demanded and continue to demand that facts beadduced to prove that the cadres are degenerating. But
no facts have been produced, nor could they be, because
no such facts exist. And when we looked into the matterproperly we all found that there was no degeneration, but
that there was undoubtedly a deviation towards petty-
bourgeois policy on the part of certain opposition leaders.Who, then, has proved to be right? Not the opposition,
it would seem.
Second issue—the student youth which, supposedly,
is the truest barometer. Who has proved right on this
point? Again, it would seem, not the opposition. If we
look at the growth of our Party in this period, at the ad-mission of 200,000 new members, it follows that the
barometer must be sought not among the student youth,
but in the ranks of the proletariat, and that the Party
must orientate itself not on the student youth, but
on the proletarian core of the Party. Two hundred thou sand
new members—that is the barometer. Here, too, the
opposition has proved wrong.
Third issue—punitive measures against the appara-
tus, attack on the Party apparatus. Who has proved
right? Again, not the opposition. It furled its flag
of attack on the apparatus and passed to the defensive.All of you here have seen how it tried to wriggle out,
how it beat a disorderly retreat in the fight against
the Party apparatus.
Fourth issue—factions and groups. Trotsky has an-
nounced that he is resolutely opposed to groups. That is
all well and good. But if we must go into the history ofthe issue, then allow me to re-establish certain facts.
In December a sub-commission of the Party Central
Committee framed the resolution published on Decem-ber 5. This sub-commission consisted of three members:
Trotsky, Kamenev, Stalin. Have you noticed that there
is no mention of groups in the December 5 resolution?It deals with the prohibition of factions but says nothing
about prohibiting groups. There is only a reference to
the well-known Tenth Congress resolution on Partyunity. How is this to be explained? Was it an accident?
No, it was not. Kamenev and I firmly insisted on the
prohibition of groups. Trotsky protested against theirprohibition, and his protest was tantamount to an ulti-
matum, for he declared that in such a case he could
not vote for the resolution. And so we confined ourselvesto a reference to the Tenth Congress resolution, which
Trotsky, apparently, had not read at the time, and
which provides not only for the prohibition of factions,
but for the prohibition of groups as well. ( Laughter,
applause. ) At that time Trotsky was in favour of freedom
of groups. At this congress he has praised the December 5
resolution. But in his letter to the R.C.P.(B.) Central
Committee of December 9, that is four days after theadoption of the resolution on Party affairs, Trotsky
wrote: “I am especially alarmed by the purely formal
attitude of the Political Bureau members on the questionof groups and factional formations.” What do you think
of that? Here is a man who extols the resolution but who,
it turns out, is especially alarmed in his soul by the Po-litical Bureau’s attitude on the question of groups and
factions. This does not seem to indicate that he was then
in favour of prohibiting groups. No, Trotsky at that timewas in favour of the formation and freedom of groups.
Further, who does not remember the resolution Preo-
brazhensky submitted in Moscow, demanding that thequestion of factions, which had been decided by the
Tenth Party Congress, be given a more precise formu-
lation in the sense of removing some of the restrictions?Here in Moscow, everyone remembers this. And is there
anyone of you who does not remember the newspaper
articles in which Preobrazhensky demanded that werevive the order of things which existed in the Party
at the time of the Brest Peace? Yet we know that in the
Brest period the Party was compelled to permit theexistence of factions—as we all know very well. And who
does not remember that at the Thirteenth Conference,
when I proposed the simplest thing—to remind the Partymembership of point seven of the resolution on unity,
on the prohibition of groups—who does not remember
how all the oppositionists raged, insisting that this point
should not be introduced? Consequently, on this issue
the opposition’s attitude has been wholly and entirelyone of freedom for groups. It thought that it could lull
the vigilance of the Party by declaring that it was de-
manding freedom not for factions, but for groups. Iftoday we are told that the opposition is against groups,
that is all well and good. But this certainly cannot be
called an offensive on their part: it is a disorderly retreat,it is a sign that the Central Committee was right on this
issue too.
After this review of the facts, permit me, comrades,
to say a few words on certain fundamental mistakes made
by Trotsky and Preobrazhensky in their utterances on
questions of Party organisation.
Trotsky has said that the essence of democracy can
be reduced to the question of generations. That is wrong,
wrong in principle. The essence of democracy can by nomeans be reduced to that. The question of generations
is a secondary one. The life of our Party, and figures
relating to it, show that the younger generation of theParty is being drawn step by step into the cadres—the
cadres are being extended from the ranks of the youth.
That always has been, and will continue to be, the Party’sline. Only those who regard our cadres as a closed
entity, as a privileged caste which does not admit new
members to its ranks; only those who regard our cadresas a sort of officer corps of the old regime which looks
down on all other Party members as “beneath its dignity,”
only those who want to drive a wedge between the cadresand the younger Party members—only they can make the
question of generations in the Party the pivotal question
of democracy. The essence of democracy lies not in the
question of generations, but in the question of independ-
ent activity, of members of the Party taking an activepart in its leadership. It is in this way, and in this way
alone, that the question of democracy can be presented
if, of course, we are discussing not a party with formaldemocracy, but a genuinely proletarian party linked by
indissoluble bonds with the mass of the working class.
The second question. The greatest danger, Trotsky
says, is bureaucratisation of the Party apparatus. This
too is wrong. The danger resides not in this, but in the
possibility of the Party’s actual isolation from the non-Party masses. You can have a party with a democrat-
ically constructed apparatus, but if the Party is not
linked with the working class this democracy will beworthless, it won’t be worth a brass farthing. The Party
exists for the class. So long as it is linked with the class,
maintains contact with it, enjoys prestige and respectamong the non-Party masses, it can exist and develop
even if it has bureaucratic shortcomings. But in the
absence of all this the Party is doomed, no matterwhat kind of Party organisation you build—bureau-
cratic or democratic. The Party is part of the class; it
exists for the class, not for itself.
The third contention, also erroneous in principle:
the Party, Trotsky says, makes no mistakes. That is
wrong. The Party not infrequently makes mistakes. Ilyichtaught us to teach the Party, on the basis of its own mis-
takes, how to exercise correct leadership. If the Party made
no mistakes there would be nothing from which to teachit. It is our task to detect these mistakes, to lay bare
their roots and to show the Party and the working class
how we came to make them and how we should avoid
repeating them in future. The development of the Party
would be impossible without this. The development ofParty leaders and cadres would be impossible without
this, for they are developed and trained in the struggle to
combat and overcome their mistakes. It seems to me thatthis statement of Trotsky’s is a kind of compliment,
accompanied by an attempt—an unsuccessful one it is
true—to jeer at the Party.
Next—about Preobrazhensky. He spoke of the purge.
Preobrazhensky feels that the purge is a weapon used
by the Party majority against the opposition. Evidentlyhe does not approve of the methods employed in the
purge. This is a question of principle. Preobrazhensky’s
profound mistake is his failure to understand that theParty cannot strengthen its ranks without periodical
purges of unstable elements. Comrade Lenin taught us
that the Party can strengthen itself only if it steadilyrids itself of the unstable elements which penetrate,
and will continue to penetrate, its ranks. We would be
going against Leninism if we were to repudiate Partypurges in general. As for the present purge, what is wrong
with it? It is said that individual mistakes have been
made. Certainly they have. But has there ever been abig undertaking that was free from individual mistakes?
Never. Individual mistakes may and will occur; but in
the main the purge is correct. I have been told withwhat fear and trepidation some non-proletarian elements
among the intellectuals and office employees awaited
the purge. Here is a scene that was described to me:a group of people are sitting in an office, waiting to be
called before the purging commission. It is a Party unit
in a Soviet institution. In another room is the purging
commission. One of the members of the Party unit comes
rushing out of the commission room, perspiring. He isasked what happened, but all he can say is: “Let me
get my breath, let me get my breath. I’m all in.”
(Laughter .) The purge may be bad for the kind of people
who suffer and perspire like that; but for the Party it
is a very good thing. ( Applause .) We still have, unfor-
tunately, a certain number of Party members receiving1,000 or 2,000 rubles a month, who are considered to be
Party members but who forget that the Party exists.
I know of a Party unit at one of the Commissariats, inwhich men of this type work. The members of this unit
include several chauffeurs, and the unit selected one of
them to sit on the purging commission. This evoked nolittle grumbling, such as saying that a chauffeur should
not be allowed to purge Soviet big-wigs. There have
been cases like that here in Moscow. Party members whohave evidently lost contact with the Party are indignant,
they cannot stomach the fact that “some chauffeur”
will put them through the purge. Such Party mem-bers must be educated and re-educated, sometimes by
expulsion from the Party. The chief thing about the
purge is that it makes people of this kind feel that thereexists a master, that there is the Party, which can call
them to account for all sins committed against it. It
seems to me absolutely necessary that this master gothrough the Party ranks with a broom every now and
again. ( Applause .)
Preobrazhensky says: Your policy is correct, but
your organisational line is wrong, and therein lies the
basis of the possible ruin of the Party. That is nonsense,
comrades. That a party with a correct policy should per-
ish because of shortcomings in its organisational line is
something that does not happen. It never works outthat way. The foundation of Party life and Party work
resides not in the organisational forms it adopts or
may adopt at any given moment, but in its policy, inits home and foreign policy. If the Party’s policy
is correct, if it has a correct approach to the political
and economic issues that are of decisive significance forthe working class—then organisational defects cannot be
of decisive significance; its policy will pull it through.
That has always been the case, and will continue to be soin the future. People who fail to understand this are
bad Marxists; they forget the very rudiments of Marxism.
Was the Party right on the issues involved in the
discussion—on the economic questions and on the ques-
tions of Party affairs? Anyone who wants to obtain
an immediate, concise answer to that should turn to theParty and the mass of the workers and put the ques-
tion: how does the mass of non-Party workers regard the
Party? Is it sympathetic or unsympathetic? If the mem-bers of the opposition were to put the question that way,
if they were to ask themselves: how does the working
class regard the Party—is it sympathetic or unsym-pathetic?—they would realise that the Party is on the
correct path. The Lenin Enrolment is the key to an
understanding of everything involved in the results of thediscussion. If the working class sends 200,000 of its mem-
bers into the Party, selecting the most upright and
staunch, this signifies that such a party is invinciblebecause it has, in fact, become the elected organ of the
working class, one that enjoys the undivided confidence
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

of the working class. Such a party will live and strike
fear into its enemies; such a party cannot disintegrate.
The trouble with our opposition is that it did notapproach Party problems and the results of the discus-
sion from the standpoint of the Marxist, who appraises
the weight of the Party in the light of its influenceamong the masses—for the Party exists for the
masses, and not vice versa—but approached them
from the formal standpoint, from the standpoint of“pure” apparatus. To find a simple and direct clue
to understanding the results of the discussion one
must turn not to this babbling about the apparatus,but to the 200,000 who have joined the Party and
who have demonstrated its profound democracy. Refer-
ences to democracy in the speeches of the oppositionistsare just empty talk. But when the working class
sends 200,000 new members into the Party, that is
real democracy. Our Party has become the electedorgan of the working class. Point me out another such
party. You cannot point one out because so far there
does not exist one. But, strange as it may seem, evensuch a powerful party as ours is not to the liking of the
oppositionists. Where on this earth will they find a bet-
ter one? I am afraid they will have to migrate to Mars
in their search for a better party. ( Applause .)
The last question—that of the opposition’s petty-
bourgeois deviation; the assertion that the charge of apetty-bourgeois deviation is unjust. Is that true? No, it
is not. How did the charge arise, what is the foundation
for it? It is founded on the fact that in their unbridledagitation for democracy in the Party the oppositionists
have unwittingly, without so desiring, served as a sort
of mouthpiece for that new bourgeoisie which does not
care a hang about democracy in our Party, but which
would like, and very much like, to obtain democracyfor itself in the country. The section of the Party which
has raised such a clamour over questions of democracy
has unwittingly served as a mouthpiece and vehiclefor the agitation in the country that emanates from the
new bourgeoisie and aims at weakening the dictatorship,
at “broadening” the Soviet constitution and at re-establishing political rights for the exploiters. That is
the mainspring and secret why members of the opposi-
tion, who undoubtedly love the Party and so on andso forth, have without themselves noticing it become a
mouthpiece for elements outside the Party, elements
which seek to weaken and disintegrate the dictatorship.
No wonder the sympathies of the Mensheviks and
Socialist-Revolutionaries are with the opposition. Is
that accidental? No, it is not. The alignment of forcesinternationally is such that every attempt to weaken
the authority of our Party and the stability of the
dictatorship in our country will inevitably be seized uponby the enemies of the revolution as a definite gain for
them, irrespective of whether such attempts are made
by our opposition or by the Socialist-Revolutionariesand Mensheviks. Whoever fails to understand this, fails
to grasp the logic of factional struggle within our Party,
fails to realise that the outcome of this struggle dependsnot on personalities and desires, but on the results pro-
duced in the sum total of the struggle between the
Soviet and anti-Soviet elements. That is the basis of thefact that in the opposition we are dealing with a petty-
bourgeois deviation.
Lenin once said about Party discipline and the unity
of our ranks: “Whoever weakens in the least the iron
discipline of the Party of the proletariat (especially dur-ing the time of its dictatorship), actually aids the bour-
geoisie against the proletariat” (see V ol. XXV , p. 190).
Is there any need to prove, after this, that the comradesof the opposition, by their attacks on the Moscow organ-
isation and the Party’s Central Committee, have been
weakening Party discipline and undermining the founda-tions of the dictatorship, for the Party is the basic core
of the dictatorship?
That is why I think that the Thirteenth Conference
was right in declaring that we are dealing here with a
deviation towards petty-bourgeois policy. This is not
as yet a petty-bourgeois policy. By no means! At theTenth Congress, Lenin explained that a deviation is
something as yet unconsummated, something that has
not assumed definite shape. And if you, comrades ofthe opposition, do not persist in this petty-bourgeois
deviation, in these small mistakes—everything will be
rectified and the Party’s activities will go forward.But if you do persist, the petty-bourgeois deviation may
develop into a petty-bourgeois policy. Consequently,
it all depends on you, comrades of the opposition.
What are the conclusions? The conclusions are that
we must continue to conduct inner-Party work on the
basis of the complete unity of the Party. Look at thiscongress, at its solid support of the Central Committee
line—there you have Party unity. The opposition repre-
sents an insignificant minority in our Party. That ourParty is united, that it will continue to be united, is
demonstrated by the present congress, by its unanim-
ity and solidity. Whether we will have unity with that
insignificant group in the Party known as the opposi-
tion, depends on them. We want to work in harmony withthe opposition. Last year, at the height of the discussion,
we said that joint work with the opposition was necessary.
We re-affirm this here today. But whether this unity willbe achieved, I do not know, for in future unity will
depend entirely on the opposition. In the present in-
stance unity comes as the result of the interaction of twofactors, the Party majority and minority. The majority
wants united activity. Whether the minority sincerely
wants it, I do not know. That depends entirely on thecomrades of the opposition.
Conclusion. The conclusion is that we must endorse
the Thirteenth Conference resolutions and approve theactivity of the Central Committee. I do not doubt that
the congress will endorse these resolutions and approve
the political and organisational activity of the CentralCommittee. ( Prolonged applause .)
THE  RESULTS  OF  THE  THIRTEENTH
CONGRESS  OF  THE  R.C.P. (B.)
Report  Delivered  at  the  C.C.,  R.C.P.(B.)
Courses  for  Secretaries  of  Uyezd  Party  Committees
June  17, 1924
Comrades, I do not propose to give a detailed anal-
ysis of the Thirteenth Congress resolutions. There arequite a number of them—they make up a whole pamphlet
—and it is hardly possible to examine them now in de-
tail, the more so because neither you nor I can spare thetime just now. I think, therefore, it will be more expe-
dient to outline and explain the basic starting points
in order to facilitate your own study of the resolutionswhen you return home.
And so, a detailed study of the Thirteenth Congress
resolutions will reveal that the manifold questions theydeal with can be reduced to four basic questions which
run through all the resolutions like a red thread.
What are these questions?The first basic question, or first group of questions,
concerns the external position of our Republic, the con-
solidation of its international position.
The second basic question, or second group of ques-
tions, concerns the bond between state industry and
the peasant economy, the alliance between the proletariatand peasantry.
The third group of questions embraces the education
and re-education of the working masses in the spirit ofthe proletarian dictatorship and socialism. Included in
this group are such questions as those of the state appa-
ratus, work among the peasants, among the women toilers
and among the youth.
Lastly, the fourth group of questions concerns the
Party itself, its internal life, its existence and develop-
ment.
I shall deal especially, in the concluding part of my
report, with the tasks of Party workers in the uyezds in
connection with the Thirteenth Congress decisions.
FOREIGN  AFFAIRS
What new developments in Soviet Russia’s interna-
tional position has the past year produced? What basic,
new developments in the international field must be
taken into account in proceeding from the past year tothe new—developments which the Thirteenth Congress
could not but take into account?
These new developments consist, firstly, in the fact
that during the past year we have had occasion to witness
a number of attempts at the open fascisation of internal
policy in the West-European countries; attempts thathave proved futile and miscarried. Leaving aside Italy,
where fascism is disintegrating, attempts to fascise Euro-
pean policy in the main countries, France and Britain,have miscarried, and the authors of these attempts,
Poincaré and Curzon, have, to put it plainly, come a
cropper, they have been thrown overboard.
This is the first new development of the past year.
The second new development of the past year was
a series of attempts by the bellicose imperialists of Brit-ain and France to isolate our country, attempts that
were defeated. There can hardly be any doubt that Poin-
caré’s numerous machinations against the Soviet Union,
and Curzon’s notorious ultimatum, were intended toisolate our country. But what happened? Instead of
isolation, the result has been the factual recognition of
the Soviet Union. More, instead of isolation of the So-viet Union, the result has been isolation of the isolators,
the resignation of Poincaré and Curzon. Our country has
proved to be a more weighty factor than some of theolder imperialist politicians were prone to believe.
This is the second new development of the past year
in the sphere of foreign policy.
What is the explanation of all this?
Some are inclined to attribute it to the wisdom of
our policy. I do not deny that our policy has been, ifnot wise, at any rate correct, and this has been confirmed
by the Thirteenth Congress. But neither the wisdom
nor the correctness of our policy can be regarded as suffi-cient explanation. The explanation lies not so much in
the correctness of our policy, as in the situation that
has arisen in Europe of late, and which determined thesuccess of our policy. Three circumstances should be
noted in this connection.
Firstly. The impotence of the imperialist powers to
cope with the results of their war victories and to es-
tablish anything resembling a tolerable peace in Europe.
They are incapable of developing further without plun-dering the defeated countries and colonies, without con-
flicts and clashes among themselves over division of the
loot. Hence, the new armaments. Hence, the danger ofanother war. But the masses do not want war, for they
have not yet forgotten the sacrifices they had to make
for the sake of the capitalists’ profits. Hence, the growing
resentment which the policy of bellicose imperialism is
evoking among the peoples.
That is the reason for the inner weakness of imperial-
ism. Why were Curzon and Poincaré thrown out? Because
public opinion regards them as instigators of anotherwar. Because by their frankly bellicose policy they
aroused mass resentment against imperialism generally,
and thereby created a danger for imperialism.
Secondly. The consolidation of Soviet power inside the
country. The capitalist states counted on the collapse of
Soviet power inside the country. Divine truth, the psalmisttells us, is sometimes uttered through the mouths of
infants. Well, if Western imperialism is to be regarded as a
divinity, then it is only natural that it should be unable todo without an infant of its own. And so, it has found one,
in the person of Benes, the not unknown Czechoslovak
Minister of Foreign Affairs. Through him it announcedto the world that there was no need to hurry with the
recognition of the Union of Republics, in view of the
instability of Soviet power, and that since the latter wouldsoon be replaced by a new, bourgeois-democratic govern-
ment, it would be better to “abstain,” for the time being,
from establishing “normal relations” with the SovietUnion. That was how things stood only a short while ago.
But the “truth” of imperialism, proclaimed to the world
through the mouth of its infant, hardly lasted a couple ofmonths, for, as we know, a number of countries soon
abandoned the policy of “abstention” for one of “recogni-
tion.”
44 Why? Because there is no going against the facts,
and the facts are that Soviet power is as firm as a rock.
To begin with, the man in the street, no matter how naive
he may be politically, could not but notice that the
Soviet government is, evidently, more stable than any
bourgeois government, for in these seven years of pro-letarian dictatorship bourgeois governments have come
and gone, but the Soviet government remains. Further,
the man in the street could not but notice our economicprogress, if only from the steady increase of our exports.
Is additional proof required that all these circumstances
speak in favour of the Soviet Union, not against it? Weare accused of conducting propaganda in Western Europe
against capitalism. I must say that there is no need
for us to conduct such propaganda; we do not need it.The very existence of the Soviet regime, its growth,
its material prosperity, its indubitable consolidation,
are all most effective propaganda among the Europeanworkers in favour of Soviet power. Any worker who
comes to the Soviet land and takes a look at our prole-
tarian order of things will not fail to see what Sovietpower is, and what a working class in power is capable
of accomplishing. This is indeed real propaganda, but
propaganda by facts, which has a much greater effecton the worker than oral or printed propaganda. We are
accused of conducting propaganda in the East. That,
too, is nonsense. There is no need for us to conduct prop-aganda in the East. Any citizen of a dependency or
colony has only to come to the Soviet Union and see how
the people run the country, how black and white, Rus-sians and non-Russians, people of every colour of skin,
and of every nationality, have joined together in the
work of running a great country, to convince himselfthat ours is the only land where the brotherhood of nations
is not a phrase, but a reality. With such propaganda by
facts as the existence of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, we require no printed or oral propaganda.
Thirdly. The increasing weight and prestige of the
Soviet government, its mounting popularity among themasses in the capitalist countries, due first and fore-
most to the fact that ours is the only country in the
world which is capable of pursuing, and actually is pur-suing, a policy of peace—pursuing this policy not hypo-
critically, but honestly and openly, resolutely and con-
sistently. Today everyone, both friend and foe, admitsthat ours is the only country that can be rightly called
the buttress and standard-bearer of the policy of peace
throughout the world. Does it need to be proved that thiscircumstance was bound to increase support and sym-
pathy for the Soviet Union among the European masses?
Have you noticed that certain European rulers are en-deavouring to build their careers on “friendship” with
the Soviet Union, that even such of them as Mussolini
are not averse, on occasion, to “profit” from this “friend-ship”? This is a direct indication of the very real
popularity the Soviet government has won among the
broad masses in the capitalist countries. More than toanything else, however, the Soviet government owes its
popularity to the policy of peace it has been honestly
and courageously pursuing amid the difficult conditionsof capitalist encirclement.
These, in general outline, are the factors which have
determined the success of our foreign policy in the pastyear.
The Thirteenth Congress in its resolution has
approved the Central Committee’s policy on foreign af-fairs. What does this imply? It implies that the congress
has bound the Party to continue its policy of peace,
its policy of determined struggle against another war,
of ruthlessly exposing each and every advocate andabettor of new armaments and new conflicts.
QUESTIONS  OF  THE  BOND  BETWEEN  TOWN
AND  COUNTRY
What is meant by the bond between town and
country? It means constant contact, constant exchange,between town and country, between our industry and
the peasant economy, exchange of the products of our
industry for the food and raw materials produced by thepeasant economy. The peasant economy cannot thrive,
cannot exist, without selling its foodstuffs and raw
materials in the urban market and obtaining from thecities, in exchange, the manufactures and implements
it requires. Similarly, state industry cannot develop
without selling its products in the peasant market andobtaining from the countryside supplies of food and raw
materials. Consequently, the home market, and above
all the peasant market, the peasant economy, is the life-source of our socialist industry. For that reason the
question of the bond between town and country is
one that involves the existence of our industry, theexistence of the proletariat itself; it is a question of
life or death for our Republic, a question of the victory
of socialism in our country.
We did not succeed in effecting this bond, this con-
stant contact between town and country, between in-
dustry and the peasant economy, through direct exchangeof industrial goods for peasant-farm produce. We did
not succeed because of our low industrial development,
because we did not have a ramified supply network
covering the entire country, and because following thewar our economy as a whole was in a state of disruption.
That is why we were obliged to introduce what is known
as the New Economic Policy, i.e., we were obliged to pro-claim freedom of trade, free circulation of commodities,
to permit capitalism, to mobilise the efforts of millions
of peasants and small proprietors so as to create a flowof goods in the country and promote trade, in order
subsequently, after gaining control of the key positions
in trade, to build up the bond between industry and thepeasant economy through trade. That is what Lenin
called the roundabout method of building up the bond—
not directly, not by means of direct exchange of peasant-farm produce for industrial goods, but through the me-
dium of trade.
The task is, by utilising the efforts of millions of
small proprietors, to gain control of trade, to bring the
chief supply channels of town and country into the
hands of the state and the co-operatives, and in this wayto establish uninterrupted contact, an indissoluble bond,
between industry and the peasant economy.
It would be wrong to say that this task is beyond our
capacity. Wrong because the proletariat, being in power,
possesses all the chief instruments, so to speak, required
for establishing the bond between town and country byroundabout means, through trade. Firstly, the prole-
tariat holds state power. Secondly, it owns industry.
Thirdly, it controls credit, and credit is a potent forcein the hands of the state. Fourthly, it has its own trad-
ing apparatus, good or bad, but at any rate an apparatus
that is developing and gaining strength. Lastly, it pos-
sesses certain commodity stocks which can be thrown
onto the market from time to time in order to curb orneutralise market fluctuations, influence prices, and
so on. The workers’ state has all these means at its com-
mand and for that reason it cannot be said that estab-lishing the bond between town and country through
trade is beyond our capacity.
That is how matters stand with regard to organising
the bond between town and country and the possibilities
for its establishment.
And so, what new and significant developments has
the past year produced from the standpoint of establish-
ing the bond between town and country?
What new materials did the Thirteenth Congress
have to deal with when framing its decisions on the
bond?
The year’s new developments in this sphere lie in
the fact that in our practical work we have for the first
time been confronted with a broad struggle, waged on
a large scale, between the socialist and private capital-ist elements within our national economy and, con-
sequently, have for the first time approached the ques-
tion of the bond in a practical and very concrete way.Questions of the bond and of trade appeared before us
no longer as questions of theory, but as vital questions of
immediate practice, requiring urgent solution.
You will recall that already at the Eleventh Con-
gress Lenin said
45 that capture of the market by the state
and the co-operatives, and gaining control of the basicchannels of trade, would not be a matter of peaceful
work, but would assume the form of struggle between
the socialist and the private capitalist elements; that
it would assume the form of fierce rivalry between these
two opposite elements in our national economy. Nowthis struggle has flared up. It has made itself evident
mainly in two spheres: trade between town and country,
and credit, chiefly in the countryside.
What have been the results of this struggle?
Firstly. Private capital, we found, had penetrated
not into industry, where the risk is greater and the turn-over of capital slower, but into trade, the very sphere
which, as Lenin said, in our transition period constitutes
the basic link in a chain of processes. And havingpenetrated into trade, private capital entrenched itself
there to such an extent that it controlled about 80 per
cent of the country’s entire retail trade, and about 50 percent of all its wholesale and retail trade. This is due to
the fact that our trading and co-operative organisations
were young and not yet properly organised; to theincorrect policy of our syndicates, which abused their
monopoly position and forced up commodity prices;
to the weakness of our Commissariat of Internal Trade,whose function it is to regulate trade in the interests of
the state, and, lastly, to the instability of the Soviet
currency then in circulation, which hit mainly at thepeasant and forced down his purchasing capacity.
Secondly. Rural credit, we found, was entirely in
the hands of the kulak and the usurer. The small peasant,having no agricultural implements of his own, was
forced into bondage to the usurer, was compelled to pay
extortionate interest and to tolerate the usurer’s domi-nation without a murmur. This is due to the fact that we
still have no local agricultural credit system capable of
granting the peasant cheap credit and ousting the
usurer; to the fact that the usurer has this field entirely
to himself.
Thus we see that the merchant and the usurer have
wedged themselves in between the state, on the one hand,
and the peasant economy, on the other, with the resultthat the bond between socialist industry and the peasant
economy has proved more difficult to organise, and in
fact has not been properly organised. The summer market-ing crisis last year was an expression of this difficulty
and lack of proper organisation.
Already then, even before the congress, the Party
took steps to overcome the marketing crisis and lay the
foundation for a system of agricultural credit. A new,
stable currency was introduced, which improved the sit-uation. Commodity stocks were put on the market to
bring down prices, and this likewise had a favourable
effect. The Commissariat of Internal Trade was reor-ganised in a way that ensured successful struggle against
private capital. The question was raised of reorgan-
ising the work of the trade and co-operative bodieswith a view to cementing the bond between town and
country. The marketing crisis was, in the main, elim-
inated.
But the Party could not confine itself to these meas-
ures. It was the task of the Thirteenth Congress to consid-
er the question of the bond anew in all its implicationsand to work out the basic lines for solving it in the new
situation created after the marketing crisis had been
eliminated.
What did the Thirteenth Congress decide on this
score?
Firstly. The congress called for a further expansion
of industry, primarily of light industry, and also metals,
for it is clear that with our present stocks of manufac-tured goods we cannot satisfy the peasant’s hunger for
commodities. This apart from growing unemployment,
which makes industrial expansion imperative. The fur-ther expansion of industry is, therefore, a question of life
or death (see the congress resolution on the Central Com-
mittee’s report
46).
Secondly. The congress called for a further expansion
of peasant farming, for assistance to the peasants in
extending crop areas. This, too, is necessary to strength-en the bond, for it is clear that the peasantry is interested
in meeting not only the requirements of our industry, of
course in exchange for manufactures, but also the require-ments of the foreign market, of course in exchange for
machines. Hence, the further expansion of peasant farm-
ing as an immediate task of Party policy (see the resolu-tion on “Work in the Countryside”
47).
Thirdly. The congress endorsed the formation of the
People’s Commissariat of Internal Trade and made itthe principal task of all our trading and co-operative
organisations to combat private capital, gain control
of the market, and oust private capital from the sphereof trade by economic measures, by reducing commodity
prices and improving the quality of goods, by manoeuvring
with commodity stocks, utilising preferential credits,etc. (see the resolutions on “Internal Trade” and on the
“Co-operatives”
48).
Fourthly. The congress raised and decided the very
important question of agricultural credit. The question
concerns not only the Central Agricultural Bank, or
even the gubernia agricultural credit committees, but
chiefly the organisation of a network of local credit co-
operatives in the uyezds and volosts. It is a questionof democratising credit, of making agricultural credit
available to the peasant, of replacing the extortionate
credit of the usurer by cheap state credit, and of oustingthe usurer from the countryside. This is a highly impor-
tant question for the whole of our economy, and unless
it is solved there can be no really durable bond betweenthe proletariat and the peasantry. That is why the
Thirteenth Congress devoted special attention to this prob-
lem (see the resolution on “Work in the Countryside”).The Central Committee has secured the appropriation of
40 million rubles to augment the basic capital of the
Agricultural Bank, on the understanding that by anarrangement with the State Bank it will be possible to
increase the amount to 80 million rubles. I believe that
with some exertion of effort the amount can be raisedto 100 million rubles. Certainly this is not very much for
such a giant as our Union; nevertheless it will do some-
thing to help the peasant to improve his farming and toundermine bondage to the usurer. I have already spoken
of the importance of local peasant credit co-operatives
for the small peasants, for the bond between the peasantryand the workers’ state. But the local credit co-operatives
can be of assistance not only to the peasant. Under the
proper conditions, they can become a most valuablesource not only of state assistance to the peasant, but
also of peasant assistance to the state. Indeed, if we devel-
op a ramified network of local agricultural credit co-op-eratives in the uyezds and volosts, and if these institutions
enjoy prestige among the peasant masses, they can
engage not only in credit, but in debit operations, too;
in other words, the peasants will not only come to them
for state loans, but will deposit money in them as well.It should not be difficult to visualise that if these local
credit institutions develop favourably they can become
a source of substantial assistance to the state by thepeasant millions, a source with which no foreign loan
can compare. As you see, the congress did not err in devot-
ing special attention to the organisation of cheaprural credit.
Fifthly. The congress re-affirmed the inviolability of
our monopoly of foreign trade. I do not think thereis any need to explain the importance of the foreign trade
monopoly for our industry and agriculture as well as
for the bond between the two. Its cardinal significancerequires no fresh proof (see the resolution on the Central
Committee’s report).
Sixthly. The congress endorsed the need to increase
our exports in general, and the export of grain in par-
ticular. This decision, too, I believe, requires no com-
ment (see the resolution on the Central Committee’sreport).
Seventhly. The congress resolved that every measure
be taken to complete the carrying through of the cur-
rency reform,
49 which has facilitated trade and the
establishment of firm ties between industry and the
peasant economy, and to ensure that both centraland local bodies create all the conditions necessary
for this (see the resolution on the Central Committee’s
report).
Such are the slogans issued by the Thirteenth Congress
on the bond between town and country. Their purpose is
to gain control of trade, establish a firm bond between
our industry and the peasant economy and thereby pave
the way for the victory of the socialist elements of ournational economy over the capitalist elements.
QUESTIONS  OF  THE  EDUCATION
AND  RE-EDUCATION  OF  THE  WORKING  MASSES
    One of the essential tasks confronting the Party in
the epoch of the dictatorship of the proletariat is to
re-educate the older generations and educate the newgenerations in the spirit of the proletarian dictatorship
and socialism. The old habits and customs, traditions
and prejudices inherited from the old society are mostdangerous enemies of socialism. They—these traditions
and habits—have a firm grip over millions of working
people; at times they engulf whole strata of the pro-letariat; at times they present a great danger to the very
existence of the proletarian dictatorship. That is why
the struggle against these traditions and habits, theirabsolute eradication in all spheres of our activity, and,
lastly, the education of the younger generations in the
spirit of proletarian socialism, represent immediate tasksfor our Party without the accomplishment of which
socialism cannot triumph. Work to improve the state
apparatus, work in the countryside, work among womentoilers and among the youth—these are the principal
spheres of the Party’s activity in the fulfilment of these
tasks.    a) The struggle to improve the state apparatus . The
congress devoted little time to the question of the state
apparatus. The report of the Central Control Commis-
sion on the fight against defects in the state apparatus
was endorsed without debate. The resolution on “The
Work of the Control Commissions”50 was likewise adopt-
ed without debate. This, I believe, was due to lack of
time and to the great number of questions which the
congress was called upon to consider. But it would beabsolutely wrong to infer from this that the Party does
not regard the question of the state apparatus as one of
key importance. On the contrary, it is a vital issue inall our constructive work. Does the state apparatus func-
tion honestly, or does it indulge in graft; does it exercise
economy in expenditure, or does it squander the nationalwealth; is it guilty of duplicity, or does it serve the state
loyally and faithfully; is it a burden on the working
people, or an organisation that helps them; does it incul-cate respect for proletarian law, or does it corrupt the
people’s minds by disparaging proletarian law; is it
progressing towards transition to a communist societyin which there will be no state, or is it retrogressing to-
wards the stagnant bureaucracy of the ordinary bour-
geois state—these are all questions the correct solution ofwhich cannot but be a matter of decisive importance for
the Party and for socialism. That our state apparatus is
full of defects, that it is cumbersome and expensive andnine-tenths bureaucratic, that its bureaucracy weighs
heavily on the Party and its organisations, hampering
their efforts to improve the state apparatus—theseare things which hardly anyone will doubt. Yet it should
be perfectly clear that, if our state apparatus were to rid
itself of at least some of its basic faults, it could, in thehands of the proletariat, serve as a most valuable instru-
ment for the education and re-education of broad sections
of the population in the spirit of the proletarian dictator-
ship and socialism.
That is why Lenin devoted special attention to im-
proving the state apparatus.
That is why the Party has set up special organisa-
tions of workers and peasants (the reorganised Workers’and Peasants’ Inspection and the enlarged Central Con-
trol Commission) to combat deficiencies in our state
apparatus.
The task is to help the Central Control Commission
and the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection in their diffi-
cult work of improving, simplifying, reducing the costof the state apparatus and bringing a healthier atmos-
phere into it from top to bottom (see the congress res-
olution on “Work of the Control Commissions”)
b) Work in the countryside . This is one of the most
complex and difficult problems of our practical Party
activity. The congress adopted a splendid resolutionon the basic lines of our work in the countryside. One
need only compare this resolution with that of the Eighth
Congress on work in the countryside
51 to appreciate the
Party’s progress in this field. But it would be a mistake
to think that the Thirteenth Congress has given, or could
have given this year, an exhaustive solution to the verycomplicated problem of work in the countryside. Such
questions as the organisational forms of collective farm-
ing; reorganisation of the state farms; proper adjustmentof land tenure, both in the central and border regions;
new forms of organisation of labour in connection with
the activities of the agricultural co-operatives; under-standing of the specific features obtaining in different
regions of our Union, and proper regard for these specific
features in our work—all these questions, for reasons
that will be readily appreciated, could not be exhaustive-
ly settled in the congress resolution. The importance
of that resolution lies in the fact that it charts the basic
lines of our work and contributes to the further study ofthese questions. You probably know that the Central
Committee plenum
52 set up a permanent commission on
work in the countryside for a detailed study of thesequestions.
The focal point of the resolution is the slogan of de-
veloping the co-operative movement among the peasant-ry. This should proceed along three lines: consumers’ co-
operatives, agricultural co-operatives and credit co-op-
eratives. This is one of the surest ways of implanting theidea of collectivism and collective methods, among the
peasantry, among the poor and middle sections of the
peasantry (see the congress resolution on “Work in theCountryside”).
c) Work among women toilers . In my report to the
congress, I remarked on the neglect shown in regard tothis work, which is of extreme, in some cases of deci-
sive, importance to the Party for the training of the
younger generations in the spirit of socialism. There is nopoint, certainly, in repeating here what has already been
said at the congress. I would like only to call your atten-
tion to the fact that, although the congress, unfortu-nately, had no opportunity to discuss activities among
women toilers as a separate item, it adopted a special deci-
sion stating that: “The congress draws the particularattention of the entire Party to the need for intensifying
our activities among working women and peasant women
and for promoting their participation in all Party and
Soviet elected bodies” (see the resolution on the Central
Committee’s report). I think that the next congress will
have to deal with this question specially. In accordancewith the congress decision, the Central Committee plenum
held immediately after the congress instructed the C.C.
Organising Bureau to initiate special measures to raiseour activities among women toilers to the proper level.
d) Work among the youth. The congress devoted par-
ticular attention to work among the youth. Its resolu-tion on the subject is, in my opinion, the most detailed
and exhaustive of all the congress resolutions, and is
therefore of immense value to the Party and to the youth.
The importance of the youth—I am referring to the
working-class and peasant youth—lies in the fact that
it constitutes a most favourable soil for building thefuture, that it represents our country’s future and is the
bearer of that future. If our work in the state apparatus,
among the peasants, among women toilers, is of immenseimportance for overcoming old habits and traditions,
for re-educating  the older generations of working people,
work among the youth, who are more or less free fromthese traditions and habits, assumes inestimable impor-
tance for the education  of new cadres of working people in
the spirit of the proletarian dictatorship and socialism,for here—and this is self-evident—we have an extremely
favourable soil.
From this follows the very great importance of the
Young Communist League and of its offshoot, the
Pioneers.
The Young Communist League is a voluntary organi-
sation of young workers and peasants. The young workers
are its centre, its core; the young peasants—its support.
The basis of the organisation of the youth is the alliance
of the working-class youth and peasant youth. Its tasks
are: to gather around the proletarian core all honest-mind-ed and revolutionary elements among the peasant youth;
to draw its members into all branches of activity—econo-
mic and cultural, military and administrative; to trainthem to be fighters and builders, workers and leaders of
our country (see the resolution on “Work Among the
Youth”
53)
THE  PARTY
There are four questions here: the opposition, the
Lenin Enrolment, democratisation of the Party leader-
ship, theory in general and the propaganda of Leninism
in particular.
a) The opposition . Now that the question of the oppo-
sition has been decided by the congress and the whole
matter, consequently, is settled, one might ask: What isthe opposition, and what, essentially, was the issue
involved in the discussion? I think, comrades, that the
issue was one of life or death for the Party. Perhaps theopposition itself did not realise this, but that is not
the point. The important thing is not what aims partic-
ular comrades or opposition groups set themselves.The important thing is the objective results that are
bound to follow from the actions of such a group. What
does declaring war on the Party apparatus mean? It meansworking to destroy the Party. What does inciting the
youth against the cadres mean? It means working to dis-
integrate the Party. What does fighting for freedom ofgroups mean? It means attempting to demolish the Party,
its unity, What does the effort to discredit the Party
cadres by talk about degeneration mean? It means try-
ing to disrupt the Party, to break its backbone. Yes,
comrades, the issue was one of life or death for the Party.And that, indeed, explains the passion of the discussion.
It also explains the fact, unparalleled in our Party’s his-
tory, that the congress unanimously  condemned the op-
position platform. The gravity of the danger welded the
Party into a solid ring of iron.
It is interesting to trace the history of the opposi-
tion. We can begin with the Seventh Party Congress,
the first after the establishment of Soviet power (in
the early part of 1918). There was an opposition at thatcongress, and it was headed by the same people who led
the opposition at the Thirteenth Congress. The issue
was war or peace, the Brest Peace. At that time the op-position had one quarter of the whole congress on its
side—no mean proportion. No wonder there was talk
then of a split.
Two years later, at the Tenth Congress, the inner-
Party struggle flared up anew, this time over the trade
union issue, and the opposition was headed by the samepeople. The opposition mustered one-eighth of the
congress, which, of course, was less than the quarter it
had before.
Another two years passed, and a new struggle flared
up at the Thirteenth Congress, the one that has just con-
cluded. Here, too, there was an opposition, but it failedto muster a single vote at the congress. This time, as
you see, its showing was a sorry one indeed.
And so, on three occasions the opposition has tried
to wage war against the Party’s basic cadres. The first
time at the Seventh Congress, the second time at the
Tenth, and the third time at the Thirteenth Congress.
It met with defeat on all these occasions, each time los-
ing some of its following and with every new step dimin-ishing the strength of its army.
What do all these facts show? Firstly, that the his-
tory of our Party in these past six years has been one ofprogressive rallying of the majority of our Party around
its basic cadres. Secondly that the opposition’s support-
ers have been steadily breaking away from it to join thebasic core of the Party and swell its ranks. The con-
clusion that follows is this: it is not precluded that
from the opposition, which had no delegates at the Thir-teenth Congress (we do not have proportional repre-
sentation) but which undoubtedly has followers in
the Party, a number of comrades will break away andjoin the basic core of the Party, as has happened in
the past.
What should our policy be with regard to these op-
positionists, or, more precisely, with regard to these
former oppositionists? It should be an exceptionally
comradely one. Every measure must be taken to helpthem to come over to the basic core of the Party and to
work jointly and in harmony with this core.
b) The Lenin Enrolment . I shall not dwell on the fact
that the Lenin Enrolment, that is, the admission into
our Party of 250,000 new members from among the
workers, is evidence of the Party’s profound democracy,of the fact that it actually is the elected organ of the
working class. The importance of the Lenin Enrolment
from this aspect is, of course, tremendous. But that isnot the aspect I should like to discuss today. I wish to
draw your attention to the dangerous infatuation which
has made its appearance in our Party of late in connec-
tion with the Lenin Enrolment. Some say that we should
go further and bring the number of members up to onemillion. Others want to go beyond that figure, maintain-
ing that it would be better to go as far as two millions.
I do not doubt that others are prepared to go furtherstill. This is a dangerous infatuation, comrades. Infatua-
tion has been the cause of the downfall of the world’s
biggest armies; they seized too much and then, beingunable to digest what they had seized, they fell to pieces.
The biggest parties can perish if they yield to infatua-
tion, seize too much and then prove incapable of embrac-ing, digesting what they have captured. Judge for your-
selves. Political illiteracy in our Party is as high as 60
per cent—60 per cent prior to the Lenin Enrolment,and I am afraid that with the Lenin Enrolment it will
be brought up to 80 per cent. Is it not time to call a halt,
comrades? Is it not time to confine ourselves to 800,000members and put the question squarely and sharply of
improving the quality  of the membership, of teaching
the Lenin Enrolment the foundations of Leninism, ofconverting the new members into conscious Leninists?
I think it is time to do that.
c) Democratisation of the Party leadership.  The Lenin
Enrolment testifies to the profound democracy of our
Party, to the proletarian composition of its basic units,
to the undoubted confidence it enjoys among the mil-lions of non-Party people. But these are not the only fea-
tures of democracy in our Party; they make up only one
aspect of democracy. Another aspect is the steady democ-ratisation of the Party leadership. It was pointed out
at the congress that the focus in Party leadership is being
shifted more and more from narrow leading bodies and
bureaus to wider organisations, to the plenums of the
local and central bodies; and that the plenums themselvesare being extended and their composition improved.
You probably know that the congress fully approved
this tendency in the development of our leading organisa-tions. What does all this indicate? It indicates that our
leading organisations are beginning to take root in the
very midst of the proletarian masses. It is interesting totrace the development of our Party’s Central Committee
during the past six years, from the point of view of size
and social composition. At the time of the Seventh Con-gress (1918) the Central Committee consisted of 15 mem-
bers, of whom only one (7 per cent) was a worker, while
intellectuals numbered 14 (93 per cent). That was at theSeventh Congress. Now, after the Thirteenth Congress,
the Central Committee has 54 members, of whom 29
(53 per cent) are workers and 25 (47 per cent) are intellec-tuals. This is a sure sign of the democratisation of the
principal Party leadership.
d) Theory in general and the propaganda of Leninism
in particular.  One of the dangerous shortcomings of our
Party is the decline in the theoretical level of its members.
This is due to the devilish pressure of routine work,which kills the desire for theoretical study and fosters
a certain dangerous disregard—to put it mildly—for ques-
tions of theory. Here are a few examples.
I recently read in a newspaper a report on the Thir-
teenth Congress by one of the comrades (I think it was
Kamenev) which said in so many words that our Party’simmediate slogan was conversion of “ Nepman  Russia”
into socialist Russia. And what is still worse, this strange
slogan was attributed to none other than Lenin him-
self—no more and no less! Yet we know that Lenin did
not say anything of the kind, nor could he have done so,for everyone knows that no such thing as “Nepman”
Russia exists. True, Lenin spoke of “ NEP ” Russia.
But “NEP” Russia (that is, Soviet Russia which is car-rying out the new economic policy) is one thing, and
“Nepman” Russia (that is, a Russia ruled by Nepmen)
is quite another. Does Kamenev appreciate this funda-mental difference? Of course he does. Why then did he
come out with this strange slogan? Because of the usual
disregard for questions of theory, for precise theoreticalformulations. Yet, unless the error is corrected, this
strange slogan is very likely to give rise to a good deal of
misunderstanding in the Party.
Another example. People often say that we have a
“dictatorship of the Party.” Someone will say: I am
for the dictatorship of the Party. I recall that the expres-sion figured in one of our congress resolutions, in fact,
I believe, in a resolution of the Twelfth Congress. This,
of course, was an oversight. Apparently, some comradesthink that ours is a dictatorship of the Party, not of the
working class. But that is sheer nonsense, comrades. If
that contention were right, then Lenin was wrong, forhe taught us that the Soviets implement  the dictatorship,
while the Party guides  the Soviets. Then Lenin was wrong,
for he spoke of the dictatorship of the proletariat, not ofthe dictatorship of the Party. If the contention about
“dictatorship of the Party” were correct, there would
be no need for the Soviets, there would have been nopoint in Lenin, at the Eleventh Congress, speaking of
the necessity to draw a “ distinction  between Party and
Soviet organs.” But from what quarter, and how, has
this nonsense penetrated into our Party? It is the result
of the passion for the “Party principle,” which does somuch harm precisely to the Party principle, without
quotation marks. It is the result of a disregard for ques-
tions of theory, of the habit of putting forward sloganswithout considering them properly beforehand, for very
little thought is required to realise the utter absurdity
of substituting the dictatorship of the Party for the dicta-torship of the class. Does it need proof that this absurd-
ity may well give rise to confusion and misunderstand-
ing in the Party?
Or another example. Everybody knows that during
the discussion one section of our Party succumbed to
the opposition’s anti-Party agitation against the organ-isational principles of Leninism. Any Bolshevik who
has had even the briefest schooling in the theory of Lenin-
ism would have immediately realised that these opposi-tion preachings had nothing in common with Lenin-
ism. However, a section of the Party, as we know,
failed at first to see the opposition in its true colours.Why? Because of this same disregard for theory, be-
cause of the low theoretical level of our Party mem-
bers.
The discussion brought the question of studying
Leninism to the forefront. The death of Lenin made
this question more acute, by heightening the Partymembers’ interest in theory. The Thirteenth Congress
merely reflected this sentiment, when in a number
of resolutions it confirmed the need to study andpropagate Leninism. The task of the Party is to take
advantage of this heightened interest in questions of
theory and do everything to raise, at last, the theo-
retical level of the membership to the proper degree. We
must not forget Lenin’s words that without a clear andcorrect theory, there can be no correct practice.
THE  TASKS  OF  PARTY  WORKERS
IN  THE  UYEZDS
Comrades, it is not accidental that it is to you that
I have come to report on the congress. I have come here not
only because of your invitation, but also because at the
present stage of development the uyezds, and in partic-ular the Party workers in the uyezds, represent the prin-
cipal connecting link between the Party and the peasant-
ry, between town and country. And, as you are wellaware, establishing the bond between town and country
is today the fundamental question of our practical Party
and state activities.
I have already said that establishing the bond be-
tween state industry and the peasant economy must pro-
ceed along three main lines: consumers’ co-operatives,agricultural co-operatives and local credit co-opera-
tives. I have said that these are the three basic channels
through which the bond must be organised. But it wouldbe fanciful to imagine that we shall succeed at once in
linking up industry with the peasant economy directly
on the volost level, by-passing the uyezd. There is noneed to prove that we have neither the forces for this,
nor the skill, nor the funds. Therefore, at this juncture,
the uyezd, the area, remains the pivotal point in build-ing up the bond between town and country. To entrench
ourselves in the sphere of trade there is no need to oust
the very last shopkeeper from the very last volost; all
we need is to convert the uyezd into a base of Soviet
trade, so that all the shopkeepers will be compelledto revolve round the co-operative or Soviet shop in the
uyezd as the planets revolve round the sun. To gain
control in the sphere of credit there is no need at allat the present moment to cover the volosts and villages
with a network of credit co-operatives; it is suffi-
cient to build a base in the uyezd, and the peasants willimmediately begin to break away from the kulak and
usurer. And so on and so forth.
In short, in the near future the uyezd (area) must
be converted into the principal base for organising the
bond between town and country, between the proletariat
and the peasantry.
How quickly this conversion will take place depends
upon you comrades working in the uyezds. There are
some 300 of you now—a veritable army. And it dependsupon you, and your comrades in the uyezds of our country,
to convert the uyezd, as quickly as possible, into the
pivotal point of our Party and state work in establishingthe bond between industry and the peasant economy. I
do not doubt that the uyezd workers will fulfil their
duty to the Party and the country.
Pravda ,  Nos.  136  and  137,
June  19  and  20,  1924
WORKER  CORRESPONDENTS
Interview  With  a  Representative
of  the  Magazine  “Rabochy  Korrespondent ”54
The importance of workers’ participation in the con-
duct of a newspaper lies primarily in the fact that such
participation makes it possible to transform this sharpweapon in the class struggle, as a newspaper is, from a
weapon for the enslavement of the people into a weapon
for their emancipation. Only worker and peasant corre-
spondents  can bring about this great transformation.
Only as an organised  force can worker and peasant
correspondents play, in the course of development of thepress, the part of mouthpiece and vehicle of proletarian
public opinion, of exposer of the defects in Soviet pub-
lic life, and of tireless fighter for the improvement ofour work of construction.
Should worker correspondents be elected at workers’
meetings, or should they be chosen by the editors? Ithink that the second method (choice by the editors) is
more advisable. The underlying principle must be the
correspondent’s independence of the institutions andpersons that, in one way or another, he comes in contact
with in the course of his work. This, however, does not
mean independence of that intangible but constantlyoperating force that is called proletarian public opinion,
of which the worker correspondent must be the vehicle.
Worker and peasant correspondents must not be re-
garded merely as future journalists, or as factory social
workers in the narrow sensa of the term; they are pri-
marily exposers of the defects in our Soviet public life,
fighters for the removal of those defects, commanders ofproletarian public opinion, striving to direct the inex-
haustible forces of this immense factor so that they help
the Party and the Soviet power in the difficult task ofsocialist construction.
This gives rise to the question of educational work
among worker and peasant correspondents. It is, of course,necessary to give worker and peasant correspondents some
grounding in the technique of journalism; but that is not
the main thing. The main thing is that the worker andpeasant correspondents should learn in the course of their
work and acquire that intuition of the journalist-public
worker without which the correspondent cannot fulfilhis mission; and which cannot be implanted by any arti-
ficial measures of training in the technical sense of the
term.
Direct ideological guidance of worker and peasant
correspondents must be exercised by the newspaper edi-
tors, who are linked with the Party. The censorship ofarticles must be concentrated in the hands of the news-
paper editors.
Persecution of worker and peasant correspondents
is barbarous, a survival of bourgeois customs. The news-
paper must undertake to protect its correspondent from
persecution, for it alone is capable of raising a fiercecampaign to expose obscurantism.
I wish Rabochy Korrespondent  every success.
J. Stalin
Rabochy  Korrespondent ,  No.  6,
June  1924
THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY  OF  POLAND
Speech  Delivered  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Polish
Commission  of  the  Comintern  55
July  3,  1924
Comrades, I have not sufficient material at my dis-
posal to enable me to speak as emphatically as some of
those who have spoken here. Nevertheless, on the basisof the material that I did, after all, manage to obtain,
and on the basis of the debate that has taken place here,
I have formed a definite opinion, which I would like toshare with you.
Undoubtedly, the Polish Communist Party is in an
abnormal state. That there is a crisis in the Polish Partyis a fact. It was admitted by Walecki; you have all ad-
mitted it, and it was clearly revealed here, for it was
noted that there is discord in the Central Committee of thePolish Party between practical workers who are members
of the C.C. and the leaders of the C.C. Moreover, the Cen-
tral Committee of the Polish Party itself, at its plenumsof December last year and March this year, admitted in
its resolutions that a number of its actions had been of
an opportunist character and it condemned them withoutmincing words. That seems to be proof enough. I repeat,
all this goes to show that there is undoubtedly a crisis
in the Communist Party of Poland.
What is the cause of this crisis?
The cause lies in certain opportunist transgressions
committed in their practical work by the official leadersof the Communist Party of Poland.
Permit me to quote a few examples confirming this
statement.
The “Russian ” question . Some Polish comrades say
that this is a question of external policy and, as such,
is of no great importance for the Polish Party. Thatis wrong. The “Russian” question is of decisive impor-
tance for the entire revolutionary movement, in the
West as well as in the East. Why? Because Sovietpower in Russia is the base, the bulwark, the haven
of the revolutionary movement all over the world. If
in this base, i.e., in Russia, the Party and the govern-ment begin to waver, it must cause very grave harm
to the entire revolutionary movement throughout the
world.
During the discussion in our R.C.P.(B.) wavering be-
gan in the Party. By its struggle against the Party, the
opposition, which is essentially opportunist, tended toshake, to weaken the Party, and hence, to weaken the
Soviet power itself; for our Party is the ruling party and
the chief guiding factor in the state. It is natural thatwavering within the R.C.P.(B.) could eventually lead
to the wavering, the weakening of the Soviet power itself;
and the wavering of the Soviet power would mean harm tothe revolutionary movement all over the world. Precisely
for this reason, disagreements within the R.C.P.(B.), and
the fate of the R.C.P.(B.) in general, cannot but directlyaffect the fate of the revolutionary movement in other
countries. That is why the “Russian” question, although
an external question for Poland, is one of prime im-
portance for all the Communist Parties, including the
Polish Communist Party.
Well, what was the attitude of the leaders of the
Polish Party towards the “Russian” question? Whom did
they support: the opportunist opposition or the revolu-tionary majority in the R.C.P.(B.)? It is clear to me that
in the first period of the struggle within the R.C.P.(B.),
the struggle against the opportunist opposition, the lead-ers of the Polish Party unambiguously supported that
opposition. I shall not delve into the minds of Warski
or Walecki; what Warski was thinking when he wrotethe well-known resolution of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of Poland in support of the opposi-
tion in the R.C.P.(B.) is of no importance for me. Itis not people’s intentions, but the objective results of
that resolution that are of primary importance for me.
And the objective results of that resolution are that itbrings grist to the opposition’s mill. That resolution sup-
ported the opportunist wing of the R.C.P.(B.). That is
the whole point. At the time when the Central Committeeof the Polish Party adopted that resolution and sent it
to the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) it represented
the Polish branch of the opportunist opposition withinthe R.C.P.(B.). If we regard the opposition within the
R.C.P.(B.) as a sort of business firm having branches
in different countries, we can say that at that time theCommunist Party of Poland was the Polish branch of
that firm. That is the essence of the opportunist transgres-
sions on the “Russian” question committed by the leadersof the Polish Party. It is sad, but, unfortunately, it is
a fact.
The German question . Next to the “Russian” question,
this one is of the greatest importance, firstly, because
Germany is more pregnant with revolution than anyother country in Europe; and secondly, because a revo-
lutionary victory in Germany would be victory in the
whole of Europe. If a revolutionary upheaval commencesanywhere in Europe it will be in Germany. Only Germany
can take the initiative in this matter, and the victory of
the revolution in Germany will ensure the victory of theinternational revolution.
You know that last year a struggle flared up within
the Communist Party of Germany between its revolu-tionary majority and opportunist minority. You know
how greatly a victory of the Left or of the Right wing
of the German Communist Party would affect the wholecourse of the international revolution. Well, whom did
the leaders of the Central Committee of the Polish Com-
munist Party support in that struggle? They supportedthe Brandler group
56 against the revolutionary majority
of the German Communist Party. That is now admitted
by all, both friends and foes. The same thing happenedas on the “Russian” question. If we assume that there is
in Germany a sort of business firm in the shape of the
opportunist opposition in the Communist Party, thenthe Polish leaders were the Polish branch of that firm.
This, too, is sad, but you cannot go against facts; facts
must be admitted.
The method of fighting the opportunist opposition.
Kostrzewa said that they, i.e., the leaders of the Polish
Central Committee, in essence support the Russian Cen-tral Committee and, perhaps, the present German Central
Committee, but disagree with those bodies on the methods
of fighting the Opposition. They, you see, demand mild
methods of fighting the opposition. They are in favour of
war against the opposition, but they want a war that willinvolve no casualties. Walecki even went so far as to shout
out: But we are in favour of the “three”! I must say that
nobody demands that Walecki should say ditto to theRussian Central Committee in everything. Besides, I
don’t know who these “three” are about whom Walecki
is so enthusiastic. He has forgotten that nobody is obligedto say ditto to the Russian Central Committee in
everything (Walecki, from his seat: “I am not obliged
to, but I can.”) Of course, you can, but one ought torealise that such conduct places both Walecki and
the Russian Central Committee in an awkward position.
It is not at all a matter of saying ditto. The point isthat in Russia, under the conditions of the NEP, a new
bourgeoisie has arisen which, being unable to come into
the political arena openly, is trying to breach the com-munist front from within and is looking for champions
among the leaders of the R.C.P.(B.). Well, this circum-
stance is giving rise to oppositionist sentiments withinthe R.C.P.(B.) and is creating the ground for an oppor-
tunist deviation. Hence, the point is that our fraternal
parties must define their attitude towards this circum-stance and take a definite stand. The point lies in that, I
repeat, and not in saying ditto to the Russian Central
Committee.
As for Kostrzewa’s mild method, I must say that
it does not stand the slightest criticism. Kostrzewa is
in favour of fighting the opportunist opposition, but insuch a way as not to lead to discrediting the leaders of
the opposition. But firstly, history knows no struggle
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

that has not involved some casualties. Secondly, we
cannot defeat the opposition and disregard the fact
that our victory will result in undermining the prestigeof the leaders of the opposition, otherwise we would
have to abandon all idea of fighting the opposition.
Thirdly, complete victory over the opposition is the sole
guarantee against a split. Party practice knows of no
other guarantee. The entire history of the R.C.P.(B.)
proves this.
Before the war, when German Social-Democracy
was orthodox, it fought opportunism by the same
mild method that Kostrzewa spoke of here. But the resultit achieved by that was that opportunism proved to be
the victor and a split became inevitable.
The R.C.P.(B.) fought opportunism by the tried and
tested method of resolutely isolating the opportunist
leaders. And the result it achieved was that revolutionary
Marxism triumphed and the Party acquired exceptionalunity.
I think that the experience of the R.C.P.(B.) should
serve as a lesson for us. The method of fighting recom-mended by Kostrzewa is a hang-over from Social-Demo-
cratic opportunism. It is fraught with the danger of a
split in the Party.
Lastly , the question of leadership of the Party.   What is
the characteristic feature of the development of the Com-
munist Parties in the West at the present time? It is thatthe parties have come right up against the question of
reorganising their practical activities on new, revolu-
tionary lines. It is not a matter of adopting a communistprogramme or of proclaiming revolutionary slogans. It
is a matter of reorganising the parties’ everyday work,
their practical activities, along such a line that every
step and every action they take should naturally lead to
the revolutionary education of the masses, to preparationfor revolution. That is now the essence of the matter and
not the adoption of revolutionary directives.
Yesterday, Pruchniak read here a whole string of
revolutionary resolutions adopted by the leaders of the
Polish Central Committee. He read those resolutions with
a triumphant air, believing that leadership of the Partyconsists solely in drafting resolutions. He has no inkling
that drafting resolutions is only the first step, the begin-
ning of leadership of the Party. He does not realise that,at bottom, leadership consists not in drafting resolutions,
but in the implementation of them, in putting them into
effect. As a consequence, in his long speech he forgot totell us what became of those resolutions; he did not deem
it necessary to tell us whether the Communist Party of
Poland has carried out those resolutions, and to whatextent. And yet, the essence of Party leadership con-
sists precisely in the implementation of resolutions and
directives. Looking at him, I was reminded of the typicalSoviet bureaucrat called to “report” to an inspec-
tion commission. “Has such and such a directive been
carried out?” the inspection commission asks. “Measureshave been taken,” answers the bureaucrat. “What meas-
ures?” the inspection commission asks. “Orders have
been issued,” the bureaucrat answers. The inspectioncommission calls for the document. With a triumphant
air the bureaucrat presents a copy of the orders. The in-
spection commission asks: “What has become of theseorders? Were they carried out and if so, when?” The
bureaucrat looks blank, and says “We have received no
information.” Of course, the inspection commission calls
such a bureaucrat to account. It was precisely such a
Soviet bureaucrat that Pruchniak reminded me of whenhe, with a triumphant air, read the revolutionary reso-
lutions, concerning the implementation of which he has
“no information.” That is not leadership of the Party;it is a mockery of all leadership.
What are the conclusions? The conclusions can be
summed up as follows.
Firstly.  In the forthcoming Party discussion in Poland,
I am emphatically opposed to any dividing line being
drawn between the former Polish Socialist Party and theformer Social-Democracy. That would be dangerous for the
Party. The former P.S.P. and P.S.D. have long been
merged in a single party and are jointly fighting the Polishlandlords and bourgeoisie. To divide them now retrospec-
tively into two parts would be a profound error. The fight
must not be waged along the old line as between theP.S.P. and P.S.D., but along the new line of isolating
the opportunist wing of the Communist Party of Poland.
Complete victory over the opportunist wing—that is theguarantee against a split and the guarantee of the
Party’s unity.
Secondly .  I am emphatically opposed to the so-called
amputation method, i.e., to the removal of certain mem-
bers of the Central Committee from that body. In general,
I am opposed to the reorganisation of the Central Commit-tee from above. It must be borne in mind that surgical
operations carried out when there is no imperative need
for them leave a bad aftermath in the Party. Let theCommunist Party of Poland itself reorganise its Central
Committee at the forthcoming congress or conference. It
is inconceivable that a growing party should not promote
new leaders.
Thirdly.  I think that the practical proposals put for-
ward by Unszlicht are quite correct. It would be quite
rational to set up in place of the present Organising Bu-
reau and Political Bureau, which have become divorcedfrom each other, a single political and practical centre
consisting of members of the present Polish Central Com-
mittee.
Doubts have been expressed here about the theoreti-
cal knowledge and party experience of the new leaders
who have come to the fore in the revolutionary strugglein Poland. I think that this circumstance is not of
decisive importance. There have been cases in the life
of the R.C.P.(B.) when workers with inadequate theoret-ical and political knowledge became the heads of huge
regional organisations. But those workers proved to be
better leaders than many intellectuals who lack the neces-sary revolutionary intuition. It is quite possible that at
first things will not run quite smoothly with the new
leaders, but there will be no harm in that. They willstumble once or twice, but eventually they will learn
to lead the revolutionary movement. Trained leaders
never fall from the skies. They grow up only in the courseof the struggle.
Bolshevik ,  No.  11,
September  20,  1924
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  DEMYAN  BEDNY
Dear Demyan,
I am very late in replying. You have a right to be
angry with me, but you must bear in mind that I am un-
usually remiss as regards letters and correspondence in
general.
Point by point.
1. It is very good to hear that you are in a “joyful
mood.” The philosophy of “Weltschmerz” is not our phi-losophy. Let the departing and the dying grieve. Our
philosophy was quite aptly expressed by the American
Whitman: “We live! Our scarlet blood seethes with thefire of unspent strength!” That’s the way it is, Demyan.
2. You write: “I am afraid to offend, but I must take
a cure.” My advice is: better offend a couple of visitorsthan refrain from taking a cure according to all the
rules of the art. You must take a cure; you must
without fail. To refrain from offending visitors is aconcern of the moment; but to offend them a little in
order to take a serious cure is a concern of more lasting
importance. Opportunists differ from their antipodesprecisely in the fact that they place concerns of the first
kind above those of the second. Needless to say, you will
not imitate the opportunists.
3. You write: “There was a touch of subtlety in the
amnesty tone of your report to the Uyezd Party Commit-
tee secretaries.”* It would be truer to say that there ishere a policy  which, speaking generally, does not preclude
a certain amount of subtlety. I think that, after having
smashed the leaders of the opposition to smithereens, we,i.e., the Party, must now adopt a milder tone towards
the rank-and-file and middle followers of the opposition
in order to make it easier for them to abandon the oppo-sition leaders. Leave the generals without an army—
that is the leitmotif.  The opposition has about forty or
fifty thousand followers in the Party. The majority ofthem would like to abandon their leaders, but they are
hindered by their own pride, or by the rudeness and arro-
gance of certain supporters of the Central Committeewho torment the rank-and-file followers of the opposi-
tion with their pinpricks and thereby hinder them from
coming over to our side. The “tone” of my report was di-rected against such supporters of the Central Committee.
Only in this way can we destroy the opposition now that
its leaders have been disgraced in sight of the whole world.
4. You ask: “Will not the harvest let us down?” It
has already let us down somewhat. Whereas, last year we
harvested (gross crop) over two thousand seven hun-dred million poods, this year we expect about two hundred
million poods less. This will be a blow to exports, of
course. True, the number of farms affected by the cropfailure this year is only a fifth of the number affected in
1921, and we shall be able to cope with the evil unaided
without exceptional effort. You need have no doubt about
*See this volume, pp. 246-73.— Ed.
that. Still, a blow is a blow. But it is an ill wind that
blows nobody any good. We have decided to take advan-
tage of the increased readiness of the peasants to do allin their power to insure themselves against the chance of
drought in future , and we shall try to take the utmost
advantage of this readiness to carry out (jointly with thepeasants) resolute measures for land melioration, improve-
ment of methods of cultivation, and so forth. We intend
to start  by creating a necessary minimum meliorated zone
along the line Samara-Saratov-Tsaritsyn-Astrakhan-Stav-
ropol. We are assigning fifteen to twenty million rubles
for the purpose. Next year we shall pass to the southerngubernias. This will mark the beginning of a revolution
in our agriculture. The local people say that the peasants
will render considerable assistance. It needs thunder tomake the peasant cross himself. It turns out that the
scourge of drought is needed to raise agriculture to a high-
er stage and to insure our country for ever against thehazards of the weather. Kolchak taught us to build an
infantry, and Denikin taught us to build a cavalry.
Drought is teaching us to build agriculture. Such are thepaths of history. And there is nothing unnatural about it.
5. You write: “Come.” Unfortunately, I cannot come.
I cannot, because I cannot spare the time. I advise youto go for “a spree in Baku.” You must. Tiflis is not so
interesting, although outwardly it is more attractive
than Baku. If you have not yet seen a forest of oil derricksthen you “have seen nothing.” I am sure that Baku will
provide you with a wealth of material for gems like your
Railway Traffic .
57
Here in Moscow the congress period is not yet over.
The speeches and debates at the Fifth Congress are, of
course, worth while, but strictly speaking they are merely
a trimming. Much more interesting are the friendly talks
with the delegates from the West (and also from the East)which all of us here have had. I had a long talk with Ger-
man, French and Polish workers. Magnificent revolution-
ary “material”! Everything goes to show that overthere, in the West, hatred, real revolutionary hatred of
the bourgeois order is growing. I was delighted to hear
them express in simple but powerful speeches their de-sire “to make a revolution in the Russian way” in their
own countries. These are a new type of workers. We have
not had any like them at our congresses before. It is stilla long way to the revolution, of course, but that things
are moving towards revolution there can be no doubt.
I was struck by yet another feature about these workers:their warm, ardent, almost maternal love for our country
and their colossal, boundless faith in the rightness, capa-
bility and might of our Party. Of the scepticism that wasonly recently evident there was not a trace. That, too, is
no accident. It is also a sign of the maturing revolution.
That’s the way it is, Demyan.Well, enough for the present. Firmly gripping your
hand,
    Yours,
J. Stalin
15.  VII.  24
Published  for  the  first  time
Y.  M.  SVERDLOV
There are people, leaders of the proletariat, about
whom no noise is made in the press—perhaps becausethey do not like to make a noise about themselves—but
who are, nevertheless, the vital sap and genuine leaders
of the revolutionary movement. Y . M. Sverdlov was aleader of this type.
An organiser to the marrow of his bones, an organiser
by nature, by habit, by revolutionary training, by in-stinct, an organiser in all his abounding activity—such
is the portrait of Y . M. Sverdlov.
What does being a leader and organiser mean under
our conditions, when the proletariat is in power? It
does not mean choosing assistants, setting up an office
and issuing orders through it. Being a leader and organis-er, under our conditions, means, firstly, knowledge of
the cadres, ability to discern their merits and shortcom-
ings, ability to handle them; and secondly, ability toarrange them in such a way that:
1) each one feels that he is in the right place;
2) each one is able to serve the revolution to the ut-
most of his ability;
3) this arrangement of cadres results not in hitches,
but in harmony, unity and the general progress of thework as a whole;
4) the general trend of the work organised in this
way serves as the expression and implementation of the
political idea for the sake of which the cadres are assignedto their posts.
Y . M. Sverdlov was precisely that kind of leader and
organiser of our Party and of our state.
The period of 1917-18 marked a turning point for
the Party and the state. In that period the Party, for
the first time, became a ruling force. For the first timein human history a new kind of power came into being,
the power of the Soviets, the power of the workers and
peasants. To transfer the Party, which hitherto had beenunderground, to the new lines, to create the organisa-
tional foundations of the new proletarian state, to devise
the organisational forms of the inter-relations betweenthe Party and the Soviets that would ensure leadership
by the Party and normal development for the Soviets—
such was the extremely complicated organisationalproblem that then confronted the Party. Nobody in the
Party will dare to deny that Y. M. Sverdlov was one
of the first, if not the first, skilfully and painlessly tosolve that organisational problem of building the new
Russia.
The ideologists and agents of the bourgeoisie are
fond of repeating threadbare assertions that the Bolshe-
viks are unable to build, that they are only able to de-
stroy. Y . M. Sverdlov, all his activities, are a living refu-tation of these falsehoods. Y . M. Sverdlov and his work
in our Party were not the result of chance. The Party
that produced a great builder like Y. M. Sverdlov canboldly say that it can build the new as well as it can
destroy the old.
I do not by any means claim that I am fully acquaint-
ed with all the organisers and builders of our Party, but
I must say that of all the outstanding organisers I amacquainted with, I know only two, of whom, next to Lenin,
our Party can and should be proud: I. F. Dubrovinsky,
who died in exile in Turukhansk, and Y. M. Sverdlov,who worked himself to death in building the Party and
the state.
Proletarskaya Revolyutsia,
No. 11 (34), November 1924
Signed:   J. S t a l i n
CONCERNING  THE  INTERNATIONAL
SITUATION
In characterising the present international situation,
I think that there is no need to take into account all the
facts of some degree of importance, absolutely all the
specific features of the present state of internationalaffairs. For this purpose it is sufficient to take into ac-
count only the principal, decisive factors in the present
situation. At the present time there are, in my opinion,three such factors:
a)  the opening of an “era” of bourgeois-democratic
“pacifism”;
b)  the intervention of America in European affairs
and the Entente’s London agreement on reparations;
c)  the strengthening of the Left-wing elements in
the European labour movement and the growth of the
international weight and prestige of the Soviet Union.
Let us examine these principal factors.
1.   THE  PERIOD  OF  BOURGEOIS-DEMOCRATIC
“PACIFISM”
The Entente has proved incapable of coping with the
results of its war victories. It fully succeeded in defeat-
ing Germany and in encircling the Soviet Union. It also
succeeded in drawing up a plan for plundering Europe.
This is shown by the innumerable conferences and treaties
of the Entente countries. But it has proved incapable of
carrying out that plan of plunder. Why? Because thecontradictions between the countries in the Entente are
too great. Because they have not succeeded, and will not
succeed, in reaching agreement on sharing the loot. Be-cause the resistance of the countries to be plundered is
growing stronger and stronger. Because the implementa-
tion of the plan of plunder is fraught with military con-flicts, and the masses do not want to fight. It is now ob-
vious to “everybody” that the imperialist frontal attack
on the Ruhr with the object of annihilating Germany hasproved to be dangerous for imperialism itself. It is also
obvious that the undisguised imperialist policy of ulti-
matums, with the object of isolating the Soviet Union,is merely producing results opposite to those intended.
A situation was created in which Poincaré and Curzon,
while faithfully and loyally serving imperialism, never-theless, by their “work” intensified the growing crisis in
Europe, roused the resistance of the masses to imperial ism,
and pushed the masses towards revolution. Hence, thebourgeoisie’s inevitable transition from the policy of
frontal attack to the policy of compromise, from undis-
guised to disguised imperialism, from Poincaré and Cur-zon to MacDonald and Herriot. Naked plundering of
the world has become dangerous. The Labour Party in
Britain and the Left bloc in France
58 are to serve as a
cloak to cover the nakedness of imperialism. That is the
origin of “pacifism” and “democracy.”
Some people think that the bourgeoisie adopted “pac-
ifism” and “democracy” not because it was compelled
to do so, but voluntarily, of its own free choice, so to
speak. And it is assumed that, having defeated the work-
ing class in decisive battles (Italy, Germany), the bour-
geoisie felt that it was the victor and could now affordto adopt “democracy.” In other words, while the decisive
battles were in progress, the bourgeoisie needed a fight-
ing organisation, needed fascism; but now that the prole-tariat is defeated, the bourgeoisie no longer needs fascism
and can afford to use “democracy” instead, as a better
method of consolidating its victory. Hence, the conclu-sion is drawn that the rule of the bourgeoisie has become
consolidated, that the “era of pacifism” will be a pro-
longed one, and that the revolution in Europe has beenpigeonholed.
This assumption is absolutely wrong.
Firstly, it is not true that fascism is only the fight-
ing organisation of the bourgeoisie. Fascism is not only
a military-technical category. Fascism is the bourgeoi-
sie’s fighting organisation that relies on the active sup-port of Social-Democracy. Social-Democracy is objec-
tively the moderate wing of fascism. There is no ground
for assuming that the fighting organisation of the bour-geoisie can achieve decisive successes in battles, or in
governing the country, without the active support of
Social-Democracy. There is just as little ground for think-ing that Social-Democracy can achieve decisive successes
in battles, or in governing the country, without the ac-
tive support of the fighting organisation of the bourgeoi-sie. These organisations do not negate, but supplement
each other. They are not antipodes, they are twins. Fas-
cism is an informal political bloc of these two chief or-ganisations; a bloc, which arose in the circumstances of
the post-war crisis of imperialism, and which is intended
for combating the proletarian revolution. The bourgeoisie
cannot retain power without such a bloc. It would there-
fore be a mistake to think that “pacifism” signifiesthe liquidation of fascism. In the present situation,
“pacifism” is the strengthening of fascism with its
moderate, Social-Democratic wing pushed into the fore-front.
Secondly, it is not true that the decisive battles
have already been fought, that the proletariat was defeat-ed in these battles, and that bourgeois rule has been
consolidated as a consequence. There have been no de-
cisive battles as yet, if only for the reason that there havenot been any mass, genuinely Bolshevik parties, capable
of leading the proletariat to dictatorship. Without such
parties, decisive battles for dictatorship are impossibleunder the conditions of imperialism. The decisive battles
in the West still lie ahead. There have been only the
first serious attacks, which were repulsed by the bour-geoisie; the first serious trial of strength, which showed
that the proletariat is not yet strong enough to overthrow
the bourgeoisie, but that the bourgeoisie is already  unable
to discount the proletariat. And precisely because the
bourgeoisie is already unable to force the working class
to its knees, it was compelled to renounce frontal attacks,to make a detour, to agree to a compromise, to resort to
“democratic pacifism.”
Lastly, it is also not true that “pacifism” is a sign
of the strength and not of the weakness of the bourgeoisie,
that “pacifism” should result in consolidating the power
of the bourgeoisie and in postponing the revolution foran indefinite period. Present-day pacifism signifies the
advent to power, direct or indirect, of the parties of
the Second International. But what does the advent to
power of the parties of the Second International mean?
It means their inevitable self-exposure as lackeys of im-perialism, as traitors to the proletariat, for the govern-
mental activity of these parties can have only one result:
their political bankruptcy, the growth of contradictionswithin these parties, their disintegration, their decay.
But the disintegration of these parties will inevitably
lead to the disintegration of the rule of the bourgeoisie,for the parties of the Second International are props of
imperialism. Would the bourgeoisie have undertaken
this risky experiment with pacifism if it had not beencompelled to do so; would it have done so of its own
free will? Of course, not! This is the second time that the
bourgeoisie is undertaking the experiment with pacifismsince the end of the imperialist war. The first experiment
was made immediately after the war, when it seemed that
revolution was knocking at the door. The second experi-ment is being undertaken now, after Poincaré’s and Cur-
zon’s risky experiments. Who would dare deny that im-
perialism will have to pay dearly for this swinging ofthe bourgeoisie from pacifism to rabid imperialism and
back again, that this is pushing vast masses of workers
out of their habitual philistine rut, that it is drawingthe most backward sections of the proletariat into poli-
tics and is helping to revolutionise them? Of course,
“democratic pacifism” is not yet the Kerensky regime,for the Kerensky regime implies dual power, the collapse
of bourgeois power and the coming into being of the foun-
dations of proletarian power. But there can scarcely beany doubt that pacifism signifies the immense awakening
of the masses, the fact that the masses are being
drawn into politics; that pacifism is shaking bour-
geois rule and preparing the ground for revolutionary
upheavals. And precisely for this reason pacifism isbound to lead not to the strengthening, but to the weak-
ening of bourgeois rule, not to the postponement of the
revolution for an indefinite period, but to its ac-celeration.
It does not, of course, follow that pacifism is not
a serious danger to the revolution. Pacifism serves tosap the foundations of bourgeois rule, it is creating fa-
vourable conditions for the revolution; but it can have
these results only against  the will of the “pacifists” and
“democrats” themselves, only if the Communist Parties
vigorously expose the imperialist and counter-revolution-
ary nature of the pacifist-democratic rule of Herriotand MacDonald. As for what the pacifists and democrats
want, as for the policy of the imperialists, they have only
one aim in resorting to pacifism: to dupe the masses withhigh-sounding phrases about peace in order to prepare
for a new war; to dazzle the masses with the brilliance of
“democracy” in order to consolidate the dictatorship ofthe bourgeoisie; to stun the masses with clamour about
the “sovereign” rights of nations and states in order the
more successfully to prepare for intervention in China,for slaughter in Afghanistan and in the Sudan, for the
dismemberment of Persia; to fool the masses with high-
faluting talk about “friendly” relations with the SovietUnion, about various “treaties” with the Soviet govern-
ment, in order to establish still closer relations with the
counter-revolutionary conspirators who have been kickedout of Russia, with the aim of bandit operations in Bye-
lorussia, the Ukraine and Georgia. The bourgeoisie needs
pacifism as a camouflage. This camouflage constitutes
the chief danger of pacifism. Whether the bourgeoisie
will succeed in its aim of fooling the people depends upon
the vigour with which the Communist Parties in the Westand in the East expose the bourgeoisie, upon their ability
to tear the mask from the imperialists in pacifist clothing.
There is no doubt that events and practice will work infavour of the Communists in this respect by exposing the
discrepancy between the pacifist words  and the imperial-
ist deeds  of the democratic servitors of capital. It is the
duty of the Communists to keep pace with events and
ruthlessly to expose every step, every act of service to
imperialism and betrayal of the proletariat committedby the parties of the Second International.
2.  THE  INTERVENTION  OF  AMERICA
IN  EUROPEAN  AFFAIRS  AND  THE  ENTENTE’S
LONDON  AGREEMENT  ON  REPARATIONS
The London conference of the Entente59 most fully
reflects the false and mendacious character of bourgeois-democratic pacifism. Whereas the advent to power of Mac-
Donald and Herriot and the clamour about “establishing
normal relations” with the Soviet Union were intended tocover up and camouflage the fierce class struggle raging
in Europe and the deadly enmity of the bourgeois states
towards the Soviet Union, the purpose of the agreementthat the Entente concluded in London is to cover up and
camouflage the desperate struggle of Britain and France
for hegemony in Europe, the growing contradiction be-tween Britain and America in the struggle for domination
in the world market, and the superhuman struggle of the
German people against Entente oppression. There is no
longer any class war, there is an end to revolution, mat-ters can now end up with class co-operation, shout the
MacDonalds and Renaudels. There is no longer a struggle
between France and Britain, between America andBritain and between Germany and the Entente, there is
an end to war, matters can now end up with universal
peace under the aegis of America, echo their friends ofthe London agreement and their brothers in betraying
the cause of the working class—the Social-Democratic
heroes of pacifism.
But what actually happened at the London conference
of the Entente?
Before the London conference the reparations problem
was decided by France alone, more or less independently
of the “Allies,” for France had a secure majority in the
Reparations Commission. The occupation of the Ruhrserved as a means for the economic disruption of Ger-
many and as a guarantee that France would receive repa-
ration payments from Germany, coal and coke for theFrench metallurgical industry, chemical semi-manufac-
tures and dyes for the French chemical industry, and
the right to export Alsace textiles to Germany duty-free.The plan was intended to create a material base for
France’s military and economic hegemony in Europe.
As is known however, the plan failed. The occupationmethod merely led to the opposite results. France received
neither payments nor deliveries in kind in any satis-
factory quantities. Finally, Poincaré, who was responsiblefor the occupation, was thrown overboard because of his
undisguised imperialist policy, which was fraught with
a new war and revolution. As regards France’s hegemony
in Europe, it proved a failure not only because the methodof occupation and undisguised plunder precluded the pos-
sibility of an economic bond between French and German
industry, but also because Britain was strongly opposedto the establishment of such a bond, for she could not
but be aware that the combination of German coal with
French metal is bound to undermine the British metal-lurgical industry.
What did the London conference of the Entente pro-
duce in place of all this?
Firstly, the conference rejected the method by which
reparation questions were decided by France alone and
resolved that, in the last instance, disputes should besettled by an Arbitration Commission consisting of repre-
sentatives of the Entente headed by representatives of
America.
Secondly, the conference rejected the occupation of
the Ruhr and recognised the necessity of evacuation, eco-
nomic (immediately) and military (in a year’s time, orearlier). Motives: the occupation of the Ruhr at the pres-
ent stage is dangerous from the viewpoint of the polit-
ical state of Europe, and inconvenient from the viewpointof the organised and systematic plundering of Germany.
There can scarcely be any doubt, however, that the En-
tente intends to plunder Germany thoroughly and system-atically.
Thirdly, while rejecting military intervention, the
conference fully approved of financial and economic in-tervention, recognising the necessity of:
a)  setting up an emission bank in Germany to be con-
trolled by a special foreign commissioner;
b)  transferring to private hands the state railways,
which are to be run under the control of a special foreign
commissioner;
c)  setting up a so-called “Transfer Committee,” con-
sisting of representatives of the Allies, to have sole
control of all reparation payments in German currency,to finance German deliveries in kind out of those pay-
ments, to have power to invest some of the reparation pay-
ments in German industry (in cases where it is deemedinadvisable to transfer them to France), and thus have full
opportunity to control the German money market.
    It scarcely needs proof that this means convertingGermany into a colony of the Entente.
Fourthly, the conference recognised France’s right
to receive from Germany compulsory deliveries of coaland chemical products for a certain period, but at once
added the reservation that Germany had the right to
appeal to the Arbitration Commission for a reduction,or even the cessation, of these compulsory payments in
kind. By this it nullified, or almost nullified, France’s
right.
If to all this we add the loan to Germany of 800,000,000
marks, covered by British and, chiefly, by American
bankers, and if we further bear in mind that the confer-ence was bossed by bankers, above all American bank-
ers, the picture will be complete: of France’s hegemony
not a trace is left; instead of the hegemony of France thereis the hegemony of America.
Such are the results of the London conference of the
Entente.
On these grounds some people think that henceforth
the antagonism of interests inside Europe must wane in
view of America’s hegemony; that America, interested in
exporting capital to Europe, will manage to put the Euro-
pean countries on rations and compel them to sit stillwhile her bankers rake in profits; that, in view of this,
peace in Europe, compulsory it is true, may be regarded
as more or less ensured for a more or less prolonged pe-riod. This assumption is utterly wrong.
Firstly, in settling the German problem, the confer-
ence reckoned without its host, the German people. Itis possible, of course, to “plan” Germany’s conversion
into a regular colony. But to attempt in actual fact to
convert a country like Germany into a colony at thepresent time, when even the backward colonies are being
kept in hand with difficulty, means placing a mine under
Europe.
Secondly, France had pushed herself forward too
much, so the conference pushed her back somewhat. The
natural result of this is that Britain has gained actualpreponderance in Europe. But to think that France can
resign herself to Britain’s preponderance means failing
to reckon with facts, failing to reckon with the logicof facts, which usually proves to be stronger than
all other logic.
Thirdly, the conference recognised the hegemony of
America. But American capital is interested in financing
Franco-German industry, in the most rational exploitation
of the latter, for example, along the lines of combiningthe French metallurgical industry with the German coal
industry. There can scarcely be any doubt that American
capital will make use of its advantages in precisely thisdirection, which is the most profitable for it. But to
think that Britain will resign herself to such a situa-
tion means not knowing Britain, means not knowing
how greatly Britain values the interests of her metallur-
gical industry.
Lastly, Europe is not an isolated country; it is bound
up with its colonies, it lives on the vital sap from these
colonies. To think that the conference can make anychange for “the better” in the relations between Europe
and its colonies, that it can restrain or retard the develop-
ment of the contradictions between them, means believ-ing in miracles.
What conclusion is to be drawn from this?
Only one: the London conference has not eliminated
a single one of the old contradictions in Europe; on the
contrary, it has added new ones to them, contradictions
between America and Britain. Undoubtedly, Britainwill continue as of old to aggravate the antagonism
between France and Germany in order to ensure her own
political predominance on the continent Undoubtedly,America, in her turn, will aggravate the antagonism
between Britain and France in order to ensure her own
hegemony in the world market. It is needless for us tospeak of the intense antagonism between Germany and
the Entente.
World events will be determined by these antagonisms
and not by the “pacifist” speeches of the gallows-bird
Hughes, or the grandiloquent Herriot. The law of uneven
development of the imperialist countries and of the in-evitability of imperialist wars remains in force today
more than ever before. The London conference merely
masks these antagonisms, only to create new premisesfor their unprecedented intensification.
3.  STRENGTHENING
OF  THE  REVOLUTIONARY  ELEMENTS
IN  THE  EUROPEAN  LABOUR  MOVEMENT.
GROWTH  OF  THE  INTERNATIONAL  POPULARITY
OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION
One of the surest signs of the instability of the “paci-
fist-democratic regime,” one of the most unmistakable
signs that this “regime” is froth on the surface of theprofound revolutionary processes that are taking place in
the depths of the working class, is the decisive vic-
tory achieved by the revolutionary wing in the Commu-nist Parties of Germany, France and Russia, the growth
of activity of the Left wing in the British labour move-
ment, and lastly, the growth of the Soviet Union’spopularity among the toiling masses in the West and
in the East.
The Communist Parties in the West are developing
under peculiar conditions. Firstly, their composition is
not uniform, for they were formed out of former Social-
Democrats of the old school and of young party memberswho have not yet had sufficient revolutionary steeling.
Secondly, their leading cadres are not purely Bolshevik,
for responsible posts are occupied by people who havecome from other parties and who have not yet completely
discarded Social-Democratic survivals. Thirdly, they
are confronted by such an experienced opponent ashard-boiled Social-Democracy, which is still an enor-
mous political force in the ranks of the working class.
Lastly, they have against them such a powerful enemy asthe European bourgeoisie, with its tried and tested state
apparatus and all-powerful press. To think that such
Communist Parties can overthrow the European bourgeois
system “overnight” is a great mistake. Hence, the im-
mediate task is to make the Communist Parties of theWest really Bolshevik; they must train genuinely revolu-
tionary cadres who will be capable of reorganising all
party activities along the lines of the revolutionary educa-tion of the masses, of preparing for revolution.
That is how matters stood with the Communist Parties
in the West in the still recent past. During the last halfyear, however, there has been a turn for the better. The
last half year is remarkable for the fact that it pro-
duced a radical change in the life of the Communist Par-ties of the West as regards eliminating Social-Democratic
survivals, Bolshevising the Party cadres and isolating
opportunist elements.
The danger that Social-Democratic survivals in the
Communist Parties can represent for the revolution was
strikingly revealed by the sad experience of the Workers’Government in Saxony,
60 where the opportunist leaders
tried to convert the idea of a united front, as a means
for the revolutionary mobilisation and organisation ofthe masses, into a means for Social-Democratic parliamen-
tary combinations. That marked a turning point, which
opened the eyes of the mass of the Party membershipand roused them against the opportunist leaders.
The second question that undermined the prestige of
the Right-wing leaders and brought new revolutionaryleaders to the front was the so-called “Russian” question,
i.e., the discussion in the R.C.P.(B.). As is known, the
Brandler group in Germany and the Souvarine group
61
in France strongly supported the opportunist opposition
in the R.C.P.(B.) against the principal cadres of the
R.C.P.(B.), against its revolutionary majority. This was
a challenge to the revolutionary mass of the workers in
the West, who definitely sympathised with the Sovietgovernment and its leader, the R.C.P.(B.). It was a
challenge to the mass of the party membership and the
revolutionary wing of the Communist Parties in the West.It is not surprising that this challenge resulted in the
utter defeat of the Brandler and Souvarine groups. It is
not surprising that this had its repercussion in all theother Communist Parties in the West. If to this we add
the complete isolation of the opportunist trend in the
R.C.P.(B.), the picture will be complete. The FifthCongress of the Comintern
62 merely sealed the victory of
the revolutionary wing in the principal sections of the
Comintern.
Undoubtedly, the mistakes of the opportunist leaders
were an important factor in hastening the Bolshevisation
of the Communist Parties in the West; but it is equallybeyond doubt that other, more profound, causes also
operated here: the successful capitalist offensive during
the past few years, the deterioration of the living con-ditions of the working class, the existence of a vast army
of unemployed, the general economic instability of capi-
talism, the growing revolutionary unrest among the broadmasses of the workers. The workers are marching to-
wards revolution, and they want to have revolutionary
leaders.
Summing up . The process of definitely  forming gen-
uine Bolshevik parties in the West, parties which will
constitute the bulwark of the coming revolution in Europe,has begun . Such is the summing up of the past half year.
Still more difficult and peculiar are the condi-
tions under which the trade unions are developing in
the West.
Firstly, they are narrow owing to their “tried” craft-
union practice and are hostile to socialism, for, hav-
ing arisen before the Socialist parties, and having de-veloped without the aid of the latter, they are accus-
tomed to plume themselves on their “independence,” they
place craft interests above class interests, and refuse torecognise anything beyond “a penny a day” increase in
wages.
Secondly, they are conservative in spirit and hos-
tile to all revolutionary undertakings, for they are
led by the old, venal trade union bureaucracy, which
is being fed by the bourgeoisie and is alwaysready to place the trade unions at the service of imperi-
alism.
Lastly, these trade unions, united around the Amster-
dam reformists, constitute that vast army of reformism
which serves as a prop for the present-day capitalist
system.
Of course, besides the Amsterdam reactionary unions
there are the revolutionary unions, which are associated
with the Profintern.63 But, firstly, a considerable sec tion
of the revolutionary unions, not wishing to cause a split
in the trade union movement, remain in the Amsterdam
federation64 and submit to its discipline; secondly, in
the decisive European countries (Britain, France and
Germany) the Amsterdamites still represent the majority
of the workers. It must not be forgotten that the Amster-dam federation unites no less than fourteen million
organised workers. To think that it will be possible to
achieve the dictatorship of the proletariat in Europe
against  the will of these millions of workers would be a
great mistake; it would mean departing from the path ofLeninism and courting inevitable defeat. Hence, the task
is to win these millions of workers to the side of the
revolution and communism, to free them from theinfluence of the reactionary trade union bureaucracy, or
at least to get them to adopt an attitude of benevolent
neutrality towards communism.
That is how matters stood until recently. But during
the past few years the situation began to improve. The
home of the narrow and reactionary trade unions is Brit-ain, once the industrial-capitalist monopolist of the world
market. Her loss of this monopoly is connected with the
development of finance capital, characteristic of which isthe struggle between a number of the biggest countries
for colonial monopoly. The imperialist phase of capital-
ism is accompanied by an expansion of territory  for the
narrow, reactionary trade unions, but it also causes a
shrinkage of their material base, for imperialist super-
profits are the object of the struggle of a number of coun-tries, and the colonies are less and less inclined to remain
in the role of colonies. Nor must it be forgotten that the
war has seriously undermined production in Europe. Asis known, total production in Europe at the present time
amounts to not more than 70 percent of pre-war produc tion.
Hence the curtailment of production and the successfulcapitalist offensive against the working class. Hence the
wage cuts, the virtual abolition of the 8-hour day, and the
series of unsuccessful defensive strikes, which once againdemonstrated the betrayal of the working class by the
trade union bureaucracy. Hence the colossal unemploy-
ment and the growth of the workers’ dissatisfaction with
the reactionary trade unions. Hence the idea of a united
front in the economic struggle of the working class andthe plan to unite the two trade union Internationals into
a single International capable of organising resistance to
capital. The talk of the reformists at the Vienna Congressof the Amsterdam International (June 1924) about nego-
tiating with the “Russian” trade unions and the appeal
of the British trade unions at the Trades Union Congress(beginning of September 1924) for trade union unity are
merely a reflection of the growing pressure that the masses
are bringing to bear upon the reactionary trade unionbureaucracy. The most remarkable thing about all this
is the fact that it is precisely the British trade unions,
that centre of conservatism and the principal core of theAmsterdam federation, which are taking the initiative in
the matter of uniting the reactionary and revolutionary
trade unions. The appearance of Left-wing elements inthe British labour movement is the surest indication that
all is not well “among them, over there,” in Amsterdam.
Some people think that the campaign for trade union
unity is needed precisely at the present time because
Left-wing elements have appeared in the Amsterdam
federation who absolutely  must be supported by all efforts
and by all means. That is not true, or, to be more exact,
it is only partly true. The point is that the Communist
Parties in the West are becoming mass organisations, theyare turning into genuine Bolshevik parties, they are grow-
ing and are advancing to power simultaneously with the
growth of discontent among the broad masses of the work-ers, and, hence, that things are moving towards pro-
letarian revolution. But the bourgeoisie cannot be over-
thrown unless it is deprived of its prop in the shape of
the reactionary Amsterdam federation; the dictatorship
cannot be achieved unless that bourgeois citadel in Am-
sterdam is won to the side of the revolution. That, how-
ever, cannot be done by one-sided action from outside.That aim can be achieved at the present time only by
combined work inside and outside for obtaining trade
union unity. That is why the question of trade unionunity and of entering international industrial federations
is becoming an urgent one. Of course, the Lefts must be
supported and pushed forward. But real support can berendered the Lefts only if the banner of the revolutionary
unions is kept unfurled, if the reactionary Amsterdam
leaders are scourged for their treachery and splittingtactics, if the Left leaders are criticised for their half-
heartedness and irresolution in the struggle against the
reactionary leaders. Only such a policy can prepare theground for real trade union unity. Otherwise we
may get a repetition of what occurred in Germany
in October last year, when the reactionary Right-wingSocial-Democracy successfully utilised Levi’s Left-wing
group
65 for the purpose of surrounding the German rev-
olutionary workers.
Lastly, about the growth of the Soviet Union’s popu-
larity among the people in the bourgeois countries. Thesurest indication of the instability of the “pacifist-dem-
ocratic regime” is, perhaps, the indubitable fact that,
far from waning, the Soviet Union’s influence and pres tige
among the toiling masses in the West and in the East
are growing year after year and month after month. The
point is not that the Soviet Union is being “recognised”
by a number of bourgeois states. Taken by itself, there
is nothing particular in that “recognition,” for it is dic-
tated, firstly, by the needs of capitalist competition be-tween the bourgeois countries, which are striving to
obtain “their place” in the Soviet Union market; and sec-
ondly, by the “programme” of pacifism, which calls forthe establishment of “normal relations” with the Soviet
country, the signing of at least some kind of “treaty”
with the Soviet Union. The point is that the present-day“democrats” and “pacifists” defeated their bourgeois ri-
vals in the parliamentary elections thanks  to their plat-
form of “recognition” of the Soviet Union; that the Mac-Donalds and Herriots came into power, and can remain
in power, thanks , among other things, to their spouting
about “friendship with Russia”; that the prestige of these“democrats” and “pacifists” is the reflection of the
Soviet government’s prestige among the masses of the
people. It is characteristic that even such a notorious“democrat” as Mussolini often deems it necessary to
boast to the workers about his “friendship” with the
Soviet government. It is no less characteristic that evensuch notorious appropriators of other people’s property
as the present rulers of Japan do not want to dispense
with “friendship” with the Soviet Union. There is noneed to mention the colossal prestige that the Soviet
government enjoys among the masses of the people in
Turkey, Persia, China and India.
What is the explanation of the unprecedented prestige
and extraordinary popularity among the masses of the
people in other countries enjoyed by such a “dictatorial”and revolutionary government as the Soviet govern-
ment?
Firstly, the fact that the working class hates capi-
talism and is striving to emancipate itself from it. The
workers in the bourgeois countries sympathise with theSoviet government, primarily because it is a government
which overthrew capitalism. Bromley, the well-known
representative of the British railwaymen, said recentlyat the Trades Union Congress:
“The capitalists know that the eyes of the workers
of the world are turned towards Russia and that, if theRussian revolution succeeds, the intelligent workers
of the world will ask themselves, is it not possible
that we also might be successful in throwing off cap-italism?”
Bromley is not a Bolshevik, of course, but what he said
expressed the thoughts and aspirations of the Europeanworkers. For, indeed, why not throw off European capi-
talism, considering that for nearly seven years already
the “Russians” have been doing without capitalists andare benefiting by it? That is the cause of the immense
popularity the Soviet government enjoys among the
broad working-class masses. The growth of the interna-tional popularity of the Soviet Union is, therefore, an
indication of the growth of the hatred of the working
class in all countries towards capitalism.
Secondly, the fact that the masses of the people hate
war and are striving to frustrate the war plans of the
bourgeoisie. The masses of the people know that the So-viet government was the first to launch the attack against
the imperialist war, and by doing so hastened its termi-
nation. The masses of the people see that the SovietUnion is the only country that is waging a struggle to
prevent the outbreak of a new war. They sympathise
with the Soviet government because it is the banner-
bearer of peace among the nations and a reliable bulwark
against war. The growth of the international popularityof the Soviet government is, therefore, an indication
of the growth of the hatred of the masses of the people
all over the world towards imperialist war and itsorganisers.
Thirdly, the fact that the oppressed masses in the
dependent countries and colonies hate the yoke of impe-rialism and are striving to smash it. The Soviet
power is the only power that has smashed the chains
of “home” imperialism. The Soviet Union is the onlycountry which is building its life on the basis of the
equality and co-operation of nations. The Soviet Govern-
ment is the only Government in the world which is un-reservedly championing the unity and independence,
freedom and sovereignty of Turkey and Persia, Afgha-
nistan and China, the colonies and dependent countriesall over the world. The oppressed masses sympathise
with the Soviet Union because they regard it as their ally
in the cause of emancipation from imperialism. Thegrowth of the international popularity of the Soviet
government is, therefore, an indication of the growth of
the hatred of the oppressed masses all over the worldtowards imperialism.
Such are the facts.
There can scarcely be any doubt that these three
hatreds  will not serve to strengthen the “pacifist-demo-
cratic regime” of present-day imperialism.
The other day, the United States Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs, the “pacifist” and Kolchakite Hughes,
published a Black-Hundred declaration against the Soviet
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

Union. Undoubtedly, envy of Poincaré’s laurels keeps
Hughes awake at night. But there can scarcely be anydoubt that Hughes’s Black-Hundred-pacifist declarationwill serve only to increase still further the Soviet Union’sinfluence and prestige among the toiling masses allover the world.
Such are the chief factors that are characteristic of
the present international situation.
Bolshevik ,  No.  11,
September 20,  1924
Signed:  J.  S t a l i n
THE  PARTY’S   IMMEDIATE  TASKS
IN  THE  COUNTRYSIDE
Speech  Delivered  at  a  Conference  of  Secretaries
of  Rural  Party  Units,  Called  by  the  Central
Committee  of  the R.C.P . (B.)66
October  22,  1924
DEFECTS  IN  THE  REPORTS  
THE  LOCALITIES
Comrades, I would like first of all to deal with
the defects in the reports that were heard here. In my
opinion, there were two principal defects.
The first defect is that the delegates spoke all the
time about successes and scarcely mentioned the de-
fects of our work in the countryside, although there are
hosts of them. They told us about the Party standing,date of birth and the number of members in the units,
and so forth, but said almost nothing about the defects
in our work. And yet, the question of the defects in ourwork in the countryside is the fundamental question of
our practical work. Hence, if you will excuse my saying
so, there was a certain touch of officialdom about thereports. Any outsider who heard the reports might have
thought that people had come to give an account of them-
selves to the Central Committee, saying: “the work isproceeding satisfactorily,” or “all is well.” That is of
no use, comrades, for we all know, both we and you,
that all is not well with the work, either with your work
in the localities, or with our work in the Central
Committee.
The second defect in the reports is that they dealt
mainly with the Party units themselves, with the mood
prevailing in them, but, for some reason, no mentionwas made of the mood of the millions of non-Party peas-
ants. It turns out that the Communists are concerned
mainly with themselves: the internal life of the units,how many lectures have been delivered, what kind of
propaganda is conducted, and so forth. It turns out that
the Communists mostly keep their eyes on themselvesand forget that they are surrounded by an ocean of non-
Party people, without whose support the entire work
of the units stands in danger of being reduced to uselessbotch-work. What are the relations between the Party
organisations and the non-Party masses? About this
nothing, or almost nothing, was said. It is wrong to keepyour eyes only on yourselves. You must look first of
all at the millions of non-Party peasants, study their
needs and wishes and reckon with their requirementsand moods. This explains the dryness of and the bureau-
cratic touch about the reports.
Those are the two principal defects that I wanted
to mention in order that the comrades should take note
of them.
I shall ask you again, comrades, to excuse me for
telling you the blunt truth. But I earnestly ask you to
tell us in your turn the truth about the defects and mis-
takes in the work of the Central Committee.
And now to business.
THE  PARTY’S  CHIEF  DEFECT—THE  WEAKNESS
OF  PARTY  WORK  IN  THE  COUNTRYSIDE
What is our Party’s chief defect at the present time,
under the conditions of the NEP, when the peasantryis displaying greater political activity, and when much
more is demanded of the Party than was demanded, say,
two years ago?
The chief defect of our Party is the weakness of its
work in the countryside, its lack of organisation and its
poor quality. What is the cause of this weakness? Howare we to explain the fact that Party work in the towns
is going full steam ahead, whereas in the countryside it
is in a bad way? Is not agriculture developing? Have notthe conditions of the peasants improved during the past
two years since the surplus-appropriation system was
abolished? Are not the growth of industry and the supplyof urban manufactures easing the conditions of the peas-
ants? Has not the stable currency eased the conditions
of the peasants? What is the source, then, of the weak-ness of our Party’s work in the countryside? To answer
this question it is necessary, first of all, to decide another
question: What is the source of our Party’s strength inthe towns?
WHEREIN  LIES  THE  STRENGTH
OF  OUR  PARTY  IN  THE  TOWNS?
And so, wherein lies the strength of our Party in
the towns? Its chief strength in the towns lies in the
fact that it has around it a wide non-Party active of
workers , numbering several hundred thousand, which
serves as a bridge between the Party and the vast
mass of the working class. Our Party is strong in
the towns because between the Party and the vast
mass of the working class there is not a wall, but aconnecting bridge, in the shape of a mass active of non-
Party workers numbering several hundred thousand.
The Party recruits forces from this active. Through it theParty wins the confidence of the masses. You have heard
that six months ago over 200,000 workers joined our
Party. Where did they come from? From the non-Partyactive, which creates an atmosphere of confidence around
our Party, links it with the rest of the non-Party masses.
Hence, the non-Party active is not only a connectingbridge, but also the very ample reservoir from which our
Party draws new forces. Without such an active our
Party could not develop. The Party grows and gainsstrength if a wide non-Party active grows and gains
strength around the Party. The Party grows sick and
feeble  if there is no such active.
WHEREIN  LIES  THE  WEAKNESS  OF  OUR  WORK
IN  THE  COUNTRYSIDE?
And so, wherein lies the weakness of our Party work
in the countryside?
It lies in the fact that the Party does not have in the
countryside a wide non-Party active of peasants  that
could link the Party with the tens of millions of toiling
peasants in our country.
What is the situation in the countryside? There is
a thin network of Party units in the countryside. Then
comes an equally thin network of non-Party peasants who
sympathise with the Party. Beyond it stretches an ocean
of non-Party people, tens of millions of peasants, whom
the thin network of the non-Party active does not and
cannot link with the Party. This, properly speaking, ex-plains why this thin network cannot stand the strain,
why it often breaks and, instead of a connecting bridge,
a blank wall sometimes rises between the Party and thenon-Party masses in the countryside.
THE  CHIEF  TASK  IS  TO  CREATE  A
PEASANT  ACTIVE  AROUND  THE  PARTY
Hence, our Party’s chief task in the countryside
is to create a numerous, non-Party peasant active, num-
bering several hundred thousand, capable of linking theParty with the tens of millions of toiling peasants. Com-
rades! Either  we create such an active and thereby raise
our Party’s position in the countryside to the level exist-ing in the towns, and then no problems and no difficul-
ties need daunt us, or we fail to create such an active,
in which case all our work in the countryside will bein a bad way. It is this that we must now make the focal
point of all our work. Unless our Party creates such an
active, which must be numerous, and must consist ofgenuine  peasants, our Party is doomed to chronic ailment
in the countryside. Of course, this is a difficult task;
such an active cannot be created in one year. But createdit must be, and the sooner we begin to create it, the better.
THE  SOVIETS  MUST  BE  REVITALISED
But how is such an active to be created? How is
this problem to be solved? To think that it can be solved
by means of verbal propaganda, by quoting from
books, would be a great mistake. A wide, non-Party
peasant active can be created around the Party only in
the course of mass work in connection with the practicalneeds of the countryside, in the course of extensive Soviet
constructive work in the countryside, by drawing the
peasants into the work of volost, district, uyezd andgubernia administration. To revitalise the Soviets, to put
them on their feet, to draw all the best elements of the
peasantry into the Soviets—that is the way in which awide, non-Party peasant active can be built up.
Lenin said that the Soviets are the organ of the
bond between the workers and the peasants, the organthrough which the workers lead the peasants. And so,
if we want to ensure that the political activity of the
toiling peasants does not become detached from theleadership of the workers, we must take all measures
to ensure that the peasants are drawn into the Soviets,
that the Soviets are revitalised and put on their feet,that the peasantry find an outlet for their political activ-
ity by participating unfailingly in the administration
of the country. Only in the course of such work can thepeasantry provide extensive cadres of a non-Party active.
Only from such an active can the Party select tens of
thousands of members in the countryside.
THE  APPROACH  TO  THE  PEASANTRY
MUST  BE  CHANGED
To revitalise the Soviets, however, apart from every-
thing else, one condition must be fulfilled. To achieve
this the very approach to the peasants must be radically
changed. What must be the nature of this change? It
consists in the Communist learning to approach the non-
Party man as an equal. He must not domineer, but care-
fully heed the voice of the non-Party people. He mustnot only teach the non-Party people, but also learn from
them. And we have something to learn from the non-
Party people. The question of the relations betweenParty and non-Party people is a major question of our
Party practice. Lenin defined those relations by the
term: mutual confidence. But the non-Party peasantcannot display confidence when he is not treated as an
equal. In such cases, instead of confidence, distrust is
created, and often the result is that a blank wall risesbetween the Party and the non-Party people, the Party
is divorced from the masses and the bond between the
workers and peasants is converted into estrangement.
THE  LESSONS  OF  THE  REVOLT  IN  GEORGIA
A vivid illustration of such a turn of affairs is the
recent revolt in Georgia.67 Our newspapers write that
the events in Georgia were stage-managed. That is
true, for, in general, the revolt in Georgia was an arti-ficial, not a popular revolt. Nevertheless, in some
places, thanks to the bad link between the Communist
Party and the masses, the Mensheviks succeeded in draw-ing a section of the peasant masses into the revolt. It is
characteristic that they are the localities that are the
most saturated with communist forces. There are rela-tively far more Communists in those localities than in
the rest. And yet it was there that our people missed,
overlooked, failed to notice the fact that there was un-rest among the peasants, that something was brewing
among them, that there was discontent among them, that
it had been growing day by day, and the Party knew
nothing about it. In the places that were most saturatedwith Communists, the latter proved to be most di-
vorced from the sentiments, thoughts and aspirations
of the non-Party peasantry. That is the crux of theproblem.
How could this incongruous thing have happened?
It happened because the Communists did not know howto approach the peasants in the Leninist way; instead
of an atmosphere of confidence they created an atmos-
phere of mutual distrust and thus divorced the Party fromthe non-Party peasants. An interesting point is that one
of the most active responsible workers in Georgia attri-
butes this incongruity to the weakness of the local So-viets and to the Party being divorced from the non-Party
people. “Undoubtedly,” he says, “the prime reason why
we failed to see that a revolt was brewing is to be foundin the weakness of the local Soviets.” Lenin said that the
Soviets are the surest barometer, the surest indi-
cator of the mood of the peasantry. Now, it was justthis barometer that the Communist Party in some of the
uyezds of Georgia lacked.
Comrades, the events in Georgia must be regarded as
symptomatic. What happened in Georgia may be repeat-
ed all over Russia if we do not radically change our
very approach to the peasantry, if we do not create anatmosphere of complete confidence between the Party
and the non-Party people, if we do not heed the voice of
the non-Party people, and, lastly, if we do not revitalisethe Soviets in order to provide an outlet for the politi-
cal activity of the toiling masses of the peasantry.
One thing or the other: either  we succeed in adopt-
ing the correct Leninist approach to the non-Party peas-
ants in order to direct the growing political activityof the peasantry into the channel of constructive Soviet
work and thus ensure that the peasants are led by the
workers, or we fail to do this, in which case the politi-
cal activity of the masses will by-pass the Soviets, will
pass over the heads of the Soviets, and take the form
of bandit revolts like that which occurred in Georgia.
That is how the question stands, comrades.
A  TACTFUL  APPROACH
TO  THE  PEASANTRY  IS  NEEDED
To illustrate how tactlessly the peasants are ap-
proached sometimes, a few words must be said about
anti-religious propaganda. Occasionally, some comradesare inclined to regard the peasants as materialist philos-
ophers and to think that it is enough to deliver a lecture
on natural science to convince the peasant of the non-existence of God. Often they fail to realise that the peas-
ant looks on God in a practical way, i.e., he is not averse
to turning away from God sometimes, but he is oftentorn by doubt: “Who knows, maybe there is a God after
all. Would it not be better to please both the Commu-
nists and God, as being safer for my affairs?” He whofails to take this peculiar mentality of the peasant into
account totally fails to understand what the relations
between Party and non-Party people should be, failsto understand that in matters concerning anti-religious
propaganda a careful approach is needed even to the
peasant’s prejudices.
THE  PARTY’S  CHIEF  TASKS
And so we arrive at the following conclusions:
1)  The chief defect of Party work in the countryside
is the absence of a wide, non-Party peasant active be-
tween the Party and the tens of millions of non-Partypeasants.
2)  The Party’s immediate task is to create such an
active around the Party in the countryside to serve asa source from which the Party could recruit new forces.
3)  Such an active can be created only by revitalis-
ing the Soviets and by drawing the peasants into thework of governing the country.
4)  To revitalise the Soviets a radical change must
be made in our approach to the non-Party peasants;there must be no domineering, and an atmosphere of
mutual confidence must be created between Party and
non-Party people.
Such are the Party’s tasks.
CONDITIONS  FOR  THE  WORK
Are there favourable conditions for carrying out these
tasks? Undoubtedly, there are. There are three such con-ditions—I have in mind the principal ones.
Firstly. The growing political activity of the rural
poor. Attention should be paid to certain specific fea-tures of the development of agriculture. Whereas the
development of industry is uniting the workers, putting
an end to the declassing of the working class and restoringit as an integral whole, in the countryside, on the con-
trary, the development of agriculture is leading to the
disintegration, to the differentiation, of the peasantry,
to the formation of two camps: the camp of the kulaks,
who are striving to capture the commanding positions inthe countryside, and the camp of the poor peasants, who
are seeking allies against the kulaks. Undoubtedly, re-
vitalising the Soviets will provide an outlet for thegrowing activity of the rural poor in order to create a
united front, headed by the workers, against the domi-
nation of the kulaks, profiteers and usurers.
Secondly. The institution of local budgets as the
material basis for revitalising the Soviets. Needless to
say, budget questions, the collections of taxes and modesof expenditure, are of major importance for the peasantry.
Hence, the participation of the peasantry in construc-
tive Soviet work is now of more urgent importancethan ever before.
Thirdly. The timely assistance rendered by the Soviet
government to the famine-stricken districts of our coun-try. Undoubtedly, this assistance has created among the
peasants an atmosphere of confidence towards the Soviet
government. It scarcely needs proof that this atmospherewill facilitate the work of revitalising the Soviets.
THE  CHIEF  THING  IS  TO  MAINTAIN
CONTACT  WITH  THE  MILLIONS
OF  NON-PARTY  PEOPLE
And so, we have before us not only certain immediate
tasks which our Party must carry out in the countryside,
but also a number of favourable conditions which facili-tate the fulfilment of these tasks. It is now a matter
of setting to work with a will on their fulfilment.
    In this connection we must bear in mind Lenin’s
immortal words to the effect that our Party’s strengthlies in maintaining living contact with the millions ofnon-Party people, that the more effective this contactis, the more durable will be our successes. He utteredthose words at the Eleventh Congress of our Party. Herethey are:
    “Among the mass of the people we (the Communists— J. St. )
are after all but a drop in the ocean , and we can administer only
when we properly express what the people are conscious of.Unless we do this the Communist Party will not lead the prole-
tariat, the proletariat will not lead the masses, and the whole
machine will collapse.”*
68
Pravda ,  No.  242,
October  23,  1924
* My italics.— J. St.
THE  PARTY’S  TASKS  IN  THE  COUNTRYSIDE
Speech  Delivered  at  a  the  Plenum
of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  R.C.P . (B.)69
October  26,  1924
Comrades, since the preceding speakers have dealt
with work in the countryside in fairly great detail, I
shall have to confine myself to a few remarks about the
specific features of the present situation.
What are the specific features of the present situa-
tion as regards the conditions of the peasants?
The first specific feature is that the old capital,
the moral capital, that we acquired in the struggle to
emancipate the peasants from the landlords is already
beginning to run out. Some comrades say: “Why is allthis fuss being made about work among the peasantry?
We have discussed the peasantry on many occasions, we
have never forgotten the peasants, why all this fussabout them?” But these comrades, apparently, fail to
understand that the old moral capital that our Party
accumulated in the period of October and in the periodof the abolition of the surplus-appropriation sys-
tem is already running out. They fail to understand that
we now need new capital. We must acquire new capitalfor the Party under the conditions of a new struggle.
We must win over the peasantry anew. That is the point.
That we helped them to throw off the landlords and toobtain land, that we ended the war, that there is now no
tsar, and that, together with the tsar, all the other tsar-
ist scorpions were swept away—the peasants have al-
ready forgotten about all this. We cannot go on livingmuch longer on this old capital. Whoever fails to under-
stand this understands nothing about the new situation,
about the new conditions created by the NEP. We arewinning over the peasantry anew—this is the first spe-
cific feature of our internal situation.
From this it follows, however, that, far from being
superfluous, the new talk about the peasantry is even
somewhat belated.
The second specific feature is that during this period
our principal classes—the workers and the peasants—have
changed, they have become different. Formerly, the prole-
tariat was declassed, scattered, while the peasants werefilled with the desire to retain the land which had been
taken from the landlords and to win the war against the
landlords. That was the situation before. Now it is differ-ent. There is no war. Industry is growing. Agriculture
is developing. The present-day proletariat is no longer a
declassed working class, but a full-blooded proletariat,whose culture and requirements are growing day by day.
As regards the peasantry, it is no longer the old peasantry,
downtrodden, terrified lest they lose the land, and readyto make every sacrifice in order to be freed from the land-
lords. It is a new class, free and active, which has already
forgotten the landlords and is now concerned about re-ceiving cheap commodities and selling its grain at the
highest possible price. Its characteristic feature is its
growing political activity. It is no longer possible tosay “The Party will settle everything,” “The Party will
arrange everything for everybody.” The peasants, not
to speak of the workers, would not understand such talk
now. We must now go deeper among the masses, we
must now explain, elucidate and convince more than wedid before. We must now win anew the confidence of the
millions of non-Party people and hold it by organisa-
tional means, primarily through the Soviets. The en-hanced political activity of the masses demands this.
But it is not only the classes that have changed. The
battle-field has changed too, for it has become different,quite different. What was the issue in the struggle before?
Whether the surplus-appropriation system was necessary
or not. Earlier than that the issue was whether landlordswere necessary or not. These questions already belong
to the past, for now there are no landlords and no surplus-
appropriation system. The issue now is not the landlords,or the surplus-appropriation system, but the price of
grain. This is an entirely new battle-field, a very wide
and intricate one, which calls for serious study andarduous struggle. Even taxes are not now the issue, for
the peasants would pay the tax if the price of grain was
“sufficiently high,” and if the price of textiles and otherurban manufactures was “sufficiently” reduced. The prin-
cipal question now is that of the market and the price of
urban manufactures and agricultural produce.
Here is what the secretary of the Gomel Gubernia
Committee writes to the Central Committee:
“In three volosts there was a mass refusal to accept
the tax forms. Receipts are coming in at only a third of
the rate that they should come in. The non-Party volost
conferences that were held were so stormy that some ofthem had to be closed, and at some of them amendments
were carried requesting the centre to reduce the tax and
to raise the price of grain. I do not know what the situa-
tion is in other gubernias, but in our gubernia it does not
coincide with the conclusions that you (meaning me)draw in your last confidential letter. The mood among
our local officials is rather bad. The countryside is
like a disturbed beehive; everybody is talking aboutthe tax and the price of grain.”
The Central Committee has received similar commu-
nications from Siberia, the South-East, and the Kursk,Tula, Nizhni-Novgorod, Ulyanovsk and other guber-
nias.
The meaning of all these communications is that the
peasant finds our price policy irksome, and he would
like to weaken, or even get rid of, the levers with which
this price policy is operated, and without which our in-dustry would not be able to advance a single step. The
peasant, as it were, says to us: “You are afraid to reduce
the price of urban manufactures to the utmost, you fearan influx of foreign goods, and so you have set up all
sorts of tariff barriers to protect our young industry
from foreign competition; but I don’t care about yourindustry, I want cheap goods, no matter where they come
from.” Or: “You are afraid to raise the price of grain
because you fear this may undermine wages, and so youhave invented all sorts of procurement bodies, you
have established a monopoly of foreign trade, and so
forth; but I don’t care about your barriers and levers,I want a high price for grain.”
Such is the meaning of the struggle in the sphere of
price policy.
A particularly striking illustration of this is provided
by the recent revolt in Georgia. Of course, this revolt
was stage-managed, but in some uyezds, particularly
the Guria Uyezd, it undoubtedly bore a mass character.
What did the peasants in Guria want? Cheap commod-ities and a high price for maize. Guria lies on the border
of the West, it sees that foreign goods are cheaper than our
Soviet goods and it would like the prices of our goods tobe reduced at least to the level of foreign prices, or the
price of maize to be raised high enough to make it pay
to buy Soviet goods. That is the economic basis of theGuria revolt in Georgia. And precisely for that reason,
that revolt is indicative of the new conditions of
the struggle all over the Soviet country. That is whythe revolt in Georgia must not be put on a par with
that in Tambov, where the issue was not the price
of manufactures and of agricultural produce, but theabolition of the surplus-appropriation system.
This new struggle in the market and in the country-
side against the Soviet price policy is inspired by thekulaks, the profiteers and other anti-Soviet elements.
Those elements are striving to divorce the vast masses of
the peasantry from the working class and thus under-mine the dictatorship of the proletariat. Hence, our task
is to isolate the kulaks and profiteers, to wrest the toiling
peasants from them, to draw the toiling peasants intoconstructive Soviet work and thereby give them an
outlet for their political activity. We can do this, and
we are already doing it, for it is in the interest of thetoiling masses of the peasantry, and of the rural poor
in particular, to maintain the alliance with the work-
ers, to maintain the proletarian dictatorship and, con-sequently, to maintain those economic levers by which
the dictatorship is upheld.
What is needed for this? First of all we must set
to work to create around the Party in the countryside
numerous non-Party peasant cadres who could link ourParty with the millions of peasants. Unless we do this
it will be useless to talk about wresting the peasantry
from the kulaks and profiteers, about winning and keep-ing the tens of millions of peasants for the Party. This is
a difficult matter, of course. But difficulty must not be
an insuperable barrier for us. We must send into thecountryside to help our Party units hundreds, and per-
haps even thousands (it is not a matter here of the num-
ber), of experienced Party workers who are familiar withthe countryside and who are capable of initiating and form-
ing an active of non-Party peasants. In this we must
bear in mind the peasants’ natural distrust of towns-folk, a distrust which still exists in the countryside,
and which will probably not be dispelled quickly. You
know how the peasants welcome a townsman, especiallyif he is rather young: “Here’s another one of those good-
for-nothings from the town. He wants to pull the wool
over our eyes, that’s certain.” This is because the peas-ants have most confidence in people who themselves
engage in farming and know something about it. That
is why I think that in our work in the countryside wemust now focus our attention on creating an active from
among the peasants themselves, from which the Party
could recruit new forces.
But how is that to be done? In my opinion, the first
thing to be done for this purpose is to revitalise the So-
viets. All the active, honest, enterprising and politicallyconscious elements, particularly ex-Red Army men, who
are the most politically conscious and enterprising among
the peasants, must be drawn into the work of the Soviets.
Why the Soviets? Because, firstly, the Soviets are organs
of government, and it is the immediate task of the Partyto draw the toiling peasantry into the work of governing
the country. Because, secondly, the Soviets are organs
of the bond between the workers and peasants, organsthrough which the workers lead the peasants, and lead-
ership of the peasants by the workers is now more nec-
essary than ever before. Because, thirdly, the Sovietsdraw up the local budgets, and the budget is a vital mat-
ter for the peasantry. Because, lastly, the Soviets are
the surest barometer of the mood of the peasantry,and it is our bounden duty to heed the voice of the peas-
antry. In the countryside there are also other extremely
important non-Party organisations, such as the peasant,committees, the co-operatives, and the organisations of
the Young Communist League. But there is a danger
that, under certain circumstances, these organisationsmay become purely peasant associations, which may be-
come divorced from the workers. To prevent this happen-
ing, the activities of these organisations must be co-ordinated in the Soviets, the very structure of which
ensures the leadership of the peasants by the workers.
That is why, at the present time, when peasant organisa-tions are springing up like mushrooms, the revitalising
of the Soviets is a task of prime importance.
Recently, at a conference of village units, I called
upon the comrades ruthlessly to criticise the defects in
our Party work in the countryside.* This caused some
displeasure. It appears that there are Communists who
* See this volume, pp. 315-326.— Ed.
are afraid of criticism, who do not want to expose the
defects in our work. That is dangerous, comrades. I
will say more: fear of self-criticism, or of criticism bynon-Party people, is a most dangerous disease at the
present time. For, either one thing or the other: either
we criticise ourselves and allow non-Party people tocriticise our work—in which case we can hope that our
work in the countryside will make progress; or we do not
permit such criticism—in which case we shall be criti-cised by events like the revolts in Kronstadt, in Tambov
and in Georgia. I think that criticism of the first kind
is preferable to criticism of the second kind. That is whywe must not fear criticism, whether from Party people
or, especially, from non-Party people.
First  published  in  the  book:
J.  Stalin,  The  Peasant  Question ,
Moscow  and  Leningrad,  1925
ENTRY  IN  THE  RED  BOOK
OF  THE  DYNAMO  FACTORY
My wish for the workers of Dynamo, as for the
workers of all Russia, is that our industry may forge
ahead, that the number of proletarians in Russia may
increase in the near future to 20-30 millions, that collec-tive farming in the countryside may thrive and bring
individual farming under its influence, that a highly
developed industry and collective farming may finallyweld the proletarians of the factories and the labourers
of the soil into a single socialist army. . . .
J. Stalin
7/XI 24
First  published
in  Pravda ,  No.  152,
June  4,  1930
TO  THE  FIRST  CA V ALRY  ARMY
Greetings to the glorious Cavalry Army, the terror
of the whiteguard legions of Krasnov and Denikin,Wrangel and Pilsudski!
Greetings to the leaders of the Cavalry Army, Com-
rade Budyonny, the Red peasant general, and ComradeV oroshilov, the Red worker general!
Men of the Cavalry Army! Your Red Banners are
covered with the unfading glory of resounding victorieson the fronts of the four years’ civil war. On this day of
celebration of the fifth anniversary you must vow that
you will remain faithful to these banners to the end ofyour days, that you will fulfil with honour your duty
to your socialist Motherland when the working class calls
upon you to fight new battles for the victory of commu-nism.
  Yours,
J. Stalin
Pravda ,  No.  261,
November  16, 1924
TO  KRESTYANSKAYA  GAZETA
GREETINGS   TO   KRESTYANSKAYA   GAZETA ,   FAITHFUL
GUARDIAN  OF  THE  GREAT  CAUSE  OF  THE  ALLIANCE
OF  THE  WORKERS  AND  PEASANTS!
Krestyanskaya Gazeta! Remember these three command-
ments:
1) Guard your peasant correspondents like the apple
of your eye. They are your army;
2) Establish the closest ties with the most honest
and most politically conscious peasants, especially with
ex-Red Army men. They are your support;
3) Disseminate truth in the countryside, and proclaim
for all the world to hear, untiringly proclaim, that the
emancipation of the peasants is inconceivable without a
fraternal alliance with the workers, that labour cannotachieve victory over capital unless the peasants are led
by the workers.
J. Stalin
Krestyanskaya  Gazeta ,  No.  51,
November  17,  1924
TROTSKYISM  OR  LENINISM?
Speech  Delivered  at  the  Plenum
of  the  Communist  Group  in  the  A.U.C.C.T.U.
November  19,  1924
Comrades, after Kamenev’s comprehensive report
there is little left for me to say. I shall therefore confine
myself to exposing certain legends that are being spreadby Trotsky and his supporters about the October
uprising, about Trotsky’s role in the uprising, about the
Party and the preparation for October, and so forth. Ishall also touch upon Trotskyism as a peculiar ideology
that is incompatible with Leninism, and upon the Party’s
tasks in connection with Trotsky’s latest literary pro-nouncements.
I
THE  FACTS  ABOUT  THE  OCTOBER  UPRISING
First of all about the October uprising. Rumours
are being vigorously spread among members of the Partythat the Central Committee as a whole was opposed to an
uprising in October 1917. The usual story is that on
October 10, when the Central Committee adopted thedecision to organise the uprising, the majority of the
Central Committee at first spoke against an upris-
ing, but, so the story runs, at that moment a worker burstin on the meeting of the Central Committee and said:
“You are deciding against an uprising, but I tell you
that there will be an uprising all the same, in spite of
everything.” And so, after that threat, the story runs,the Central Committee, which is alleged to have become
frightened, raised the question of an uprising afresh and
adopted a decision to organise it.
This is not merely a rumour, comrades. It is related
by the well-known John Reed in his book Ten Days.
Reed was remote from our Party and, of course, couldnot know the history of our secret meeting on October 10,
and, consequently, he was taken in by the gossip spread
by people like Sukhanov. This story was later passed roundand repeated in a number of pamphlets written by Trots-
kyites, including one of the latest pamphlets on October
written by Syrkin. These rumours have been stronglysupported in Trotsky’s latest literary pronouncements.
It scarcely needs proof that all these and similar
“Arabian Nights” fairy tales are not in accordance withthe truth, that in fact nothing of the kind happened,
nor could have happened, at the meeting of the Central
Committee. Consequently, we could ignore these absurdrumours; after all, lots of rumours are fabricated in the
office rooms of the oppositionists or those who are re-
mote from the Party. Indeed, we have ignored themtill now; for example, we paid no attention to John
Reed’s mistakes and did not take the trouble to rectify
them. After Trotsky’s latest pronouncements, however,it is no longer possible to ignore such legends, for attempts
are being made now to bring up our young people on
them and, unfortunately, some results have alreadybeen achieved in this respect. In view of this, I must
counter these absurd rumours with the actual facts.
I take the minutes of the meeting of the Central Com-
mittee of our Party on October 10 (23), 1917. Present:
Lenin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Stalin, Trotsky, Sverdlov,Uritsky, Dzerzhinsky, Kollontai, Bubnov, Sokolnikov,
Lomov. The question of the current situation and the
uprising was discussed. After the discussion, ComradeLenin’s resolution on the uprising was put to the vote.
The resolution was adopted by a majority of 10 against 2.
Clear, one would think: by a majority of 10 against 2,the Central Committee decided to proceed with the imme-
diate, practical work of organising the uprising. At
this very same meeting the Central Committee elected apolitical  centre to direct the uprising; this centre, called
the Political Bureau, consisted of Lenin, Zinoviev,
Stalin, Kamenev, Trotsky, Sokolnikov and Bubnov.
Such are the facts.
These minutes at one stroke destroy several legends.
They destroy the legend that the majority on the CentralCommittee was opposed to an uprising. They also de-
stroy the legend that on the question of the uprising
the Central Committee was on the verge of a split. It isclear from the minutes that the opponents of an imme-
diate uprising—Kamenev and Zinoviev—were elected to
the body that was to exercise political direction of theuprising on a par with those who were in favour of
an uprising. There was no question of a split, nor could
there be.
Trotsky asserts that in October our Party had a
Right wing in the persons of Kamenev and Zinoviev,
who, he says, were almost Social-Democrats. What onecannot understand then is how, under those circumstances,
it could happen that the Party avoided a split; how it
could happen that the disagreements with Kamenev and
Zinoviev lasted only a few days; how it could happen
that, in spite of those disagreements, the Party appointedthese comrades to highly important posts, elected them
to the political centre of the uprising, and so forth.
Lenin’s implacable attitude towards Social-Democratsis sufficiently well known in the Party; the Party knows
that Lenin would not for a single moment have agreed to
have Social-Democratically-minded comrades in the Par-ty, let alone in highly important posts. How, then, are we
to explain the fact that the Party avoided a split? The
explanation is that in spite of the disagreements, thesecomrades were old Bolsheviks who stood on the common
ground of Bolshevism. What was that common ground?
Unity of views on the fundamental questions: the charac-ter of the Russian revolution, the driving forces of the
revolution, the role of the peasantry, the principles
of Party leadership, and so forth. Had there not beenthis common ground, a split would have been inevitable.
There was no split, and the disagreements lasted only
a few days, because, and only because, Kamenev andZinoviev were Leninists, Bolsheviks.
Let us now pass to the legend about Trotsky’s spe-
cial role in the October uprising. The Trotskyites arevigorously spreading rumours that Trotsky inspired and
was the sole leader of the October uprising. These ru-
mours are being spread with exceptional zeal by the so-called editor of Trotsky’s works, Lentsner. Trotsky him-
self, by consistently avoiding mention of the Party, the
Central Committee and the Petrograd Committeeof the Party, by saying nothing about the leading role
of these organisations in the uprising and vigorously
pushing himself forward as the central figure in the Oc-
tober uprising, voluntarily or involuntarily helps to
spread the rumours about the special role he is supposedto have played in the uprising. I am far from denying
Trotsky’s undoubtedly important role in the uprising.
I must say, however, that Trotsky did not play any spe-cial role in the October uprising, nor could he do so;
being chairman of the Petrograd Soviet, he merely car-
ried out the will of the appropriate Party bodies, whichdirected every step that Trotsky took. To philistines like
Sukhanov, all this may seem strange, but the facts, the
true facts, wholly and fully confirm what I say.
Let us take the minutes of the next meeting of the
Central Committee, the one held on October 16 (29),
1917. Present: the members of the Central Committee,plus representatives of the Petrograd Committee, plus
representatives of the military organisation, factory com-
mittees, trade unions and the railwaymen. Among thosepresent, besides the members of the Central Committee,
were: Krylenko, Shotman, Kalinin, V olodarsky, Shlyap-
nikov, Lacis, and others, twenty-five in all. The ques-tion of the uprising was discussed from the purely prac-
tical-organisational aspect. Lenin’s resolution on the
uprising was adopted by a majority of 20 against 2,three abstaining. A practical  centre was elected for
the organisational leadership of the uprising. Who was
elected to this centre? The following five: Sverdlov,Stalin, Dzerzhinsky, Bubnov, Uritsky. The functions
of the practical centre: to direct all the practical organs
of the uprising in conformity with the directives of theCentral Committee. Thus, as you see, something “terri-
ble” happened at this meeting of the Central Commit-
tee, i.e., “strange to relate,” the “inspirer,” the “chief
figure,” the “sole leader” of the uprising, Trotsky, was
not elected to the practical centre, which was called uponto direct the uprising. How is this to be reconciled with
the current opinion about Trotsky’s special role? Is not
all this somewhat “strange,” as Sukhanov, or the Trotsky-ites, would say? And yet, strictly speaking, there is noth-
ing strange about it, for neither in the Party, nor in
the October uprising, did Trotsky play any special  role,
nor could he do so, for he was a relatively new man in
our Party in the period of October. He, like all the re-
sponsible workers, merely carried out the will of the Cen-tral Committee and of its organs. Whoever is familiar
with the mechanics of Bolshevik Party leadership will
have no difficulty in understanding that it could notbe otherwise: it would have been enough for Trotsky to
have gone against the will of the Central Committee to
have been deprived of influence on the course of events.This talk about Trotsky’s special role is a legend that is
being spread by obliging “Party” gossips.
This, of course, does not mean that the October
uprising did not have its inspirer. It did have its in-
spirer and leader, but this was Lenin, and none other
than Lenin, that same Lenin whose resolutions the Cen-tral Committee adopted when deciding the question of
the uprising, that same Lenin who, in spite of what
Trotsky says, was not prevented by being in hiding frombeing the actual inspirer of the uprising. It is foolish
and ridiculous to attempt now, by gossip about Lenin
having been in hiding, to obscure the indubitable factthat the inspirer of the uprising was the leader of the
Party, V . I. Lenin.
Such are the facts.
Granted, we are told, but it cannot be denied that
Trotsky fought well in the period of October. Yes, thatis true, Trotsky did, indeed, fight well in October; but
Trotsky was not the only one who fought well in the
period of October. Even people like the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who then stood side by side with the
Bolsheviks, also fought well. In general, I must say that
in the period of a victorious uprising, when the enemy isisolated and the uprising is growing, it is not difficult
to fight well. At such moments even backward people
become heroes.
The proletarian struggle is not, however, an uninter-
rupted advance, an unbroken chain of victories. The pro-
letarian struggle also has its trials, its defeats. The genu-ine revolutionary is not one who displays courage in
the period of a victorious uprising, but one who, while
fighting well during the victorious advance of the revo-lution, also displays courage when the revolution is in
retreat, when the proletariat suffers defeat; who does
not lose his head and does not funk when the revolutionsuffers reverses, when the enemy achieves success; who
does not become panic-stricken or give way to despair
when the revolution is in a period of retreat. The LeftSocialist-Revolutionaries did not fight badly in the pe-
riod of October, and they supported the Bolsheviks. But
who does not know that those “brave” fighters becamepanic-stricken in the period of Brest, when the advance
of German imperialism drove them to despair and hyste ria?
It is a very sad but indubitable fact that Trotsky, whofought well in the period of October, did not, in the period
of Brest, in the period when the revolution suffered tem-
porary reverses, possess the courage to display sufficient
staunchness at that difficult moment and to refrain from
following in the footsteps of the Left Socialist-Revolu-tionaries. Beyond question, that moment was a difficult
one; one had to display exceptional courage and imper-
turbable coolness not to be dismayed, to retreat in goodtime, to accept peace in good time, to withdraw the pro-
letarian army out of range of the blows of German im-
perialism, to preserve the peasant reserves and, afterobtaining a respite in this way, to strike at the enemy with
renewed force. Unfortunately, Trotsky was found to lack
this courage and revolutionary staunchness at that diffi-
cult moment.
In Trotsky’s opinion, the principal lesson of the pro-
letarian revolution is “not to funk” during October.That is wrong, for Trotsky’s assertion contains only a
particle  of the truth about the lessons of the revolution.
The whole  truth about the lessons of the proletarian rev-
olution is “not to funk” not only when the revolution
is advancing, but also when it is in retreat, when the
enemy is gaining the upper hand and the revolutionis suffering reverses. The revolution did not end with
October. October was only the beginning of the prole-
tarian revolution. It is bad to funk when the tide ofinsurrection is rising; but it is worse to funk when the
revolution is passing through severe trials after power
has been captured. To retain power on the morrowof the revolution is no less important than to capture
power. If Trotsky funked during the period of Brest,
when our revolution was passing through severe trials,when it was almost a matter of “surrendering” power,
he ought to know that the mistakes committed by
Kamenev and Zinoviev in October are quite irrelevant
here.
That is how matters stand with the legends about the
October uprising.
II
THE  PARTY  AND  THE  PREPARATION
FOR  OCTOBER
Let us now pass to the question of the preparation
for October.
Listening to Trotsky, one might think that during
the whole of the period of preparation, from March to
October, the Bolshevik Party did nothing but marktime; that it was being corroded by internal contradic-
tions and hindered Lenin in every way; that had it not
been for Trotsky, nobody knows how the October Revo-lution would have ended. It is rather amusing to hear
this strange talk about the Party from Trotsky, who de-
clares in this same “preface” to V olume III that “the chiefinstrument of the proletarian revolution is the Party,”
that “without the Party, apart from the Party, by-passing
the Party, with a substitute for the Party, the proletarianrevolution cannot be victorious.” Allah himself would
not understand how our revolution could have succeeded
if “its chief instrument” proved to be useless, while suc-cess was impossible, as it appears, “by-passing the Party.”
But this is not the first time that Trotsky treats us to
oddities. It must be supposed that this amusing talkabout our Party is one of Trotsky’s usual oddities.
Let us briefly review the history of the preparation
for October according to periods.
1) The period of the Party ’s new orientation  (March-
April ). The major facts of this period:
a) the overthrow of tsarism;b) the formation of the Provisional Government (dic-
tatorship of the bourgeoisie);
c) the appearance of Soviets of Workers’ and Sol-
diers’ Deputies (dictatorship of the proletariat and peas-
antry);
d) dual power;e) the April demonstration;
f) the first crisis of power.
The characteristic feature of this period is the fact
that there existed together, side by side and simul-
taneously, both the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie and
the dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry; thelatter trusts the former, believes that it is striving for
peace, voluntarily surrenders power to the bourgeoisie and
thereby becomes an appendage of the bourgeoisie. Thereare as yet no serious conflicts between the two dictator-
ships. On the other hand, there is the “Contact Com-
mittee.”
70
This was the greatest turning point in the history
of Russia and an unprecedented turning point in the
history of our Party. The old, pre-revolutionary plat-form of direct overthrow of the government was clear
and definite, but it was no longer suitable for the new
conditions of the struggle. It was now no longer possi-ble to go straight out for the overthrow of the govern-
ment, for the latter was connected with the Soviets,
then under the influence of the defencists, and the Partywould have had to wage war against both the govern-
ment and the Soviets, a war that would have been beyond
its strength. Nor was it possible to pursue a policy of
supporting the Provisional Government, for it was the
government of imperialism. Under the new conditionsof the struggle the Party had to adopt a new orientation.
The Party (its majority) groped its way towards this
new orientation. It adopted the policy of pressure on theProvisional Government through the Soviets on the ques-
tion of peace and did not venture to step forward at once
from the old slogan of the dictatorship of the proletar-iat and peasantry to the new slogan of power to the
Soviets. The aim of this halfway policy was to enable the
Soviets to discern the actual imperialist nature of theProvisional Government on the basis of the concrete
questions of peace, and in this way to wrest the Soviets
from the Provisional Government. But this was a pro-foundly mistaken position, for it gave rise to pacifist
illusions, brought grist to the mill of defencism and
hindered the revolutionary education of the masses. Atthat time I shared this mistaken position with other
Party comrades and fully abandoned it only in the mid-
dle of April, when I associated myself with Lenin’stheses. A new orientation was needed. This new orien-
tation was given to the Party by Lenin, in his celebrat-
ed April Theses.
71 I shall not deal with these theses, for
they are known to everybody. Were there any disagree-
ments between the Party and Lenin at that time? Yes,
there were. How long did these disagreements last?Not more than two weeks. The City Conference of the
Petrograd organisation
72 (in the latter half of April),
which adopted Lenin’s theses, marked a turning pointin our Party’s development. The All-Russian April Con-
ference
73 (at the end of April) merely completed on an
all-Russian scale the work of the Petrograd Conference,
rallying nine-tenths of the Party around this united
Party position.
Now, seven years later, Trotsky gloats maliciously
over the past disagreements among the Bolsheviks and
depicts them as a struggle waged as if there were almosttwo parties within Bolshevism. But, firstly, Trotsky dis-
gracefully exaggerates and inflates the matter, for the
Bolshevik Party lived through these disagreements with-out the slightest shock. Secondly, our Party would be
a caste and not a revolutionary party if it did not permit
different shades of opinion in its ranks. Moreover, it iswell known that there were disagreements among us
even before that, for example, in the period of the Third
Duma, but they did not shake the unity of our Party.Thirdly, it will not be out of place to ask what was then
the position of Trotsky himself, who is now  gloating
so eagerly over the past disagreements among the Bol-sheviks. Lentsner, the so-called editor of Trotsky’s works,
assures us that Trotsky’s letters from America (March)
“wholly anticipated” Lenin’s Letters from Afar
74 March),
which served as the basis of Lenin’s April Theses. That
is what he says: “wholly anticipated.” Trotsky does not
object to this analogy; apparently, he accepts it withthanks. But, firstly, Trotsky’s letters “do not in the
least resemble” Lenin’s letters either in spirit or in con-
clusions, for they wholly and entirely reflect Trotsky’santi-Bolshevik slogan of “no tsar, but a workers’ govern-
ment,” a slogan which implies a revolution without  the
peasantry. It is enough to glance through these twoseries of letters to be convinced of this. Secondly, if
what Lentsner says is true, how are we to explain the
fact that Lenin on the very next day after his arrival
from abroad considered it necessary to dissociate him-
self from Trotsky? Who does not know of Lenin’s re-peated statements that Trotsky’s slogan of “ no tsar, but
a workers ’ government ” was an attempt “to skip the
still unexhausted peasant movement,” that this sloganmeant “playing at the seizure of power by a workers’
government”?*
What can there be in common between Lenin’s Bol-
shevik theses and Trotsky’s anti-Bolshevik scheme with
its “playing at the seizure of power”? And what prompts
this passion that some people display for comparinga wretched hovel with Mont Blanc? For what purpose
did Lentsner find it necessary to make this risky ad-
dition to the heap of old legends about our revolutionof still another legend, about Trotsky’s letters from
America “anticipating” Lenin’s well-known Letters from
Afar **?
* See Lenin’s Works , V ol. XX, p. 104. See also the reports made
at the Petrograd City Conference and at the All-Russian Confer-
ence of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) (middle and end of April 1917).
** Among these legends must be included also the very wide-
spread story that Trotsky was the “sole” or “chief organiser” of
the victories on the fronts of the Civil War. I must declare, com-rades, in the interest of truth, that this version is quite out of accord
with the facts. I am far from denying that Trotsky played an impor-
tant role in the Civil War. But I must emphatically declare that thehigh honour of being the organiser of our victories belongs not to
individuals, but to the great collective body of advanced workers
in our country, the Russian Communist Party. Perhaps it will notbe out of place to quote a few examples. You know that Kolchak
and Denikin were regarded as the principal enemies of the Soviet
Republic. You know that our country breathed freely only afterthose enemies were defeated. Well, history shows that both those
No wonder it is said that an obliging fool is more
dangerous than an enemy.
2) The period of the revolutionary mobilisation of the
masses  (May-August ). The major facts of this period:
a) the April demonstration in Petrograd and the for-
mation of the coalition government with the participa-tion of “Socialists”;
b) the May Day demonstrations in the principal cen-
tres of Russia with the slogan of “a democratic peace”;
c) the June demonstration in Petrograd with the prin-
cipal slogan: “Down with the capitalist ministers!”;
d) the June offensive at the front and the reverses of
the Russian army;
e) the July armed demonstration in Petrograd; the
Cadet ministers resign from the government;
f) counter-revolutionary troops are called in from
the front; the editorial offices of Pravda  are wrecked;
enemies, i.e., Kolchak and Denikin, were routed by our troops
in spite  of Trotsky’s plans.
    Judge for yourselves.    1) Kolchak.  This is in the summer of 1919. Our troops are ad-
vancing against Kolchak and are operating near Ufa. A meeting
of the Central Committee is held. Trotsky proposes that the advancebe halted along the line of the River Belaya (near Ufa), leaving the
Urals in the hands of Kolchak, and that part of the troops be
withdrawn from the Eastern Front and transferred to the SouthernFront. A heated debate takes place. The Central Committee dis-
agrees with Trotsky, being of the opinion that the Urals, with its
factories and railway network, must not be left in the hands ofKolchak, for the latter could easily recuperate there, organise a
strong force and reach the V olga again; Kolchak must first be driv-
en beyond the Ural range into the Siberian steppes, and onlyafter that has been done should forces be transferred to the South.
the counter-revolution launches a struggle against the
Soviets and a new coalition government is formed,
headed by Kerensky;
g) the Sixth Congress of our Party, which issues the
slogan to prepare for an armed uprising;
h) the counter-revolutionary Conference of State and
the general strike in Moscow;
i) Kornilov’s unsuccessful march on Petrograd, the
revitalising of the Soviets; the Cadets resign and a“Directory” is formed.
The characteristic feature of this period is the in-
tensification of the crisis and the upsetting of the unsta-ble equilibrium between the Soviets and the Provisional
Government which, for good or evil, had existed in
The Central Committee rejects Trotsky’s plan. Trotsky hands in
his resignation. The Central Committee refuses to accept it. Com-mander-in-Chief Vatsetis, who supported Trotsky’s plan, resigns.
His place is taken by a new Commander-in-Chief, Kamenev.
From that moment Trotsky ceases to take a direct part in the affairsof the Eastern Front.
2) Denikin.  This is in the autumn of 1919. The offensive
against Denikin is not proceeding successfully. The “steel ring”around Mamontov (Mamontov’s raid) is obviously collapsing.
Denikin captures Kursk. Denikin is approaching Orel. Trotsky
is summoned from the Southern Front to attend a meeting of the Cen-tral Committee. The Central Committee regards the situation as
alarming and decides to send new military leaders to the Southern
Front and to withdraw Trotsky. The new military leaders demand“no intervention” by Trotsky in the affairs of the Southern Front.
Trotsky ceases to take a direct part in the affairs of the Southern
Front. Operations on the Southern Front, right up to the captureof Rostov-on-Don and Odessa by our troops, proceed without
Trotsky.
Let anybody try to refute these facts.
the preceding period. Dual power has become intolerable
for both sides. The fragile edifice of the “Contact Com-
mittee” is tottering. “Crisis of power” and “ministe-rial re-shuffle” are the most fashionable catch-words of
the day. The crisis at the front and the disruption in
the rear are doing their work, strengthening the extremeflanks and squeezing the defencist compromisers from both
sides. The revolution is mobilising, causing the mobili-
sation of the counter-revolution. The counter-revolution,in its turn, is spurring on the revolution, stirring up
new waves of the revolutionary tide. The question of
transferring power to the new class becomes the imme-diate question of the day.
Were there disagreements in our Party then? Yes,
there were. They were, however, of a purely practicalcharacter, despite the assertions of Trotsky, who is try-
ing to discover a “Right” and a “Left” wing in the Party.
That is to say, they were such disagreements as are in-evitable where there is vigorous Party life and real Party
activity.
Trotsky is wrong in asserting that the April dem-
onstration in Petrograd gave rise to disagreements in
the Central Committee. The Central Committee was abso-
lutely united on this question and condemned the attemptof a group of comrades to arrest the Provisional Govern-
ment at a time when the Bolsheviks were in a minority
both in the Soviets and in the army. Had Trotsky writ-ten the “history” of October not according to Sukhanov,
but according to authentic documents, he would easily
have convinced himself of the error of his assertion.
Trotsky is absolutely wrong in asserting that the at-
tempt, “on Lenin’s initiative,” to arrange a demonstration
on June 10 was described as “adventurism” by the “Right-
wing” members of the Central Committee. Had Trotsky
not written according to Sukhanov he would surelyhave known that the June 10 demonstration was post-
poned with the full agreement of Lenin, and that he
urged the necessity of postponing it in a big speech hedelivered at the well-known meeting of the Petrograd
Committee (see minutes of the Petrograd Committee
75).
Trotsky is absolutely wrong in speaking about “tragic”
disagreements in the Central Committee in connec-
tion with the July armed demonstration. Trotsky is
simply inventing in asserting that some members of theleading group in the Central Committee “could not but
regard the July episode as a harmful adventure.” Trotsky,
who was then not yet a member of our Central Committeeand was merely our Soviet parliamentary, might, of
course, not have known that the Central Committee re-
garded the July demonstration only as a means of sound-ing the enemy, that the Central Committee (and Lenin)
did not want to convert, did not even think of convert-
ing, the demonstration into an uprising at a time when theSoviets in the capitals still supported the defencists.
It is quite possible that some Bolsheviks did whimper
over the July defeat. I know, for example, that some ofthe Bolsheviks who were arrested at the time were even
prepared to desert our ranks. But to draw inferences
from this against certain supposed “Rights,” supposed to be
members of the Central Committee, is a shameful dis-tortion of history.
Trotsky is wrong in declaring that during the Korni-
lov days a section of the Party leaders inclined towards
the formation of a bloc with the defencists, towards sup-
porting the Provisional Government. He, of course, is
referring to those same alleged “Rights” who keep him
awake at night. Trotsky is wrong, for there exist docu-ments, such as the Central Organ of the Party of that
time, which refute his statements. Trotsky refers to
Lenin’s letter to the Central Committee warning againstsupporting Kerensky; but Trotsky fails to understand
Lenin’s letters, their significance, their purpose. In his
letters Lenin sometimes deliberately ran ahead, push-ing into the forefront mistakes that might possibly  b e
committed, and criticising them in advance with the
object of warning the Party and of safeguarding it againstmistakes. Sometimes he would even magnify a “trifle”
and “make a mountain out of a molehill” for the same
pedagogical purpose. The leader of the Party, especiallyif he is in hiding, cannot act otherwise, for he must see
further than his comrades-in-arms, he must sound the
alarm over every possible mistake, even over “trifles.”But to infer from such letters of Lenin’s (and he wrote
quite a number of such letters) the existence of “tragic”
disagreements and to trumpet them forth means not tounderstand Lenin’s letters, means not to know Lenin.
This, probably, explains why Trotsky sometimes is wide
of the mark. In short: there were no disagreements in theCentral Committee during the Kornilov revolt, abso-
lutely none.
After the July defeat disagreement did indeed arise
between the Central Committee and Lenin on the ques-
tion of the future of the Soviets. It is known that Lenin,
wishing to concentrate the Party’s attention on the taskof preparing the uprising outside the Soviets, warned
against any infatuation with the latter, for he was of the
opinion that, having been defiled by the defencists,
they had become useless. The Central Committee and the
Sixth Party Congress took a more cautious line and de-cided that there were no grounds for excluding the pos-
sibility that the Soviets would revive. The Kornilov
revolt showed that this decision was correct. This dis-agreement, however, was of no great consequence for
the Party. Later, Lenin admitted that the line taken by
the Sixth Congress had been correct. It is interestingthat Trotsky has not clutched at this disagreement and
has not magnified it to “monstrous” proportions.
A united and solid party, the hub of the revolution-
ary mobilisation of the masses—such was the picture
presented by our Party in that period.
3) The period of organisation of the assault  (Septem-
ber-October ). The major facts of this period:
a) the convocation of the Democratic Conference and
the collapse of the idea of a bloc with the Cadets;
b) the Moscow and Petrograd Soviets go over to the
side of the Bolsheviks;
c) the Congress of Soviets of the Northern Region
76;
the Petrograd Soviet decides against the withdrawal of
the troops;
d) the decision of the Central Committee on the up-
rising and the formation of the Revolutionary Military
Committee of the Petrograd Soviet;
e) the Petrograd garrison decides to render the
Petrograd Soviet armed support; a network of com-
missars of the Revolutionary Military Committee is
organised;
f) the Bolshevik armed forces go into action; the
members of the Provisional Government are arrested;
g) the Revolutionary Military Committee of the
Petrograd Soviet takes power; the Second Congress of
Soviets sets up the Council of People’s Commissars.
The characteristic feature of this period is the rap-
id growth of the crisis, the utter consternation reigning
among the ruling circles, the isolation of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and the mass flight
of the vacillating elements to the side of the Bolsheviks.
A peculiar feature of the tactics of the revolution in thisperiod must be noted, namely, that the revolution strove
to take every, or nearly every, step in its attack in the
guise of defence. Undoubtedly, the refusal to allow thetroops to be withdrawn from Petrograd was an important
step in the revolution’s attack; nevertheless, this attack
was carried out under the slogan of protecting Petrogradfrom possible attack by the external enemy. Undoubt-
edly, the formation of the Revolutionary Military Commit-
tee was a still more important step in the attack uponthe Provisional Government; nevertheless, it was carried
out under the slogan of organising Soviet control over the
actions of the Headquarters of the Military Area. Undoubt-edly, the open transition of the garrison to the side of
the Revolutionary Military Committee and the organi-
sation of a network of Soviet Commissars marked thebeginning of the uprising; nevertheless, the revolu-
tion took these steps under the slogan of protecting the
Petrograd Soviet from possible action by the counter-revolution. The revolution, as it were, masked its ac-
tions in attack under the cloak of defence in order the
more easily to draw the irresolute, vacillating elementsinto its orbit. This, no doubt, explains the outwardly
defensive character of the speeches, articles and slogans
of that period, the inner content of which, none the less,
was of a profoundly attacking nature.
Were there disagreements in the Central Committee
in that period? Yes, there were, and fairly important
ones at that. I have already spoken about the disagree-
ments over the uprising. They are fully reflected in theminutes of the meetings of the Central Committee of
October 10 and 16. I shall, therefore, not repeat what
I have already said. Three questions must now be dealtwith: participation in the Pre-parliament, the role of
the Soviets in the uprising, and the date of the upris-
ing. This is all the more necessary because Trotsky, inhis zeal to push himself into a prominent place, has
“inadvertently” misrepresented the stand Lenin took on
the last two questions.
Undoubtedly, the disagreements on the question of
the Pre-parliament were of a serious nature. What was,
so to speak, the aim of the Pre-parliament? It was:to help the bourgeoisie to push the Soviets into the back-
ground and to lay the foundations of bourgeois parliamen-
tarism. Whether the Pre-parliament could have accom-plished this task in the revolutionary situation that had
arisen is another matter. Events showed that this aim
could not be realised, and the Pre-parliament itself was aKornilovite abortion. There can be no doubt, however,
that it was precisely this aim that the Mensheviks and
Socialist-Revolutionaries pursued in setting up the Pre-parliament. What could the Bolsheviks’ participation in
the Pre-parliament mean under those circumstances?
Nothing but deceiving the proletarian masses about thetrue nature of the Pre-parliament. This is the chief ex-
planation for the passion with which Lenin, in his letters,
scourged those who were in favour of taking part in the
Pre-parliament. There can be no doubt that it was a
grave mistake to have taken part in the Pre-parliament.
It would be a mistake, however, to think, as Trotsky
does, that those who were in favour of taking part in
the Pre-parliament went into it for the purpose of con-structive work, for the purpose of “directing the working-
class movement” “into the channel of Social-Democracy.”
That is not at all the case. It is not true. Had that beenthe case, the Party would not have been able to rectify
this mistake “in two ticks” by demonstratively walking
out of the Pre-parliament. Incidentally, the swift recti-fication of this mistake was an expression of our Party’s
vitality and revolutionary might.
And now, permit me to correct a slight inaccuracy
that has crept into the report of Lentsner, the “editor”
of Trotsky’s works, about the meeting of the Bolshevik
group at which a decision on the question of the Pre-parliament was taken. Lentsner says that there were
two reporters at this meeting, Kamenev and Trotsky.
That is not true. Actually, there were four reporters:two in favour of boycotting the Pre-parliament (Trotsky
and Stalin), and two in favour of participation (Kamenev
and Nogin).
Trotsky is in a still worse position when dealing
with the stand Lenin took on the question of the form
of the uprising. According to Trotsky, it appears thatLenin’s view was that the Party should take power in
October “independently of and behind the back of the
Soviet.” Later on, criticising this nonsense, which heascribes to Lenin, Trotsky “cuts capers” and
finally delivers the following condescending utterance:
“That would have been a mistake.” Trotsky is here utter-
ing a falsehood about Lenin, he is misrepresenting
Lenin’s views on the role of the Soviets in the uprising.A pile of documents can be cited, showing that Lenin
proposed that power be taken through  the Soviets, either
the Petrograd or the Moscow Soviet, and not behind the
back  of the Soviets. Why did Trotsky have to invent this
more than strange legend about Lenin?
Nor is Trotsky in a better position when he “ana-
lyses” the stand taken by the Central Committee and Lenin
on the question of the date of the uprising. Reportingthe famous meeting of the Central Committee of October10, Trotsky asserts that at that meeting “a resolution
was carried to the effect that the uprising should take
place not later than October 15.” From this it appearsthat the Central Committee fixed October 15 as the date
of the uprising and then itself violated that decision
by postponing the date of the uprising to October 25.Is that true? No, it is not. During that period the Central
Committee passed only two resolutions on the upris-
ing—one on October 10 and the other on October 16.Let us read these resolutions.
The Central Committee’s resolution of October 10:
“The Central Committee recognises that the international
position of the Russian revolution (the mutiny in the Germannavy, which is an extreme manifestation of the growth throughout
Europe of the world socialist revolution, and the threat of peace[*]
between the imperialists with the object of strangling the revo-lution in Russia) as well as the military situation (the indubitable
decision of the Russian bourgeoisie and Kerensky and Co. to sur-
render Petrograd to the Germans), and the fact that the prole-
* Obviously, this should be “a separate peace.”— J. St.
tarian party has gained a majority in the Soviets—all this, taken
in conjunction with the peasant revolt and the swing of popular
confidence towards our Party (the elections in Moscow), and,finally, the obvious preparations being made for a second Kor-
nilov affair (the withdrawal of troops from Petrograd, the dis-
patch of Cossacks to Petrograd, the surrounding of Minsk byCossacks. etc.)—all this places an armed uprising on the order of
the day.
“Considering, therefore, that an armed uprising is inevitable,
and that the time for it is fully ripe, the Central Committee in-
structs all Party organisations to be guided accordingly, and to
discuss and decide all practical questions (the Congress of Sovietsof the Northern Region, the withdrawal of troops from Petrograd,
the actions of the people in Moscow and Minsk, etc.) from this
point of view.”
77
The resolution adopted by the conference of the Cen-
tral Committee with responsible workers on October 16:
“This meeting fully welcomes and wholly supports the Central
Committee’s resolution, calls upon all organisations and all workers
and soldiers to make thorough and most intense preparations for
an armed uprising and for support of the centre set up by the CentralCommittee for this purpose, and expresses complete confidence
that the Central Committee and the Soviet will in good time indi-
cate the favourable moment and the suitable means for launchingthe attack.”
78
You see that Trotsky’s memory betrayed him about
the date of the uprising and the Central Committee’s
resolution on the uprising.
Trotsky is absolutely wrong in asserting that Lenin
underrated Soviet legality, that Lenin failed to appreci-
ate the great importance of the All-Russian Congress of
Soviets taking power on October 25, and that this wasthe reason why he insisted that power be taken before
October 25. That is not true. Lenin proposed that power
be taken before October 25 for two reasons. Firstly,
because the counter-revolutionaries might have surren-dered Petrograd at any moment, which would have
drained the blood of the developing uprising, and so every
day was precious. Secondly, because the mistake made bythe Petrograd Soviet in openly  fixing and announcing the
day of the uprising (October 25) could not be rectified in
any other way than by actually launching the uprisingbefore  the legal date set for it. The fact of the matter
is that Lenin regarded insurrection as an art, and he
could not help knowing that the enemy, informed aboutthe date of the uprising (owing to the carelessness of the
Petrograd Soviet) would certainly try to prepare for that
day. Consequently, it was necessary to forestall theenemy, i.e., without fail to launch the uprising be-
fore the legal date. This is the chief explanation for the
passion with which Lenin in his letters scourged thosewho made a fetish of the date—October 25. Events
showed that Lenin was absolutely right. It is well known
that the uprising was launched prior to the All-RussianCongress of Soviets. It is well known that power was
actually taken before the opening of the All-Russian
Congress of Soviets, and it was taken not by the Con-gress of Soviets, but by the Petrograd Soviet, by the
Revolutionary Military Committee. The Congress
of Soviets merely took over  power from the Petrograd
Soviet. That is why Trotsky’s lengthy arguments about
the importance of Soviet legality are quite beside
the point.
A virile and mighty party standing at the head of
the revolutionary masses who were storming and over-
throwing bourgeois rule—such was the state of our Party
in that period.
That is how matters stand with the legends about
the preparation for October.
III
TROTSKYISM  OR  LENINISM?
We have dealt above with the legends directed against
the Party and those about Lenin spread by Trotsky and his
supporters in connection with October and the preparation
for it. We have exposed and refuted these legends. Butthe question arises: For what purpose did Trotsky need
all these legends about October and the preparation for
October, about Lenin and the Party of Lenin? What isthe purpose of Trotsky’s new literary pronouncements
against the Party? What is the sense, the purpose, the
aim of these pronouncements now, when the Party doesnot want a discussion, when the Party is busy with a
host of urgent tasks, when the Party needs united ef-
forts to restore our economy and not a new strugglearound old questions? For what purpose does Trotsky
need to drag the Party back, to new discussions?
Trotsky asserts that all this is needed for the pur-
pose of “studying” October. But is it not possible to
study October without giving another kick at the Party
and its leader Lenin? What sort of a “history” of Octo-ber is it that begins and ends with attempts to discredit
the chief leader of the October uprising, to discredit the
Party, which organised and carried through the upris-ing? No, it is not a matter here of studying October.
That  is not the way to study October. That is not the
way to write the history of October. Obviously, there
is a different “design” here, and everything goes to show
that this “design” is that Trotsky by his literary pro-nouncements is making another (yet another!) attempt to
create the conditions for substituting Trotskyism for
Leninism. Trotsky needs “desperately” to discredit theParty, and its cadres who carried through the uprising,
in order, after discrediting the Party, to proceed to dis-
credit Leninism. And it is necessary for him to discreditLeninism in order to drag in Trotskyism as the “sole”
“proletarian” (don’t laugh!) ideology. All this, of course
(oh of course!) under the flag of Leninism, so that thedragging operation may be performed “as painlessly as
possible.”
That is the essence of Trotsky’s latest literary pro-
nouncements.
That is why those literary pronouncements of Trot-
sky’s sharply raise the question of Trotskyism.
And so, what is Trotskyism?
Trotskyism possesses three specific features which
bring it into irreconcilable contradiction with Leninism.
What are these features?
Firstly.  Trotskyism is the theory of “permanent”
(uninterrupted) revolution. But what is permanent revolu-tion in its Trotskyist interpretation? It is revolution
that fails to take the poor peasantry into account as
a revolutionary force. Trotsky’s “permanent” revolutionis, as Lenin said, “skipping” the peasant movement, “play-
ing at the seizure of power.” Why is it dangerous? Be-
cause such a revolution, if an attempt had been made tobring it about, would inevitably have ended in failure,
for it would have divorced from the Russian proletariat
its ally, the poor peasantry. This explains the struggle
that Leninism has been waging against Trotskyism ever
since 1905.
How does Trotsky appraise Leninism from the stand-
point of this struggle? He regards it as a theory that
possesses “anti-revolutionary features.” What is thisindignant opinion about Leninism based on? On the fact
that at the proper time Leninism advocated and upheld
the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat andpeasantry.
But Trotsky does not confine himself to this indig-
nant opinion. He goes further and asserts: “The entireedifice of Leninism at the present time is built on lies
and falsification and bears within itself the poisonous
elements of its own decay” (see Trotsky’s letter to Chkhe-idze, 1913). As you see, we have before us two opposite
lines.
Secondly.  Trotskyism is distrust of the Bolshevik
Party principle, of the monolithic character of the Party,
of its hostility towards opportunist elements. In the
sphere of organisation, Trotskyism is the theory thatrevolutionaries and opportunists can co-exist and form
groups and coteries within a single party. You are, no
doubt, familiar with the history of Trotsky’s August bloc,in which the Martovites and Otzovists, the Liquidators
and Trotskyites, happily co-operated, pretending that
they were a “real” party. It is well known that thispatchwork “party” pursued the aim of destroying the
Bolshevik Party. What was the nature of “our disagree-
ments” at that time? It was that Leninism regarded thedestruction of the August bloc as a guarantee of the de-
velopment of the proletarian party, whereas Trotskyism
regarded that bloc as the basis for building a “real”
party.
Again, as you see, we have two opposite lines.Thirdly.  Trotskyism is distrust of the leaders of Bol-
shevism, an attempt to discredit, to defame them. I
do not know of a single trend in the Party that couldcompare with Trotskyism in the matter of discrediting
the leaders of Leninism or the central institutions of
the Party. For example, what should be said of Trotsky’s“polite” opinion of Lenin, whom he described as “a pro-
fessional exploiter of every kind of backwardness in the
Russian working-class movement” ( ibid. )? And this is
far from being the most “polite” of the “polite” opinions
Trotsky has expressed.
How could it happen that Trotsky, who carried such
a nasty stock-in-trade on his back, found himself, after
all, in the ranks of the Bolsheviks during the October
movement? It happened because at that time Trotskyabandoned (actually did abandon) that stock-in-trade;
he hid it in the cupboard. Had he not performed that
“operation,” real co-operation with him would have beenimpossible. The theory of the August bloc, i.e., the the-
ory of unity with the Mensheviks, had already been
shattered and thrown overboard by the revolution, forhow could there be any talk about unity when an armed
struggle was raging between the Bolsheviks and the
Mensheviks? Trotsky had no alternative but to admitthat this theory was useless.
The same misadventure “happened” to the theory of
permanent revolution, for not a single Bolshevik con-templated the immediate seizure of power on the morrow
of the February Revolution, and Trotsky could not help
knowing that the Bolsheviks would not allow him, in the
words of Lenin, “to play at the seizure of power.” Trotsky
had no alternative but recognise the Bolsheviks’ policyof fighting for influence in the Soviets, of fighting to
win over the peasantry. As regards the third specific
feature of Trotskyism (distrust of the Bolshevik leaders),it naturally had to retire into the background owing to
the obvious failure of the first two features.
Under those circumstances, could Trotsky do any-
thing else but hide his stock-in-trade in the cupboard
and follow the Bolsheviks, considering that he had no
group of his own of any significance, and that he cameto the Bolsheviks as a political individual, without an
army? Of course, he could not!
What is the lesson to be learnt from this? Only one:
that prolonged collaboration between the Leninists and
Trotsky is possible only if the latter completely abandons
his old stock-in-trade, only if he completely acceptsLeninism. Trotsky writes about the lessons of October,
but he forgets that, in addition to all the other lessons,
there is one more lesson of October, the one I havejust mentioned, which is of prime importance for
Trotskyism. Trotskyism ought to learn that lesson of
October too.
It is evident, however, that Trotskyism has not
learnt that lesson. The fact of the matter is that the
old stock-in-trade of Trotskyism that was hidden in thecupboard in the period of the October movement is now
being dragged into the light again in the hope that a
market will be found for it, seeing that the market inour country is expanding. Undoubtedly, Trotsky’s new
literary pronouncements are an attempt to revert to
Trotskyism, to “overcome” Leninism, to drag in, im-
plant, all the specific features of Trotskyism. The new
Trotskyism is not a mere repetition of the old Trotskyism;its feathers have been plucked and it is rather bedrag-
gled; it is incomparably milder in spirit and more mod-
erate in form than the old Trotskyism; but, in essence, itundoubtedly retains all the specific features of the old
Trotskyism. The new Trotskyism does not dare to come
out as a militant force against Leninism; it prefers tooperate under the common flag of Leninism, under the
slogan of interpreting, improving Leninism. That is be-
cause it is weak. It cannot be regarded as an accidentthat the appearance of the new Trotskyism coincided
with Lenin’s departure. In Lenin’s lifetime it would
not have dared to take this risky step.
What are the characteristic features of the new Trot-
skyism?
1) On the question of “permanent ” revolution . The
new Trotskyism does not deem it necessary openly to up-
hold the theory of “permanent” revolution. It “simply”
asserts that the October Revolution fully confirmed theidea of “permanent” revolution. From this it draws the
following conclusion: the important and acceptable part
of Leninism is the part that came after the war, in theperiod of the October Revolution; on the other hand,
the part of Leninism that existed before the war, before
the October Revolution, is wrong and unacceptable.Hence, the Trotskyites’ theory of the division of Leninism
into two parts: pre-war Leninism, the “old,” “useless”
Leninism  with its idea of the dictatorship of the proletar-iat and peasantry, and the new, post-war, October
Leninism, which they count on adapting to the require-
ments of Trotskyism. Trotskyism needs this theory of
the division of Leninism as a first, more or less “accept-
able” step that is necessary to facilitate further steps inits struggle against Leninism.
But Leninism is not an eclectic theory stuck together
out of diverse elements and capable of being cut intoparts. Leninism is an integral theory, which arose in
1903, has passed the test of three revolutions, and is
now being carried forward as the battle-flag of the worldproletariat.
“Bolshevism,” Lenin said, “as a trend of political thought and
as a political party, has existed since 1903. Only the history of
Bolshevism during the whole  period of its existence can satisfacto rily
explain why it was able to build up and to maintain under mostdifficult conditions the iron discipline needed for the victory of
the proletariat” (see Vol. XXV , p. 174).
Bolshevism and Leninism are one. They are two
names for one and the same thing. Hence, the theory of
the division of Leninism into two parts is a theory in-
tended to destroy Leninism, to substitute Trotskyism forLeninism.
Needless to say, the Party cannot reconcile itself
to this grotesque theory.
2) On the question of the Party principle.  The old
Trotskyism tried to undermine the Bolshevik Party prin-
ciple by means of the theory (and practice) of unity withthe Mensheviks. But that theory has suffered such dis-
grace that nobody now even wants to mention it. To
undermine the Party principle, present-day Trotskyismhas invented the new, less odious and almost “democratic”
theory of contrasting the old cadres to the younger
Party members. According to Trotskyism, our Party has
not a single and integral history. Trotskyism divides
the history of our Party into two parts of unequal im-portance: pre-October and post-October. The pre-October
part of the history of our Party is, properly speaking,
not history, but “pre-history,” the unimportant or, atall events, not very important preparatory period of our
Party. The post-October part of the history of our Party,
however, is real, genuine history. In the former, thereare the “old,” “pre-historic,” unimportant cadres of our
Party. In the latter there is the new, real, “historic”
Party. It scarcely needs proof that this singular schemeof the history of the Party is a scheme to disrupt the
unity between the old and the new cadres of our Party,
a scheme to destroy the Bolshevik Party principle.
Needless to say, the Party cannot reconcile itself
to this grotesque scheme.
3) On the question of the leaders of Bolshevism . The
old Trotskyism tried to discredit Lenin more or less
openly, without fearing the consequences. The new
Trotskyism is more cautious. It tries to achieve the pur-pose of the old Trotskyism by pretending to praise,
to exalt Lenin. I think it is worth while quoting a few
examples.
The Party knows that Lenin was a relentless revolu-
tionary; but it knows also that he was cautious, that
he disliked reckless people and often, with a firm hand,restrained those who were infatuated with terrorism,
including Trotsky himself. Trotsky touches on this sub-
ject in his book On Lenin , but from his portrayal of Lenin
one might think that all Lenin did was “at every oppor-
tunity to din into people’s minds the idea that terrorism
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

was inevitable.” The impression is created that Lenin
was the most bloodthirsty of all the bloodthirsty Bolshe-
viks.
For what purpose did Trotsky need this uncalled-
for and totally unjustified exaggeration?
The Party knows that Lenin was an exemplary Party
man, who did not like to settle questions alone, without
the leading collective body, on the spur of the moment,
without careful investigation and verification. Trotskytouches upon this aspect, too, in his book. But the por-
trait he paints is not that of Lenin, but of a sort of Chi-
nese mandarin, who settles important questions in thequiet of his study, by intuition.
Do you want to know how our Party settled the ques-
tion of dispersing the Constituent Assembly? Listen toTrotsky:
“‘Of course, the Constituent Assembly will have to
be dispersed,’ said Lenin, ‘but what about the Left So-cialist-Revolutionaries?’
“But our apprehensions were greatly allayed by old
Natanson. He came in to ‘take counsel’ with us, andafter the first few words he said:
“‘We shall probably have to disperse the Constit-
uent Assembly by force.’
“‘Bravo!’ exclaimed Lenin. ‘What is true is true!
But will your people agree to it?’
“‘Some of our people are wavering, but I think that
in the end they will agree,’ answered Natanson.”
That is how history is written.Do you want to know how the Party settled the ques-
tion about the Supreme Military Council? Listen to
Trotsky:
“‘Unless we have serious and experienced military
experts we shall never extricate ourselves from this
chaos,’ I said to Vladimir Ilyich after every visit tothe Staff.
“‘That is evidently true, but they might betray
us. . . .’
“‘Let us attach a commissar to each of them.’
“‘Two would be better,’ exclaimed Lenin, ‘and
strong handed ones. There surely must be strong-handedCommunists in our ranks.’
“That is how the structure of the Supreme Military
Council arose.”
That is how Trotsky writes history.
Why did Trotsky need these “Arabian Nights” sto-
ries derogatory to Lenin? Was it to exalt V . I. Lenin,the leader of the Party? It doesn’t look like it.
The Party knows that Lenin was the greatest Marxist
of our times, a profound theoretician and a most experi-enced revolutionary, to whom any trace of Blanquism was
alien. Trotsky touches upon this aspect, too, in his book.
But the portrait he paints is not that of the giant Lenin,but of a dwarf like Blanquist who, in the October days,
advises the Party “to take power by its own hand, inde-
pendently of and behind the back of the Soviet.” I havealready said, however, that there is not a scrap of truth
in this description.
Why did Trotsky need this flagrant . . . inaccuracy?
Is this not an attempt to discredit Lenin “just a little”?
Such are the characteristic features of the new
Trotskyism.
What is the danger of this new Trotskyism? It is
that Trotskyism, owing to its entire inner content, stands
every chance of becoming the centre and rallying point
of the non-proletarian elements who are striving to weak-
en, to disintegrate the proletarian dictatorship.
You will ask: what is to be done now? What are the
Party’s immediate tasks in connection with Trotsky’s
new literary pronouncements?
Trotskyism is taking action now in order to dis-
credit Bolshevism and to undermine its foundations. It is
the duty of the Party to bury Trotskyism as an ideologi-
cal trend.
There is talk about repressive measures against the
opposition and about the possibility of a split. Thatis nonsense, comrades. Our Party is strong and mighty.
It will not allow any splits. As regards repressive meas-
ures, I am emphatically opposed to them. What we neednow is not repressive meas ures, but an extensive ideolog-
ical struggle against renascent Trotskyism.
We did not want and did not strive for this literary
discussion. Trotskyism is forcing it upon us by its anti-
Leninist pronouncements. Well, we are ready, comrades.
Pravda ,  No.  269,
November  26,  1924
THE  OCTOBER  REVOLUTION
AND  THE  TACTICS
OF  THE  RUSSIAN  COMMUNISTS?
Preface  to  the  Book  “On  the  Road  to  October ” 79
I
THE  EXTERNAL  AND  INTERNAL  SETTING
FOR  THE  OCTOBER  REVOLUTION
Three circumstances of an external nature determined
the comparative ease with which the proletarian revolu-
tion in Russia succeeded in breaking the chains of im-perialism and thus overthrowing the rule of the bour-
geoisie.
Firstly, the circumstance that the October Revolution
began in a period of desperate struggle between the two
principal imperialist groups, the Anglo-French and the
Austro-German; at a time when, engaged in mortal strug-gle between themselves, these two groups had neither the
time nor the means to devote serious attention to the
struggle against the October Revolution. This circum-stance was of tremendous importance for the October
Revolution; for it enabled it to take advantage of the
fierce conflicts within the imperialist world to strengthenand organize its own forces.
Secondly, the circumstance that the October Rev-
olution began during the imperialist war, at a time
when the labouring masses, exhausted by the war and
thirsting for peace, were by the very logic of facts led up
to the proletarian revolution as the only way out of thewar. This circumstance was of extreme importance for
the October Revolution; for it put into its hands the
mighty weapon of peace, made it easier for it to link theSoviet revolution with the ending of the hated war, and
thus created mass sympathy for it both in the West,
among the workers, and in the East, among the oppressedpeoples.
Thirdly, the existence of a powerful working-class
movement in Europe and the fact that a revolutionarycrisis was maturing in the West and in the East, brought on
by the protracted imperialist war. This circumstance was
of inestimable importance for the revolution in Russia;for it ensured the revolution faithful allies outside Russia
in its struggle against world imperialism.
But in addition to circumstances of an external na-
ture, there were also a number of favourable internal
conditions which facilitated the victory of the October
Revolution.
Of these conditions, the following must be regarded
as the chief ones:
Firstly, the October Revolution enjoyed the most
active support of the overwhelming majority of the work-
ing class in Russia.
Secondly, it enjoyed the undoubted support of the poor
peasants and of the majority of the soldiers, who were
thirsting for peace and land.
Thirdly, it had at its head, as its guiding force, such a
tried and tested party as the Bolshevik Party, strong not
only by reason of its experience and discipline acquired
through the years, but also by reason of its vast connec-
tions with the labouring masses.
Fourthly, the October Revolution was confronted by
enemies who were comparatively easy to overcome, such
as the rather weak Russian bourgeoisie, a landlord class
which was utterly demoralized by peasant “revolts,” andthe compromising parties (the Mensheviks and Socialist-
Revolutionaries), which had become completely bankrupt
during the war.
Fifthly, it had at its disposal the vast expanses of the
young state, in which it was able to manoeuvre freely,
retreat when circumstances so required, enjoy a respite,gather strength, etc.
Sixthly, in its struggle against counter-revolution the
October Revolution could count upon sufficient resourcesof food, fuel and raw materials within the country.
The combination of these external and internal cir-
cumstances created that peculiar situation which deter-mined the comparative ease with which the October
Revolution won its victory.
This does not mean, of course, that there were no un-
favourable features in the external and internal setting of
the October Revolution. Think of such an unfavourable
feature as, for example, the isolation, to some extent, ofthe October Revolution, the absence near it, or bordering
on it, of a Soviet country on which it could rely for sup-
port. Undoubtedly, the future revolution, for example,in Germany, will be in a more favourable situation
in this respect, for it has in close proximity a powerful
Soviet country like our Soviet Union. I need not mentionso unfavourable a feature of the October Revolution as
the absence of a proletarian majority within the country.
But these unfavourable features only emphasize the
tremendous importance of the peculiar internal and
external conditions of the October Revolution of whichI have spoken above.
These peculiar conditions must not be lost sight of
for a single moment. They must be borne in mind partic-ularly in analysing the events of the autumn of 1923 in
Germany. Above all, they should be borne in mind by
Trotsky, who draws an unfounded analogy between theOctober Revolution and the revolution in Germany and
lashes violently at the German Communist Party for its
actual and alleged mistakes.
“It was easy for Russia,” says Lenin, “in the specific,
historically very special situation of 1917, to start  the socialist
 revolution, but it will be more difficult for Russia than for theEuropean countries to continue  the revolution and carry it through
to the end. I had occasion to point this out already at thebeginning of 1918, and our experience of the past two years hasentirely confirmed the correctness of this view. Such specificconditions, as 1) the possibility of linking up the Soviet revo-lution with the ending, as a consequence of this revolution, ofthe imperialist war, which had exhausted the workers and peas-ants to an incredible degree; 2) the possibility of taking advan-tage for a certain time of the mortal conflict between two world-powerful groups of imperialist robbers, who were unable to uniteagainst their Soviet enemy; 5) the possibility of enduring a com-paratively lengthy civil war, partly owing to the enormous sizeof the country and to the poor means of communication; 4) theexistence of such a profound bourgeois-democratic revolutionarymovement among the peasantry that the party of the proletariatwas able to take the revolutionary demands of the peasant party(the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, the majority of the membersof which were definitely hostile to Bolshevism) and realize themat once, thanks to the conquest of political power by the proletar-iat—such specific conditions do not exist in Western Europe
at present; and a repetition of such or similar conditions will
not come so easily. That, by the way, apart from a number of
other causes, is why it will be more difficult for WesternEurope to start  a socialist revolution than it was for us” (See V ol.
XXV, p. 205).
    These words of Lenin’s should not be forgotten.
II
TWO  SPECIFIC  FEATURES
OF  THE  OCTOBER  REVOLUTION—OR  OCTOBER
AND  TROTSKY’S  THEORY  OF  “PERMANENT”
REVOLUTION
There are two specific features of the October Revo-
lution which must be understood first of all if we are to
comprehend the inner meaning and the historical signif-icance of that revolution.
What are these features?
Firstly, the fact that the dictatorship of the proletariat
was born in our country as a power which came into ex-
istence on the basis of an alliance between the proletariat
and the labouring masses of the peasantry, the latterbeing led by the proletariat. Secondly, the fact that the
dictatorship of the proletariat became established in
our country as a result of the victory of socialism in onecountry—a country in which capitalism was little
developed—while capitalism was preserved in other
countries where capitalism was more highly developed.This does not mean, of course, that the October Revo-
lution has no other specific features. But it is precisely
these two specific features that are important for us at
the present moment, not only because they distinctly
express the essence of the October Revolution, but also
because they brilliantly reveal the opportunist nature ofthe theory of “permanent revolution.”
Let us briefly examine these features.
The question of the labouring masses of the petty
bourgeoisie, both urban and rural, the question of win-
ning these masses to the side of the proletariat, is
highly important for the proletarian revolution.Whom will the labouring people of town and country
support in the struggle for power, the bourgeoisie or
the proletariat; whose reserve will they become, thereserve of the bourgeoisie or the reserve of the proletariat
—on this depend the fate of the revolution and the sta-
bility of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The revolu-tions in France in 1848 and 1871 came to grief chiefly
because the peasant reserves proved to be on the side
of the bourgeoisie. The October Revolution was victo-rious because it was able to deprive the bourgeoisie of
its peasant reserves, because it was able to win these
reserves to the side of the proletariat, and because inthis revolution the proletariat proved to be the only
guiding force for the vast masses of the labouring people
of town and country.
He who has not understood this will never understand
either the character of the October Revolution, or the
nature of the dictatorship of the proletariat, or the spe-cific characteristics of the internal policy of our prole-
tarian power.
The dictatorship of the proletariat is not simply a
governmental top stratum “skilfully” “selected” by the
careful hand of an “experienced strategist,” and
“judiciously relying” on the support of one section or an-
other of the population. The dictatorship of the proletariat
is the class alliance between the proletariat and the la-bouring masses of the peasantry for the purpose of over-
throwing capital, for achieving the final victory of social-
ism, on the condition that the guiding force of thisalliance is the proletariat.
     Thus, it is not a question of “slightly” underestimating
or “slightly” overestimating the revolutionary poten-tialities of the peasant movement, as certain diplomatic
advocates of “permanent revolution” are now fond of
expressing it. It is a question of the nature of the newproletarian state which arose as a result of the October
Revolution. It is a question of the character of the pro-
letarian power, of the foundations of the dictatorshipof the proletariat itself.
   “The dictatorship of the proletariat,” says Lenin, “is a spe-
cial form of class alliance between the proletariat, the vanguard
of the working people, and the numerous non-proletarian strata
of working people (the petty bourgeoisie, the small proprietors,the peasantry, the intelligentsia, etc.), or the majority of these;
it is an alliance against capital, an alliance aiming at the complete
overthrow of capital, at the complete suppression of the resistanceof the bourgeoisie and of any attempt on its part at restoration,
an alliance aiming at the final establishment and consolidation
of socialism” (see Vol. XXIV, p. 311).
And further on:
“The dictatorship of the proletariat, if we translate this Latin,
scientific, historical-philosophical term into simpler language,means the following:
“Only a definite class, namely, the urban workers and the
factory, industrial workers in general, is able to lead the whole
mass of the toilers and exploited in the struggle for the overthrow
of the yoke of capital, in the process of the overthrow itself, in the
struggle to maintain and consolidate the victory, in the work
of creating the new, socialist social system, in the whole struggle
for the complete abolition of classes” (see V ol. XXIV, p. 336).
Such is the theory of the dictatorship of the prole-
tariat given by Lenin.
One of the specific features of the October Revolu-
tion is the fact that this revolution represents a classic
application of Lenin’s theory of the dictatorship of the
proletariat.
Some comrades believe that this theory is a purely
“Russian” theory, applicable only to Russian conditions.
That is wrong. It is absolutely wrong. In speaking ofthe labouring masses of the non-proletarian classes
which are led by the proletariat, Lenin has in mind
not only the Russian peasants, but also the labouringelements of the border regions of the Soviet Union,
which until recently were colonies of Russia. Lenin con-
stantly reiterated that without an alliance with thesemasses of other nationalities the proletariat of Russia
could not achieve victory. In his articles on the national
question and in his speeches at the congresses of theComintern, Lenin repeatedly said that the victory
of the world revolution was impossible without a rev-
olutionary alliance, a revolutionary bloc, between theproletariat of the advanced countries and the oppressed
peoples of the enslaved colonies. But what are colo-
nies if not the oppressed labouring masses, and, prima-rily, the labouring masses of the peasantry? Who does
not know that the question of the liberation of the
colonies is essentially  a question of the liberation of the
labouring masses of the non-proletarian classes from
the oppression and exploitation of finance capital?
But from this it follows that Lenin’s theory of the
dictatorship of the proletariat is not a purely “Russian”
theory, but a theory which necessarily applies to all
countries. Bolshevism is not only a Russian phenomenon.“Bolshevism,” says Lenin, is “ a model of tactics for all ”
(see V ol. XXIII, p. 386).
Such are the characteristics of the first specific fea-
ture of the October Revolution.
How do matters stand with regard to Trotsky’s theory
of “permanent revolution” in the light of this specificfeature of the October Revolution?
We shall not dwell at length on Trotsky’s position
in 1905, when he “simply” forgot all about the peasantryas a revolutionary force and advanced the slogan of “no
tsar, but a workers’ government,” that is, the slogan of
revolution without the peasantry. Even Radek, thatdiplomatic defender of “permanent revolution,” is now
obliged to admit that “permanent revolution” in 1905
meant a “leap into the air” away from reality. Now,apparently everyone admits that it is not worth while
bothering with this “leap into the air” any more.
Nor shall we dwell at length on Trotsky’s position in
the period of the war, say, in 1915, when, in his article
“The Struggle for Power,” proceeding from the fact that
“we are living in the era of imperialism,” that impe-rialism “sets up not the bourgeois nation in opposition to
the old regime, but the proletariat in opposition to the
bourgeois nation,” he arrived at the conclusion that therevolutionary role of the peasantry was bound to subside,
that the slogan of the confiscation of the land no longer
had the same importance as formerly. It is well known
that at that time, Lenin, examining this article of
Trotsky’s, accused him of “denying” “the role of the peas-antry,” and said that “Trotsky is in fact helping the
liberal labour politicians in Russia who understand
‘denial’ of the role of the peasantry to mean refusal  t o
rouse the peasants to revolution!” (see Vol. XVIII,
p. 318).
Let us rather pass on to the later works of Trotsky on
this subject, to the works of the period when the proletar ian
dictatorship had already become established and when
Trotsky had had the opportunity to test his theory of“permanent revolution” in the light of actual events
and to correct his errors. Let us take Trotsky’s “Preface”
to his book The Year 1905 , written in 1922. Here is what
Trotsky says in this “Preface” concerning “permanent
revolution”:
“It was precisely during the interval between January 9 and
the October strike of 1905 that the views on the characterof the revolutionary development of Russia which came to beknown as the theory of ‘permanent revolution’ crystallized in
the author’s mind. This abstruse term represented the idea that
the Russian revolution, whose immediate objectives were bour-geois in nature, could not, however, stop when these objectiveshad been achieved. The revolution would not be able to solve itsimmediate bourgeois problems except by placing the proletariatin power. And the latter, upon assuming power, would not be
able to confine itself to the bourgeois limits of the revolution.
On the contrary, precisely in order to ensure its victory, the pro-letarian vanguard would be forced in the very early stages of itsrule to make deep inroads not only into feudal property but intobourgeois property as well. In this it would come into  hostile col-
lision  not only with all the bourgeois groupings which supported
the proletariat during the first stages of its revolutionary
struggle, but also with the broad masses of the peasantry  with whose
assistance it came into power. The contradictions in the posi-
tion of a workers’ government in a backward country withan overwhelmingly peasant population could be solved only
on an international scale, in the arena of the world proletarian
 revolution.”*
That is what Trotsky says about his “permanent rev-
olution.”
One need only compare this quotation with the above
quotations from Lenin’s works on the dictatorship of
the proletariat to perceive the great chasm thatseparates Lenin’s theory of the dictatorship of the prole-
tariat from Trotsky’s theory of “permanent revolution.”
Lenin speaks of the alliance  between the proletariat
and the labouring strata of the peasantry as the basis
of the dictatorship of the proletariat. Trotsky sees
a “hostile collision ” between “the proletarian vanguard”
and “the broad masses of the peasantry.”
Lenin speaks of the leadership  of the toiling and
exploited masses by the proletariat. Trotsky sees “ contra-
dictions  in the position of a workers’ government in a
backward country with an overwhelmingly peasant pop-
ulation.”
According to Lenin, the revolution draws its strength
primarily from among the workers and peasants of
Russia itself. According to Trotsky, the necessary strengthcan be found only  “in the arena of the world proletarian
revolution.”
But what if the world revolution is fated to arrive
with some delay? Is there any ray of hope for our revolu-
* My italics.— J. St.
tion? Trotsky offers no ray of hope; for “the contradictions
in the position of a workers’ government . . . could be
solved only  . . . in the arena of the world proletarian
revolution.” According to this plan, there is but one
prospect left for our revolution: to vegetate in its own
contradictions and rot away while waiting for the worldrevolution.
What is the dictatorship of the proletariat according
to Lenin?
The dictatorship of the proletariat is a power which
rests on an alliance between the proletariat and the la-
bouring masses of the peasantry for “the complete over-throw of capital” and for “the final establishment and
consolidation of socialism.”
What is the dictatorship of the proletariat according
to Trotsky?
The dictatorship of the proletariat is a power which
comes “into hostile collision” with “the broad massesof the peasantry” and seeks the solution of its “contra-
dictions” only  “in the arena of the world proletarian
revolution.”
What difference is there between this “theory of per-
manent revolution” and the well-known theory of Men-
shevism which repudiates the concept of dictatorshipof the proletariat?
Essentially, there is no difference.
There can be no doubt at all. “Permanent revolution”
is not a mere underestimation of the revolutionary
potentialities of the peasant movement. “Permanent rev-
olution” is an underestimation of the peasant move-ment which leads to the repudiation  of Lenin’s theory
of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Trotsky’s “permanent revolution” is a variety of
Menshevism.
This is how matters stand with regard to the first
specific feature of the October Revolution.
What are the characteristics of the second specific
feature of the October Revolution?
In his study of imperialism, especially in the period
of the war, Lenin arrived at the law of the uneven, spas-
modic, economic and political development of the capi-talist countries. According to this law, the development
of enterprises, trusts, branches of industry and indi-
vidual countries proceeds not evenly—not according toan established sequence, not in such a way that one
trust, one branch of industry or one country is always in
advance of the others, while other trusts or countries keepconsistently one behind the other—but spasmodically,
with interruptions in the development of some countries
and leaps ahead in the development of others. Underthese circumstances the “quite legitimate” striving of
the countries that have slowed down to hold their old
positions, and the equally “legitimate” striving of thecountries that have leapt ahead to seize new positions,
lead to a situation in which armed clashes among the
imperialist countries become an inescapable necessity.Such was the case, for example, with Germany, which
half a century ago was a backward country in comparison
with France and Britain. The same must be said ofJapan as compared with Russia. It is well known,
however, that by the beginning of the twentieth century
Germany and Japan had leapt so far ahead that Germanyhad succeeded in overtaking France and had begun to
press Britain hard on the world market, while Japan
was pressing Russia. As is well known, it was from these
contradictions that the recent imperialist war arose.
This law proceeds from the following:1) “Capitalism has grown into a world system of
colonial oppression and of the financial strangulation of
the vast majority of the population of the world by ahandful of ‘advanced’ countries” (see Preface to the French
edition of Lenin’s Imperialism , V ol. XIX, p. 74);
2) “This ‘booty’ is shared between two or three
powerful world robbers armed to the teeth (America,
Britain, Japan), who involve the whole world in their
war over the sharing of their  booty” ( ibid.);
3) The growth of contradictions within the world
system of financial oppression and the inevitability of
armed clashes lead to the world front of imperial-ism becoming easily vulnerable to revolution, and to a
breach in this front in individual countries becoming
probable;
4) This breach is most likely to occur at those
points, and in those countries, where the chain of the
imperialist front is weakest, that is to say, where impe-rialism is least consolidated, and where it is easiest for
a revolution to expand;
5) In view of this, the victory of socialism in one
country, even if that country is less developed in the capi-
talist sense, while capitalism remains in other countries,
even if those countries are more highly developed in thecapitalist sense—is quite possible and probable.
Such, briefly, are the foundations of Lenin’s theory
of the proletarian revolution.
What is the second specific feature of the October
Revolution?
The second specific feature of the October Revolu-
tion lies in the fact that this revolution represents a
model of the practical application of Lenin’s theory ofthe proletarian revolution.
He who has not understood this specific feature
of the October Revolution will never understand eitherthe international nature of this revolution, or its colossal
international might, or the specific features of its for-
eign policy.
“Uneven economic and political development,” says Lenin,
“is an absolute law of capitalism. Hence, the victory of socialism is
possible first in several or even in one capitalist country taken sepa-
rately. The victorious proletariat of that country, having expropriatedthe capitalists and organized its own socialist production, would stand
up against  the rest of the world, the capitalist world, attracting
to its cause the oppressed classes of other countries, raising re-volts in those countries against the capitalists, and in the event of
 necessity coming out even with armed force against the exploiting
classes and their states.” For “the free union of nations in social-ism is impossible without a more or less prolonged and stubborn
struggle of the socialist republics against the backward states”
(see Vol. XVIII, pp. 232-33).
The opportunists of all countries assert that the pro-
letarian revolution can begin—if it is to begin anywhere
at all, according to their theory—only in industriallydeveloped countries, and that the more highly developed
these countries are industrially the more chances there
are for the victory of socialism. Moreover, accordingto them, the possibility of the victory of socialism in
one country, and one in which capitalism is little
developed at that, is excluded as something absolutelyimprobable. As far back as the period of the war, Lenin,
taking as his basis the law of the uneven development
of the imperialist states, opposed to the opportunists
his theory of the proletarian revolution about the victory
of socialism in one country, even if that country is onein which capitalism is less developed.
It is well known that the October Revolution fully
confirmed the correctness of Lenin’s theory of the pro-letarian revolution.
How do matters stand with Trotsky’s “permanent
revolution” in the light of Lenin’s theory of the victoryof the proletarian revolution in one country?
Let us take Trotsky’s pamphlet Our Revolution  (1906).
Trotsky writes:
“Without direct state support from the European proletar-
iat, the working class of Russia will not be able to maintain
itself in power and to transform its temporary rule into a lastingsocialist dictatorship. This we cannot doubt for an instant.”
What does this quotation mean? It means that the
victory of socialism in one country, in this case Russia,
is impossible “ without  direct state support from the Euro-
pean proletariat,” i.e., before the European proletariathas conquered power.
What is there in common between this “theory”
and Lenin’s thesis on the possibility of the victory ofsocialism “in one capitalist country taken separately”?
Clearly, there is nothing in common.
But let us assume that Trotsky’s pamphlet, which
was published in 1906, at a time when it was difficult to
determine the character of our revolution, contains
inadvertent errors and does not fully correspond toTrotsky’s views at a later period. Let us examine another
pamphlet written by Trotsky, his Peace Programme,
which appeared before the October Revolution of 1917
and has now (1924) been republished in his book The
Year 1917 . In this pamphlet Trotsky criticizes Lenin’s
theory of the proletarian revolution about the victory of
socialism in one country and opposes to it the slogan of
a United States of Europe. He asserts that the victory
of socialism in one country is impossible, that the vic-
tory of socialism is possible only as the victory of several
of the principal countries of Europe (Britain, Russia,Germany), which combine into a United States of
Europe; otherwise it is not possible at all. He says
quite plainly that “a victorious revolution in Russiaor in Britain is inconceivable without a revolution in
Germany, and vice versa.”
“The only more or less concrete historical argument,” says
Trotsky, “advanced against the slogan of a United States of Europe
was formulated in the Swiss Sotsial-Demokrat  (at that time the
central organ of the Bolsheviks— J. St. ) in the following sen-
tence: ‘Uneven economic and political development is an abso-
lute law of capitalism.’ From this the Sotsial-Demokrat  dr aws
the conclusion that the victory of socialism is possible in one
country, and that therefore there is no reason to make the dicta-
torship of the proletariat in each separate country contingent
upon the establishment of a United States of Europe. That capi-
talist development in different countries is uneven is an abso-
lutely incontrovertible argument. But this unevenness is itself
extremely uneven. The capitalist level of Britain, Austria, Ger-
many or France is not identical. But in comparison with Africa
and Asia all these countries represent capitalist ‘Europe,’ which
has grown ripe for the social revolution. That no country in its
struggle must ‘wait’ for others, is an elementary thought which
it is useful and necessary to reiterate in order that the idea of
concurrent international action may not be replaced by the idea
of temporizing international inaction. Without waiting for the
others, we begin and continue the struggle nationally, in the full
confidence that our initiative will give an impetus to the struggle
in other countries; but if this should not occur, it would be hope-
less to think—as historical experience and theoretical considera-
tions testify—that, for example, a revolutionary Russia could
hold out in the face of a conservative Europe, or that a socialist
Germany could exist in isolation in a capitalist world.”
As you see, we have before us the same theory of
the simultaneous victory of socialism in the principal
countries of Europe which, as a rule, excludes Lenin’s
theory of revolution about the victory of socialism in onecountry.
It goes without saying that for the complete  victory of
socialism, for a complete  guarantee against the restoration
of the old order, the united efforts of the proletarians of
several countries are necessary. It goes without saying
that, without the support given to our revolution by theproletariat of Europe, the proletariat of Russia couldnot have held out against the general onslaught, just
as without the support given by the revolution in Russia
to the revolutionary movement in the West the lattercould not have developed at the pace at which it has
begun to develop since the establishment of the prole-
tarian dictatorship in Russia. It goes without sayingthat we need support. But what does support of our revo-
lution by the West-European proletariat imply? Is not
the sympathy of the European workers for our revo-lution, their readiness to thwart the imperialists’ plans
of intervention—is not all this support, real assist-
ance? Unquestionably it is. Without such support,without such assistance, not only from the European
workers but also from the colonial and dependent
countries, the proletarian dictatorship in Russiawould have been hard pressed. Up to now, has this
sympathy and this assistance, coupled with the might
of our Red Army and the readiness of the workers and
peasants of Russia to defend their socialist fatherlandto the last—has all this been sufficient to beat off the
attacks of the imperialists and to win us the necessary
conditions for the serious work of construction? Yes,it has been sufficient. Is this sympathy growing stronger,
or is it waning? Unquestionably, it is growing strong-
er. Hence, have we favourable conditions, not only forpushing on with the organizing of socialist economy, but
also, in our turn, for giving support to the West-European
workers and to the oppressed peoples of the East? Yes,we have. This is eloquently proved by the seven years
history of the proletarian dictatorship in Russia. Can it
be denied that a mighty wave of labour enthusiasm hasalready risen in our country? No, it cannot be denied.
After all this, what does Trotsky’s assertion that a
revolutionary Russia could not hold out in the face ofa conservative Europe signify?
It can signify only this: firstly, that Trotsky does not
appreciate the inherent strength of our revolution; sec-ondly, that Trotsky does not understand the inesti-
mable importance of the moral support which is given
to our revolution by the workers of the West and thepeasants of the East; thirdly, that Trotsky does not
perceive the internal infirmity which is consuming im-
perialism today.
Carried away by his criticism of Lenin’s theory of
the proletarian revolution, Trotsky unwittingly dealt
himself a smashing blow in his pamphlet Peace Pro-
gramme  which appeared in 1917 and was republished
in 1924.
    But perhaps this pamphlet, too, has become out of
date and has ceased for some reason or other to correspond
to Trotsky’s present views? Let us take his later works,written after the victory of the proletarian revolution
in one country , in Russia. Let us take, for example,
Trotsky’s “Postscript,” written in 1922, for the newedition of his pamphlet Peace Programme . Here is what
he says in this “Postscript”:
    “The assertion reiterated several times in the Peace Programme
that a proletarian revolution cannot culminate victoriously within
national bounds may perhaps seem to some readers to have beenrefuted by the nearly five years’ experience of our Soviet Republic.
But such a conclusion would be unwarranted, The fact that the
workers’ state has held out against the whole world in one country,and a backward country at that, testifies to the colossal
might of the proletariat, which in other, more advanced, more
civilized countries will be truly capable of performing miracles.But while we have held our ground as a state politically and mil-
itarily, we have not arrived, or even begun to arrive, at the crea-
tion of a socialist society. . . . As long as the bourgeoisie remainsin power in the other European countries we shall be compelled,
in our struggle against economic isolation, to strive for agreements
with the capitalist world; at the same time it may be said withcertainty that these agreements may at best help us to mitigate
some of our economic ills, to take one or another step forward,
but real progress of a socialist economy in Russia will becomepossible only after the victory * of the proletariat in the major Euro-
pean  countries.”
    Thus speaks Trotsky, plainly sinning against real-
ity and stubbornly trying to save his “permanent rev-
olution” from final shipwreck.
* My italics.— J. St.
It appears, then, that, twist and turn as you like,
we not only have “not arrived,” but we have “not even
begun to arrive” at the creation of a socialist society.It appears that some people have been hoping for “agree-
ments with the capitalist world,” but it also appears
that nothing will come of these agreements; for, twistand turn as you like, “real progress of a socialist econ-
omy” will not be possible until the proletariat has been
victorious in the “major European countries.”
Well, then, since there is still no victory in the West,
the only “choice” that remains for the revolution in
Russia is: either to rot away or to degenerate into a bour-geois state.
It is no accident that Trotsky has been talking for
two years now about the “degeneration” of our Party.
It is no accident that last year Trotsky prophesied
the “doom” of our country.
How can this strange “theory” be reconciled with
Lenin’s theory of the “victory of socialism in one
country”?
How can this strange “prospect” be reconciled with
Lenin’s view that the New Economic Policy will enable
us “to build the foundations of socialist economy”?
How can this “permanent” hopelessness be recon-
ciled, for instance, with the following words of Lenin:
“Socialism is no longer a matter of the distant future, or an
abstract picture, or an icon. We still retain our old bad opinion
of icons. We have dragged socialism into everyday life, and
here we must find our way. This is the task of our day, thetask of our epoch. Permit me to conclude by expressing the
conviction that, difficult as this task may be, new as it may be
compared with our previous task, and no matter how many dif-
ficulties it may entail, we shall all—not in one day, but in the
course of several years—all of us together fulfil it whatever
happens so that NEP Russia will become socialist Russia” (see
Vol. XXVII, p. 366).
    How can this “permanent” gloominess of Trotsky’s
be reconciled, for instance, with the following wordsof Lenin:
    “As a matter of fact, state power over all large-scale
means of production, state power in the hands of the pro-
letariat, the alliance of this proletariat with the many millions
of small and very small peasants, the assured leadership of thepeasantry by the proletariat, etc.—is not this all that is necessary
for building a complete socialist society from the co-operatives,
from the co-operatives alone, which we formerly looked down uponas huckstering and which from a certain aspect we have the right to
look down upon as such now, under NEP? Is this not all that
is necessary for building a complete socialist society? This is notyet the building of socialist society, but it is all that is necessary
and sufficient for this building” (see Vol. XXVII, p 392).
    It is plain that these two views are incompatible and
cannot in any way be reconciled. Trotsky’s “permanent
revolution” is the repudiation of Lenin’s theory of the
proletarian revolution; and conversely, Lenin’s theory ofthe proletarian revolution is the repudiation of the theory
of “permanent revolution.”
    Lack of faith in the strength and capacities of ourrevolution, lack of faith in the strength and capacity
of the Russian proletariat—that is what lies at the root
of the theory of “permanent revolution.”
Hitherto only one aspect of the theory of “permanent
revolution” has usually been noted—lack of faith in
the revolutionary potentialities of the peasant movement.
Now, in fairness, this must be supplemented by another
aspect—lack of faith in the strength and capacity of
the proletariat in Russia.
What difference is there between Trotsky’s theory
and the ordinary Menshevik theory that the victory of
socialism in one country, and in a backward country atthat, is impossible without the preliminary victory of
the proletarian revolution “in the principal countries of
Western Europe”?
Essentially, there is no difference.
There can be no doubt at all. Trotsky’s theory of
“permanent revolution” is a variety of Menshevism.
Of late rotten diplomats have appeared in our
press who try to palm off the theory of “permanent
revolution” as something compatible with Leninism.Of course, they say, this theory proved to be worthless
in 1905; but the mistake Trotsky made was that he ran
too far ahead at that time, in an attempt to apply to thesituation in 1905 what could not then be applied. But
later, they say, in October 1917, for example, when the
revolution had had time to mature completely, Trotsky’stheory proved to be quite appropriate. It is not difficult
to guess that the chief of these diplomats is Radek.
Here, if you please, is what he says:
“The war created a chasm between the peasantry, which
was striving to win land and peace, and the petty-bourgeois par-
ties; the war placed the peasantry under the leadership of the work-
ing class and of its vanguard the Bolshevik Party. This renderedpossible, not the dictatorship of the working class and peas-
antry, but the dictatorship of the working class relying on the
peasantry. What Rosa Luxemburg and Trotsky advanced againstLenin in 1905 (i.e., “permanent revolution”— J. St. ) proved, as a
matter of fact, to be the second stage of the historic development.”
Here every statement is a distortion.
It is not true that the war “rendered possible, not the
dictatorship of the working class and peasantry, but thedictatorship of the working class relying on the peas-
antry.” Actually, the February Revolution of 1917 was
the materialization of the dictatorship of the proletar-iat and peasantry, interwoven in a peculiar way with
the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
It is not true that the theory of “permanent revolu-
tion,” which Radek bashfully refrains from mentioning,
was advanced in 1905 by Rosa Luxemburg and Trotsky.
Actually, this theory was advanced by Parvus andTrotsky. Now, 10 months later, Radek corrects him-
self and deems it necessary to castigate Parvus for
the theory of “permanent revolution.” But in allfairness Radek should also castigate Parvus’ partner,
Trotsky.
It is not true that the theory of “permanent revolu-
tion,” which was brushed aside by the 1905 revolution,
proved to be correct in the “second stage of the historic
development,” that is, during the October Revolu-tion. The whole course of the October Revolution, its
whole development, demonstrated and proved the utter
bankruptcy of the theory of “permanent revolution” andits absolute incompatibility with the foundations of
Leninism.
Honeyed speeches and rotten diplomacy cannot hide
the yawning chasm which lies between the theory of
“permanent revolution” and Leninism.
III
CERTAIN  SPECIFIC  FEATURES  OF  THE  TACTICS
OF  THE  BOLSHEVIKS  DURING  THE  PERIOD
OF  PREPARATION  FOR  OCTOBER
In order to understand the tactics pursued by the
Bolsheviks during the period of preparation for Octoberwe must get a clear idea of at least some of the particu-
larly important features of those tactics. This is all the
more necessary since in numerous pamphlets on the tac-tics of the Bolsheviks precisely these features are fre-
quently overlooked.
What are these features?First specific feature.  If one were to listen to Trotsky,
one would think that there were only two periods in
the history of the preparation for October: the period ofreconnaissance and the period of uprising, and that
all else comes from the evil one. What was the April
demonstration of 1917? “The April demonstration, whichwent more to the ‘Left’ than it should have, was a recon-
noitring sortie for the purpose of probing the disposi-
tion of the masses and the relations between them andthe majority in the Soviets.” And what was the July
demonstration of 1917? In Trotsky’s opinion, “this, too,
was in fact another, more extensive, reconnaissanceat a new and higher phase of the movement.” Needless
to say, the June demonstration of 1917, which was organ-
ized at the demand of our Party, should, accordingto Trotsky’s idea, all the more be termed a “reconnais-
sance.”
This would seem to imply that as early as March 1917,
the Bolsheviks had ready a political army of workers and
peasants, and that if they did not bring this army into
action for an uprising in April, or in June, or in July,
but engaged merely in “reconnaissance,” it was because,and only because, “the information obtained from
the reconnaissance” at the time was unfavoura-
ble.
Needless to say, this oversimplified notion of the
political tactics of our Party is nothing but a con-
fusion of ordinary military tactics with the revolutionarytactics of the Bolsheviks.
Actually, all these demonstrations were primarily
the result of the spontaneous pressure of the masses, theresult of the fact that the indignation of the masses
against the war had boiled over and sought an outlet
in the streets.
Actually, the task of the Party at that time was to
shape and to guide the spontaneously arising demonstra-
tions of the masses along the line of the revolutionaryslogans of the Bolsheviks.
Actually, the Bolsheviks had no political army ready
in March 1917, nor could they have had one. The Bolshe-viks built up such an army (and had finally built it up
by October 1917) only in the course of the struggle and
conflicts of the classes between April and October 1917,through the April demonstration, the June and July dem-
onstrations, the elections to the district and city Dumas,
the struggle against the Kornilov revolt, and the winningover of the Soviets. A political army is not like a military
army. A military command begins a war with an army
ready to hand, whereas the Party has to create its armyin the course of the struggle itself, in the course of class
conflicts, as the masses themselves become convinced
through their own experience of the correctness of the
Party’s slogans and policy.
Of course, every such demonstration at the same time
threw a certain amount of light on the hidden inter-
relations of the forces involved, provided certain recon-
naissance information, but this reconnaissance was not themotive for the demonstration, but its natural result.
In analysing the events preceding the uprising
in October and comparing them with the events thatmarked the period from April to July, Lenin says:
“The situation now is not at all what it was prior to April 20-
21, June 9, July 3; for then there was spontaneous excitement
which we, as a party, either failed to perceive (April 20) or tried torestrain and shape into a peaceful demonstration (June 9 andJuly 3). For at that time we were fully aware that the Sovietswere not yet  ours, that the peasants still  trusted the Lieber-
Dan-Chernov course and not the Bolshevik course (uprising),and that, consequently, we could not have the majority of thepeople behind us, and hence, an uprising was premature” (see V ol.XXI, p. 345).
It is plain that “reconnaissance” alone does not get
one very far.
Obviously, it was not a question of “reconnaissance,”
but of the following:
1) all through the period of preparation for October
the Party invariably relied in its struggle upon the spon-taneous upsurge of the mass revolutionary move-
ment;
    2) while relying on the spontaneous upsurge, itmaintained its own undivided leadership of the move-
ment;
3) this leadership of the movement helped it to form
the mass political army for the October uprising;
4) this policy was bound to result in the entire
preparation for October proceeding under the leadership
of one party, the Bolshevik Party;
5) this preparation for October, in its turn, brought
it about that as a result of the October uprising
power was concentrated in the hands of one party, the
Bolshevik Party.
Thus, the undivided leadership of one party, the Com-
munist Party, as the principal factor in the preparation
for October—such is the characteristic feature of theOctober Revolution, such is the first specific feature
of the tactics of the Bolsheviks in the period of prepara-
tion for October.
It scarcely needs proof that without this feature
of Bolshevik tactics the victory of the dictatorship of
the proletariat in the conditions of imperialism wouldhave been impossible.
In this the October Revolution differs favourably
from the revolution of 1871 in France, where the leader-ship was divided between two parties, neither of which
could be called a Communist Party.
Second specific feature.  The preparation for October
thus proceeded under the leadership of one party, the
Bolshevik Party. But how did the Party carry out this
leadership, along what line did the latter proceed? Thisleadership proceeded along the line of isolating the  compro-
mising  parties, as the most dangerous groupings in the pe-
riod of the outbreak of the revolution, the line of isolat-ing the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks.
     What is the fundamental strategic rule of Leninism?
It is the recognition of the following:
1) the compromising  parties are the most dangerous
social support of the enemies of the revolution in theperiod of the approaching revolutionary outbreak;
2) it is impossible to overthrow the enemy (tsarism
or the bourgeoisie) unless these parties are isolated;
3) the main weapons in the period of preparation
for the revolution must therefore be directed towards
isolating these parties, towards winning the broad massesof the working people away from them.
In the period of the struggle against tsarism, in
the period of preparation for the bourgeois-democraticrevolution (1905-16), the most dangerous social support
of tsarism was the liberal-monarchist party, the Cadet
Party. Why? Because it was the compromising party,the party of compromise  between tsarism and the major-
ity of the people, i.e., the peasantry as a whole. Natu-
rally, the Party at that time directed its main blowsat the Cadets, for unless the Cadets were isolated there
could be no hope of a rupture  between the peasantry
and tsarism, and unless this rupture was ensured therecould be no hope of the victory of the revolution. Many
people at that time did not understand this specific
feature of Bolshevik strategy and accused the Bolsheviksof excessive “Cadetophobia”; they asserted that with the
Bolsheviks the struggle against the Cadets “overshadowed”
the struggle against the principal enemy -- tsarism. Butthese accusations, for which there was no justification,
revealed an utter failure to understand the Bolshevik
strategy, which called for the isolation of the com-promising party in order  to facilitate, to hasten the
victory over the principal enemy.
It scarcely needs proof that without this strategy
the hegemony of the proletariat in the bourgeois-demo-
cratic revolution would have been impossible.
In the period of preparation for October the centre
of gravity of the conflicting forces shifted to another
plane. The tsar was gone. The Cadet Party had been trans-formed from a compromising force into a governing
force, into the ruling force of imperialism. Now the
fight was no longer between tsarism and the people, butbetween the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. In this
period the petty-bourgeois democratic parties, the par-
ties of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,were the most dangerous social support of imperialism.
Why? Because these parties were then the compromising
parties, the parties of compromise  between imperialism
and the labouring masses. Naturally, the Bolsheviks
at that time directed their main blows at these parties;
for unless these parties were isolated there could be nohope of a rupture  between the labouring masses and
imperialism, and unless this rupture was ensured there
could be no hope of the victory of the Soviet revo-lution. Many people at that time did not understand
this specific feature of the Bolshevik tactics and accused
the Bolsheviks of displaying “excessive hatred” towardsthe Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, and of
“forgetting” the principal goal. But the entire period
of preparation for October eloquently testifies to thefact that only by pursuing these tactics could the Bol-
sheviks ensure the victory of the October Revolution.
The characteristic feature of this period was the
further revolutionization of the labouring masses of the
peasantry, their disillusionment with the Socialist-
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, their defection from
these parties, their turn towards rallying directly around
the proletariat as the only consistently revolutionaryforce, capable of leading the country to peace. The history
of this period is the history of the struggle between the
Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, on the onehand, and the Bolsheviks, on the other, for the labouring
masses of the peasantry, for winning over these masses.
The outcome of this struggle was decided by the coali-tion period, the Kerensky period, the refusal of the So-
cialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to confiscate
the landlords’ land, the fight of the Socialist-Revo-lutionaries and Mensheviks to continue the war, the
June offensive at the front, the introduction of capital
punishment for soldiers, the Kornilov revolt. And theydecided the issue of this struggle entirely in favour of
the Bolshevik strategy; for had not the Socialist-Revo-
lutionaries and Mensheviks been isolated it would havebeen impossible to overthrow the government of the
imperialists, and had this government not been over-
thrown it would have been impossible to break awayfrom the war. The policy of isolating the Socialist-Revo-
lutionaries and Mensheviks proved to be the only cor-
rect policy.
Thus, isolation of the Menshevik and Socialist-
Revolutionary parties as the main line in directing the
preparations for October—such was the second specificfeature of the tactics of the Bolsheviks.
It scarcely needs proof that without this feature of
the tactics of the Bolsheviks, the alliance of the workingclass and the labouring masses of the peasantry would
have been left hanging in the air.
It is characteristic that in his Lessons of October
Trotsky says nothing, or next to nothing, about this
specific feature of the Bolshevik tactics.
Third specific feature.  Thus, the Party, in directing
the preparations for October, pursued the line of isolat-
ing the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties,of winning the broad masses of the workers and peasants
away from them. But how, concretely, was this isolation
effected by the Party—in what form, under what slogan?It was effected in the form of the revolutionary mass
movement for the power of the Soviets, under the slogan
“All power to the Soviets!”, by means of the struggleto convert the Soviets from organs for mobilizing the
masses into organs of the uprising, into organs of power,
into the apparatus of a new proletarian state power.
Why was it precisely the Soviets that the Bolsheviks
seized upon as the principal organizational lever that
could facilitate the task of isolating the Mensheviksand Socialist-Revolutionaries, that was capable of ad-
vancing the cause of the proletarian revolution, and that
was destined to lead the millions of labouring massesto the victory of the dictatorship of the proletariat?
What are the Soviets?
“The Soviets,” said Lenin as early as September 1917, “are
a new state apparatus, which, in the first place, provides an armedforce of workers and peasants; and this force is not divorced fromthe people, as was the old standing army, but is most closely boundup with the people. From the military standpoint, this force isincomparably more powerful than previous forces; from the revolu-tionary standpoint, it cannot be replaced by anything else. Sec-ondly, this apparatus provides a bond with the masses, withthe majority of the people, so intimate, so indissoluble, so readilycontrollable and renewable, that there was nothing even remotely
like it in the previous state apparatus. Thirdly, this apparatus,
by virtue of the fact that its personnel is elected and subject
to recall at the will of the people without any bureaucraticformalities, is far more democratic than any previous apparatus.
Fourthly, it provides a close contact with the most diverse profes-
sions, thus facilitating the adoption of the most varied and mostprofound reforms without bureaucracy. Fifthly, it provides a form of
 organization of the vanguard, i.e., of the most politically conscious,
most energetic and most progressive section of the oppressed  classes,
the workers and peasants, and thus constitutes an apparatus by
means of which the vanguard of the oppressed classes can elevate,
train, educate, and lead the entire vast mass  of these classes, which has
hitherto stood quite remote from political life, from history. Sixthly,
it makes it possible to combine the advantages of parliamentarism
with the advantages of immediate and direct democracy, i.e.,to unite in the persons of the elected representatives of the people
both legislative and executive  functions. Compared with bourgeois
parliamentarism, this represents an advance in the developmentof democracy which is of world-wide historic significance. . . .
“Had not the creative spirit of the revolutionary classes of
the people given rise to the Soviets, the proletarian revolutionin Russia would be a hopeless affair; for the proletariat undoubt-
edly could not retain power with the old state apparatus,
and it is impossible to create a new apparatus immediately”(see Vol. XXI, pp. 258-59).
That is why the Bolsheviks seized upon the Soviets
as the principal organizational link that could facilitatethe task of organizing the October Revolution and the
creation of a new, powerful apparatus of the proletarian
state power.
From the point of view of its internal development,
the slogan “All power to the Soviets!” passed through
two stages: the first (up to the July defeat of the Bolshe-viks, during the period of dual power), and the second
(after the defeat of the Kornilov revolt).
     During the first stage this slogan meant breaking
the bloc of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolu-
tionaries with the Cadets, the formation of a SovietGovernment consisting of Mensheviks and Socialist-
Revolutionaries (for at that time the Soviets were
Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik), the right of freeagitation for the opposition (i.e., for the Bolsheviks),
and the free struggle of parties within the Soviets, in
the expectation that by means of such a struggle theBolsheviks would succeed in capturing the Soviets and
changing the com position of the Soviet Government in
the course of a peaceful development of the revolution.This plan, of course, did not signify the dictatorship
of the proletariat. But it undoubtedly facilitated the
preparation of the conditions required for ensuring thedictatorship; for, by putting the Mensheviks and Social-
ist-Revolutionaries in power and compelling them to
carry out in practice their anti-revolutionary platform,it hastened the exposure of the true nature of these
parties, hastened their isolation, their divorce from
the masses. The July defeat of the Bolsheviks, how-ever, interrupted this development; for it gave pre-
ponderance to the generals’ and Cadets’ counter-revo-
lution and threw the Socialist-Revolutionaries andMensheviks into the arms of that counter-revolution. This
compelled the Party temporarily to withdraw the slogan
“All power to the Soviets!”, only to put it forward againin the conditions of a fresh revolutionary upsurge.
The defeat of the Kornilov revolt ushered in the sec-
ond stage. The slogan “All power to the Soviets!” becameagain the immediate slogan. But now this slogan had a
different meaning from that in the first stage. Its content
had radically changed. Now this slogan meant a com-
plete rupture with imperialism and the passing of power
to the Bolsheviks, for the majority of the Soviets werealready Bolshevik. Now this slogan meant the revo-
lution’s direct approach towards the dictatorship of
the proletariat by means of an uprising. More thanthat, this slogan now meant the organization of the
dictatorship of the proletariat and giving it a state
form.
The inestimable significance of the tactics of trans-
forming the Soviets into organs of state power lay in
the fact that they caused millions of working peopleto break away from imperialism, exposed the Menshevik
and Socialist-Revolutionary parties as the tools of im-
perialism, and brought the masses by a direct route,as it were, to the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Thus, the policy of transforming the Soviets into
organs of state power, as the most important conditionfor isolating the compromising parties and for the victory
of the dictatorship of the proletariat—such is the third
specific feature of the tactics of the Bolsheviks in theperiod of preparation for October.
Fourth specific feature.  The picture would not be
complete if we did not deal with the question of how andwhy the Bolsheviks were able to transform their Party
slogans into slogans for the vast masses, into slogans
which pushed the revolution forward; how and why theysucceeded in convincing not only the vanguard, and not
only the majority of the working class, but also the major-
ity of the people, of the correctness of their policy.
The point is that for the victory of the revolution, if
it is really a people’s revolution embracing the masses
in their millions, correct Party slogans alone are not
enough. For the victory of the revolution one more neces-
sary condition is required, namely, that the masses them-selves become convinced through their own experience
of the correctness of these slogans. Only then do the slo-
gans of the Party become the slogans of the masses them-selves. Only then does the revolution really become a
people’s revolution. One of the specific features of the
tactics of the Bolsheviks in the period of preparationfor October was that they correctly determined the paths
and turns which would naturally lead the masses
to the Party’s slogans—to the very threshold of therevolution, so to speak—thus helping them to feel,
to test, to realize by their own experience the correct-
ness of these slogans. In other words, one of the specificfeatures of the tactics of the Bolsheviks is that they do
not confuse leadership of the Party with leadership
of the masses; that they clearly see the difference be-tween the first sort of leadership and the second; that they,
therefore, represent the science, not only of leadership
of the Party, but of leadership of the vast massesof the working people.
A graphic example of the manifestation of this fea-
ture of Bolshevik tactics was provided by the experienceof convening and dispersing the Constituent Assembly.
It is well known that the Bolsheviks advanced the
slogan of a Republic of Soviets as early as April 1917. It iswell known that the Constituent Assembly was a bour-
geois parliament, fundamentally opposed to the princi-
ples of a Republic of Soviets. How could it happen that
the Bolsheviks, who were advancing towards a Republic of
Soviets, at the same time demanded that the Provisional
Government should immediately convene the Constituent
Assembly? How could it happen that the Bolsheviks
not only took part in the elections, but themselves con-vened the Constituent Assembly? How could it happen
that a month before the uprising, in the transition
from the old to the new, the Bolsheviks considered atemporary combination of a Republic of Soviets with
the Constituent Assembly possible?
This “happened” because:1) the idea of a Constituent Assembly was one of
the most popular ideas among the broad masses of the
population;
2) the slogan of the immediate convocation of the
Constituent Assembly helped to expose the counter-
revolutionary nature of the Provisional Government;
3) in order to discredit the idea of a Constituent
Assembly in the eyes of the masses, it was necessary to
lead the masses to the walls of the Constituent Assemblywith their demands for land, for peace, for the power
of the Soviets, thus bringing them face to face with the
actual, live Constituent Assembly;
4) only this could help the masses to become convinced
through their own experience of the counter-revolu-
tionary nature of the Constituent Assembly and of thenecessity of dispersing it;
5) all this naturally presupposed the possibility of
a temporary combination of the Republic of Soviets withthe Constituent Assembly, as one of the means for
eliminating the Constituent Assembly;
6) such a combination, if brought about under  t he
condition that all power was transferred to the Soviets,
could only signify the subordination of the Constituent
Assembly to the Soviets, its conversion into an append-
age of the Soviets, its painless extinction.
It scarcely needs proof that had the Bolsheviks
not adopted such a policy the dispersion of the Constit-
uent Assembly would not have taken place so smoothly,
and the subsequent actions of the Socialist-Revolution-aries and Mensheviks under the slogan “All power to
the Constituent Assembly!” would not have failed so
signally.
“We took part,” says Lenin, “in the elections to the Russian
bourgeois parliament, the Constituent Assembly, in September-
November 1917. Were our tactics correct or not? . . . Did not we,the Russian Bolsheviks, have more right in September-November
1917 than any Western Communists to consider that parliamen-
tarism was politically obsolete in Russia? Of course we had; forthe point is not whether bourgeois parliaments have existed for
a long or a short time, but how far the broad masses of the working
people are  prepared  (ideologically, politically and practically)
to accept the Soviet system and to disperse the bourgeois-democrat-
ic parliament (or allow it to be dispersed). That, owing to a number
of special conditions, the working class of the towns and the soldiersand peasants of Russia were in September-November 1917 excep-
tionally well prepared to accept the Soviet system and to disperse
the most democratic of bourgeois parliaments, is an absolutelyincontestable and fully established historical fact. Nevertheless,
the Bolsheviks did  not  boycott the Constituent Assembly, but
took part in the elections both before the proletariat conqueredpolitical power and after ” (see Vol. XXV , pp. 201-02).
Why then did they not boycott the Constituent
Assembly? Because, says Lenin,
“participation in a bourgeois-democratic parliament even
a few weeks before the victory of a Soviet Republic, and evenafter  such a victory, not only does not harm the revolutionary
proletariat, but actually helps it to prove  to the backward masses
why such parliaments deserve to be dispersed; it helps  their suc-
cessful dispersal, and helps  to make bourgeois parliamentarism
‘politically obsolete.’” ( ibid. )
It is characteristic that Trotsky does not understand
this feature of Bolshevik tactics and snorts at the “theory”of combining the Constituent Assembly with the Soviets,
qualifying it as Hilferdingism.
He does not understand that to permit such a combi-
nation, accompanied  by the slogan of an uprising and
the probable victory of the Soviets, in connection with
the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, wasthe only revolutionary tactics, which had nothing in
common with the Hilferding tactics of converting
the Soviets into an appendage of the ConstituentAssembly; he does not understand that the mistake
committed by some comrades in this question gives
him no grounds for disparaging the absolutely correctposition taken by Lenin and the Party on the “com-
bined type of state power” under  certain conditions
(cf. V ol. XXI, p. 338).
He does not understand that if the Bolsheviks
had not adopted this special policy towards the Con-
stituent Assembly they would not have succeeded inwinning over to their side the vast masses of the people;
and if they had not won over these masses they could
not have transformed the October uprising into aprofound people’s revolution.
It is interesting to note that Trotsky even snorts
at the words “people,” “revolutionary democracy,” etc.,occurring in articles by Bolsheviks, and considers them
improper for a Marxist to use.
     Trotsky has evidently forgotten that even in Septem-
ber 1917, a month before the victory of the dictatorship
of the proletariat, Lenin, that unquestionable Marxist,
wrote of “the necessity of the immediate transfer of thewhole power to the revolutionary democracy headed by
the revolutionary proletariat ” (see V ol. XXI, p. 198).
     Trotsky has evidently forgotten that Lenin, that
unquestionable Marxist, quoting the well-known letter
of Marx to Kugelmann (April 1871)80 to the effect that
the smashing of the bureaucratic-military state machineis the preliminary condition for every real people ’s revo-
lution on the continent, writes in black and white the
following lines:
“particular attention should be paid to Marx’s extremely
profound remark that the destruction of the bureaucratic-militarystate machine is ‘the preliminary condition for every real people ’s
 revolution.’ This concept of a ‘people’s’ revolution seems strangecoming from Marx, and the Russian Plekhanovites and Menshe-viks, those followers of Struve who wish to be regarded as Marxists,might possibly declare such an expression to be a ‘slip of the pen’on Marx’s part. They have reduced Marxism to such a state ofwretchedly liberal distortion that nothing exists for them beyondthe antithesis between bourgeois revolution and proletarian revo-lution—and even this antithesis they interpret in an extremelylifeless way. . . .
“In Europe, in 1871, there was not a single country on the
continent in which the proletariat constituted the majority ofthe people. A ‘people’s’ revolution, one that actually brought themajority into movement, could be such only if it embraced boththe proletariat and the peasantry. These two classes then consti-tuted the ‘people.’ These two classes are united by the fact thatthe ‘bureaucratic-military state machine’ oppresses, crushes,exploits them. To break up  this machine, to smash  it—this is truly
in the interest of the ‘people,’ of the majority, of the workers andmost of the peasants, this is ‘the preliminary condition’ for a free
alliance between the poor peasants and the proletarians, whereas
without such an alliance democracy is unstable and socialist trans-
formation is impossible” (see Vol. XXI, pp. 395-96).
These words of Lenin’s should not be forgotten.
Thus, ability to convince the masses of the correctness
of the Party slogans on the basis of their own experience,by bringing them to the revolutionary positions, as the
most important condition for the winning over of the
millions of working people to the side of the Party—such is the fourth specific feature of the tactics of the
Bolsheviks in the period of preparation for October.
I think that what I have said is quite sufficient to get
a clear idea of the characteristic features of these tactics.
IV
THE  OCTOBER  REVOLUTION  AS  THE  BEGINNING
OF  AND  THE  PRE-CONDITION  FOR  THE  WORLD
REVOLUTION
There can be no doubt that the universal theory of
a simultaneous victory of the revolution in the principal
countries of Europe, the theory that the victory of so-cialism in one country is impossible, has proved to be
an artificial and untenable theory. The seven years’
history of the proletarian revolution in Russia speaksnot for but against this theory. This theory is unaccept-
able not only as a scheme of development of the world
revolution, for it contradicts obvious facts. It is stillless acceptable as a slogan; for it fetters, rather than
releases, the initiative of individual countries which,
by reason of certain historical conditions, obtain the
opportunity to break through the front of capital independ-
ently; for it does not stimulate an active onslaught on
capital in individual countries, but encourages passivewaiting for the moment of the “universal denouement”;
for it cultivates among the proletarians of the different
countries not the spirit of revolutionary determination,but the mood of Hamlet-like doubt over the question as to
“what if the others fail to back us up?” Lenin was abso-
lutely right in saying that the victory of the proletar-iat in one country is the “typical case,” that “a simulta-
neous revolution in a number of countries” can only be
a “rare exception” (see V ol. XXIII, p. 354).
But, as is well known, Lenin’s theory of revolution
is not limited only to this side of the question. It is also
the theory of the development of the world revolution.*The victory of socialism in one country is not a self-
sufficient task. The revolution which has been victorious
in one country must regard itself not as a self-sufficiententity, but as an aid, as a means for hastening
the victory of the proletariat in all countries. For the
victory of the revolution in one country, in the pres-ent case Russia, is not only the product of the uneven
development and progressive decay of imperialism; it is
at the same time the beginning of and the pre-conditionfor the world revolution.
Undoubtedly, the paths of development of the world
revolution are not as plain as it may have seemed pre-viously, before the victory of the revolution in one coun-
try, before the appearance of developed imperialism,
which is “the eve of the socialist revolution.” For a new
* See above The Foundations of Leninism .—J. St.
factor has arisen—the law of the uneven development
of the capitalist countries, which operates under the
conditions of developed imperialism, and which im-plies the inevitability of armed collisions, the general
weakening of the world front of capital, and the pos-
sibility of the victory of socialism in individual coun-tries. For a new factor has arisen—the vast Soviet coun-
try, lying between the West and the East, between the
centre of the financial exploitation of the world and thearena of colonial oppression, a country which by its
very existence is revolutionizing the whole world.
All these are factors (not to mention other less im-
portant ones) which cannot be left out of account in
studying the paths of development of the world revo-
lution.
Formerly, it was commonly thought that the revo-
lution would develop through the even “maturing”
of the elements of socialism, primarily in the more devel-oped, the “advanced,” countries. Now this view must
be considerably modified.
“The system of international relationships,” says Lenin,
“has now taken a form in which one of the states of Europe,
viz., Germany, has been enslaved by the victor countries. Fur-
thermore, a number of states, which are, moreover, the oldeststates in the West, find themselves in a position, as the result
of their victory, to utilize this victory to make a number of insig-
nificant concessions to their oppressed classes—concessions which nevertheless retard the revolutionary movement in those countries
and create some semblance of ‘social peace.’
     “At the same time, precisely as a result of the last imperialistwar, a number of countries—the East, India, China, etc.—have
been completely dislodged from their groove. Their development
has definitely shifted to the general European capitalist lines.
The general European ferment has begun to affect them, and it
is now clear to the whole world that they have been drawn into
a process of development that cannot but lead to a crisis in the
whole of world capitalism.”
In view of this fact, and in connection with it, “the West-
European capitalist countries will consummate their develop-ment towards socialism . . . not as we formerly expected. Theyare consummating it not by the even ‘maturing’ of socialism in
them, but by the exploitation of some countries by others, by the
exploitation of the first of the countries to be vanquished in theimperialist war combined with the exploitation of the whole ofthe East. On the other hand, precisely as a result of the firstimperialist war, the East has definitely come into the revolution-ary movement, has been definitely drawn into the general mael-
strom of the world revolutionary movement” (see V ol. XXVII,
pp. 415-16).
If we add to this the fact that not only the defeated
countries and colonies are being exploited by the victo-rious countries, but that some of the victorious coun-
tries are falling into the orbit of financial exploitation
at the hands of the most powerful of the victorious coun-tries, America and Britain; that the contradictions
among all these countries are an extremely important
factor in the disintegration of world imperialism; that,in addition to these contradictions, very profound con-
tradictions exist and are developing within each of these
countries; that all these contradictions are becomingmore profound and more acute because of the existence,
alongside these countries, of the great Republic of
Soviets—if all this is taken into consideration, then thepicture of the special character of the international
situation will become more or less complete.
     Most probably, the world revolution will developby the breaking away of a number of new countries from
the system of the imperialist states as a result of revolu-
tion, while the proletarians of these countries will be
supported by the proletariat of the imperialist states.We see that the first country to break away, the first
victorious country, is already being supported by the
workers and the labouring masses of other countries.Without this support it could not hold out. Undoubt-
edly, this support will increase and grow. But there
can also be no doubt that the very development of theworld revolution, the very process of the breaking away
from imperialism of a number of new countries will be
the more rapid and thorough, the more thoroughly social-ism becomes consolidated in the first victorious country,
the faster this country is transformed into a base for
the further unfolding of the world revolution, into alever for the further disintegration of imperialism.
While it is true that the final  victory of socialism in
the first country to emancipate itself is impossible with-out the combined efforts of the proletarians of several
countries, it is equally true that the unfolding of the
world revolution will be the more rapid and thorough,the more effective the assistance rendered by the first
socialist country to the workers and labouring masses
of all other countries.
In what should this assistance be expressed?
It should be expressed, firstly, in the victorious coun-
try achieving “the utmost possible in one country  f o r
the development, support and awakening of the revolu-
tion in all countries”  (see Lenin, V ol. XXIII, p. 385).
It should be expressed, secondly, in that the “victo-
rious proletariat” of one country, “having expropriated
the capitalists and organized socialist production, would
stand up . . . against  the rest of the world, the capitalist
world, attracting to its cause the oppressed classes of
other countries, raising revolts in those countries againstthe capitalists, and in the event of necessity coming out
even with armed force against the exploiting classes
and their states” (see Lenin, V ol. XVIII, pp. 232-33).
The characteristic feature of the assistance given by
the victorious country is not only that it hastens the
victory of the proletarians of other countries, but alsothat, by facilitating this victory, it ensures the final
victory of socialism in the first victorious country.
Most probably, in the course of development of the
world revolution, side by side with the centres of impe-
rialism in individual capitalist countries and with the
system of these countries throughout the world, centres ofsocialism will be created in individual Soviet countries
and a system of these centres throughout the world, and
the struggle between these two systems will fill thehistory of the unfolding of the world revolution.
For, says Lenin, “the free union of nations in socialism is
impossible without a more or less prolonged and stubborn struggleof the socialist republics against the backward states.” ( ibid.)
The world significance of the October Revolution lies
not only in the fact that it constitutes a great beginning
made by one country in causing a breach in the system ofimperialism and that it is the first centre of socialism
in the ocean of imperialist countries, but also in that it
constitutes the first stage of the world revolution anda mighty base for its further development.
     Therefore, not only those are wrong who forget the
international character of the October Revolution and
declare the victory of socialism in one country to be a
purely national, and only a national, phenomenon, but
also those who, although they bear in mind the inter-national character of the October Revolution, are in-
clined to regard this revolution as something passive,
merely destined to accept help from without. Actually,not only does the October Revolution need support
from the revolution in other countries, but the revolu-
tion in those countries needs the support of the OctoberRevolution, in order to accelerate and advance the cause
of overthrowing world imperialism.
December 17, 1924
J.  Stalin,  On  the  Road  to  October
GIZ,  1925
N O T E S
1The Thirteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) took place in
Moscow on January 16-18, 1924. There were present 128 dele-gates with right of voice and vote and 222 with rightof voice only. The conference discussed Party affairs, the inter-national situation, and the immediate tasks in economic
policy. On J. V . Stalin’s report “Immediate Tasks in Party
Affairs” the conference passed two resolutions: “Party Affairs,”and “Results of the Discussion and the Petty-BourgeoisDeviation in the Party.”
The conference condemned the Trotskyite opposition, declar-
ing it to be a petty-bourgeois deviation from Marxism, and
recommended that the Central Committee publish Point 7 of
the resolution “On Party Unity” that was adopted by theTenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.) on the proposal of V . I. Lenin.These decisions of the conference were endorsed by the Thir-teenth Party Congress and by the Fifth Congress of the Com-intern. (For the resolutions of the conference, see Resolutions
and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses, Conferences and Cen-
tral Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941, pp. 535-56.) p.  3
2This refers to the resolution on Party affairs adopted at the
joint meeting of the Political Bureau of the Central Committeeand the Presidium of the Central Control Commission of the
R.C.P.(B.) held on December 5, 1923, and published in Pravda,
No. 278, December 7, 1923. The plenum of the CentralCommittee of the R.C.P.(B.), which took place on January14-15, 1924, summed up the discussion in the Party and en-dorsed the resolution on Party affairs adopted by the Political
Bureau of the Central Committee and the Presidium of the
Central Control Commission for submission to the Thirteenth
Party Conference (see Resolutions and Decisions of C.P.S.U.(B.)
Congresses, Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I,
1941, pp. 533-40). p.  5
3Concerning the document of the 46 members of the opposition,
see History of the C.P .S.U.(B.), Short Course , Moscow, 1952,
pp. 408-09.  p.  29
4On May 8, 1923, Lord Curzon, British Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, sent the Soviet Government an ultimatum con-
taining slanderous charges against the Soviet Government.It demanded the recall of the Soviet plenipotentiary represent-
atives from Persia and Afghanistan, the release of British fish-
ing boats which had been detained for illegal fishing in thenorthern territorial waters of the U.S.S.R., etc., and threatened
a rupture of trade relations if these demands were not
conceded within ten days. Curzon’s ultimatum created thedanger of a new intervention. The Soviet Government rejected
the unlawful claims of the British Government, at the same
time expressing complete readiness to settle the relationsbetween the two countries in a peaceful way, and took measures
to strengthen the country’s defensive capacity. p.  36
5This refers to the advance on Soviet territory by German troops
under the command of General Hoffmann in February 1918
(see J. V . Stalin, Works , Vol. 4, pp. 39-49). p.  37
6This refers to the counter-revolutionary mutiny in Kronstadt
in 1921, and to the kulak revolt in the Tambov Gubernia in1919-21. p.  37
7Dni (Days )—a daily newspaper of the Socialist-Revolution-
ary white guard émigrés; published in Berlin from October
1922.  p.  45
8Zarya  (Dawn )—a magazine of the Right-wing Menshevik
whiteguard émigrés; published in Berlin from April 1922 to
January 1924. p.  46
9The Second All-Union Congress of Soviets  was held in Moscow
from January 26 to February 2, 1924. At the first sitting,which was devoted to the memory of Lenin, J. V. Stalin deliv-
ered a speech in which, in the name of the Bolshevik Party,
he took a solemn vow to hold sacred and fulfil the behestsof Lenin. In connection with the death of Lenin, the congress
adopted an appeal “To Toiling Mankind.” To perpetuate the
memory of Lenin, the congress adopted a decision to publishLenin’s Works, to change the name of Petrograd to Leningrad,
to establish a Day of Mourning, and to erect a mausoleum for
Lenin in the Red Square in Moscow, and monuments to himin the capitals of the Union Republics and also in the cities of
Leningrad and Tashkent. The congress discussed a report on
the activities of the Soviet Government, the budget of the Unionof Soviet Socialist Republics, and the establishment of a Cen-
tral Agricultural Bank. On January 31, the congress endorsed
the first Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the U.S.S.R.which had been drafted under the guidance of J. V . Stalin.
The congress elected a Central Executive Committee—the
Soviet of the Union and the Soviet of Nationalities.J. V . Stalin was elected to the Soviet of the Union. p.  47
10This refers to the economic and political crisis in Germany in
1923. A mass revolutionary movement spread over the coun-
try, as a result of which workers’ governments were set up inSaxony and Thuringia, and an armed uprising broke out
in Hamburg. After the suppression of the revolutionary move-
ment in Germany, bourgeois reaction was intensified all overEurope, as well as the danger of a new intervention against
the Soviet Republic. p.  51
11Iskra  (Spark )—the first all-Russian illegal Marxist news-
paper, founded by V . I. Lenin in December 1900. It was pub-
lished abroad and brought secretly into Russia (on the signif-icance and role of Iskra  see History of the C.P .S.U.(B.),
Short Course , Moscow 1952, pp. 55-68). p.  54
12The Stockholm Party Congress—the Fourth (“Unity”) Congress
of the R.S.D.L.P.—took place on April 10-25 (April 23-
May 8), 1906 (see History of the C.P.S.U.(B.), Short Course ,
Moscow 1952, pp. 136-39). p.  57
13The Fifth (London) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. took place
from April 30 to May 19 (May 13 to June 1), 1907 (seeJ. V . Stalin, Works , V ol. 2, pp. 47-80, and History of the
C.P .S.U.(B.), Short Course , Moscow 1952, pp. 143-46). p.  58
14On April 3, 1924, a conference was held under the auspices of
the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) to discuss work among
the youth. There were present the members of the Central
Committee of the Party, members and candidate membersof the Central Committee of the Russian Young Communist
League and representatives from ten of the largest gubernia
organisations of the R.Y .C.L. The conference summed up the dis-cussion on the immediate tasks of the Young Communist League
that had taken place at the beginning of 1924. Later, the
Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) discussed the resultsof the conference and instructed the local Party and Y .C.L.
organisations to secure unity and harmony in the work of
the R.Y .C.L., and to call upon the leading members of theY .C.L. to work unanimously to carry out the tasks set by
the Party.  p.  67
15J. V . Stalin’s lectures, The Foundations of Leninism , were
published in Pravda  in April and May 1924. In May 1924,
J. V . Stalin’s pamphlet On Lenin and Leninism  appeared,
containing his reminiscences on Lenin  and the lectures The
Foundations of Leninism.  J. V . Stalin’s work The Foundations
of Leninism  is included in all the editions of his book Prob-
lems of Leninism.  p. 71
16Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Manifesto of the Commu-
nist Party , (Selected Works , Vol. I, Moscow 1951, p. 61)
p. 80
17This refers to the statement by Karl Marx in his
letter to Frederick Engels of April 16, 1856 (see Karl Marxand Frederick Engels, Selected Works , V ol. II, Moscow, 1951,
p. 412)  p.  86
18This refers to Frederick Engels’ article “The Bakuninists at
Work” (see F. Engels, “Die Bakunisten an der Arbeit” in
Der Volksstaat , No. 105, 106, and 107, 1873). p.  87
19V . I. Lenin, “ Left-Wing ” Communism, an Infantile Disorder
(see Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 31, p. 9).  p.  88
20V . I. Lenin, What the “Friends of the People ” Are and How
They Fight the Social-Democrats  (see Works , 4th Russ. ed.,
V ol. 1, pp. 278-79). p.  88
21The Basle Congress of the Second International was held on
November 24-25, 1912. It was convened in connection with
the Balkan War and the impending threat of a world war.
Only one question was discussed: the international situationand joint action against war. The congress adopted a mani-
festo calling upon the workers to utilize their proletarian organ-
ization and might to wage a revolutionary struggle againstthe danger of war, to declare “war against war.”  p.  88
22See Karl Marx, Preface to the Second German Edition of the
first volume of Capital  (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
Selected Works , Vol. I, Moscow, 1951, p. 414). p.  90
23See Frederick Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Clas-
sical German Philosophy  (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
Selected Works , Vol. II, Moscow, 1951, p. 338). p.  93
24See V. I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 14. p.  93
25Karl Marx, Theses on Feuerbach  (see Frederick Engels, Ludwig
Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy , Ap-
pendix). (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works ,
V ol. II, Moscow, 1951, p. 367). p.  95
26V. I. Lenin, I mperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism  (see
Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 22, pp. 173-290). p.  97
27J. V . Stalin refers to the following articles written by V . I. Lenin
in 1905: “Social-Democracy and the Provisional Revolutionary
Government,” from which he cites a passage; “The Revolution-ary Democratic-Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Peasantry”;
and “On the Provisional Revolutionary Government.” (see
V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 8, pp. 247-63, 264-74,
427-47). p.  104
28Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The First Address of the
Central Committee to the Communist League  (see Karl Marx
and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , Vol. I, Moscow, 1951,
p. 102). p.  108
29See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Manifesto of the Com-
munist Party , (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works ,
V ol. I, p. 22, and Vol. II, p. 420, Moscow 1951). p.  120
30See Frederick Engels, The Peasant Question in France and
Germany  (Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works ,
V ol. II, Moscow 1951, p. 382).  p.  138
31Selskosoyuz —the All-Russian Union of Rural Co-operatives—
existed from August 1921 to June 1929. p.  140
32See V . I. Lenin, “The Importance of Gold Now and
After the Complete Victory of Socialism” ( Works , 4th Russ.
ed., Vol. 33, pp. 85-92). p.  174
33The resolution “On Party Unity” was written by V. I. Lenin
and adopted by the Tenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.), held
March 8-16, 1921 (see V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed.,
V ol. 32, pp. 217-21, and also Resolutions and Decisions of
 C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses, Conferences and Central Committee
Plenums , in Russian, 1941, Part I, pp. 364-66). p.  191
34The Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)—the first congress
of the Bolshevik Party held after the death of V . I. Lenin—
took place on May 23-31, 1924. The congress proceedings were
directed by J. V . Stalin. There were present 748 delegates with
right of voice and vote, representing 735,881 Party mem-
bers. Of these, 241,591 had joined during the Lenin Enrolmentand 127,741 were candidate members who had joined before the
Lenin Enrolment. There were also present 416 delegates with
right of voice only. The congress discussed the politicaland organisational reports of the Central Committee, the re-
ports of the Central Auditing Commission and of the Central
Control Commission, the report of the R.C.P.(B.) representa-tives on the Executive Committee of the Comintern, questions
of Party organisation, internal trade and the co-operatives,
work in the countryside, work among the youth, and otherquestions.
The congress unanimously condemned the platform of the
Trotskyite opposition, defining it as a petty-bourgeois deviationfrom Marxism, as a revision of Leninism, and it endorsed the
resolutions on “Party Affairs” and “Results of the Discussion
and the Petty-Bourgeois Deviation in the Party” adopted bythe Thirteenth Party Conference.
The congress pointed to the enormous importance of the
Lenin Enrolment and drew the Party’s attention to the neces-sity of intensifying the education of new members of the Party
in the principles of Leninism. The congress instructed the Lenin
Institute to prepare a thoroughly scientific and most carefullycompiled edition of the complete Works  of V . I. Lenin, and
also selections of his works for the broad masses of the work-
ers in the languages of all the nationalities in the U.S.S.R.
p. 197
35Peasant mutual aid committees (peasant committees) were
set up under village Soviets and executive committees of volost
Soviets in conformity with the decree of the Council of People’s
Commissars on May 14, 1921, signed by V . I. Lenin. Theyexisted until 1933. They were set up for the purpose of improv-
ing the organisation of public aid for peasants and families of
men in the Red Army, with the aim of stimulating the independ-ent activity and initiative of the broad masses of the peasants,
The regulations governing the peasant mutual aid committees,
endorsed by the All-Russian Central Executive Committeeand by the Council of People’s Commissars of the R.S.F.S.R.
in September 1924, also charged the peasant committees with
the task of promoting and strengthening various forms of co-operation among the rural population and of drawing the
masses of the poor and middle peasants into these co-operative
 organisations. p.  205
36On May 23, 1924, a parade of Young Pioneers was held in the
Red Square in Moscow in honour of the Thirteenth Congress
of the R.C.P.(B.) and of the adoption by the Young Pioneerorganisation of the new name: “V . I. Lenin Children’s Com-
munist Organisation.” About 10,000 Young Pioneers took part
in the parade, at which the salute was taken by the Presidiumof the Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.). p.  205
37Joint-stock companies (state, mixed and co-operative) were
formed in the U.S.S.R. by the People’s Commissariat of For-
eign Trade, the People’s Commissariat of Internal Trade andthe People’s Commissariat of Finance on endorsement by the
Council of Labour and Defence. Their function was to attract
capital, including those of private businessmen, for the rapidrestoration of the national economy and the development of
trade.
The mixed companies, one of the forms of the joint-stock
companies, attracted foreign capital for procuring export
goods within the country and selling them abroad, and for
importing goods needed for restoring the national economy.The mixed companies operated under the control of the People’s
Commissariat of Foreign Trade. The joint-stock companies
existed in the first period of the NEP. p.  226
38Krestyanskaya Gazeta  (Peasants ’ Gazette )—organ of the Central
 Committee of the C.P.S.U.(B.), a newspaper for the masses
of the rural population, published from November 1923 toFebruary 1939. p.  227
39The Ukrainian Committees of Peasant Poor, which united
Ukrainian peasants who had little or no land, were formedfor the purpose of protecting the interests of the poor and mid-dle peasants. They existed from 1920 onwards and were dis-
solved after the achievement of complete collectivisation in
1933. In the first period of their existence (1920-21), thesecommittees were political organisations, which helped to con-solidate Soviet power in the countryside. On the introductionof the New Economic Policy they were reorganised into pub-lic organisations concerned with production, their chief function
being to draw the peasants into various agricultural collec-
tive organisations. The Committees of Peasant Poor wereeffective agencies for carrying out the policy of the Party andthe state in the countryside. p.  228
40Territorial formations, i.e., territorial army units, were estab-
lished by a decree of the Central Executive Committee and
the Council of People’s Commissars of the U.S.S.R. datedAugust 8, 1923, alongside the regular units of the RedArmy. They were organised on a militia basis and their purposewas to provide military training for the working people dur-ing short periods at training camps. p.  228
41See V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 33, pp. 231-91.
p. 228
42This refers to V . I. Lenin’s work The Tax in Kind  (see Works,
4th Russ. ed., V ol. 32, pp. 308-43).    p.  229
43This refers to the resolution “Results of the Discussion and
the Petty-Bourgeois Deviation in the Party” adopted at theThirteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) on January 18, 1924on J. V . Stalin’s report “Immediate Tasks in Party Affairs”(see Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941,
pp. 540-45).  p.  232
44The capitalist countries’ policy of recognising the U.S.S.R.
was expressed in the establishment of diplomatic relations
with the U.S.S.R. in February 1924 by Great Britain, Italy,
Norway and Austria; in March by Greece and Sweden; in Juneby Denmark; in October by France, and in January 1925 by
Japan and a number of other countries. p.  249
45See V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 33, pp. 231-91.
p. 254
46See Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941,
pp. 566-68. p.  257
47See Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941,
pp. 589-98. p.  257
48See Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941,
pp. 582-88. p.  257
49Currency reform—the replacement of the depreciated Soviet
paper money by chervonets (ten-ruble) notes with a firm gold
backing, carried out by the Soviet Government during 1924.
p. 259
50See Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941,
pp. 578-82. p.  261
51See Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941,
pp. 307-11. p.  262
52This refers to the plenum of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) held on June 2, 1924, after the Thirteenth PartyCongress. J. V . Stalin was elected to the Political Bureau, to
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

the Organising Bureau and to the Secretariat of the Central
Committee of the R.C.P.(B.), and re-elected General Secre-tary of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.). The plenum discussed the question
of the representation of the R.C.P.(B.) on the E.C.C.I. and at
the Fifth Congress of the Comintern, questions concerning wages,the metal industry, the drought, etc. The plenum decided to set
up a permanent commission of the plenum of the Central Com-
mittee of the R.C.P.(B.) for detailed study of questionsconcerning work in the countryside. On the instructions of the
plenum, the Political Bureau of the Central Committee ap-
pointed the following to this commission: V . M. Molotov(chairman), J. V. Stalin, M. I. Kalinin, L. M. Kaganovich,
N. K. Krupskaya, and others. By a decision of the plenum of
the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) held in September1924, the commission was transformed into a Council on Work
in the Countryside under the auspices of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.).
p. 263
53See Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941,
pp. 610-17. p.  265
54Rabochy Korrespondent  (Worker Correspondent )—a monthly
magazine, published from January 1924 to June 1941. In Janu-
ary 1925 its title was changed to Raboche-Krestyansky Korre-
spondent  (Worker and Peasant Correspondent ). p.  274
55The Polish commission was set up at the Fifth Congress of
the Comintern, held in Moscow from June 17 to July 8,1924. J. V . Stalin was a member of the most important com-
missions of this congress and was chairman of the Polish
commission. The resolution on the Polish question proposedby the commission was unanimously adopted at the first sit-
ting of the enlarged plenum of the Executive Committee of
the Comintern held on July 12, 1924. p.  276
56The Brandler group—a Right-wing opportunist group in the
Communist Party of Germany. Without regard to principles,
the Brandlerites entered into collaboration with the leaders
of German Social-Democracy and helped to cause the defeatof the German working class at the time of the revolutionary
events in 1923. The Fifth Congress of the Comintern (1924)
condemned the capitulatory policy of the Brandler group.The fifth enlarged plenum of the Executive Committee of the
Comintern, held on April 4, 1925, passed a decision prohibit-
ing the Brandler group from interfering in the affairs of theCommunist Party of Germany and from taking part in the work
of the Comintern. In 1929, Brandler was expelled from the
Communist Party on account of factional activities. p.  279
57This refers to a poem about railwaymen by Demyan Bedny
(see Demyan Bedny, Complete Works , Russ. ed., 1928, Vol.
IX, pp. 86-93). p.  287
58The “Left bloc” in France was a bloc of Radicals and Radical-
Socialists, headed by Edouard Herriot, which came to power
in May 1924. Under the cloak of “Left” phrases the “Left-bloc” government in practice actively assisted French imperial-
ism in its home and foreign policy. The Herriot government re-
mained in power until April 1925. p.  293
59The London conference of the Entente took place from July 16
to August 16, 1924, with the participation of Great Britain,
France, the United States and other countries. The conference
was convened for the purpose of discussing and settling the Ger-man reparations question. p.  298
60The Workers’ Government in Saxony was formed on October
11, 1923, as a result of the mass revolutionary movement
that had spread over the whole of Germany. Five Social-Demo-
crats and two Communists entered this government, which washeaded by the “Left” Social-Democrat Zeigner. The Commu-
nists in this government pursued the capitulatory policy of
the Brandler leadership of the Communist Party of Germanyand, jointly with the “Left” Social-Democrats, frustrated the
arming of the proletariat and the development of the revolu-
tion in Germany. On October 30, 1923, imperial troops
dispersed the Workers’ Government in Saxony. p.  305
61The Souvarine group was an opportunist group within the
Communist Party of France, headed by Souvarine, an out-and-out supporter of Trotsky. Supporting the Trotskyite
opposition in the R.C.P.(B.), the Souvarine group slandered
the Communist Party of France and the Comintern and grosslyviolated party discipline. In 1924, the fourth enlarged plenum
of the Executive Committee of the Comintern granted the
demand of the Communist Party of France for the expulsionof Souvarine from the Party, and the seventh enlarged ple-
num of the Executive Committee of the Comintern, held in
1926, expelled him from the ranks of the Communist Interna-tional  for  conducting  counter-revolutionary  propaganda.
p. 305
62The Fifth World Congress of the Comintern took place
in Moscow from June 17 to July 8, 1924. There were
present 510 delegates, representing 60 organisations in 49countries.
The congress discussed the activities of the Executive
Committee of the Comintern, the world economic situation, theeconomic situation in the U.S.S.R. and the discussion in the
R.C.P.(B.), fascism, tactics in the trade union movement,
factory units of the Party, questions relating to the Partiesin various countries, the programme, the national question, the
agrarian question, etc. J. V . Stalin was a member of the pre-
sidium of the congress and also of its most important commis-sions: the political commission, the programme commission,
and the commission for drafting a resolution on Leninism,
and was chairman of the Polish commission. The Fifth Congressof the Comintern unanimously supported the Bolshevik Party
in its fight against Trotskyism. The congress endorsed the
resolution of the Thirteenth Conference and Thirteenth Con-gress of the R.C.P.(B.) “Results of the Discussion and the
Petty-Bourgeois Deviation in the Party” and decided to publish
it as a decision of the congress. The congress adopted a resolu-
tion on strengthening the Communist Parties in the capitalist
countries, on Bolshevising them and transforming them into
real mass parties resting on the trade unions. p.  306
63The Profintern—the Red International of Trade Unions—was
formed in 1921 and existed to the end of 1937. It was a federa-tion of revolutionary trade unions and adopted the stand-
point of the Communist International. p.  307
64The Amsterdam federation (the Amsterdam International)—
the International Federation of Trade Unions formed in July
1919 at an international congress in Amsterdam. It consistedof reformist trade unions in a number of countries of Western
Europe and the United States, and in its programme and tactics
adopted an anti-revolutionary standpoint, hostile to commu-nism. It went out of existence on the formation of the World
Federation of Trade Unions at the First World Congress of
Trade Unions (September-October 1945). p.  307
65Levi’s Left-wing group—a group within the Social-Democratic
Party of Germany. In October 1923, when the Workers’ Govern-ment was formed in Saxony, the Levi group, afraid of losing
influence among the masses of the workers, announced its read-
iness to co-operate with the Communists. Actually, it servedas a screen for the counter-revolutionary policy of Social-
Democracy and helped the bourgeoisie to suppress the revolu-
tionary proletarian movement. p.  310
66The conference of secretaries of rural Party units called
by the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) took place onOctober 21-24, 1924. There were present 62 local Party workers,
of whom 4 represented central regions and Gubernia Commit-
tees, 15 represented Area and District Committees, 17 rep-resented V olost Committees, 11 represented village units,
11 represented Y .C.L. units and 4 were volost organisers of
peasant women. The conference heard the following reports:“Immediate Tasks of Rural Units,” by V . M. Molotov;
“The New Regulations Governing Peasant Mutual Aid Com-
mittees,” by M. I. Kalinin; “The Local Soviet Apparatus,” by
L. M. Kaganovich, and “Political and Educational Work in
the Countryside,” by N. K. Krupskaya. Reports were alsodelivered on the situation in the localities, and other questions
were discussed. J. V . Stalin took part in the proceedings, and
at the sitting on October 22 he spoke on “The Party’s Immedi-ate Tasks in the Countryside.” p.  315
67This refers to the counter-revolutionary revolt in Georgia at
the end of August 1924, organised by the Georgian Mensheviks
and bourgeois nationalists, who were supported by the leaders
of the Second International and by agents of foreign govern-ments. The revolt was quickly put down with the active assist-
ance of the Georgian workers and toiling peasant masses.
p. 321
68See V. I. Lenin,  Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 33, p. 273.  p.  326
69The plenum of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) took
place on October 25-27, 1924. It discussed economic questions
and a report by V. M. Molotov “Immediate Tasks in the Coun-tryside.” The plenum adopted a resolution on “Immediate
Tasks in the Countryside,” containing supplementary instruc-
tions to the Party organisations in furtherance of the decisionsof the Thirteenth Party Congress on work in the countryside.
J. V . Stalin directed the proceedings of the plenum and at the
sitting on October 26 spoke on “The Party’s Tasks in theCountryside.” p.  327
70The “Contact Committee,” consisting of Chkheidze, Steklov,
Sukhanov, Filippovsky and Skobelev (and later Chernov and
Tsereteli), was set up by the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolu-
tionary Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet of Work ers’
and Soldiers’ Deputies on March 7, 1917, for the purpose
of establishing contact with the Provisional Government, of
“influencing” it and “controlling” its activities. Actually,the “Contact Committee” helped to carry out the bourgeois
policy of the Provisional Government and restrained the masses
of the workers from waging an active revolutionary struggleto transfer all power to the Soviets. The “Contact Committee”
existed until May 1917, when representatives of the Menshe-
viks and Socialist-Revolutionaries entered the ProvisionalGovernment. p.  347
71See V. I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 24, pp. 1-7.  p.  348
72The Petrograd City Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) took
place from April 14-22 (April 27-May 5), 1917, with 57 dele-
gates present. V . I. Lenin and J. V . Stalin took part in the
proceedings. V . I. Lenin delivered a report on the current sit-uation based on his April Theses. J. V. Stalin was elected to
the commission for drafting the resolution on V . I. Lenin’s
report. p.  348
73Concerning the Seventh (April) All-Russian Conference of the
Bolshevik Party see the History of the C.P.S.U.(B.), Short
Course , Moscow, 1952, pp. 291-96. p.  348
74See V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 23, pp. 289-333.
p. 349
75See “Speech by V . I. Lenin at the Meeting of the Petrograd
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), June 24 (11), 1917, Concern-
ing the Cancelling of the Demonstration.” ( Works , 4th Russ.
ed., Vol. 25, pp. 62-63.  p.  354
76The Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies
of the Northern Region took place in Petrograd on October
24-26 (11-13), 1917, under the direction of the Bolsheviks.Representatives were present from Petrograd, Moscow, Kron-
stadt, Novgorod, Reval, Helsingfors, Vyborg and other cities.
In all there were 94 delegates, of whom 51 were Bolshe-viks. The congress adopted a resolution on the need for imme-
diate transference of all power to the Soviets, central and local.
It called upon the peasants to support the struggle for the
transference of power to the Soviets and urged the Soviets
themselves to commence active operations and to set up Rev-
olutionary Military Committees for organising the militarydefence of the revolution. The congress set up a Northern Re-
gional Committee and instructed it to prepare for the convo-
cation of the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets and to
co-ordinate  the  activities  of  all  the  Regional  Soviets.
p. 356
77See V. I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 26, p. 162. p.  361
78See V. I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 26, p. 165.  p.  361
79J. V. Stalin’s book On the Road to October  appeared in two edi-
tions, one in January and the other in May 1925. The articlesand speeches published in that book are included in V ol. 3
of J. V . Stalin’s Works.  The author finished the preface in
December 1924, but it was given in full only in the book On
the Road to October.  The greater part of the preface, under the
general title The October Revolution and the Tactics of the
Russian Communists , has appeared in all the editions of
J. V . Stalin’s Problems of Leninism , as well as in various
symposia and separate pamphlets. A part of the preface is
given in V ol. 3 of Stalin’s Works  as an author’s note to
the article “Against Federalism.”  p.  374
80See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works , V ol. II,
Moscow, 1951, pp. 420-21.  p.  413

BIOGRAPHICAL  CHRONICLE
1 9 2 4
January  4 The Krasnaya Presnya District Conference of
the. R.C.P.(B.) elects J. V . Stalin a delegate
to the Moscow Gubernia Party Conference.
January  9 J. V. Stalin gives an interview to a Rosta corre-
spondent on the discussion concerning the situa-tion in the Party.
January  14-15 J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
January  14 At the plenum of the Central Committee of
the R.C.P.(B.) J. V. Stalin reports on the draft
resolution “Immediate Tasks in Party Affairs”
for the Thirteenth Party Conference.
January  15 The plenum of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) appoints J. V . Stalin reporter atthe Thirteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) on
the question of “Immediate Tasks in Party
Affairs.”
January  16-18 J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the
Thirteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.).
January  16 The Thirteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.)
elects J. V . Stalin to the presidium of the con-ference.
January  17 J. V. Stalin reports to the Thirteenth Conference
of the R.C.P.(B.) on “Immediate Tasks in
Party Affairs.”
January  18 J. V . Stalin replies to the discussion at
the Thirteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.)
on his report on “Immediate Tasks in Party
Affairs.”
January  19 The Eleventh All-Russian Congress of Soviets
elects J. V . Stalin to the presidium of the con-
gress.
January  21 Death of V . I. Lenin (in Gorki).
6.50  p. m.
9.30  p. m. J. V . Stalin with the other members of the Po-
litical Bureau of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) leave for Gorki.
January  22 J. V . Stalin makes amendments to the text
of the appeal of the Eleventh All-Russian Con-
gress of Soviets “To All the Working Peo-ple of the U.S.S.R.” concerning the death of
V . I. Lenin.
In a telegram to the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Bukhara, J. V . Stalinannounces the death of V . I. Lenin and appeals
for support of Lenin’s policy of strengthening
the alliance between the workers and peasants,and for closer solidarity with the Soviet gov-
ernment.
January  23 J. V . Stalin and other members of the Central
9  a. m. Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) carry out the
coffin with Lenin’s body from the house in
Gorki.
1.30  p. m.— J. V . Stalin and delegates at the Second All-
2.45  p. m. Union Congress and the Eleventh All-Russian
Congress of Soviets, members of the Central
Committee of the Party, members of the Govern-ment, workers, and representatives of various
organisations, carry the coffin with Lenin’s
body from the Paveletsky Railway Station tothe House of Trade Unions.
6.10  p. m. J. V . Stalin stands in the guard of honour at
Lenin’s bier in the Hall of Columns of the Houseof Trade Unions.
January  25 Pravda , No. 20, publishes the appeal of the
Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.), signedby J. V . Stalin, to all Party organisations, in-
stitutions and to the press to collect all docu-
ments, etc., concerning V . I. Lenin and to sendthem to the Lenin Institute of the Central
Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
January  26 At the memorial session of the Second Congress
8.24  p. m.— of Soviets of the U.S.S.R., J. V . Stalin delivers
8.40  p. m. a speech “On the Death of Lenin” and in the
name of the Bolshevik Party takes a vow toguard and fulfil the behests of Lenin.
January  27 J. V . Stalin stands in the guard of honour at
8  a. m. Lenin’s bier in the Hall of Columns of the House
of Trade Unions.
8.30  a. m. J. V . Stalin stands at the head of Lenin’s bier
in the Hall of Columns of the House of TradeUnions.
9  a. m. J. V . Stalin and workers’ representatives carry
out the coffin with Lenin’s body from theHouse of Trade Unions.
4  p. m. On the conclusion of the memorial meeting in
the Red Square, J. V . Stalin, V . M. Molotov
and others, lift the coffin with Lenin’s body
and proceed towards the tomb.
January  28 J. V . Stalin delivers a speech at a gathering of
students of the A.R.C.E.C. Kremlin MilitarySchool, held in memory of V . I. Lenin.
January  29 At a sitting of the Eleventh All-Russian Con-
gress of Soviets, J. V . Stalin is elected to the
All-Russian Central Executive Committee.
January  29, 31 J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
January  30 J. V . Stalin is elected to the presidium of the
Second Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R.
February  2 At a sitting of the Second All-Union Congress
of Soviets, J. V . Stalin is elected to the Soviet
of the Union of the Central Executive Commit-tee of the U.S.S.R.
At a sitting of the first session of the Central
Executive Committee of the U.S.S.R. (second
convocation), J. V . Stalin is elected to the
Presidium of the Central Executive Committeeof the U.S.S.R.
At a sitting of the first session of the All-Russian
Central Executive Committee (eleventh convoca-
tion), J. V . Stalin is elected to the Presidium
of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee.
February  3 At the plenum of the Central Committee of
the R.C.P.(B.), J. V . Stalin speaks on the re-port of the commission that investigated the
state of the Red Army.
March  5-12 On the instructions of J. V . Stalin, the commis-
sion of the Central Executive Committee of
the U.S.S.R. appointed to perpetuate the mem-
ory of V . I. Lenin confers with prominentSoviet scientists on the question of preserving
the body of V. I. Lenin.
March  25 J. V . Stalin completes his “Outline of Studies
in Leninism.” The “Outline” was published inMay 1924 in the magazine Krasnaya Molo-
dyozh  (Red Youth ), No. 1.
March  27 At a meeting of the Political Bureau of the Cen-
tral Committee of the R.C.P.(B.), J. V . Stalin
speaks on the report on internal trade and the
consumers’ co-operatives.
March  31— J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
April  2 num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
April  1 At the plenum of the Central Committee of
the R.C.P.(B.), J. V . Stalin speaks on the re-port on internal trade and the consumers’
co-operatives.
April  2 At the plenum of the Central Committee of
the R.C.P.(B.), J. V . Stalin speaks onM. I. Kalinin’s report on work in the country-
side.
April  3 Pravda , No. 76, publishes the announcement of
the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.), signed
by J. V . Stalin, of the convocation of the
Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.) on May20, 1924.
J. V . Stalin speaks at the C.C., R.C.P.(B.)
conference on work among the youth.
Beginning J. V . Stalin delivers lectures at the Sverdlov
of  April University on The Foundations of Leninism.
April  28 J. V. Stalin, with other comrades formerly in
Baku, sends greetings to the Baku organisation
of the Communist Party on its twenty-fifth
anniversary.
May  9 In a telegram to the Revolutionary Military
Council of the Baltic Fleet, J. V. Stalin statesthat, owing to the preparations for the forth-
coming Thirteenth Party Congress, he cannot
accept the invitation to attend the Fleet’s cel-ebrations. This telegram was published in the
newspaper Krasny Baltiisky Flot  (Red Baltic
Fleet ), No. 106, May 15, 1924.
May  11 The Twentieth Leningrad Gubernia Party
Conference elected J. V. Stalin to the LeningradGubernia Committee of the Party and also as
a delegate to the Thirteenth Congress of the
R.C.P.(B.).
May  15 The Third Congress of the Transcaucasian Com-
munist organisations elects J. V . Stalin as adelegate to the Thirteenth Congress of the
R.C.P.(B.).
May  18 The Twelfth Moscow Gubernia Party Conference
elects J. V. Stalin as a delegate to the Thir-
teenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.).
May  23-31 J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the Thir-
teenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.), the firstParty congress held since the death of V . I.
Lenin.
May  23 J. V. Stalin and the members of the presidium
of the Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)
take the salute at the Young Pioneers’ parade
held in the Red Square, Moscow, in honour ofthe Thirteenth Congress.
J. V . Stalin presents S. M. Kirov with a copy
of the book On Lenin and Leninism  with the
inscription: “To my friend and beloved broth-er, from the author. J. Stalin.”
May  24 J. V . Stalin makes the Central Committee’s
organisational report at the Thirteenth Con-gress of the R.C.P.(B.).
May  27 At the Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.),
J. V . Stalin replies to the discussion on the
Central Committee’s organisational report.
May  29 At the Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.),
J. V . Stalin is elected to the commission on
work among the youth.
May  31 The Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P. (B.)
elects J. V . Stalin to the Central Committee
of the R.C.P.(B.).
June  2 The plenum of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) elects J. V . Stalin to the Political
Bureau, Organising Bureau and the Secretariat,
and re-elects him General Secretary of the Cen-tral Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
June  4 Greetings to the Baku workers on the occasion
of the opening of a new gusher in the Surakhanioil field, signed by J. V . Stalin and the other
members of the presidium of the Thirteenth
Congress of the R.C.P.(B.), are published inthe newspaper Bakinsky Rabochy  (Baku Worker ),
No. 125.
June  12 The Political Bureau of the Central Committee
of the R.C.P.(B.) appoints J. V . Stalin to the
commission of the plenum of the Central Com-mittee on work in the countryside.
June  17 J. V. Stalin delivers a report on the “Results
of the Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)”
at the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) Courses for Secretaries
of Uyezd Party Committees.
June  17— J. V . Stalin takes part in the proceedings of
July  8 the Fifth Congress of the Communist Inter-
national.
June  17 J. V . Stalin is elected to the presidium of
the Fifth Congress of the Comintern.
June  19 The Fifth Congress of the Comintern elects
J. V . Stalin to the commission for drafting the
resolution on Leninism, and to the political
and programme commissions.
June  20 A sitting of the Fifth Congress of the Comintern
endorses J. V . Stalin’s appointment as chair-man of the Polish commission.
June  27 The Political Bureau of the Central Committee
of the R.C.P.(B.) appoints J. V . Stalin to the
Central Committee’s commission on work
among working women and peasant women.
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

June The magazine Rabochy Korrespondent , No. 6,
publishes J. V. Stalin’s interview with a rep-resentative of this magazine on the functions
of worker and peasant correspondents.
July  1-3 J. V. Stalin directs the meetings of the Polish
commission of the Fifth Congress of the Com-
intern.
July  3 J. V . Stalin delivers a speech on “The Commu-
nist Party of Poland” at a meeting of the
Polish commission of the Fifth Congress of theComintern.
July  5 J. V. Stalin, with the other members of the
presidium of the Fifth Congress of the Comin-
tern, signs the “Manifesto of the CommunistInternational to the World Proletariat” that
was adopted by the congress.
July  8 J. V. Stalin is elected to the Executive Commit-
tee and to the Presidium of the E.C. of the Com-
intern.
July  15 J. V . Stalin writes a letter to Demyan Bedny.
July  25 The appeal of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) to all Party organisations, signed
by J. V . Stalin, concerning measures to be taken
to combat the drought and its consequences, ispublished in Pravda , No. 167.
July  28 J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Organis-
ing Bureau of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) on the report of the Bureau’s com-mission on work in the Red Army.
July  31 In a letter to Manuilsky, J. V . Stalin gives his
views on the resolutions adopted by the Fifth
Congress of the Comintern on the national
question in Central Europe and in the Balkans,and on Eastern and colonial questions.
July J. V. Stalin makes amendments to the text of
the appeal of the Executive Committee ofthe Comintern “To All the Organisations of
the Communist Party of Poland.”
August  2 J. V . Stalin writes the article “Y. M. Sverdlov.”
August  4 J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Organis-
ing Bureau of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) on the report of the Bureau’s com-
mission on the Young Pioneer movement.
August  11 J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Organis-
ing Bureau of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) on the report of the commission on
the education of the Party members of theLenin Enrolment.
August  16-20 J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
September  12 J. V . Stalin finishes the article “Concerning the
International Situation,” published in Pravda,
No. 214, September 20, and in the magazine
Bolshevik , No. 11.
October  20 J. V . Stalin has a talk with young correspond-
ents of the magazine Yuniye Stroitely  (Young
Builders ).
October  21-24 J. V. Stalin takes part in the proceedings of a
conference of secretaries of rural Party units
called by the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.).
October  22 At the conference of secretaries of rural Party
units called by the Central Committee ofthe R.C.P.(B.), J. V. Stalin speaks on “The
Party’s Immediate Tasks in the Countryside.”
October  25-27 J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
October  26 At the plenum of the Central Committee of
the R.C.P.(B.), J. V. Stalin speaks on “The
Party’s Tasks in the Countryside.”
Before  November  7 J. V. Stalin receives a delegation representing
the workers of the Dynamo Factory, who invite
him to attend a meeting at the factory on Novem-ber 7 to celebrate the seventh anniversary of
the Great October Socialist Revolution.
November  7 J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the workers
at the Dynamo Factory held on the occasion of theseventh anniversary of the Great October So-
cialist Revolution and the unveiling of a memo-
rial plaque to commemorate Lenin’s visit tothe factory in 1921. J. V . Stalin makes an entry
in the Red Book of the factory.
November  15 J. V. Stalin writes his greetings to the First
Cavalry Army on the occasion of its fifth anni-
versary.
November  16 On the instructions of the Central Committee
of the R.C.P.(B.), J. V . Stalin writes a letterto the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Germany in connection with the forth-
coming Reichstag elections. In the letter heexposes the treacherous role played by counter-
revolutionary German Social-Democracy.
November  17 J. V . Stalin’s greetings to Kreslyanskaya
Gazeta  on its first anniversary are published in
that newspaper, No. 51.
November  19 J. V . Stalin delivers a speech on “Trotskyism
or Leninism?” at a plenary meeting of the Com-
munist group in the A.U.C.C.T.U.
November  20 The Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) ap-points J. V . Stalin to the Council of the Lenin
Institute of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.).
November  29 In the name of the Central Committee of theR.C.P.(B.) J. V . Stalin sends a letter to theCentral Committee of the C.P.(B.) of the
Ukraine on the fight against Trotskyism.
December  8 J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Organ-ising Bureau of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) on the report of the commission onthe education of the Party members of the
Lenin Enrolment.
December  17 J. V . Stalin finishes the preface to his book On
the Road to October.
December  19 J. V. Stalin signs a circular letter of the Cen-tral Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) to all Party
organisations calling for strict implementationof the decisions on internal trade adopted by the
Thirteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.).
Printed  in  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics




