




From Marx to Mao
M
L
© Digital Reprints
2006
RUSSIAN  EDITION
PUBLISHED  BY  DECISION
OF  THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE
OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY
OF  THE  SOVIET  UNION
(BOLSHEVIKS)
ИНCTИTУT   МАР KCА—ЭНГЕ ЛЬCА —ЛЕНИНА   пpи  ЦK  ВKП(б)
n.b. CTAlnH
СОчИНEНИя
⋆
О  Г  И  З
ГОСУДАРСТВ ЕНН ОЕ ИЗ ДАТ ЕЛЬ СТВО  ПОЛИТИЧЕ СКОЙ  ЛИТЕРАТУ РЫ
М o c к в  a  •  1 9 4 7
FOREIGN  LANGUAGES  PUBLISHING  HOUSE
M  o  s  c  o  w   •   1  9  5  4E 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

J. V.  S TA L I N
w o R k s
VOLUME
¶
!(@%


 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

C O N T E N T S
Preface .................. X I I I
WORKING  WOMEN  AND  PEASANT  WOMEN,  REMEM-
BER  AND  CARRY  OUT  ILYICH’S  BEHESTS! . . 1
TO  THE  TEACHERS’  CONGRESS . . . . . . . . 3
THE  TASKS  OF  THE  MAGAZINE  KRASNAYA  MOLO-
DYOZH  . ................ 4
SPEECH    DELIVERED    AT    A    PLENUM    OF    THE
CENTRAL    COMMITTEE    AND    THE    CENTRAL
CONTROL  COMMISSION  OF  THE  R.C.P.(B.),  Janu-
ary  17,  1925 ............... 6
SPEECH  DELIVERED  AT  THE  PLENUM  OF  THE  CEN-
TRAL  COMMITTEE  OF  THE  R.C.P.(B.),  January  19,
1925 . . . ............... 1 1
TO  RABOCHAYA  GAZETA ........... 1 5
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  D—OV . . . . . . . . 16
“DYMOVKA.”   Speech    Delivered    at   a   Meeting    of   the
Organising  Bureau   of  the  Central  Committee  of  the
R.C.P .(B.),  January  26,  1925 ......... 1 9
CONCERNING THE QUESTION OF THE PROLETARIAT
AND  THE  PEASANTRY .  Speech  Delivered  at  the  Thir-
teenth  Gubernia  Conference  of  the  Moscow  Organisation  of
the  R.C.P .(B.),  January  27,  1925 . ....... 25
THE  PROSPECTS  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY  OF
GERMANY  AND  THE  QUESTION  OF  BOLSHEVISA-
TION.  Interview  with  Herzog,  Member  of  the  C.P.G. . 34
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  ME—RT . . . . . . . 42
INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN’S  DAY . . . . . . . . 48
THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE  OF  THE  R.C.P.(B.)   TO
THE  CENTRAL  EXECUTIVE  COMMITTEE  OF  THE
KUOMINTANG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
THE  INTERNATIONAL  SITUATION  AND  THE  TASKS
OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTIES . . . . . . . 51
THE   COMMUNIST   PARTY   OF   CZECHOSLOV AKIA.
Speech  Delivered  in  the  Czechoslovak  Commission  of  the
E.C.C.I.,  March  27,  1925 .......... 5 8
CONCERNING  THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  IN  YUGOSLA-
VIA.  Speech  Delivered  in  the  Yugoslav  Commission  of  the
E.C.C.I.,  March  30, 1925 .......... 6 9
THE  ACTIVE  OF  THE  YOUNG  COMMUNIST  LEAGUE
IN  THE  COUNTRYSIDE.  Speech  Delivered  at  a  Meet-
ing  of  the  Organising  Bureau  of  the  Central  Committee  of
the  R.C.P .(B.),  April  6,  1925 ......... 7 7
TO  THE  FIRST  ALL-UNION  CONFERENCE  OF  PROLE-
TARIAN  STUDENTS.  A  Message ....... 8 5
THE  RESULTS  OF  THE  WORK  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH
CONFERENCE   OF   THE   R.C.P.(B.);   Report   Deliv-
ered  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Active  of  the  Moscow  Organisation
of  the  R.C.P.(B.),  May  9,  1925 ........ 9 0
I. The  International  Situation . . . . . . . 91
II.The  Immediate  Tasks  of  the  Communist  Parties
in  the  Capitalist  Countries. . . . . . . . 102
III. The Immediate Tasks of the Communist Elements
in  the  Colonial  and  Dependent  Countries . . . 107
IV. The  Fate  of  Socialism  in  the  Soviet  Union . . 110
V . The  Party’s  Policy  in  the  Countryside . . . 123
VI. The   Metal   Industry . . . . . . . . . . 130
THE  POLITICAL  TASKS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  THE
PEOPLES  OF  THE  EAST.  Speech  Delivered  at  a  Meet-
ing  of  Students  of  the  Communist  University  of  the
Toilers  of  the  East,  May  18,  1925 . ...... 1 3 5
I.The  Tasks  of  the  Communist  University  of  the
Toilers  of  the  East  in  Relation  to  the  Soviet
Republics  of  the  East . . . ....... 1 3 6
II.The  Tasks  of  the  Communist  University  of  the
Toilers  of  the  East  in  Relation  to  the  Colonial
and  Dependent  Countries  of  the  East .... 1 46
TO  ALL  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE  EDITORIAL  BOARD
OF  KOMSOMOLSKAYA  PRAVDA . . . .... 1 5 5
QUESTIONS  AND  ANSWERS.  Speech  Delivered  at  the  Sverd-
lov  University,  June  9,  1925 . . . . .... 1 5 8
TO  THE  SVERDLOV  UNIVERSITY.  On  the  Occasion  of
the  Second  Graduation  of  Students  of  Basic  and  Trade
Union  Courses . . . . . . . . . . .... 2 1 5
THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  ONCE  AGAIN.  Concerning
the  Article  by  Semich . . . . . . . . .... 2 1 9
THE  REVOLUTIONARY  MOVEMENT   IN  THE  EAST.
Interview  Given  to  Mr.  Fuse,  Japanese  Correspondent
of  Nichi-Nichi . . . . . . . . . . .... 2 3 1
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  YERMAKOVSKY .... 2 3 7
INTERVIEW  WITH  THE  PARTICIPANTS  IN  THE  CON-
FERENCE   OF   AGITATION   AND   PROPAGANDA
DEPARTMENTS,  October 14,  1925 . . . .... 2 40
THE  TASKS  OF  THE  YOUNG  COMMUNIST  LEAGUE.
Answers  to  Questions  Submitted  by  the  Editorial  Board  of
Komsomolskaya  Pravda . . . . . . . .... 2 47
SPEECH  AT  THE  FUNERAL  OF  M.  V .  FRUNZE,  Novem-
ber  3,  1925 . . . . . . . . . . . .... 2 5 6
OCTOBER,   LENIN,   AND   THE   PROSPECTS   OF   OUR
DEVELOPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258
A  LETTER   TO   THE   PRESIDIUM   OF   THE   TWENTY-
SECOND   LENINGRAD   GUBERNIA   PARTY   CON-
FERENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
THE  FOURTEENTH  CONGRESS  OF  THE  C.P.S.U.(B.),
December  18-31,  1925 ........... 2 6 5
Political   Report   of   the   Central   Committee,   Decem-
ber  18 ................ 2 6 7
I. The  International  Situation . . . . . . . . . 267
1. The  Stabilisation  of  Capitalism ........ 2 6 9
2.Imperialism,  the  Colonies  and  Semi-Colonies .... 2 7 5
3. Victors  and  Vanquished ....... . . . 277
4. The  Contradictions  between  the  Victor  Countries . . . 284
5. The  Capitalist  World  and  the  Soviet  Union . . . . 288
6. The  External  Position  of  the  U.S.S.R. . . . . . . 295
7. The  Party’s  Tasks ............ 3 0 2
II.The    Internal    Situation    in    the    Soviet     Union      304
1. The  National  Economy  as  a  Whole ....... 3 0 5
2. Industry  and  Agriculture . . ....... 3 2 1
3. Questions  Concerning  Trade . . ....... 3 2 5
4. Classes,  Their  Activity,  Their  Correlation ..... 3 2 7
5. Lenin’s  Three  Slogans  on  the  Peasant  Question . . . 332
6.Two  Dangers  and  Two  Deviations  In  Regard  to  the  Peas-
ant  Question . . ........... 3 42
7. The  Party’s  Tasks . ........... 3 47
III. The  Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
Reply  to  the  Discussion  on  the  Political  Report  of  the
Central  Committee,  December  23 ....... 3 6 2
1. Sokolnikov  and  the  Dawesation  of  Our  Country . . . 363
2.Kamenev  and  Our  Concessions  to  the  Peasantry . . . 365
3. Whose  Miscalculations? .......... 3 6 9
4.How  Sokolnikov  Protects  the  Poor  Peasants .... 3 7 0
5. Ideological  Struggle  or  Slander? . . ..... 3 7 2
6. Concerning  NEP . . . . . . . ..... 3 7 3
7. Concerning  State  Capitalism . . . . ..... 3 7 5
8. Zinoviev  and  the  Peasantry . . . . ..... 3 8 1
9. Concerning  the  History  of  the  Disagreements . . . 389
10. The  Opposition’s  Platform . . . . ..... 3 9 7
11. Their  “Desire  for  Peace” . . . . ..... 3 9 9
12. The  Party  Will  Achieve  Unity . . . ..... 40 1
Notes . . . . . . . . . .... ..... 40 4
Biographical  Chronicle  (1925) . .... ..... 41 9

PREFACE
The Seventh V olume of J. V . Stalin’s Works  con-
tains writings and speeches of the year 1925.
In this period the working class and peasantry,
led by the Bolshevik Party, were completing the restora-
tion of the national economy. The Land of Soviets
was passing into the period of socialist industrialisation,which was the key-note of the Fourteenth Congress of
the Bolshevik Party. In this period the question of the
character and prospects of our country’s development,of the fate of socialism in the Soviet Union, was already
confronting the Party as a practical question.
In the works: “The Results of the Work of the Four-
teenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.),” “Questions and
Answers,” “October, Lenin, and the Prospects of Our
Development,” “The Political Report of the Central Com-mittee to the Fourteenth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.),”
and others, J. V . Stalin gives an all-round substantiation
of the Bolshevik Party’s general line for the victory ofsocialism in the U.S.S.R. in the conditions of capital-
ist encirclement, and exposes the defeatist line of the
Trotskyites and Zinovievites, whose aim was to restorecapitalism.
The questions of strengthening the alliance between
the working class and the peasantry, of educating the
masses of the working people and the youth, and of draw-
ing them into active participation in building a socialist
society are dealt with in the following works: “Dymov-ka,” “Concerning the Question of the Proletariat and
the Peasantry,” “The Active of the Young Communist
League in the Countryside,” “The Tasks of the YoungCommunist League,” “The First All-Union Conference
of Proletarian Students,” “The Political Tasks of the
University of the Peoples of the East,” and in the inter-view with delegates at the Conference of Agitation and
Propaganda Departments on October 14, 1925, etc.
This volume also contains the following articles and
speeches on the situation and tasks of the Communist
Parties abroad under the conditions of the partial stabili-
sation of capitalism: “The International Situation andthe Tasks of the Communist Parties,” “The Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia,” “The National Question in
Yugoslavia,” “The Prospects of the Communist Partyof Germany and the Question of Bolshevisation,” and
“A Letter to Comrade Me—rt.”
The following are published for the first time:
“Speech at the Plenum of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) on January 19, 1925,” “Interview with Dele-
gates at the Conference of Agitation and PropagandaDepartments on October 14, 1925,” letter to the members
of the editorial board of Komsomolskaya Pravda,
and letters to Comrades D—ov, Me—rt and Yerma-kovsky.
Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute
of the C.C., C.P .S.U.(B.)
!(@%


WORKING  WOMEN  AND  PEASANT  WOMEN
REMEMBER  AND  CARRY  OUT  ILYICH’S
BEHESTS!
A year ago, departing from us, the great leader and
teacher of the working people, our Lenin, bequeathed
to us his behests, indicated the road along which wemust go to the final victory of communism. Carry out
these behests of Ilyich, working women and peasant
women! Bring up your children in the spirit of thesebehests!
Comrade Lenin bequeathed to us the behest to
strengthen with all our might the alliance of the work-ers and peasants. Then strengthen this alliance, working
women and peasant women!
Comrade Lenin taught the toiling people to support
the working class in its struggle against the bourgeoisie,
home and foreign. Remember this behest, working wom-
en and peasant women! Support the rule of the workingclass which is building a new life!
Comrade Lenin taught us to hold high the banner of
the Communist Party, the leader of all the oppressed.Then rally round this Party, working women and peas-
ant women—it is your Party!
On the anniversary of Ilyich’s death, the Party is-
sues the watchword—more scope for the working women
and peasant women who, with the Party, are building anew life!
J. Stalin
Written  January  5,  1925
Published  in  the  magazineRabotnitsa ,  No.  1,
January  1925
TO  THE  TEACHERS’  CONGRESS1
The phalanx of school-teachers is one of the most
essential units of the great army of working people in our
country who are building a new life on the basis of so-
cialism.
The path along which the working class is marching
to socialism can lead to victory only if the vast masses
of the toiling peasantry follow this path and march instep with the working class, only if the working class
exercises unrelaxing leadership of the toiling masses.
The village school-teacher must realise that if there
is no such leadership there can be no proletarian dicta-
torship, and if there is no such dictatorship, our coun-
try cannot be free and independent.
To become one of the links that connect the peasant
masses with the working class—such is the chief task of
the village school-teacher if he really wants to serve thecause of his people, to serve the cause of its freedom and
independence.
J. Stalin
January  6,  1925
Uchitelskaya  Gazeta ,  No.  2
January  10,  1925
THE  TASKS  OF  THE  MAGAZINE
KRASNAYA  MOLODYOZH 2
In his interview with the members of the editorial board,
Comrade Stalin , dealing with the tasks of the magazine, said:
The chief task the magazine should set itself is to
encourage the proletarian non-Party students to takean active part in the work of the Soviet Government
and of the Communist Party. The magazine will accom-
plish this only when it becomes a real Soviet students’magazine. There are still, of course, a number of defects
in the work of higher educational institutions, organs
of the People’s Commissariat of Education, etc. Thestudents, who know these defects better than anybody
else, should systematically expose and criticise them,
point them out, so that by common effort we may improveour work. It is therefore necessary, on a wide scale,
to encourage the best of the non-Party proletarian stu-
dents to write for the magazine. The students must feelthat it is their own magazine, a means of facilitating
their work and development.
Referring to the tasks of some of the departments of the mag-
azine, Comrade Stalin  pointed out:
The political departments of the magazine should
deal only with the major questions of the work of
the Party and the Soviet Government. There is no need
to duplicate other magazines. Every organ of the press
in our Union ought to have its own definite place in thegeneral work. The departments: “Student Life,” “Liter-
ature,” and “Science and Technology,” should be consid-
erably enlarged. Those are the departments in whichthe students themselves can take an active part and
show what they can do. It is also necessary to get the
students, as well as lecturers and professors, to elab-orate various problems in the department: “Reform of
Higher Education.”
If the magazine acts in keeping with the slogan
“closer to the students,” it will be better able to perform
its function and really become the Soviet students’
own organ.
The  magazine  Krasnaya  Molodyozh ,
No.  1  (5),  January  1925
SPEECH  DELIVERED  AT  A  PLENUM
OF  THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE
AND  THE  CENTRAL  CONTROL  COMMISSION
OF THE R.C.P.(B.)3
January  17,  1925
Comrades, on the instructions of the Secretariat of
the Central Committee I have to give you certain neces-
sary information on matters concerning the discussion
and on the resolutions connected with the discussion.Unfortunately, we shall have to discuss Trotsky’s ac-
tion in his absence because, as we have been informed
today, he will be unable to attend the plenum owing toillness.
You know, comrades, that the discussion started with
Trotsky’s action, the publication of his Lessons of Oc-
tober .
The discussion was started by Trotsky. The discus-
sion was forced on the Party.
The Party replied to Trotsky’s action by making two
main charges. Firstly, that Trotsky is trying to revise
Leninism; secondly, that Trotsky is trying to bring abouta radical change in the Party leadership.
Trotsky has not said anything in his own defence
about these charges made by the Party.
It is hard to say why he has not said anything in his
own defence. The usual explanation is that he has
fallen ill and has not been able to say anything in hisown defence. But that is not the Party’s fault, of
course. It is not the Party’s fault if Trotsky begins to
get a high temperature after every attack he makes upon
the Party.
Now the Central Committee has received a statement
by Trotsky (statement to the Central Committee dated
January 15) to the effect that he has refrained from mak-ing any pronouncement, that he has not said anything in
his own defence, because he did not want to intensify the
controversy and to aggravate the issue. Of course, one mayor may not think that this explanation is convincing.
I, personally, do not think that it is. Firstly, how long
has Trotsky been aware that his attacks upon the Partyaggravate relations? When, precisely, did he become
aware of this truth? This is not the first attack that
Trotsky has made upon the Party, and it is not the firsttime that he is surprised, or regrets, that his attack ag-
gravated relations. Secondly, if he really wants to pre-
vent relations within the Party from deteriorating, whydid he publish his Lessons of October , which was directed
against the leading core of the Party, and was intended to
worsen, to aggravate relations? That is why I think thatTrotsky’s explanation is quite unconvincing.
A few words about Trotsky’s statement to the Cen-
tral Committee of January 15, which I have just men-tioned, and which has been distributed to the members of
the Central Committee and the Central Control Com-
mission. The first thing that must be observed and takennote of is Trotsky’s statement that he is willing to take
any post to which the Party appoints him, that he is
willing to submit to any kind of control as far as futureactions on his part are concerned, and that he thinks
it absolutely necessary in the interests of our work that
he should be removed from the post of Chairman of
the Revolutionary Military Council as speedily as pos-
sible.
All this must, of course, be taken note of.
    As regards the substance of the matter, two points
should be noted: concerning “permanent revolution” andchange of the Party leadership. Trotsky says that if at
any time after October he happened on particular occa-
sions to revert to the formula “permanent revolution,” itwas only as something appertaining to the History of
the Party Department, appertaining to the past, and not
with a view to elucidating present political tasks. Thisquestion is important, for it concerns the fundamentals
of Leninist ideology. In my opinion, this statement of
Trotsky’s cannot be taken either as an explanation oras a justification. There is not even a hint in it that he ad-
mits his mistakes. It is an evasion of the question. What
is the meaning of the statement that the theory of“permanent revolution” is something that appertains
to the History of the Party Department? How is this to
be understood? The History of the Party Department isnot only the repository, but also the interpreter of Party
documents. There are documents there that were valid at
one time and later lost their validity. There are alsodocuments there that were, and still are, of great im-
portance for the Party’s guidance. And there are also
documents there of a purely negative character, ofa negative significance, to which the Party cannot
become reconciled. In which category of documents does
Trotsky include his theory of “permanent revolution”?In the good or in the bad category? Trotsky said noth-
ing about that in his statement. He wriggled out of
the question. He avoided it. Consequently, the charge
of revising Leninism still holds good.
Trotsky says further that on the questions settled
by the Thirteenth Congress he has never, either in the
Central Committee, or in the Council of Labour and De-
fence, and certainly not to the country at large, madeany proposals which directly or indirectly raised the ques-
tions already settled. That is not true. What did Trots-
ky say before the Thirteenth Congress? That the cadreswere no good, and that a radical change in the Party lead-
ership was needed. What does he say now, in his Lessons
of October ? That the main core of the Party is no good
and must be changed. Such is the conclusion to be drawn
from The Lessons of October . The Lessons of October  was
published in substantiation of this conclusion. That wasthe purpose of The Lessons of October . Consequently, the
charge of attempting to bring about a radical change in
the Party leadership still holds good.
In view of this, Trotsky’s statement as a whole is
not an explanation in the true sense of the term, but a
collection of diplomatic evasions and a renewal of oldcontroversies already settled by the Party.
That is not the kind of document the Party demanded
from Trotsky.
Obviously, Trotsky does not understand, and I doubt
whether he will ever understand, that the Party demands
from its former and present leaders not diplomatic eva-sions, but an honest admission of mistakes. Trotsky, evi-
dently, lacks the courage frankly to admit his mistakes.
He does not understand that the Party’s sense of powerand dignity has grown, that the Party feels that it is
the master and demands that we should bow our heads
to it when circumstances demand. That is what Trotsky
does not understand.
How did our Party organisations react to Trotsky’s
action? You know that a number of local Party organ-
isations have passed resolutions on this subject. They
have been published in Pravda . They can be divided into
three categories. One category demands Trotsky’s expul-
sion from the Party. Another category demands Trotsky’s
removal from the Revolutionary Military Council andhis expulsion from the Political Bureau. The third cate-
gory, which also includes the last draft resolution sent to
the Central Committee today by the comrades from Mos-cow, Leningrad, the Urals and the Ukraine, demands
Trotsky’s removal from the Revolutionary Military
Council and his conditional retention in the PoliticalBureau.
Such are the three main groups of resolutions on
Trotsky’s action.
The Central Committee and the Central Control
Commission have to choose between these resolutions.
That is all I had to tell you about matters concern-
ing the discussion.
J.  Stalin,  Trotskyism ,
Moscow,  1925
SPEECH  DELIVERED
AT  THE  PLENUM  OF  THE  CENTRAL
COMMITTEE  OF THE R.C.P.(B.)
January  19,  1925
I have taken the floor in order strongly to support
Comrade Frunze’s proposal. I think that we must decide
here on three things.
Firstly, we must accept Comrade Frunze’s proposal
concerning additional assignments—5,000,000 rubles;
a total of 405,000,000 rubles.
Secondly, we must pass a resolution endorsing Com-
rade Frunze’s appointment to the post of Chairman of
the Revolutionary Military Council.
Thirdly, we must instruct the Party to render the
new Revolutionary Military Council every assistance in
the way of providing personnel.
I must say that lately, owing to some increase in
the requirements of our economic bodies and to the fact
that economic and cultural requirements are growingbeyond our present means, a certain liquidationist mood
concerning the army has arisen among us. Some of our
comrades say that little by little, keeping the brakeson, we ought to reduce our army to the level of a
militia. What they have in mind is not the militia
system, but a peace army, the conversion of the armyinto a simple militia that cannot be prepared for mili-
tary complications.
I must declare most emphatically that we must reso-
lutely do away with this liquidationist mood.
Why? Because a radical change in the international
situation has begun lately. New pre-conditions are ma-
turing, which foreshadow new complications for us, and
we must be ready to meet them. The danger of interven-tion is again becoming real.
What are those facts?
Firstly, the growth of the colonial movement, and
of the liberation movement in general, in the East. In-
dia, China, Egypt, the Sudan are important bases for
imperialism. There, the colonial movement is growingand will continue to grow. That is bound to turn the rul-
ing strata of the Great Powers against us, against the
Soviets, for they know that the seeds that are falling onthis fertile soil in the East will mature and germi-
nate. They will certainly germinate.
Second fact: complications are maturing in North Af-
rica, in the region of Morocco and Tunisia. That is causing
a new regrouping of forces, new preparations for new mili-
tary complications between the imperialists. The factthat Spain has suffered defeat in Morocco
4; that France
is stretching out her hands to grab Morocco; that Britain
will not tolerate the strengthening of France’s positionin Morocco; that Italy is trying to take advantage of
the new situation to lay her hands on Tunisia and that
the other states will not permit her to do so; the factthat Britain and France are vying with each other in
their strenuous endeavours to secure influence in the
Balkans, in the new states that were formed as a resultof the disintegration of Austria-Hungary—all this is
reminiscent of the well-known facts in the history of
the last war, reminiscent of the facts that preceded the
last war. The Albanian events are not accidental5; they are
a manifestation of the struggle between the Great Powers,each trying to establish its influence on that small area. All
this shows that the preparation and regrouping of forces
is taking place all over Europe in view of the nascentcomplications in the Far East and of the new prospects
that are opening in North Africa. All this forms the
pre-conditions for a new war. And a new war is boundto affect our country.
Third fact: the growth of a revolutionary mood among
the workers in Britain. This is a fact of first-rate impor-tance. Britain holds a commanding position in Europe.
The incipient split between the General Council of the
Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party, and thefissures which have begun to develop within the British
Labour Party, go to show that something revolutionary,
something new is developing in Britain. This is alarm-ing the ruling strata in Britain. And this is bound to turn
them against Soviet Russia, for the key-note of the reviv-
al of the movement in Britain is friendship with Russia.
Fourth fact: in view of the pre-conditions of which
I have spoken, in view of the fact that the pre-condi-
tions for war are maturing and that war may become in-evitable, not tomorrow or the day after, of course, but in
a few years’ time, and in view of the fact that war is
bound to intensify the internal, revolutionary crisis bothin the East and in the West—in view of this we are bound
to be faced with the question of being prepared for all
contingencies. I think that the forces of the revolution-ary movement in the West are strong, that they are
growing and will continue to grow, and here or there may
succeed in kicking out the bourgeoisie. That is so. But
it will be very difficult for them to hold out. That is
clearly shown by the examples of the border countries,Estonia and Latvia, for instance. The question of our ar-
my, of its might and preparedness, will certainly face us as
a burning question in the event of complications arisingin the countries around us.
That does not mean that in such a situation we must
necessarily undertake active operations against somebodyor other. That is not so. If anybody shows signs of har-
bouring such a notion—he is wrong. Our banner is still
the banner of peace . But if war breaks out we shall not be
able to sit with folded arms. We shall have to take ac-
tion, but we shall be the last to do so. And we shall do so
in order to throw the decisive weight in the scales, theweight  that can turn the scales.
Hence the conclusion: we must be prepared for all
contingencies; we must prepare our army, supply it withfootwear and clothing, train it, improve its technical
equipment, improve chemical defence and aviation, and
in general, raise our Red Army to the proper level. Theinternational situation makes this imperative for us.
That is why I think that we must resolutely and irrev-
ocably meet the demands of the war department.
Published  for  the  first  time
TO  RABOCHAYA  GAZETA6
Remember, love and study Ilyich, our teacher, our
leader.
Fight and defeat our enemies, home and foreign—
in the way that Ilyich taught us.
Build the new society, the new way of life, the new
culture—in the way that Ilyich taught us.
Never refuse to do the little things, for from little
things are built the big things—that is one of Ilyich’simportant behests.
J. Stalin
Rabochaya Gazeta ,  No.  17,
January  21,  1925
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  D—OV
Comrade D—ov,
I am late with my reply, but I had no time to reply
earlier.
1) I think that you read the article7 carelessly, other-
wise you would certainly have found in it the passage
from Ilyich’s article about “the victory of socialism inone country.”
2) If you read the article carefully you will prob-
ably understand that the point at issue is not complete
victory, but the victory of socialism in general, i.e.,
driving away the landlords and capitalists, taking pow-
er, repelling the attacks of imperialism and beginningto build a socialist economy. In all this, the proletariat
in one country can be fully successful; but a complete
guarantee against restoration can be ensured only bythe “joint efforts of the proletarians in several countries.”
It would have been foolish to have begun the October
Revolution in Russia with the conviction that the victo-rious proletariat of Russia, obviously enjoying the sym-
pathy of the proletarians of other countries, but in the
absence of victory in several countries, “cannot hold out inthe face of a conservative Europe.” That is not Marxism,
but the most ordinary opportunism, Trotskyism, and
whatever else you please. If Trotsky’s theory were correct,Ilyich, who stated that we shall convert NEP Russia into
socialist Russia, and that we have “all that is necessary
for building a complete socialist society” (see the article
“On Co-operation”8), would be wrong.
3) Evidently, you failed to note that the published
article is part of a “Preface.” Had you noted this, I think
you would have understood that the “Preface” mustbe taken as a whole.
4) The most dangerous thing in our political practice
is the attempt to regard the victorious proletarian countryas something passive, capable only of marking time un-
til the moment when assistance comes from the victo-
rious proletarians in other countries. Let us assumethat the Soviet system will exist in Russia for five or
ten years without a revolution taking place in the West;
let us assume that, nevertheless, during that period ourRepublic goes on existing as a Soviet Republic, building
a socialist economy under the conditions of NEP*—do
you think that during those five or ten years our countrywill merely spend the time in collecting water with a
sieve and not in organising a socialist economy? It is
enough to ask this question to realise how very danger-ous is the theory that denies the possibility of the
victory of socialism in one country.
But does that mean that this victory will be complete,
final? No, it does not (see my “Preface”), for as long as
capitalist encirclement exists there will always be the
danger of military intervention. Nevertheless, it is obvi-ous to everyone that it is the victory and not the
* I am fully justified in making the second assumption
because the strength of our Republic is growing and will continue
to grow, and the support we are receiving from our Western
Comrades is increasing and will continue to increase.
defeat of socialism. And there can scarcely be any rea-
son to doubt that at the same time this victory creates
the pre-conditions for the victory of the revolution inother countries.
I see that some comrades have not yet abandoned the
old Social-Democratic theory that the proletarian revo-lution cannot be brought about in countries where capi-
talism is less developed than, say, in Britain or America.
5) I advise you to read again some of Ilyich’s articles
in the symposium Against the Stream ,
9 his pamphlets
The Proletarian Revolution10 and “ Left-Wing ” Commu-
nism ,11 and also his article “On Co-operation.”
With communist greetings,
J. Stalin
January  25,  1925
Published  for  the  first  time
“DYMOVKA”
Speech  Delivered
at  a  Meeting  of  the  Organising Bureau
of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  R.C.P .(B.)12
January  26,  1925
First of all the question of Sosnovsky, although it
is not the central question. He is accused of statingsomewhere in the press that the entire Soviet apparatus,
even the system, is rotten. I have not read such state-
ments, and nobody has indicated where Sosnovsky wrotethis. Had he said anywhere that the Soviet system was
rotten, he would have been a counter-revolutionary.
Here is his book. It says: “Not knowing the
Ukrainian countryside sufficiently, I do not undertake
to judge how far Dymovka is typical of all the Ukrainian
villages. Let those who have more expert knowledgeabout the Soviet Ukraine decide this. Nevertheless, I take
the liberty to assert that Dymovka is by no means an
exception. From the local press, from conversationswith responsible workers, from meetings with peasants
and from certain documents that came into my hands,
I gathered that elements of a ‘Dymovka’ situation are tobe found in other villages too.”
This is put very mildly, and it does not say anything
about decay of the Soviet system or of the Soviet appa-ratus as a whole. Therefore, the accusations against
Sosnovsky made by the commission, or by individual
comrades, are incorrect. Whether they are made by the
Gubernia Committee, the Okrug Committee, the commis-sion, or by individuals makes no difference; the charges
are unsupported, there are no documents.
On the contrary, I should like to point out that in this
matter Sosnovsky has something to his credit. Nobody
has said anything about that. It is to the credit of Prav-
da, to the credit of Sosnovsky, to the credit of Demyan
Bedny, that they had the courage to drag into the light
of day a piece of real life and to reveal it to the whole
country. That is a service which it is absolutely nec-essary to point out. That is what must be said, and not
that they overdid things.
It is said that Sosnovsky overdid things. But in cases
where there is a general tendency towards officialdom,
-while there are evils under the surface which are spoiling
all our work, it is necessary to overdo things. It is certainlynecessary. It is inevitable. Nothing but good can come of
it. Of course, somebody will be offended, but our work
gains by it. We shall not be able to set things right with-out some offence to individuals.
The main thing in this matter, in my opinion, is not
that a village correspondent was murdered, or even thatwe have a Dymovka—all this is very deplorable, but it
is not the main thing. The main thing is that here and
there in the countryside, in the volosts, in the districts,in the okrugs, our local responsible workers look only
towards Moscow and refuse to turn towards the peasantry,
failing to understand that it is not enough to be on goodterms with Moscow, that it is also necessary to be on
good terms with the peasantry. That is the principal mis-
take, the principal danger in our work in the country-
side.
Many responsible workers say that it has become the
fashion at the centre to make new statements about the
countryside, that this is diplomacy for the outside world,
that we are not moved by an earnest and determined de-sire to improve our policy in the countryside. That is what
I regard as the most dangerous thing. If our comrades in
the localities refuse to believe that we have earnestlyset to work to teach our responsible workers a new ap-
proach to the countryside, to the peasantry, if they fail
to see this, or do not believe it, a very grave danger arises.What we must do now is to dispel this mood among
the local responsible workers, to turn the line abruptly
in the other direction, so that they look on our policyin regard to the countryside as something important,
something absolutely essential.
We have three allies: the international proletariat,
which is tardy in making a revolution; the colonies,
which are very slow in getting into their stride; and
the peasantry. I shall not now speak of the fourth ally,i.e, the conflicts in the camp of our enemies. It is hard
to say when the international revolution will get into
its stride; when it does, it will be the decisive factor. Itis also hard to say when the colonies will get into their
stride; that is a very serious and difficult question and
nothing definite can be said about it. As for the peasant-ry, we are working with it today; it is our third ally,
and an ally who is giving us direct assistance at this
very moment; it gives us the men for the army, grain,and so forth. With this ally, i.e., the peasantry, we are
working jointly, together we are building socialism, well
or ill, but we are building it, and we must appreciate
the value of this ally at the present time, particularly
at the present time.
That is why we are now putting the question of the
peasantry into the forefront of our work.
It must be said that the present course of our policy
is a new one; it marks a new line in our policy in regard
to the countryside in the matter of building socialism.
The comrades do not wish to understand this. If theyfail to understand this fundamental thing, we shall
make no progress whatever in our work, and there will
be no building of socialism in our country. The gravestcause of danger, to my mind, is that our comrades forget
about this main thing and are carried away by what may
be called their departmental view that Moscow must beshown the “right side of the cloth” and that apparent-
ly all is well, that they must conceal evils, that they
must not permit criticism because, they think, it discred-its the local authorities, the local responsible workers.
We must put a stop to that, and we must tell the com-
rades that they must not be afraid of dragging bits oflife into the light of day, however unpleasant they may
be. We must make our comrades turn round, so that
they do not look only towards Moscow, but learn to looktowards the peasantry, whom it is their function to
serve; so that they shall not conceal evils, but, on the
contrary, help us to expose our mistakes, to rectify themand to conduct our work along the line now laid down
by the Party.
One thing or the other (I have already spoken about
this a number of times): either we, jointly with the
non-Party peasants, jointly with our local Soviet and
Party workers, criticise ourselves in order to improve
our work, or the discontent of the peasants will accumu-
late and burst out in revolts. Bear in mind that underthe new conditions, under NEP, another Tambov, or
another Kronstadt,
13 is by no means precluded. The
Transcaucasian, the Georgian revolt14 was a grave warn-
ing. Such revolts are possible in future if we do not
learn to expose and eliminate our evils, if we go on mak-
ing it appear outwardly that all is well.
That is why I think that what we must speak of here
is not the shortcomings or exaggerations of individual
writers who expose the defects in our work, but theirmerits in doing so.
Here I must pass on to the question of our writers,
our correspondents. I think that we have arrived at theperiod when the worker correspondents and village cor-
respondents can become one of the principal instruments
for correcting our constructive work in the countryside,for exposing our defects and, consequently, for correcting
and improving the work of the Soviets. Perhaps we do
not all realise this, but it is clear to me that it is precise-ly from this end that the improvement of our work
must begin. These people, the bulk of whom are impres-
sionable, who are fired by the love of truth, whodesire to expose and correct our shortcomings at
all costs, people who are not afraid of bullets—it is these
people who, in my opinion, should become one of theprincipal instruments for exposing our defects and cor-
recting our Party and Soviet constructive work in the
localities.
That is why we must heed the voice of these comrades
and not disparage our press workers. By means of them,
as by means of a sort of barometer which directly marks
defects in our constructive work, there is very much that
we could expose and correct.
As regards the Central Control Commission, I think
that, on the whole, the resolution that it adopted is cor-
rect. Something, perhaps, should be amended, revised.
The Dymovka affair should be dealt with in the press
in such a way as to enable our comrades to understand
what gave rise to it. The point does not lie in the factthat a village correspondent was murdered; still less
does it lie in not offending the secretary of the Okrug
Committee or Gubernia Committee. The point is to startimproving our constructive socialist work in the country-
side. That is the main thing. That is the point at issue.
J.  Stalin,  The  Peasant  Question ,
Moscow  and  Leningrad,  1925
CONCERNING
THE  QUESTION  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT
AND  THE  PEASANTRY
Speech  Delivered  at  the  Thirteenth  Gubernia  Conference
of  the  Moscow  Organisation  of  the  R.C.P .(B.)15
January  27,  1925
Comrades, I should like to say a few words about the
principles underlying the policy which the Party has now
adopted towards the peasantry. That the question of the
peasantry is particularly important at the present timethere can be no doubt. Many comrades have gone to ex-
tremes and even say that a new era has begun—the peas-
ant era. Others have begun to interpret the slogan “faceto the countryside” as meaning that we must turn our
backs on the towns. Some have even gone to the length
of talking about a political NEP. That is nonsense, ofcourse. All that means going to extremes, of course. If,
however, we put those extremes aside, one thing remains,
namely, that at the present time, particularly justnow, the question of the peasantry acquires exceptional
importance.
Why? What is the reason?There are two reasons for it. I am speaking of fun-
damental reasons.
The first reason why the peasant question has assumed
exceptional importance for us at the present moment is
that, of the allies of the Soviet power, of all the
proletariat’s principal allies—of whom there are four,
in my opinion—the peasantry is the only ally that can
be of direct assistance to our revolution at this very mo-
ment . It is a question of direct assistance just now, at
the present moment. All the other allies, while they
will be of great importance in the future and while they
constitute an immense reserve for our revolution, never-theless, unfortunately, cannot render our regime, our
state, direct assistance now.
What are these allies?The first ally, our principal ally, is the proletar-
iat in the developed countries. The advanced proletar-
iat, the proletariat in the West, is an immense force,and it is the most faithful and most important ally of
our revolution and our regime. But, unfortunately, the
situation, the state of the revolutionary movement in thedeveloped capitalist countries, is such that the proletar-
iat in the West is unable to render us direct and deci-
sive assistance at the present moment. We have its in-direct, moral support, and this is so important that its
value cannot even be measured, it is inestimable. Never-
theless, it does not constitute that direct and immediateassistance that we need now.
The second ally is the colonies, the oppressed peo-
ples in the under-developed countries, which are op-pressed by the more developed countries. Comrades, they
constitute an immense reserve for our revolution. But
they are very slow in getting into their stride. They arecoming directly to our help, but it is evident that they
will not arrive quickly. For that very reason they are
unable to render us direct and immediate assistance inour work of socialist construction, of strengthening the
Soviet regime, of building our socialist economy.
We have a third ally, intangible, impersonal, but for
all that an extremely important one, namely, the con-
flicts and contradictions between the capitalist coun-tries; they cannot be personified, but they certainly
render our regime and our revolution very great
support. That may seem strange, comrades, but it is afact. Had the two chief coalitions of capitalist countries
not been engaged in mortal combat during the imperialist
war in 1917, had they not been clutching at each other’sthroats, had they not been busy with their own affairs
and unable to spare time to wage a struggle against the
Soviet power, it is doubtful whether the Soviet powerwould have survived. The struggle, conflicts and wars
between our enemies, I repeat, constitute an extremely
important ally for us. But what is the situation withregard to this ally? The situation is that world capital
after the war, after passing through several crises, has
begun to recover. That must be admitted. The chief vic-tor countries—Britain and America—have now acquired
such strength that they have the material possibility
not only of putting capital’s affairs in more or less toler-able order at home, but also of infusing new blood into
France, Germany and other capitalist countries. That is
one aspect of the matter. And as a result of that aspectof the matter, the contradictions between the capitalist
countries are, for the time being, not developing with
the same intensity as was the case immediately afterthe war. That is a gain for capital, and a loss for us.
But this process has also another aspect, a reverse side.
The reverse side is that, notwithstanding the relativestability which capital has been able to create for the
time being, the contradictions at the other end of the
inter-relations, the contradictions between the exploiting
advanced countries and the exploited backward countries,
the colonies and dependent countries, are becoming sharp-er and deeper and are threatening to disrupt capital’s
“work” from a new and “unexpected” end. The crisis
in Egypt and in the Sudan—you have probably readabout it in the newspapers—also a number of key
points of contradiction in China, which may set the pres-
ent “allies” at loggerheads and wreck the strengthof capital, a new series of key points of contradiction
in North Africa, where Spain is losing Morocco, towards
which France is stretching out her hands, but which shewill be unable to take because Britain will not permit
France to gain control over Gibraltar—all these are facts
which are in many ways reminiscent of the pre-war periodand which are bound to imperil the “constructive work”
of international capital.
Such are the gains and losses in the total balance-
sheet of the development of contradictions. But as, for
the time being, capital’s gains in this sphere are big-
ger than its losses and as there are no grounds for ex-pecting that armed conflicts between the capitalists will
break out in the immediate future, it is evident that
the situation as regards our third ally is still not whatwe would like it to be.
There remains the fourth ally—the peasantry. It is
by our side, we are living together, together we arebuilding the new life; well or ill, we are building togeth-
er. As you yourselves are aware, this ally is not a very
staunch one; the peasantry is not as reliable an ally asthe proletariat in the developed capitalist countries.
But, for all that, it is an ally, and of all our existing
allies it is the only one that can render us, and is render-
ing us, direct assistance at this very moment, receiving
our assistance in exchange.
That is why, particularly at the present moment,
when the course of development of revolutionary and
all other crises has slowed down somewhat, the questionof the peasantry acquires exceptional importance.
Such is the first reason for the exceptional importance
of the peasant question.
The second reason for our making the question of the
peasantry the corner-stone of our policy at the present mo-
ment is that our industry, which is the basis of socialismand the basis of our regime, rests on the home market, the
peasant market. I do not know what the situation will be
when our industry develops to the full, when we are ableto cope with the home market, and when we are faced
with the question of winning foreign markets. We shall
be faced with that question in the future, you can haveno doubt about that. It is doubtful whether we shall
be able in the future to count on capturing foreign mar-
kets in the West from capital, which is more experiencedthan we are. But as regards markets in the East, our re-
lations with which cannot be considered bad—and they
will improve still further—here we shall find more fa-vourable conditions. There can be no doubt that textile
goods, means of defence, machinery, and so forth, will
be the principal commodities with which we shall sup-ply the East in competition with the capitalists. But
that concerns the future of our industry. As for the
present, when we have not yet fully utilised even a thirdof our peasant market, at the present moment, the chief
question that faces us is that of the home market, and
above all the peasant market. The fact that the peasant
market is at the present moment the chief basis of our
industry is precisely the reason why we, as the govern-ment, and we, as the proletariat, are interested in improv-
ing to the utmost the condition of peasant economy, in
improving the material conditions of the peasantry, inraising the purchasing power of the peasantry, in improv-
ing the relations between the proletariat and the peas-
antry, in establishing that bond which Lenin spoke about,but which we have not yet established properly.
That is the second reason why we, as the Party, must
put the question of the peasantry in the forefront at thepresent moment, why we must devote special attention
and special care to the peasantry.
Such are the premises of our Party’s policy in regard
to the peasantry.
The whole trouble, comrades, is that many of our
comrades do not understand, or do not want to under-stand, how extremely important this question is.
It is often said: our leaders in Moscow have made
it the fashion to talk about the peasantry; probably,they don’t mean it seriously, it is diplomacy. Moscow
needs these speeches to be made for the outside world,
but we can continue the old policy. That is what somesay. Others say that the talk about the peasantry is just
talk. If the Moscow people did not stick in their offices,
but were to visit the countryside, they would see whatthe peasants are, and how the taxes are collected. That
is the sort of talk one hears. I think, comrades, that
of all the dangers that face us, this failure of our localresponsible workers to understand the tasks before us
is the most serious danger.
One thing or the other:
Either our local comrades will realise how very se-
rious the question of the peasantry is, in which case theywill really set about drawing the peasantry into our con-
structive work, improving peasant economy and strength-
ening the bond; or the comrades will fail to realise it, inwhich case things may end in the collapse of the Soviet
power.
Let not the comrades think that I am trying to
frighten somebody. No, comrades, there would be no
sense in trying to frighten anybody. The question is too
serious, and it must be dealt with in a way that befitsserious people.
On arriving in Moscow, comrades often try to show
the “right side of the cloth,” saying that all is well inthe countryside where they are. This official optimism
is sometimes sickening, for it is obvious that all is not
well, nor can it be. Obviously, there are defects, whichmust be exposed without fear of criticism, and then elim-
inated The issue is as follows: either we, the entire
Party, allow the non-Party peasants and workers to criti-cise us, or we shall be criticised by means of revolts.
The revolt in Georgia was criticism. The revolt in Tam-
bov was also criticism. The revolt in Kronstadt—wasnot that criticism? One thing or the other: either we aban-
don this official optimism and official approach to the
matter, do not fear criticism and allow ourselves to becriticised by the non-Party workers and peasants, who,
after all, are the ones to feel the effects of our mistakes,
or we do not do this, and discontent will accumulateand grow, and we shall have criticism in the form of re-
volts.
The greatest danger now is that many of our comrades
fail to understand this specific feature of the present
situation.
Has this question—the question of the peasantry—
any connection with the question of Trotskyism, which
you have discussed here? Undoubtedly it has.
What is Trotskyism?
Trotskyism is disbelief in the forces of our revo-
lution, disbelief in the alliance between the workersand peasants, disbelief in the bond. What is our prin-
cipal task at the present time? In the words of Ilyich,
it is to convert NEP Russia into socialist Russia. Canthis task be carried out if the bond is not established?
No, it cannot. Can the bond, the alliance between the
workers and peasants, be established if the theory whichinvolves disbelief in that alliance, i.e., the theory
of Trotskyism, is not smashed? No, it cannot. The con-
clusion is obvious: whoever wants to emerge fromNEP as the victor must bury Trotskyism as an ideologi-
cal trend.
Before the revolution in October, Ilyich would often
say that of all our ideological opponents the most dan-
gerous were the Mensheviks, for they were trying to in-
stil disbelief in the victory of the October Revolution.Therefore, he said, the victory of October could not be
achieved unless Menshevism was smashed. I think that
there is some analogy between Menshevism at that time,in the period of October, and Trotskyism at the present
time, in the period of NEP. I think that of all the
ideological trends in communism today, after the vic-tory of October, under the present conditions of NEP,
Trotskyism must be regarded as the most dangerous,
for it tries to instil disbelief in the forces of our revo-
lution, disbelief in the alliance of the workers and
peasants, disbelief in the work of converting NEP Russiainto socialist Russia. Therefore, unless Trotskyism is
smashed, it will be impossible to achieve victory
under the conditions of NEP, it will be impossibleto achieve the conversion of present-day Russia into so-
cialist Russia.
Such is the connection between the Party’s policy
towards the peasantry and Trotskyism.
Pravda ,  No.  24,
January  30,  1925
THE  PROSPECTS
OF  THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY  OF  GERMANY
AND  THE  QUESTION  OF  BOLSHEVISATION
Interview  with  Herzog,  Member  of  the  G.C.P .
First Question  (Herzog ). Do you think that political
and economic conditions in the democratic-capitalistrepublic of Germany are such that the working class
will have to wage a struggle for power in the more or
less immediate future?
Answer  (Stalin ). It would be difficult to give a strictly
definite answer to this question if it were a matter of
dates and not of trends. That the present situation, as
regards both international and internal conditions, dif-fers substantially from that in 1923 needs no proof.
That, however, does not preclude the possibility of the
situation changing abruptly in favour of a revolution inthe immediate future as a result of possible important
changes in the external situation. The instability of
the international situation is a guarantee that this as-sumption may become very probable.
Second question . Considering the present economic
situation and the present relation of forces, shall weneed a longer preparatory period in which to win over
the majority of the proletariat (the task which Lenin set
the Communist Parties of all countries as an extreme-ly important condition for the conquest of political
power)?
Answer . As regards the economic situation, I am
able to judge the matter only in the light of the general
data that I have at my disposal. I think that the DawesPlan
16 has already produced some results, which have
led to a relative stabilisation of the situation. The influx
of American capital into German industry, the stabili-sation of the currency, the improvement that has taken
place in a number of highly important branches of Ger-
man industry—which by no means signifies a radicalrecovery of Germany’s economy—and lastly, some im-
provement in the material conditions of the working
class—all this was bound to strengthen the position ofthe bourgeoisie in Germany to some extent. That is, so
to speak, the “positive” side of the Dawes Plan.
But the Dawes Plan also has “negative” sides,
which are bound inevitably to make themselves felt at
some definite period and to demolish the “positive” re-
sults of this plan. Undoubtedly, the Dawes Plan im-poses a double yoke upon the German proletariat, the
yoke of home and the yoke of foreign capital. The con-
tradiction between the expansion of German industryand the shrinking of the foreign markets for this industry,
the discrepancy between the hypertrophied demands of
the Entente and the maximum ability of German nation-al economy to meet these demands—all this inevita-
bly worsens the conditions of the proletariat, the small
peasants, office employees and the intelligentsia, and isbound to lead to an upheaval, to a direct struggle for
the conquest of power by the proletariat.
That circumstance must not, however, be regarded as
the only favourable condition for a German revolution.
In order that this revolution may be victorious, it is
also necessary that the Communist Party should repre-
sent the majority of the working class, that it should be-
come the decisive force in the working class. So-cial-Democracy must be exposed and routed, it must
be reduced to an insignificant minority in the working
class. Without that, it is useless even to think of the dic-tatorship of the proletariat. If the workers are to achieve
victory, they must be inspired by a single will, they
must be led by a single party, which enjoys the indubi-table confidence of the majority of the working class.
If there are two competing parties of equal strength with-
in the working class, a lasting victory is impossibleeven under favourable external circumstances. Lenin
was the first to lay special emphasis on this in the pe-
riod before the October Revolution as a most essentialcondition for the victory of the proletariat.
It could be considered that the situation most fa-
vourable for a revolution would be one in which an in-ternal crisis in Germany and the decisive growth of the
Communist Party’s forces coincided with grave com-
plications in the camp of Germany’s external enemies.
I think that the absence of this latter circumstance
in the revolutionary period of 1923 was by no means the
least important unfavourable factor.
Third question . You said that the C.P.G. must have
the majority of the workers behind it. Too little atten-
tion has been paid to this aim hitherto. What, in youropinion, must be done to convert the C.P.G. into such
an energetic party, with a progressively increasing recruit-
ing power?
Answer . Some comrades think that strengthening
the Party and Bolshevising it mean expelling all dissent-
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

ers from it. That is wrong, of course. Social-Democracy
can be exposed and reduced to an insignificant minority
in the working class only in the course of the day-to-daystruggle for the concrete needs of the working class.
The Social-Democrats must be pilloried not on the
basis of planetary questions, but on the basis of theday-to-day struggle of the working class for improving
its material and political conditions; in this, questions
concerning wages, hours, housing conditions, insurance,taxation, unemployment, high cost of living, and so
forth, must play a most important if not the decisive
role. To hit the Social-Democrats day after day on thebasis of these questions, exposing their treachery—such
is the task.
But that task would not be fully carried out if those
everyday practical questions were not linked up with the
fundamental questions of Germany’s international and
internal situation, and if, in all its work, the Party failedto deal with all those everyday questions from the stand-
point of revolution and the conquest of power by the pro-
letariat.
But such a policy can be conducted only by a party
which is headed by cadres of leaders sufficiently ex-
perienced to be able to take advantage of every singleblunder of Social-Democracy in order to strengthen the
Party, and possessing sufficient theoretical training not
to lose sight of the prospects of revolutionary develop-ment because of partial successes.
It is this, chiefly, that explains why the question of
the leading cadres of the Communist Parties in general,including those of the Communist Party of Germany, is
one of the vital questions of Bolshevisation.
To achieve Bolshevisation it is necessary to bring
about at least certain fundamental conditions, without
which no Bolshevisation of the Communist Parties willbe possible.
1) The Party must regard itself not as an appendage
of the parliamentary electoral machinery, as the Social-Democratic Party in fact does, and not as a gratuitous
supplement to the trade unions, as certain Anarcho-
Syndicalist elements sometimes claim it should be,but as the highest  form of class association of the pro-
letariat, the function of which is to lead  all the other
forms of proletarian organisations, from the tradeunions to the Party’s group in parliament.
2) The Party, and especially its leading elements,
must thoroughly master the revolutionary theory ofMarxism, which is inseparably connected with revolu-
tionary practice.
3) The Party must draw up slogans and directives
not on the basis of stock formulas and historical anal-
ogies, but as the result of a careful analysis of the
concrete internal and international conditions of the rev-olutionary movement, and it must, without fail, take
into account the experience of revolutions in all coun-
tries.
4) The Party must test the correctness of these slo-
gans and directives in the crucible of the revolutionary
struggle of the masses.
5) The entire work of the Party, particularly if So-
cial-Democratic traditions have not yet been eradicated
in it, must be reorganised on new, revolutionary lines,so that every step, every action, taken by the Party
should naturally serve to revolutionise the masses, to
train and educate the broad masses of the working class
in the revolutionary spirit.
6) In its work the Party must be able to combine the
strictest adherence to principle (not to be confused with
sectarianism!) with the maximum of ties and contacts
with the masses (not to be confused with khvostism!);without this, the Party will be unable not only to teach
the masses but also to learn from them, it will be unable
not only to lead the masses and raise them to its ownlevel but also to heed their voice and anticipate their
urgent needs.
7) In its work the Party must be able to combine an
uncompromising revolutionary spirit (not to be confused
with revolutionary adventurism!) with the maximum
of flexibility and manoeuvring ability (not to be con-fused with opportunism!); without this, the Party will be
unable to master all the forms of struggle and organisa-
tion, will be unable to link the daily interests of theproletariat with the fundamental interests of the prole-
tarian revolution, and to combine in its work the legal
with the illegal struggle.
8) The Party must not cover up its mistakes, it must
not fear criticism; it must improve and educate its
cadres by learning from its own mistakes.
9) The Party must be able to recruit for its main
leading group the best elements of the advanced fight-
ers who are sufficiently devoted to the cause to begenuine spokesmen of the aspirations of the revolu-
tionary proletariat, and who are sufficiently experi-
enced to become real leaders of the proletarian revolu-tion, capable of applying the tactics and strategy of
Leninism.
10) The Party must systematically improve the so-
cial composition of its organisations and rid itself of
corrupting opportunist elements with a view to achiev-ing the utmost solidarity.
11) The Party must achieve iron proletarian disci-
pline based on ideological solidarity, clarity concerningthe aims of the movement, unity of practical action and
an understanding of the Party’s tasks by the mass of the
Party membership.
12) The Party must systematically verify the execu-
tion of its decisions and directives; without this, these
decisions and directives are in danger of becoming emptypromises, which can only rob the Party of the con-
fidence of the broad proletarian masses.
In the absence of these and similar conditions, Bol-
shevisation is just an empty sound.
Fourth question . You said that, in addition to the neg-
ative sides of the Dawes Plan, the second condition forthe conquest of power by the C.P.G. is a situation in
which the Social-Democratic Party stands fully exposed
before the masses, and when it is no longer an impor-tant force in the working class. In view of actual circum-
stances, we are a long way from that. That is obvious-
ly the effect of the shortcomings and weaknesses of theParty’s present methods of work. How can these be re-
moved? What is your opinion of the results of the De-
cember 1924 elections, in which the Social-DemocraticParty—an utterly corrupt and rotten party—far from
losing votes, actually gained about two million votes?
Answer . That is not due to shortcomings in the work
of the Communist Party of Germany. It is primarily
due to the fact that the American loans and the influx
of American capital, plus the stabilisation of the cur-
rency, which have somewhat improved the situation,
have created the illusion that the internal and externalcontradictions connected with Germany’s situation can
be completely eliminated. It was on this illusion that
German Social-Democracy rode into the present Reichstagas if on a white horse. Wels is now preening himself
on his election victory; evidently he does not realise that
he is claiming another’s victory as his own. It was notthe victory of German Social-Democracy, but of the
Morgan group. Wels has been and remains merely one of
Morgan’s agents.
Pravda ,  No.  27,
February  3,  1925
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  ME—RT
Dear Comrade Me—rt,
I have received your letter of February 20. First of
all, accept my greetings. And now to the matter in hand.
1) You (and not only you) are making too much of
my interview with Herzog.* I could not, and will not,kick him out, not only because he is a member of the
Party, but also because he came to me with a letter
from Comrade Geschke, who begged me to give him aninterview. I am sending you a copy of that letter. I have
already sent the German original to the Central Committee
of the C.P.G. On the basis of the mere fact that, on Com-rade Geschke’s written request, I gave Herzog an inter-
view, to draw the conclusion that the Central Committee
of the R.C.P.(B.) is turning, or intends to turn, towardsBrandler, means making a mountain not even out of a
molehill, but out of nothing, and being altogether wide of
the mark. If the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) wereto learn that you, or other members of the Central Com-
mittee of the C.P.G., suspect the C.C. of the R.C.P.(B.)
of having sympathies towards Brandler-Thalheimer,
17
and of turning from the Lefts to the Rights, they would
split their sides with laughter.
* See this volume, pp. 34-41.— Ed.
2) You are quite right in saying that the Commu-
nist Party of Germany has achieved enormous successes.
There is no doubt that Brandler and Thalheimer belong tothe category of the old type of leaders who have outlived
their time and are being pushed into the background
by leaders of a new type. Here in Russia, too, the processof the dying-out of a number of old guiding functionaries
from the world of letters and old “leaders” has taken place.
That process was more rapid in periods of revolution-ary crises and slower in periods when we were accumulat-
ing forces, but it went on all the time. The Lunacharskys,
Pokrovskys, Rozhkovs, Goldenbergs, Bogdanovs, Krassins,etc.—such are the first specimens that come to my mind
of former Bolshevik leaders who later dropped into second-
ary roles. It is a necessary process of renewal of the lead-ing cadres of a live and developing party. Incidentally,
the difference between the Brandlers and Thalheimers
and the comrades I have mentioned is that, in additionto everything else, the Brandlers and Thalheimers are
burdened with the old Social-Democratic baggage, where-
as the above-mentioned Russian comrades were freefrom such a burden. This difference, as you see, speaks
not in favour of but against Brandler and Thalheimer.
The fact that the C.P.G. has succeeded in pushing theBrandlers and Thalheimers aside, in pushing them off
the stage, is in itself evidence that the C.P.G. is grow-
ing, advancing and prospering. That is apart from theundoubted successes of the C.P.G. which you quite right-
ly mention in your letter. To think now that there are
people in the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) whoare planning to turn back the wheel of the German Com-
munist Party’s development means having a very bad
opinion of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.). Be
more careful, Comrade Me—rt. . . .
3) You speak about the line of the C.P.G. It is be-
yond doubt that its line—I mean its political line—is
correct. That indeed explains the close, friendly (and
not merely comradely) relations between the R.C.P.(B.)and the C.P.G. that you yourself refer to in your letter. But
does that mean that we must slur over individual mistakes
in the political work of the C.P.G. or of the R.C.P.(B.)?Of course not. Can it be asserted that the Central Commit-
tee of the C.P.G., or the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.), are free from individual mistakes? Can itbe asserted that criticism of part  of the activities of
the Central Committee of the C.P.G. (inadequate exploi-
tation of the Barmat case,
18 the well-known voting of
the Communist group in the Prussian parliament in the
election of the Speaker of that parliament, the question
of taxation in connection with the Dawes Plan, etc.) isincompatible with complete solidarity with the general
line of the Central Committee of the C.P.G.? Obviously
not. What will become of our Parties if, when meet-ing one another, in the Executive Committee of the Com-
intern, say, we shut our eyes to individual mistakes com-
mitted by our Parties, content ourselves with parad-ing our “complete harmony” and “well-being,” and be-
come yesmen to one another? I think that such parties
could never become revolutionary. They would not berevolutionary parties, but mummies. It seems to me that
some German comrades are occasionally inclined to
demand that we should become complete yesmen to theCentral Committee of the C.P.G. and are ready on their
part to become complete yesmen to the Central Commit-
tee of the R.C.P.(B.). I am emphatically opposed to
this mutual yesmenship. Judging by your letter, you
are also opposed to it. All the better for the C.P.G.
4) I am emphatically opposed to the policy of kick-
ing out all dissenting comrades. I am opposed to such a
policy not because I am sorry for the dissenters, butbecause such a policy gives rise in the Party to a
regime of intimidation, a regime of bullying, which
kills the spirit of self-criticism and initiative. It is notgood when leaders of the Party are feared but not respected.
Party leaders can be real leaders only if they are not
merely feared but respected in the Party, when theirauthority is recognised. It is difficult to produce such
leaders, it is a long and arduous process, but it is abso-
lutely essential, otherwise the Party cannot be called areal Bolshevik Party, and the discipline of the Party
cannot be conscious discipline. I think that the German
comrades are acting contrary to this self-evident truth.To disavow Trotsky and his supporters, we Russian Bol-
sheviks carried out an intense campaign based on an expla-
nation of principles in support of the foundations of Bol-shevism as against the foundations of Trotskyism, al-
though, considering the strength and prestige of the Central
Committee of the R.C.P.(B.), we could have dispensed withsuch a campaign. Was that campaign needed? Certainly
it was, for by means of it we educated hundreds of thou-
sands of new Party members (and also people who are notParty members) in the spirit of Bolshevism. It is very sad
that our German comrades do not feel it necessary that
repressive measures against the opposition should be pre-ceded or supplemented by a wide campaign based on an
explanation of principles, and are thus hindering the
education of the Party members and Party cadres in the
spirit of Bolshevism. To expel Brandler and Thalheimer is
an easy matter, but the task of overcoming Brandlerismis a difficult and serious one. In this matter, repressive
measures alone can only cause harm; here the soil must
be deeply ploughed, minds must be greatly enlightened.The R.C.P.(B.) always developed through contradictions,
i.e., in the struggle against non-communist trends, and
only in that struggle did it gain strength and forge realcadres. The same path of development through contradic-
tions, through a real, serious and lengthy struggle against
non-communist trends, especially against Social-Demo-cratic traditions, Brandlerism, etc., lies before the
C.P.G. But repressive measures alone are not enough in
such a struggle. That is why I think that the inner-Party policy of the Central Committee of the C.P.G. must
be made more flexible. I have no doubt that the C.P.G.
will be able to rectify the defects in this sphere.
5) You are quite right about work in the trade un-
ions. The role of the trade unions in Germany is different
from that of the trade unions in Russia. In Russia, thetrade unions arose after the Party and, in essence, they
were the Party’s auxiliary organs. That is not the case in
Germany, or in Europe generally. There, the Party arosefrom the trade unions; the latter successfully competed
with the Party in influencing the masses, and often acted
as a heavy fetter on the Party. If the broad massesin Germany, or in Europe generally, were asked which
organisation they regarded as nearer to them, the Party
or the trade unions, they would undoubtedly answerthat the trade unions were nearer to them than the Party.
Whether good or bad, it is a fact that the non-Party
workers in Europe regard the trade unions as their prin-
cipal strongholds, which help them in their struggle
against the capitalists (wages, hours, insurance, etc.),whereas they regard the Party as something auxiliary, sec-
ondary, although necessary. That explains the fact that
the broad masses of the workers regard the direct strugglewaged against the present trade unions from outside by the
“ultra-Lefts” as a struggle against their principal strong-
holds, which took them decades to build, and whichthe “Communists” now want to destroy. Failure to take
this specific feature into account means wrecking the
entire communist movement in the West. But from thistwo conclusions follow:
firstly, that in the West the vast working-class
masses cannot be won over unless the trade unions arewon over,
and, secondly, that the trade unions cannot be won
over unless we work inside them and strengthen our in-fluence there.
That is why special attention must be paid to the
work of our comrades in the trade unions.
That is all for the time being. Don’t scold me for
being straightforward and blunt.
J. Stalin
28.II.25
Published  for  the  first  time
INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN’S  DAY
There has not been in the history of mankind a single
great movement of the oppressed in which women toilershave not participated. Women toilers, the most oppressed
of all the oppressed, have never kept away from the high
road of the emancipation movement, and never could havedone so. As is known, the movement for the emancipation
of the slaves brought to the front hundreds of thousands
of great women martyrs and heroines. In the ranks ofthe fighters for the emancipation of the serfs there were
tens of thousands of women toilers. It is not surprising
that the revolutionary working-class movement, themightiest of all the emancipation movements of the op-
pressed masses, has rallied millions of women toilers to
its banner.
International Women’s Day is a token of the invinci-
bility of the working-class movement for emancipation
and a harbinger of its great future.
Women toilers—working women and peasant women—
are a vast reserve of the working class. This reserve con-
stitutes a good half of the population. The side that ittakes—for or against the working class—will determine
the fate of the proletarian movement, the victory or
defeat of the proletarian revolution, the victory or defeat
of the proletarian power. Consequently, the first task of
the proletariat, and of its advanced detachment—the
Communist Party, is to wage a resolute struggle to freewomen, working women and peasant women, from the in-
fluence of the bourgeoisie, to enlighten them politically
and to organise them under the banner of the prole-tariat.
International Women’s Day is a means of winning
the reserve of women toilers to the side of the proletariat.
But the women toilers are not only a reserve. If
the working class pursues a correct policy, they can and
must become a real working-class army, operating againstthe bourgeoisie. To forge from this reserve of women
toilers an army of working women and peasant women,
operating side by side with the great army of the prole-tariat—such is the second and decisive task of the work-
ing class.
International Women’s Day must become a means
of transforming the working women and peasant women
from a reserve of the working class into an active army of
the emancipation movement of the proletariat.
Long live International Women’s Day!
J. Stalin
Pravda ,  No.  56,
March  8,  1925
THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE  OF  THE  R.C.P.(B.)
TO  THE  CENTRAL  EXECUTIVE  COMMITTEE
OF  THE  KUOMINTANG
The Central Committee of the Russian Communist
Party joins you in mourning the loss of the leader of the
Kuomintang19 and organiser of the national-liberation
struggle of the workers and peasants of China for thefreedom and independence of the Chinese people, for the
unity and independence of the Chinese state.
The Central Committee of the Russian Communist
Party has no doubt that Sun Yat-sen’s great cause will
not die with Sun Yat-sen, that Sun Yat-sen’s cause will
live in the hearts of the Chinese workers and peasantsto the terror of the enemies of the Chinese people.
The Central Committee of the Russian Communist
Party is confident that the Kuomintang will hold highthe banner of Sun Yat-sen in the great struggle for liber-
ation from imperialism, that the Kuomintang will
succeed with honour in carrying this banner to completevictory over imperialism and its agents in China.
Sun Yat-sen is dead—long live the cause of Sun Yat-
sen! May Sun Yat-sen's behests live on and gain in power!
Secretary  of  the  Central  Committee
of  the  Russian  Communist  Party
J. Stalin
March  13,  1925
Pravda ,  No.  60,
March  14,  1925
THE  INTERNATIONAL  SITUATION
AND  THE  TASKS  OF  THE  COMMUNIST
PARTIES
Of a number of phenomena of decisive significance in
the international situation, the following basic facts
should be noted:
1. Undoubtedly, capital has succeeded in extricating
itself from the quagmire of the post-war crisis. The
stabilisation of the currency in a number of capitalist
countries, the growth of world trade and the expansionof production in individual countries, the export and
investment of capital, especially Anglo-American capi-
tal, in Europe and Asia—all this testifies to the successescapital has achieved in its “constructive work.” As is
known, that “work” is being conducted under the aegis
of the Anglo-American bloc. Of the results of this “work,”the so-called “Dawesation” of Germany, i.e., the transi-
tion from the method of military intervention to
the method of financial intervention, to the methodof financial enslavement of Germany, must be regard-
ed as one of the most important.
2. It is also beyond doubt that in Germany, in the
centre of Europe, the period of revolutionary upsurge
has come to an end. The period of the upsurge of revolu-
tion, when the movement seethes, rises and boils over,whereas the Party’s slogans lag behind the movement,
when the masses break the bounds of legality, storm
the old order and establish their own, new law—
that period has now gone by in Germany. The working-
class movement in Germany has passed from the periodof assault to the period of accumulating forces, to the
period of forming and training a proletarian army under
the banner of communism. It scarcely needs proof thatthis circumstance is bound to be of great importance.
All the more definitely, therefore, must this be said, in
order to be able quickly to find our bearings in the newsituation and to start the work of preparing the revolution
on new lines.
    Such are the facts of positive  significance for the bour-
geoisie, for they testify to the strength and successes of
capital at the present time.
But alongside these facts there are a number of
facts of negative  significance for capitalism.
1. Undoubtedly, side by side with the strengthening
of capitalism, there is a growth of the contradictionsbetween the capitalist groups, a growth of the forces
which weaken and disintegrate capitalism. The struggle
between Britain and America for oil, for Canada, formarkets, etc.; the struggle between the Anglo-American
bloc and Japan for Eastern markets; the struggle be-
tween Britain and France for influence in Europe; and,lastly, the struggle between enslaved Germany and the
dominant Entente—all these are commonly-known facts
which indicate that the successes that capital hasachieved are transient, that the process of capitalism’s
“recovery” contains within itself the germs of its in-
herent weakness and disintegration.
2. The growth and consolidation of the national-liber-
ation movement in India, China, Egypt, Indonesia,
North Africa, etc., which are undermining capitalism’s
rear. Since, for its “recovery,” imperialism must enlarge
its sphere of influence in the colonies and dependent coun-tries, whereas the struggle of these countries against
imperialism is undoubtedly becoming intensified, it is
obvious that the successes of imperialism in this spherecannot be durable.
3. The fight for trade-union unity in Europe and the
crisis in the Amsterdam Federation.
20 The fight of the
British trade unions for trade-union unity, the support
of this fight by the Soviet trade unions, the transforma-
tion of the fight for trade-union unity into a fight againstthe counter-revolutionary leaders of the Amsterdam
Federation (Oudégeest, Sassenbach, Jouhaux, and others),
who pursue a policy of splitting the trade unions—areall facts which indicate that the Amsterdam Federa-
tion is in a state of profound crisis. And what does
the crisis in the Amsterdam Federation mean? It meansthe instability of bourgeois rule, for the Amsterdam
trade-union bureaucracy is a part and a prop of this
rule.
4. The economic growth of the Soviet Union. There
is no doubt that the stories of the bourgeois hack writers
about the Soviets being incapable of organising industryhave been completely refuted. There is no doubt that dur-
ing the past two years, after intervention and the block-
ade ceased, the industry of the Soviet Union has revivedand gained strength. There is no doubt that the material
and cultural conditions of the workers have substantially
improved during this short period. There is no doubt thatthis improvement will continue. All these circumstances
are now of decisive importance for revolutionising the
workers in the capitalist countries. I think that the work-
ers of the West have never displayed such interest in
Russia as they are doing now. Why? Because rumoursare reaching them about the new way of life  of the Soviet
workers in the workers’ state called the Soviet Union,
and they would like to test the truth of these rumours.The fact that scores and hundreds of workers holding di-
verse views come from Europe to Russia and peer into
every nook and cranny undoubtedly indicates that in-terest in Russia will grow month by month among the
workers of the West. There is no doubt that this pilgrim-
age to Russia will grow. And when the Western workersbecome convinced that every step in the development of
industry in Russia also means a step in the improvement
of the conditions of the workers, and not the deteriorationof these conditions, as usually happens in the capitalist
countries, they will realise that it is high time for them,
the Western workers, to set up workers’ states in theirown countries. That is why the very existence of the So-
viet state is a deadly menace to imperialism. That is
why no successes that imperialism achieves can be durableas long as the Soviet state exists and develops.
Such are the facts of negative  significance for the
bourgeoisie, for they testify to the strength and probablesuccesses of the revolutionary movement in the near
future.
The conflict between these opposite trends, positive
and negative, constitutes the basis and content of the
present international situation.
Amidst this conflict of opposites, so-called pacifism
arose and wilted before it could bloom, failing to mark
either an “era,” an “epoch” or a “period.” It failed to
justify either the hopes of the compromisers or the appre-
hensions of the counter-revolutionaries.
In this conflict the “renowned” names of Poincaré
and Hughes, of MacDonald and Herriot, perished.
Which of these trends will gain the upper hand, the
positive or the negative?
There can be no doubt that in time  the trends that
are unfavourable for capitalism and favourable for the
revolution must triumph, for imperialism is incapableof resolving the contradictions that are corroding it,
for it is capable only of alleviating them for a time with
the result that they break out again later on and mani-fest themselves with fresh destructive force. It is also
beyond doubt, however, that at the present  time the posi-
tive trends, that are favourable for capitalism, are gain-ing the upper hand.
That is the specific feature of the present internation-
al situation.
As a result we have a sort of lull in Europe and
America, “disturbed” by the national revolutionary move-
ment in the colonies and “marred” by the existence,development and growing strength of the Soviet Union.
For the bourgeoisie it means a respite , increased
exports of capital, increased wealth, increased oppres-sion and exploitation in the colonies, increased pres-
sure on the Soviet Union, the concentration of all the
counter-revolutionary forces around Anglo-Americancapital.
For the proletariat in the capitalist countries it means
the opening of a period of accumulating forces, theopening of a period of forming and training the proletar-
ian armies under the banner of communism in the
conditions of a system of repression alternating with a
system of “liberties.”
For the colonies it means an intensification of the
struggle against national oppression and exploitation, an
intensification of the struggle for liberation from imperial-
ism.
For the Soviet Union it means the exertion of all ef-
forts to develop industry further, to strengthen the
country’s defensive capacity, to concentrate the revolu-tionary forces of all countries against imperialism.
Hence the tasks of the Communist Parties:
1. To utilise to the utmost all contradictions in the
camp of the bourgeoisie with the object of disintegrating
and weakening its forces and of strengthening the posi-
tions of the proletariat.
2. To devise concrete forms and methods of drawing
the working class in the advanced countries closer to
the national revolutionary movement in the colonies anddependent countries with the object of rendering all
possible support to this movement against the common
enemy, against imperialism.
3. To promote the fight for trade-union unity and to
carry it to a successful conclusion, bearing in mind that
this is the surest means of winning over the vast working-class masses; for it is impossible to win over the vast
proletarian masses unless the trade unions are won over;
and it is impossible to win over the trade unions unlesswork is conducted in them and unless the confidence of
the masses of the workers is won in the trade unions
month by month and year by year. Failing this, it isout of the question even to think of achieving the
dictatorship of the proletariat.
4. To devise concrete forms and methods of drawing
the working class closer to the small peasantry, who are
crushed by the bureaucratic machine of the bourgeois stateand by the extortionate prices of the all-powerful trusts,
bearing in mind that the struggle to win over the small
peasantry is the immediate task of a party that is ad-vancing towards the dictatorship of the proletariat.
5. To support the Soviet regime and to frustrate the
interventionist machinations of imperialism against theSoviet Union, bearing in mind that the Soviet Union is
the bulwark of the revolutionary movement in all coun-
tries, and that to preserve and strengthen the SovietUnion means to accelerate the victory of the working
class over the world bourgeoisie.
Pravda ,  No.  66,
March  22,  1925
Signed:  J.  Stalin
THE  COMMUNIST  PARTY
OF  CZECHOSLOV AKIA
Speech  Delivered  in  the  Czechoslovak
Commission  of  the  E.C.C.I.21
January  17,  1925
Comrades, leaving aside certain minor points and
personal factors which some comrades have dragged intothe subject, the disagreements in the Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia can be reduced to the following nine
questions:
1) Is there a crisis in the Communist Party of Cze-
choslovakia?
2) What is the chief cause of the crisis?3) What is the character of the crisis, i.e., from
where does danger threaten, from the Left or from the
Right?
4) Which danger is the more serious, the Left or the
Right?
5) Why is the danger from the Right the more real
danger?
6) How should the struggle against the Right danger
be waged so that it results in real Bolshevisation andin a real solution of the crisis?
7) What is the immediate task in connection with
Bolshevisation in the Communist Party of Czechoslo-vakia?
8) The rights of the Comintern in relation to the
national sections.
9) Comrade Kreibich and the threat of a split.Is there a crisis in the Communist Party of Czecho-
slovakia? Yes, there is. Both sides admit it. On this
point there is no disagreement between them. ComradeŠmeral went even further and said that the crisis is deep-
er than some comrades usually represent it.
What is the chief cause of the crisis? Comrade Šmeral
was quite right when he said that the chief cause of
the crisis lay in the difficulties entailed by the transi-
tion from a period of revolutionary upsurge to a periodof lull. A transition period, which calls for a new orienta-
tion, usually gives rise to some kind of a crisis in the
Party. That is the situation in Czechoslovakia, too, at thepresent time.
What is the character of the crisis, and from where
does danger threaten, from the Left or from the Right?Here, too, Comrade Šmeral  was right when he said that
danger threatens from both sides, from the Left and from
the Right. There is the danger of over-estimating theimportance of partial demands to the detriment of funda-
mental demands, of over-estimating parliamentary activ-
ity and work in the trade unions. That is the dangerfrom the Right, for it leads to adapting oneself to the bour-
geoisie. On the other hand, there is the danger of under-esti-
mating the importance of partial demands, of parliamen-tary activity, of work in the trade unions, and so forth.
That is the danger from the Left, for it leads to becom-
ing divorced from the masses and to sectarianism. Com-rade Šmeral’s desire to take a middle position in this
conflict between the two opposite deviations is quite
legitimate. The only trouble is that he has failed to keep
to that position and has followed in the wake of the
Rights.
Which is the more serious danger, the Left or the
Right? I think that Comrade Šmeral has not cleared
up this question for himself. He directs his criticismmainly against the Lefts, in the belief that they are the
chief danger. The facts, however, show that the chief
danger comes from the Right and not from the Left.Comrade Šmeral has not realised this, and herein lies
his first mistake.
Why is the danger from the Right the more serious
danger at the present time? For three reasons.
     Firstly. The transition itself from upsurge to lull,
by its very nature, increases the chances of danger fromthe Right. Whereas an upsurge gives rise to revolutionary
illusions and causes the Left danger to become the prin-
cipal one, a lull, on the contrary, gives rise to Social-Democratic, reformist illusions and causes the Right
danger to become the principal one. In 1920, when the
working-class movement was on the upgrade, Lenin wrotehis pamphlet “ Left-Wing ” Communism , an Infantile
Disorder . Why did Lenin write this particular pamphlet?
Because at that time the Left danger was the more seriousdanger. I think that if Lenin were alive he would now
write another pamphlet entitled Right-Wing Communism ,
an Old-Age Disorder , because, at the present time, in
the period of lull, when illusions about compromise are
bound to grow, the Right danger is the most serious
danger.
Secondly. As Comrade Šmeral reported, no less than
70 per cent of the members of the Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia are former Social-Democrats. It scarcely
needs proof that Social-Democratic relapses are not only
possible but inevitable in such a party. Needless to say,this circumstance is bound to increase the danger from
the Right.
     Thirdly. The Czechoslovak state is a state that marksthe national victory of the Czechs. The Czechs have
already acquired their national state as a dominant
nation. The workers there are for the time being fairlywell off: there is no unemployment, and they are obviously
intoxicated with the idea of possessing a national state.
All this is bound to give rise to illusions about nationalpeace between the classes in Czechoslovakia. Needless to
say, this circumstance, in its turn, gives rise to and in-
creases the danger from the Right. And it is here thatwe must look for the reason why the divergence between
the Rights and Lefts took place along national lines,
why the Slovaks and the Germans (oppressed nations)are on the left flank, and the Czechs are on the opposite
flank Comrade Šmeral spoke of the danger of such a
division. That is true, of course. But it is also true thatsuch a division is quite understandable, if we bear in
mind the above-mentioned specific national features of
the Czechoslovak state and the dominant position of theCzechs.
Such are the principal reasons why the danger from
the Right in the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia isa particularly serious danger.
How should the struggle against the Right danger in
the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia be waged? Thisquestion brings us to the very core of the disagreements.
One would think that the struggle against this danger
should be waged in the most determined and ruthless man-
ner. But with the Czech Communists the opposite has
happened. Is Comrade Šmeral combating the danger from
the Right? Yes, he is. But he is combating it in such a way
that, in the final result, the Rights, instead of being elim-
inated, are being cultivated, supported, protected fromthe blows of the Lefts. That is somewhat strange, but it
is a fact, comrades. That is Comrade Šmeral’s second
and principal mistake.
Judge for yourselves.
     1. It is a fact that Comrade Kreibich wrote an article
in favour of Trotskyism. It is a fact that this documentis known in Party circles and is passing from hand to
hand. This document should have been dragged into the
light of day and its author should have been given a gooddrubbing, an ideological drubbing, in full view of the work-
ers, in order to give the Party the opportunity to realise
the danger of Trotskyism and to train the cadres in thespirit of Bolshevism; for what is Trotskyism if not the
Right wing of communism, if not the danger from the
Right? What did Comrade Šmeral do in this case? In-
stead of raising the question of Comrade Kreibich’s
Trotskyism before the whole Party, he slurred over it,
suppressed it, took it behind the scenes and “settled” itthere in a hole-and-corner way, as if it were an ordinary
“misunderstanding.” The gainers by this were Trots-
kyism and Comrade Kreibich. The Party was theloser. Instead of the Rights being combated, they were
protected.
2. It is known that some of the leaders of three trade
unions—those of the transport workers, woodworkers
and building workers—issued a document demanding the
complete independence of the unions from the Party. It
is known that this document is evidence of the existence
of a number of Right elements in the trade unions ofCzechoslovakia. This document should have been ana-
lysed in full view of the Party, and the Party should have
been warned of the danger of the trade unions be-coming divorced from it. What did Comrade Šmeral
do in this case? He hushed up this question too; he
withdrew the document from circulation and there-by hid it from the eyes of the Party membership.
The Rights escaped unscathed and the “Party’s pres-
tige” was saved. And that is called combating theRights!
3. It is known that there are Right-wing elements in
the communist group in parliament. It is known that ev-ery now and again these elements throw off the leadership
of the Party and try to set themselves up in opposition
to the Central Committee of the Party. It is urgentlynecessary to combat these elements, particularly at the
present time, in the present lull. How did Comrade
Šmeral combat this danger? Instead of exposing the Right-
wing elements in the communist parliamentary group
he took them under his protection and saved them by
means of an elastic resolution on recognising the Partyleadership, a resolution adopted as the result of an in-
ternal struggle conducted behind the scenes, in the fourth
year of the Party’s existence. Again the Rights gainedand the Party was the loser.
4. Lastly, the Bubnik case. I must say, comrades,
that the lull is not a period of the absence of allaction. The lull is a period of forming and training
the proletarian armies, a period of preparing them
for revolution. But the proletarian armies can be trained
only in the course of action. The rise in the cost
of living that has recently begun in Czechoslovakia isone of the favourable conditions for such action.
As is known, the Communist Party of Czechoslova-
kia took advantage of this situation and recently or-ganised a number of demonstrations in connection
with the rise in the cost of living. As is known, the
Right-wing Communist Bubnik, now expelled from theParty, also took advantage of the situation and tried
to disrupt those actions by the workers, thereby strik-
ing a blow at the Party in the rear. What did Com-rade Šmeral do to safeguard the Party from the blow
struck in its rear by the Rights? Instead of utilis-
ing the Bubnik “case” and by means of it ruthlesslyexposing the entire Right-wing group in full view of
the Party, Comrade Šmeral reduced the question of
principle concerning the Rights to the individualcase of Bubnik, although all the world knows that
Bubnik does not stand alone, that he has supporters
in the trade unions, in the communist group inparliament, and in the press. At the price of a small
sacrifice (the expulsion of Bubnik) he saved the Right-
wing group from defeat, to the detriment of the funda-mental interests of the Communist Party of Czechoslova-
kia. And Comrade Šmeral calls that the tactics of combat-
ing the Rights!
Comrade Šmeral calls those tactics “fine,” “delicate.”
Those tactics may indeed be fine, but they have nothing
in common with the Bolshevik tactics of uncompromis-ing struggle against the Rights; there cannot be the
slightest doubt about that. Comrade Šmeral forgets the
Russian saying: “The finest thread is most likely to
break.” He forgot that fineness is no guarantee against
failure. And that is what happened, as is known; forthose “fine” tactics towards the Rights broke and failed
at the very first test, when, encouraged by those tactics,
the Bubnik group almost succeeded in disrupting therecent action by the Czech proletariat. The strengthening
of the Rights and Bubnik’s treachery—such are the
results of Comrade Šmeral’s “fine” tactics. That is why
I think that Comrade Šmeral’s “fine” tactics are tactics
that save the Rights, tactics that intensify the crisis,
tactics threatening to doom the Party.
Why did the old Social-Democracy perish as a revo-
lutionary Party? Among other things, because Kautsky
and Co. did indeed employ the “fine” tactics of shield-ing and saving the Rights, the “delicate” tactics of “uni-
ty and peace” with Ed. Bernstein and Co. What was
the result? The result was that at the crucial moment,just before the war, the Right-wing Social-Democrats
betrayed the workers, the “orthodox” became the prison-
ers of the Rights, and Social-Democracy as a wholeproved to be a “living corpse.” I think that, in time,
this may happen to the Communist Party in Czechoslo-
vakia if you do not quickly and resolutely substitute forComrade Šmeral’s “fine” tactics the Bolshevik tactics
of ruthless struggle against the Right-wing groups in
the communist movement. In saying this I am not put-ting Comrade Šmeral on a par with the Social-Democrats.
Not at all. He is undoubtedly a Communist, and, perhaps,
even a splendid Communist. What I want to say is that ifhe does not renounce his “fine” tactics he will inevitably
slide into Social-Democracy.
     What is the immediate task of the Communist Party
of Czechoslovakia?
     The immediate task is, while combating “ultra-Left”deviations, resolutely to combat the danger from the
Right with the aim of altogether isolating and completely
eliminating the Rights. To unite all the genuine revolu-tionary elements in the Party for the purpose of completely
eliminating the Right groups—such is the Party’s task,
such is the way out of the crisis. Unless this is done itis useless even to think of Bolshevising the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia.
That, of course, does not mean that all the Rights
must necessarily be expelled. Expulsion is not the deci-
sive weapon in the struggle against the Rights. The main
thing is to give the Right groups a drubbing, ideolog-ically and morally, in the course of a struggle based on
principle and to draw the mass of the Party membership
into this struggle. That is one of the chief and most im-portant means of educating the Party in the spirit of Bol-
shevism. Expulsion must come, if it is really necessary,
as a natural result of the ideological rout of the enemy.In this respect, the Lefts in Czechoslovakia committed a
grave mistake in hastening to expel Bubnik. Instead of
utilising the Bubnik “case” to the utmost and linking itwith the principles underlying the stand taken by the
Rights on the question of mass action, revealing their
true countenance, the Lefts hastened with the expul-sion, and cut off the road to further attack against the
Rights on this ground.
     As regards the rights of the Comintern and its inter-vention in the affairs of the national parties, I emphati-
cally disagree with those comrades who spoke in favour
of curtailing those rights. They want the Comintern to
be transformed into an organisation situated beyond the
stars, gazing dispassionately at what is going on in theindividual parties and patiently recording events. No,
comrades, the Comintern cannot become an organisation
beyond the stars. The Comintern is a militant organisa-tion of the proletariat, it is linked with the working-
class movement by all the roots of its existence and can-
not refrain from intervening in the affairs of individualparties, supporting the revolutionary elements and com-
bating their opponents. Of course, the parties possess
internal autonomy, the party congresses must be unfet-tered, and the Central Committees must be elected by
the congresses. But to deduce from this that the Comin-
tern must be denied the right of leadership, and hence ofintervention, means working on behalf of the enemies of
communism.
Lastly, about Comrade Kreibich. I think that the
purpose of his entire speech was to frighten somebody or
other with the threat of a split. Don’t touch the Rights
in Brünn, he said. If you do there will be trouble. Don’tfight them; if you do there will be a split. Well, we
shall see. But let not Comrade Kreibich try to frighten
us, he will not succeed. He surely knows that we are sea-soned people, and threats of a split cannot frighten our
kind. And if he thinks of passing from threats to action,
I assure him that he, and he alone, will suffer.
To sum up. There is a crisis in the Party. There can
be no doubt about its causes. The chief danger comes
from the Right. The task is to wage a determined and un-compromising struggle against this danger. The way out
of the crisis is to unite all the revolutionary elements
in the Party for the purpose of completely eliminating
the Rights.
Advantage must be taken of the lull to strength-
en the Party, to Bolshevise it and make it “always
ready” for all possible “complications”; for “ye know
neither the day nor the hour” wherein “the bridegroomcometh” to open the road for a new revolutionary upsurge.
Pravda ,  No.  72,
March  29,  1925
CONCERNING  THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION
IN  YUGOSLA VIA
Speech  Delivered
in  the  Yugoslav  Commission  of  the  E.C.C.I.,
March  30,  1925
Comrades, I think that Semich has not fully under-
stood the main essence of the Bolshevik presentation of
the national question. The Bolsheviks never separated
the national question from the general question of revo-lution, either before October or after October. The main
essence of the Bolshevik approach to the national ques-
tion is that the Bolsheviks always examined the nationalquestion in inseparable connection with the revolu-
tionary perspective.
Semich quoted Lenin, saying that Lenin was in
favour of embodying the solution of the national question
in the constitution. By this he, Semich, evidently
wanted to say that Lenin regarded the national questionas a constitutional one, that is, not as a question of
revolution but as a question of reform. That is quite
wrong. Lenin never had, nor could he have had, consti-tutional illusions. It is enough to consult his works to
be convinced of that. If Lenin spoke of a constitution,
he had in mind not the constitutional, but the revolu-tionary way of settling the national question, that is to
say, he regarded a constitution as something that would
result from the victory of the revolution. We in theU.S.S.R. also have a Constitution, and it reflects
a definite solution of the national question. This
Constitution, however, came into being not as the result
of a deal with the bourgeoisie, but as the result of avictorious revolution.
     Semich further referred to Stalin’s pamphlet on
the national question written in 1912,
22 and tried to
find in it at least indirect corroboration of his point
of view. But this reference was fruitless, because he did
not and could not find even a remote hint, let alonea quotation, that would in the least justify his “consti-
tutional” approach to the national question. In con-
firmation of this, I might remind Semich of thepassage in Stalin’s pamphlet where a contrast is drawn
between the Austrian (constitutional) method of set-
tling the national question and the Russian Marxists’(revolutionary) method.
     Here it is:
    “The Austrians hope to achieve the ‘freedom of nationalities’
by means of petty reforms, by slow steps. While they propose
cultural-national autonomy as a practical measure, they do not
count on any radical change, on a democratic movement for liber-
ation, which they do not even contemplate. The Russian Marxists,
on the other hand, associate the ‘freedom of nationalities’ with
a probable radical change, with a democratic movement for liber-
ation, having no grounds for counting on reforms. And this essen-
tially alters matters in regard to the probable fate of the nations
of Russia.”
    Clear, one would think.
    And this is not Stalin’s personal view, but the gen-
eral view of the Russian Marxists, who examined, and
continue to examine, the national question in inseparable
connection with the general question of revolution.
    It can be said without stretching a point that in the
history of Russian Marxism there were two stages in the
presentation of the national question: the first, or
pre-October stage; and the second, or October stage. Inthe first stage, the national question was regarded as
part of the general question of the bourgeois-democratic
revolution, that is to say, as part of the question of thedictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry. In the
second stage, when the national question assumed wider
scope and became a question of the colonies, when itbecame transformed from an intra-state question into a
world question, it came to be regarded as part of the
general question of the proletarian revolution, as part ofthe question of the dictatorship of the proletariat. In
both stages, as you see, the approach was strictly revolu-
tionary.
I think that Semich has not yet fully grasped all
this. Hence his attempts to reduce the national question
to a constitutional issue, i.e., to regard it as a ques-tion of reform.
That mistake leads him to another, namely, his re-
fusal to regard the national question as being, in essence,a peasant question. Not an agrarian but a peasant ques-
tion, for these are two different things. It is quite true
that the national question must not be identified withthe peasant question, for, in addition to peasant ques-
tions, the national question includes such questions as
national culture, national statehood, etc. But it is alsobeyond doubt that, after all, the peasant question is
the basis, the quintessence, of the national question.
That explains the fact that the peasantry constitutesthe main army of the national movement, that there is
no powerful national movement without the peasant
army, nor can there be. That is what is meant when it is
said that, in essence , the national question is a peasant
question. I think that Semich’s reluctance to acceptthis formula is due to an under-estimation of the inher-
ent strength of the national movement and a failure
to understand the profoundly popular and profoundlyrevolutionary character of the national movement.
This lack of understanding and this under-estimation
constitute a grave danger, for, in practice, they implyan under-estimation of the potential might latent,
for instance, in the movement of the Croats for national
emancipation. This under-estimation is fraught withserious complications for the entire Yugoslav Communist
Party.
That is Semich’s second mistake.Undoubtedly, Semich’s attempt to treat the na-
tional question in Yugoslavia in isolation from
the international situation and the probable pros-pects in Europe must also be regarded as a mistake.
Proceeding from the fact that there is no serious popular
movement for independence among the Croats and theSlovenes at the present moment, Semich arrives at the
conclusion that the question of the right of nations to
secede is an academic question, at any rate, not an ur-gent one. That is wrong, of course. Even if we admit
that this question is not urgent at the present moment,
it might definitely become very urgent if war begins ,
or when war begins, if a revolution breaks out in Europe ,
or when it breaks out. That war will inevitably begin,
and that they , over there, are bound to come to blows
there can be no doubt, bearing in mind the nature and
development of imperialism.
In 1912, when we Russian Marxists were outlining
the first draft of the national programme, no serious move-
ment for independence yet existed in any of theborder regions of the Russian Empire. Nevertheless,
we deemed it necessary to include in our programme the
point on the right of nations to self-determination, i.e.,the right of every nationality to secede and exist as an
independent state. Why? Because we based ourselves
not only on what existed then, but also on what wasdeveloping and impending in the general system of in-
ternational relations; that is, we took into account not
only the present, but also the future. We knew that ifany nationality were to demand secession, the Russian
Marxists would fight to ensure the right to secede for
every such nationality. In the course of his speech Semichrepeatedly referred to Stalin’s pamphlet on the national
question. But here is what Stalin’s pamphlet says about
self-determination and independence:
“The growth of imperialism in Europe is not fortuitous.
In Europe, capital is beginning to feel cramped, and it is reaching
out towards foreign countries in search of new markets, cheaplabour and new fields of investment But this leads to external
complications and to war. . . . It is quite possible that a combi-
nation of internal and external conditions may arise in which oneor another nationality in Russia may find it necessary to raise
and settle the question of its independence. And, of course, it is
not for Marxists to create obstacles in such cases.”
That was written as far back as 1912. You know that
subsequently this view was fully confirmed both during
the war and afterwards, and especially after the victoryof the dictatorship of the proletariat in Russia.
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

All the more reason, therefore, why we must reckon
with such possibilities in Europe in general, and in Yugo-
slavia in particular, especially now, when the nationalrevolutionary movement in the oppressed countries has
become more profound, and after the victory of the rev-
olution in Russia. It must also be borne in mind thatYugoslavia is not a fully independent country, that she
is tied up with certain imperialist groups, and that,
consequently, she cannot escape the great play of forcesthat is going on outside Yugoslavia. If you are drawing
up a national programme for the Yugoslav Party—and
that is precisely what we are dealing with now—youmust remember that this programme must proceed not
only from what exists at present, but also from what is
developing and what will inevitably occur by virtue ofinternational relations. That is why I think that the
question of the right of nations to self-determina-
tion must be regarded as an immediate and vitalquestion.
Now about the national programme. The starting
point of the national programme must be the thesis ofa Soviet revolution in Yugoslavia, the thesis that the
national question cannot be solved at all satisfactorily
unless the bourgeoisie is overthrown and the revolutionis victorious. Of course, there may be exceptions; there
was such an exception, for instance, before the war,
when Norway separated from Sweden—of which Lenintreats in detail in one of his articles.
23 But that was be-
fore the war, and under an exceptional combination of
favourable circumstances. Since the war, and especiallysince the victory of the Soviet revolution in Russia,
such cases are hardly possible. At any rate, the chances
of their being possible are now so slight that they can be
put as nil. But if that is so, it is obvious that we cannot
construct our programme from elements whose signifi-cance is nil. That is why the thesis of a revolution must
be the starting point of the national programme.
Further, it is imperatively necessary to include in
the national programme a special point on the right of
nations to self-determination, including the right to
secede. I have already said why such a point cannot beomitted under present internal and international condi-
tions.
Finally, the programme must also include a special
point providing for national territorial autonomy for
those nationalities in Yugoslavia which may not deem it
necessary to secede from that country. Those who thinkthat such a contingency must be excluded are incorrect.
That is wrong. Under certain circumstances, as a result
of the victory of a Soviet revolution in Yugoslavia, itmay well be that some nationalities will not wish
to secede, just as happened here in Russia. It is clear
that to meet such a contingency it is necessary to havein the programme a point on autonomy, envisaging the
transformation of the state of Yugoslavia into a fed-
eration of autonomous national states based on the So-viet system.
Thus, the right to secede must be provided for those
nationalities that may wish to secede, and the right toautonomy must be provided for those nationalities that
may prefer to remain within the framework of the Yugo-
slav state.
To avoid misunderstanding, I must say that the right
to secede must not be understood as an obligation , as a
duty to secede. A nation may take advantage of this
right and secede, but it may also forgo the right, and if
it does not wish to exercise it, that is its business and wecannot but reckon with the fact. Some comrades turn
this right to secede into an obligation and demand from
the Croats, for instance, that they secede whatever happens .
That position is wrong and must be rejected. We must
not confuse a right with an obligation.
The  magazine  Bolshevik ,  No.  7,
April  15,  1925
THE  ACTIVE
OF  THE  YOUNG  COMMUNIST  LEAGUE
IN  THE  COUNTRYSIDE
Speech  Delivered  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Organising
Bureau  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  R.C.P.(B.)
April  6,  1925
Comrades, the first task is to ensure that the Youth
League possesses its basic proletarian core, as the core
which leads the entire League. The reporter did not say
anything on this question. That is not surprising, sincewe are discussing the work of the Young CommunistLeague in the countryside and not its proletarian core.But this does not prevent the task of acquiring a pro-letarian core from remaining the League’s principal task. I
think that the efforts that are being made in the League
in this direction are more or less successful. It may besaid without exaggeration that the recruiting of youngworkers for the Young Communist League is proceedingsuccessfully, and the time is not far distant when theLeague will embrace no less than nine-tenths of the
entire working-class youth.
The second task is properly to distribute the respon-
sible workers of the proletarian core in the key pointsand principal districts of the Union in order to ensurethat this core exercises real leadership of the peasantsection of the youth. I take as my starting point the
fact that the peasant section of the youth is numerical-
ly larger than its proletarian section, and also thefact that the proletarian forces among the youth arenot numerous enough to be distributed evenly among
all the uyezds and volosts of the Soviet Union. It is
therefore necessary to place these forces at points from
which it will be most easy to ensure leadership of thepeasant youth. I do not think that the Young Commu-
nist League is carrying out this task as successfully as
the first. Nevertheless, there are grounds for supposingthat the League is devoting all its energy to the accom-
plishment of this task and that the results of these
efforts will be seen in the very near future.
The third task is to ensure that the Young Communist
League has a numerous active of peasant youth in the
countryside, to educate this active politically, to makeit the instrument of proletarian policy in the country-
side, and to transform it into a cement that will bind
the proletariat with the toiling masses of the peasant-ry. That is a difficult and extremely complicated task,
and it is quite impossible to carry it out in a short space
of time. The proletarian core of the Young CommunistLeague will have to exert tremendous efforts, and to
strain every nerve in order to cope with it. But it must
be carried out at all costs, for if it is not, it will beimpossible either to strengthen the Young Communist
League or to maintain the bond between the workers
and peasants.
But how can we ensure that the Young Communist
League has a peasant active, how can we educate this ac-
tive, and how can we ensure that this active will becomethe instrument of proletarian policy in the countryside?
It is said that the secretaries of Y .C.L. village
units alone number not less than 27,000. It is saidthat in addition to secretaries of units there are
active Young Communist League workers in the co-
operatives, in the Soviets, in the Peasant Committees,
cultural institutions, and so forth. It is said that, all
together, these should constitute a Young CommunistLeague rural active amounting to no less than 100,000.
Whether all this is true, it is difficult to say, but if it
is, then I must say that, skilfully utilised, this active canbe a tremendous force, capable of performing miracles.
This is all the more important because at the present
time the Party’s active in the countryside is much smaller.
And so the problem is: how is this numerous active
to be educated, how can it be made an instrument of prole-
tarian policy in the countryside not only in name, but in fact ?
It is not my intention to give an exhaustive answer
here. It is quite impossible to do so in a short speech. But
it is quite possible even in a short speech to indicate someof the chief conditions that are necessary for a correct
approach to this problem. What are these conditions?
There are at least eight of them.
Firstly . The youth active in the countryside must
be supplied with popular pamphlets and handbooks
explaining the decrees the Soviet Government has issuedfor the benefit of the peasant poor. This active must
know these decrees inside out, must be able to explain
them to the peasant poor, and must be able on the basisof these decrees to protect the interests of the peasant
poor from the domination of the kulaks. I think that
ignorance of these decrees and their systematic violationby the “powers that be” in the countryside is one of the
chief evils of the existing state of things there. The
Young Communist League active in the countryside mustbe the guardian of revolutionary law. It must stand up
staunchly for the poor in the countryside. This task is
undoubtedly simple and prosaic. Undoubtedly, it is far
easier to talk about the world revolution than to carry
out this simple and everyday task connected with theSoviet decrees. There is no doubt, however, that unless
it is carried out, no bond is possible.
Secondly . The youth active in the countryside must
be supplied with popular pamphlets on the elementary
principles of agricultural science. This active must study
agriculture, must become familiar with measures for im-proving it, and must be able to give the peasants the
necessary advice on this subject. Often the peasants do
not take Young Communist League members seriouslyand ridicule them. That happens because the peasants
regard them as having nothing to do with farming,
regard them as ignoramuses and idlers. Hence, the taskis to bring the Young Communist Leaguers closer to farm-
ing, to link them with it. The Young Communist League
activist will be able to win the respect and confidenceof the peasants only if he becomes directly linked with
agriculture, if he learns to give useful advice on how to
advance peasant economy, how to improve and strengthenit. That is not an easy matter, of course; it may even
be dull work. But that does not prevent it from being an
essential means of winning the confidence of the peasantry.
Thirdly . The Young Communist League active in
the countryside must be supplied with popular pamphlets
on the agricultural tax, on the local budget and on thefinancial state of the country. The tax and the local budg-
et are now in the forefront in the countryside. In con-
nection with them innumerable abuses are being com-mitted. How should the taxes be apportioned so that
the poor peasant is not wronged or the kulak relieved
from the burden of taxation? How should the sums as-
signed in the local budgets be spent, and for what needs?
How can it be ensured that abuses in this connectionare exposed and eradicated? All these are questions that
the Young Communist League activist cannot ignore.
The task is to intervene in all these matters and come tothe aid of the labouring peasants. That, too, is by no means
easy or attractive. But if it is not done there cannot be
any Soviet constructive work in the countryside.
Fourthly . The Young Communist League active in the
countryside must be supplied with popular handbooks on
questions concerning Soviet constructive work, on revital-ising the Soviets and enlisting the peasants in the work
of village, volost, district, uyezd, etc., administration.
The Young Communist League activist must know insideout the regulations governing the rights and duties of the
local Soviets; the rights and duties of the peasants in rela-
tion to the Soviets, the electoral system, the procedure ofconducting elections, etc. The task is to explain to the
peasants the policy of the Party and the Soviet Govern-
ment in the countryside and to see to it that this policyis honestly and conscientiously carried out. If that is not
done it is useless to think of winning confidence among
the peasants, of enlarging the peasant active, or of
implanting proletarian democracy in the countryside.
Fifthly . The Young Communist League active in the
countryside must be supplied with popular pamphletson agricultural, credit and consumer co-operatives, on
agricultural artels, and on collective farming generally.
The Young Communist League activist must be able toenlist the peasants in the work of implanting a co-operative
communal life in the countryside. This is an extremely
difficult and complicated task, but it is absolutely necessa-
ry to carry it out in order to draw the rural population into
the work of socialist construction. Agricultural and creditco-operatives are now a matter of first-rate importance for
the peasants. The task is to make co-operation something
near and dear to the peasantry. In this connection atten-tion should be paid to the fact that the lack of livestock
and farm implements among the poor sections of the
peasantry creates in the countryside a special situationfavourable to the formation of artels and collective farms,
provided the state credit institutions render definite
assistance. The task is to make it possible for the poorsections of the peasantry to obtain preferential credits
for this purpose. The Young Communist League activist
cannot ignore such vital questions.
Sixthly . The Young Communist League active in the
countryside must be supplied with the necessary instruc-
tions and information concerning cultural developmentin the countryside—on the organisation of village read-
ing-rooms, the abolition of illiteracy, etc. The task
is to make the Young Communist League activist thenatural assistant of the Soviets, and of the rural cultural
forces generally, in the work of implanting Soviet culture.
Seventhly . The Young Communist League active in
the countryside must receive precise instructions concern-
ing the rights and duties of Young Communist Leaguers,
concerning the relations between the Young CommunistLeague and the Party, between the Soviets and the Young
Communist League. Every Young Communist League ac-
tivist must regard himself as an assistant of the Party andthe Soviet Government in the countryside. High-handed
methods in the countryside, disorder during Soviet elec-
tions, attempts to usurp the functions of the Party, co-
operative and Soviet organisations, and rowdy escapades
during so-called anti-religious propaganda—all this mustbe abandoned and stopped forthwith as something that
tarnishes the banner of the Young Communist League
and disgraces the name of Young Communist Leaguer.The task is to wage a ruthless struggle against such scan-
dals and to establish proper relations between the Young
Communist League and the Soviet and Party bodies.
Eighthly . The Young Communist League active in
the countryside must be supplied with popular pam-
phlets on the alliance between the workers and peasants,on the meaning and significance of this alliance, on the
dictatorship of the proletariat, on the principles of com-
munism, and lastly, on the history of the October Revolu-tion and on how the peasants lived before, under the tsar
and the landlords, how they are living now, and how
they will live if the bond is strengthened and socialismis implanted. The Y .C.L. activist must in no way pander
to the peasants’ prejudices. There is a difference between
reckoning with these prejudices and pandering to them.He must be able to speak to the peasants in the language
of the Communists. He must be able to convince the
peasants by means of concrete facts that there is no salva-tion for them outside of socialism.
Such are the conditions that must be fulfilled in order
to educate politically the Young Communist Leagueactive in the countryside and to make it the instrument
of proletarian policy there.
The task of the Central Committee of the Young
Communist League is to facilitate and supervise the
fulfilment of these conditions.
There is talk about the danger of the colossal growth
of the Young Communist League in the countryside.
There is talk about an influx of peasant youth into theYoung Communist League. Undoubtedly, there is some
danger in that. But it is also beyond doubt that the Young
Communist League will have no reason to fear that dan-ger if it succeeds in carrying out with honour the tasks
mentioned above. A Young Communist League active of
100,000 in the countryside is a force for whom no influxof peasant youth can be dangerous. The whole point is
to make energetic efforts to educate this active politically.
The whole point is skilfully to direct the efforts of thisactive towards strengthening the alliance between the
workers and peasants. The whole point is to utilise this
active for the purpose of drawing the peasantry into thenew Soviet constructive work.
Hence: a) to ensure that the Young Communist
League has a proletarian core which is the chief leadingforce; b) to distribute the active forces of this core among
the principal districts of the Soviet Union with a view
to ensuring this leadership; c) to educate the youth ac-tive in the countryside in such a way as to ensure the im-
plementation of proletarian policy there—such are the
immediate tasks of the Young Communist League ingeneral and of its Central Committee in particular.
Having these tasks before it, and carrying them out
in the course of its daily work, the Young CommunistLeague need not fear the dangers that confront it in the
countryside.
Pravda ,  No.  85,
April  15,  1925
TO  THE  FIRST  ALL-UNION  CONFERENCE
OF  PROLETARIAN  STUDENTS24
A  Message
Comrades, your representatives have asked me to
give my views on the tasks of the Party and of Party
work among the proletarian students.
Permit me to say a few words to you on this subject.The specific feature of the present situation is that
the proletariat of our country has succeeded in creating
the conditions necessary for building socialism. It is nottrue that socialism cannot be built in one country, a
country that has vanquished and driven out the capitalists
and landlords. A country which has established the dic-tatorship of the proletariat, which possesses tremendous
resources and enjoys the backing of the proletarians of
all countries—such a country can and must build social-ism. Lenin was right when he said that our country pos-
sesses all that is necessary “for building a complete
socialist society.” The specific feature of the presentsituation is that we have succeeded in making considera-
ble progress in building socialism, that we have trans-
formed socialism from an icon into a prosaic object ofeveryday practical work.
What part should the proletarian students play in
this work of construction?
Their part is undoubtedly important, perhaps of
prime importance. The higher educational institutions,
communist universities, workers’ faculties and technical
schools are institutions for training the commanding
personnel for economic and cultural development.Doctors and economists, co-operators and teachers,
miners and statisticians, technicians and chemists, agri-
culturists and railway engineers, veterinary surgeons andforestry experts, electrical and mechanical engineers,
are all future commanders of the work of building the
new society, of building socialist economy and socialistculture. The new society cannot be built without new com-
manders, just as a new army cannot be built without new
commanders. The advantage that the new commanderspossess is that their function is to build not for the purpose
of exploiting the working people in the interests of a
handful of rich men, but for the purpose of emancipatingthe working people, in opposition to the handful of ex-
ploiters. The whole point is that the students at the
higher educational institutions—workers and peasants,Party and non-Party—should become conscious of this
honourable role, and begin to fulfil it not by constraint
but by conviction.
Hence: to make the proletarian students conscious
builders of socialist economy and socialist culture—
such is the Party’s first task.
But the new society cannot be built only by the com-
manders, without the direct support of the masses of the
working people. The knowledge obtained by the newcommanders is not in itself sufficient for the building of
socialism. These commanders must also have the confi-
dence and support of the masses. The distinguishing fea-ture of the old commanders who built under capitalism
was that they were divorced from the workers and peas-
ants, they felt superior to the toiling masses, they attached
no value either to the confidence or to the support of
these masses and, as a consequence, enjoyed neither theone nor the other. This method is absolutely unsuitable
for our country. The new commanders of the work of
building the new economy and the new culture are callednew precisely because they must abruptly and irrev-
ocably break with the old methods of commanding. Not
divorce from the masses, but the closest connection withthem; not feeling superior to the masses, but going in
front of them and leading them; not alienation from the
masses, but merging with them and winning their confi-dence and support—such are the new methods of manage-
ment that must be employed by the new commanders.
Without these methods no kind of socialist constructionis conceivable.
Hence: to make the proletarian students regard them-
selves as an inseparable part of the masses of the work-ing people, to make the students feel and act in a genu-
inely public spirit—such is the Party’s second task.
Lastly, about the Communist students in particular.
It is said that the Communist students are making little
progress in scientific knowledge. It is said that they lag
very much behind the non-Party students in this respect.It is said that the Communist students prefer to engage
in “high politics” and that they waste two-thirds of
their time in endless debates on “world problems.” Isall this true? I think it is. But if it is true, at least two
conclusions must be drawn. Firstly, that the Commu-
nist students stand in danger of becoming poor directorsof the work of building socialism, for it is impossible
to direct the work of building a socialist society without a
mastery of scientific knowledge. Secondly, the work of
training the new commanders stands in danger of becom-
ing the monopoly of the old professors, who need to bereplaced by new people, for a new professorial staff and
new scientific workers cannot be obtained from people
who are unwilling or unable to master science. Needlessto say, all this cannot but directly jeopardise the entire
work of building socialism. Can we resign ourselves to
such a state of affairs? Obviously not. Hence the Com-munist students, and Soviet students generally, must set
themselves clearly and definitely the immediate task of
mastering science, and of creating a new professorialstaff consisting of new Soviet people to take the place of
the old. I do not mean to say that students should not
engage in politics. Not in the least. I merely wish tosay that the Communist students must learn to combine
political work with the work of mastering science. It is
said that it is difficult to combine the two. That is true,of course. But since when have Communists been daunted
by difficulties? The difficulties in the path of our work
of construction are there precisely to be combated andovercome.
Moreover, still another circumstance must be taken
into consideration. I think that our country, with itsrevolutionary habits and traditions, its struggle against
conservatism and stagnation of thought, provides the
most favourable environment for the flourishing of science.There can be scarcely any doubt that philistine narrow-
mindedness and routine, which are characteristic of the
old professors of the capitalist school, are fetters onscience. There can be scarcely any doubt that only
new people who are free from these defects are capable
of full and free creative activity in science. In this
respect, our country has a great future before it as the
citadel and nursery of free and unfettered science. Ithink that we are already beginning to take this road. But
it would be deplorable and disgraceful if the Communist
students kept away from the high road of development ofscience. That is why the slogan about mastering science is
acquiring special importance.
Hence: to make the proletarian students, and above
all the Communist students, realise the necessity of
mastering science and that they do master it—such is
the Party ‘s third task.
Accept  my  greetings,
J. Stalin
15.IV .25
Pravda ,  No.  87,
April  16,  1925
THE  RESULTS  OF THE  WORK
OF  THE FOURTEENTH  CONFERENCE
OF  THE  R.C.P.(B.)
Report  Delivered  at  a  Meeting  of  the  Active
of  the  Moscow  Organisation  of  the  R.C.P .(B.)
May  9,  1925
Comrades, I do not think there is any point in exam-
ining here in detail the resolutions adopted at the Four-teenth Conference of our Party.
25 That would take up
a great deal of time, and besides, there is no need to do
so. I think it will be enough to note the main lines thatstand out in these resolutions. That will enable us to
emphasise the main conclusions of the resolutions that
were adopted. And this, in its turn, will facilitate a fur-ther study of these resolutions.
If we turn to the resolutions we shall find that the
diverse questions touched upon in them can be reducedto six main groups of questions. The first group consists
of questions concerning the international situation. The
second group consists of questions concerning the imme-diate tasks of the Communist Parties in the capitalist
countries. The third group consists of questions concern-
ing the immediate tasks of the communist elements inthe colonial and dependent countries. The fourth group
consists of questions concerning the fate of socialism
in our country in connection with the present internation-al situation. The fifth group consists of questions con-
cerning our Party policy in the countryside and the tasks
of Party leadership under the new conditions. And, lastly,
the sixth group consists of questions concerning the vitalnerve of all our industry, namely, the metal industry.
I
THE  INTERNATIONAL  SITUATION
What is new and specific in the international situa-
tion, which, in the main, determines the character ofthe present period?
The new feature that has revealed itself lately, and
which has laid its impress upon the international situa-tion, is that the revolution in Europe has begun to ebb,
that a certain lull has set in, which we call the temporary
stabilisation of capitalism, while  at the same time the
economic development and political might of the Soviet
Union are increasing.
What is the ebb of the revolution, the lull? Is it the
beginning of the end of the world revolution, the be-
ginning of the liquidation of the world proletarian rev-
olution? Lenin said that the victory of the proletariatin our country ushered in a new epoch, the epoch of world
revolution, an epoch replete with conflicts and wars,
advances and retreats, victories and defeats, an epochleading to the victory of the proletariat in the major
capitalist countries. Does the fact that the revolution
in Europe has begun to ebb mean that Lenin’s thesisconcerning a new epoch, the epoch of world revolution,
no longer holds good? Does it mean that the proletarian
revolution in the West has been cancelled?
No, it does not.
The epoch of world revolution is a new stage of the
revolution, a whole strategic period, which will last for
a number of years, perhaps even a number of decades.During this period there can and must be ebbs and flows
of the revolution.
Our revolution passed through two stages, two stra-
tegic periods, in the course of its development, and after
October it entered a third stage, a third strategic period.
The first stage (1900-17) lasted over fifteen years. Theaim then was to overthrow tsarism, to achieve the vic-
tory of the bourgeois democratic revolution. During that
period we had a number of ebbs and flows of the revo-lution. The tide of revolution flowed in 1905. That tide
ended with the temporary defeat of the revolution. After
that we had an ebb, which lasted a number of years(1907-12). Then the tide flowed anew, beginning with the
Lena events (1912), and later it ebbed again, during the
war. In 1917 (February) the tide began to flow onceagain and it culminated in the victory of the people over
tsarism, the victory of the bourgeois-democratic revolu-
tion. With each ebb the Liquidators asserted that therevolution was done for. After ebbing and flowing sever-
al times, however, the revolution swept on to victory
in February 1917.
The second stage of the revolution began in February
1917. The aim then was to extricate the country from
the imperialist war, to overthrow the bourgeoisie and toachieve the victory of the proletarian dictatorship.
That stage, or strategic period, lasted only eight months,
but these were eight months of profound revolutionarycrisis, during which war and economic ruin spurred on the
revolution and quickened its pace to the utmost. Pre-
cisely for that reason, those eight months of revolutionary
crisis can and should be counted as being equal to at
least eight years of ordinary constitutional development.That strategic period, like the preceding one, was not
marked by a steady rise of the revolution in a straight
ascending line, as the philistines of revolution usuallypicture it, but by alternating ebbs and flows. During
that period we had an immense rise in the tide of the rev-
olutionary movement in the days of the July demon-stration. Then the revolutionary tide ebbed after the
July defeat of the Bolsheviks. The tide flowed again
immediately after the Kornilov revolt and it carried usto the victory of the October Revolution. The Liquidators
of that time talked of the complete liquidation of the rev-
olution after the July defeat. After passing through anumber of trials and ebbs, however, the revolution, as
is known, culminated in the victory of the proletarian
dictatorship.
After the October victory we entered the third stra-
tegic period, the third stage of the revolution, in which
the aim is to overcome the bourgeoisie on a world scale.How long this period will last it is difficult to say. At
all events, there is no doubt that it will be a long one,
and there is no doubt also that it will contain ebbs andflows. The world revolutionary movement at the present
time has entered a period of ebb of the revolution, but,
for a number of reasons, of which I shall speak later, thetide must turn again, and it may end in the victory of
the proletariat. On the other hand, it may not end in
victory, but be replaced by a new ebb, which in its turnis bound to be followed by another rise in the tide of the
revolution. The present-day Liquidators say that the lull
that has now set in marks the end of the world revolu-
tion. But they are mistaken, just as they were mistaken
before, in the periods of the first and second stages ofour revolution, when they regarded every ebb of the
revolutionary movement as the utter defeat of the rev-
olution.
Such are the fluctuations within each stage of the revo-
lution, within each strategic period.
What do those fluctuations show? Do they show that
Lenin’s thesis about the new epoch of world revolution
has lost, or may lose, its significance? Of course not!
They merely show that, usually, revolution develops notin a straight ascending line, not in a continuously
growing upsurge, but in zigzags, in advances and retreats,
in flows and ebbs, which in the course of developmentsteel the forces of the revolution and prepare for its
final victory.
Such is the historical significance of the present ebb
of the revolution, the historical significance of the lull
we are now experiencing.
But the ebb is only one aspect of the matter. The
other aspect is that simultaneously with the ebb of the
revolution in Europe we have the impetuous growth of
the economic development of the Soviet Union and itsincreasing political might. In other words, we have not
only the stabilisation of capitalism; we also have the stab-
ilisation of the Soviet system. Thus, we have two stabi-lisations: the temporary stabilisation of capitalism and
the stabilisation of the Soviet system. A certain tempo-
rary equilibrium between these two stabilisations hasbeen reached—such is the characteristic feature of the
present international situation.
But what is stabilisation? Is it not stagnation? And
if it means stagnation, can that term be applied to the
Soviet system? No. Stabilisation is not stagnation. Stabili-sation is the consolidation of a given position and further
development. World capitalism has not only consolidat-
ed itself in its present position; it is going on and devel-oping further, expanding its sphere of influence and in-
creasing its wealth. It is wrong to say that capitalism
cannot develop, that the theory of the decay of capital-ism advanced by Lenin in his Imperialism
26 precludes
the development of capitalism. Lenin fully proved in his
pamphlet Imperialism  that the growth of capitalism does
not cancel, but presupposes and prepares the progres-
sive decay of capitalism.
Thus, we have two stabilisations. At one pole capi-
talism is becoming stabilised, consolidating the posi-
tion it has achieved and developing further. At the
other pole the Soviet system is becoming stabilised,consolidating the positions it has won and advancing
further along the road to victory.
Who will win? That is the essence of the question.Why are there two stabilisations, one parallel with
the other? Why are there two poles? Because there is
no longer a single, all-embracing capitalism in the world.Because the world has split into two camps—the capital-
ist camp, headed by Anglo-American capital, and the
socialist camp, headed by the Soviet Union. Because theinternational situation will to an increasing degree be
determined by the relation of forces between these two
camps.
Thus, the characteristic feature of the present sit-
uation is not only that capitalism and the Soviet system
have become stabilised, but also that the forces of these
two camps have reached a certain temporary equilib-
rium, with a slight advantage for capital, and hence,a slight disadvantage for the revolutionary movement;
for, compared with a revolutionary upsurge, the lull
that has now set in is undoubtedly a disadvantage forsocialism, although a temporary one.
What is the difference between these two stabili-
sations? Where does the one and where does the otherlead to?
Stabilisation under capitalism, while temporarily
strengthening capital, at the same time inevitably leadsto the aggravation of the contradictions of capitalism:
a) between the imperialist groups of the various countries;
b) between the workers and the capitalists in each coun-try; c) between imperialism and the peoples of all colo-
nial countries.
Stabilisation under the Soviet system, however, while
strengthening socialism, at the same time inevitably
leads to an alleviation of contradictions and to an im-
provement in the relations: a) between the proletariat andthe peasantry in our country; b) between the proletariat
and the colonial peoples of the oppressed countries;
c) between the proletarian dictatorship and the workersof all countries.
The fact of the matter is that capitalism cannot de-
velop without intensifying the exploitation of the work-ing class, without a semi-starvation existence for the ma-
jority of the working people, without intensifying the
oppression of the colonial and dependent countries,without conflicts and clashes between the different im-
perialist groups of the world bourgeoisie. On the other
hand, the Soviet system and the proletarian dictatorship
can develop only if there is a continuous rise in the mate-
rial and cultural level of the working class, if there isa continuous improvement in the conditions of all the
working people in the Land of Soviets, if the workers
of all countries draw closer and closer together and unite,if the oppressed peoples of the colonial and dependent
countries rally around the revolutionary movement of
the proletariat.
The path of development of capitalism is the path
of impoverishment and a semi-starvation existence for
the vast majority of the working people, while a smallupper stratum of these working people is bribed and
pampered.
The path of development of the proletarian dictator-
ship, on the contrary, is the path of continuous improve-
ment in the welfare of the vast majority of the working
people.
Precisely for this reason the development of capital-
ism is bound to create conditions which aggravate the
contradictions of capitalism. Precisely for this reasoncapitalism cannot resolve these contradictions.
Of course, if there were no law of the uneven devel-
opment of capitalism, leading to conflicts and wars be-tween the capitalist countries on account of colonies; if
capitalism could develop without exporting capital to
backward countries, countries where raw materialsand labour are cheap; if the surplus capital accumulated
in the “metropolises” were used not for export of capital,
but for seriously developing agriculture and for improvingthe material conditions of the peasantry; and lastly, if this
surplus were used for the purpose of raising the standard
of living of the entire mass of the working class, there
would be no intensification of the exploitation of the work-
ing class, no impoverishment of the peasantry undercapitalism, no intensification of oppression in colonial
and dependent countries, and no conflicts and wars be-
tween capitalists.
But then, capitalism would not be capitalism.
The whole point is that capitalism cannot develop
without aggravating all these contradictions, and with-out thereby developing the conditions which, in the final
analysis, facilitate the downfall of capitalism.
The whole point is that the dictatorship of the pro-
letariat, on the contrary, cannot develop further without
creating the conditions which raise the revolutionary
movement in all countries to a higher stage and preparefor the final victory of the proletariat.
Such is the difference between the two stabilisations.
That is why the stabilisation of capitalism cannot
be either lasting or firm.
Let us now examine the question of the stabilisation
of capitalism concretely.
In what way has the stabilisation of capitalism found
concrete expression?
Firstly, in the fact that America, Britain and France
have temporarily succeeded in striking a deal on the meth-
ods of robbing Germany and on the scale on which she
is to be robbed. In other words, they have struck a dealon what they call the Dawesation of Germany. Can
that deal be regarded as being at all durable? No, it can-
not. Because, firstly, it was arrived at without reckoningwith the host, i.e., the German people; secondly, because
this deal means imposing a double yoke upon the German
people, the yoke of the national bourgeoisie and the yoke
of the foreign bourgeoisie. To think that a cultured nation
like the German nation and a cultured proletariat likethe German proletariat will consent to bear this double
yoke without making repeated serious attempts at a rev-
olutionary upheaval means believing in miracles. Evensuch an essentially reactionary fact as the election of
Hindenburg as President,
27 leaves no doubt that the
Entente’s temporary deal directed against Germany isunstable, ridiculously unstable.
Secondly, the stabilisation of capitalism has found
expression in the fact that British, American and Japa-nese capital have temporarily succeeded in striking a
deal about the division of spheres of influence in China,
that vast market for international capital, about themethods for plundering that country. Can that deal be
regarded as being at all durable? Again, no! Firstly,
because the partners to it are fighting, and will fight tothe death, over the division of the spoils; secondly,
because that deal was struck behind the back of the Chinese
people, who have no wish to submit to the laws of the alienrobbers, and will not do so. Does not the growth of
the revolutionary movement in China show that the
machinations of the foreign imperialists are doomed tofailure?
Thirdly, the stabilisation of capitalism has found
expression in the fact that the imperialist groups of theadvanced countries have temporarily succeeded in strik-
ing a deal about mutual non-intervention in the plun-
der and oppression of “their” respective colonies.Can that deal, or that attempt at a deal, be regarded as
being at all durable? No, it cannot. Firstly, because each
imperialist group is striving, and will go on striving, to
snatch a piece of the others’ colonies; secondly, because
the pressure the imperialist groups exercise in the colo-nies and the policy of oppression they pursue there only
serve to steel and revolutionise those colonies and thereby
intensify the revolutionary crisis. The imperialists aretrying to “pacify” India, to curb Egypt, to tame Mo-
rocco, to tie Indo-China and Indonesia hand and foot,
and are resorting to all sorts of cunning devices and mach-inations. They may succeed in achieving some “results”
in this respect, but there can scarcely be any doubt
that these machinations will not, and cannot, sufficefor long.
Fourthly, the stabilisation of capitalism may find
expression in an attempt on the part of the imperial-ist groups of the advanced countries to strike a deal
concerning the formation of a united front against the
Soviet Union. Let us assume that the deal comes off.Let us assume that they succeed in establishing something
in the nature of a united front by resorting to all
sorts of trickery, including the scoundrelly forgeriesin connection with the explosion in Sofia,
28 etc. Are
there any grounds for assuming that a deal directed
against our country, or stabilisation in this sphere, canbe at all durable, at all successful? I think that there are
no such grounds. Why? Because, firstly, the threat of
a capitalist united front and united attack would actlike a gigantic hoop that would bind the whole country
around the Soviet Government more tightly than ever
before and transform it into an even more impregnablefortress than it was, for instance, during the invasion
of the “fourteen states.” Recall the threat of an invasion
by fourteen states uttered by the notorious Churchill. You
know that the mere utterance of that threat was enough
to unite the entire country around the Soviet Govern-ment against the imperialist vultures. Because, secondly,
a crusade against the Land of Soviets would certainly
set in motion a number of revolutionary key points in ourenemies’ rear, which would disintegrate and demoralise
the ranks of imperialism. There can scarcely be any doubt
that a host of such key points have developed of late, andthey bode imperialism no good. Because, thirdly, our
country no longer stands alone; it has allies in the shape
of the workers in the West and the oppressed peoples inthe East. There can scarcely be any doubt that war
against the Soviet Union will mean for imperialism that
it will have to wage war against its own workers and colo-nies. Needless to say, if our country is attacked we shall
not sit with folded arms; we shall take all measures to
unleash the revolutionary lion in all countries of theworld. The leaders of the capitalist countries cannot
but know that we have some experience in this matter.
Such are the facts and considerations which show
that the stabilisation of capitalism cannot be durable,
that this stabilisation signifies the creation of condi-
tions that lead to the defeat of capitalism, while the stab-ilisation of the Soviet system, on the contrary, signifies
the continuous accumulation of conditions that strength-
en the proletarian dictatorship, raise the revolution-ary movement in all countries and lead to the victory
of socialism.
This fundamental antithesis between the two stabili-
sations, capitalist and Soviet, is an expression of the
antithesis between the two systems of economy and
government, between the capitalist system and the
socialist system.
Whoever fails to understand this antithesis will never
understand the basic character of the present interna-
tional situation.
Such is the general picture of the international sit-
uation at the present time.
II
THE  IMMEDIATE  TASKS  OF  THE  COMMUNIST
PARTIES  IN  THE  CAPITALIST  COUNTRIES
I pass to the second group of questions.
The new and specific feature of the present position
of the Communist Parties in the capitalist countries
is that the period of the flow of the revolutionary
tide has given way to a period of its ebb, a periodof lull. The task is to take advantage of the period of
lull that we are passing through to strengthen the
Communist Parties, to Bolshevise them, to transformthem into genuine mass parties relying on the trade
unions, to rally the labouring elements among the non-
proletarian classes, above all among the peasantry,around the proletariat, and lastly, to educate the pro-
letarians in the spirit of revolution and proletarian dicta-
torship.
I shall not enumerate all the immediate tasks that
confront the Communist Parties in the West. If you read
the resolutions on this subject, especially the resolutionon Bolshevisation passed by the enlarged plenum of
the Comintern,
29 it will not be difficult for you to under-
stand what these tasks are concretely.
I should like to deal with the main task, with that
task confronting the Communist Parties in the West,
the elucidation of which will facilitate the fulfilment of allthe other immediate tasks.
What is that task?
That task is to link the Communist Parties in the West
with the trade unions. That task is to develop and bring to
a successful conclusion the campaign for trade-union uni-
ty, to see that all Communists without fail join the tradeunions, to work systematically in them for combining
the workers in a united front against capital, and in this
way to create the conditions that will enable the Com-munist Parties to have the backing of the trade unions.
If this task is not carried out it will be impossible to
transform the Communist Parties into genuine massparties or to create the conditions necessary for the vic-
tory of the proletariat.
The trade unions and parties in the West are not
what the trade unions and the Party are here in Russia.
The relations between the trade unions and the parties
in the West are quite different from those that have beenestablished here in Russia. In our country the trade
unions arose after the Party, and around the Party of the
working class. Trade unions had not yet arisen in our coun-try when the Party and its organisations were already
leading not only the political but also the economic
struggle of the working class, down to small and verysmall strikes. That, mainly, explains the exceptional
prestige of our Party among the workers prior to the Feb-
ruary Revolution, in contrast to the rudimentary tradeunions which then existed here and there. Real trade
unions appeared in our country only after February
1917. Before October we already had definitely formed
trade-union organisations, which enjoyed tremen-
dous prestige among the workers. Already at that timeLenin said that without trade-union support it would be
impossible either to achieve or to maintain the dic-
tatorship of the proletariat. The most powerful devel-opment of the trade unions in our country was reached
after the capture of power, particularly under the con-
ditions of NEP. There is no doubt that our powerfultrade unions now constitute one of the chief supports
of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The most char-
acteristic feature of the history of the development ofour trade unions is that they arose, developed and became
strong after the Party, around the Party, and in friend-
ship with the Party.
The trade unions in Western Europe developed under
entirely different circumstances. Firstly, they arose and
became strong long before working-class parties appeared.Secondly, there it was not the trade unions that developed
around the working-class parties; on the contrary, the work-
ing-class parties themselves emerged from the trade un-ions. Thirdly, since the economic sphere of the struggle, the
one that is closest to the working class, had already been
captured, so to speak, by the trade unions, the partieswere obliged to engage mainly in the parliamentary polit-
ical struggle, and that could not but affect the character
of their activities and the importance attached to themby the working class. And precisely because the parties
there arose after the trade unions, precisely because
the trade unions came into being long before the parties,and in fact became the proletariat’s principal fortresses
in its struggle against capital—precisely for that
reason, the parties, as independent forces that did not
have the backing of the trade unions, were pushed into
the background.
From this it follows, however, that if the Communist
Parties want to become a real mass force, capable of push-
ing the revolution forward, they must link up with thetrade unions and get their backing.
Failure to take this specific feature of the situation
in the West into account means leading the cause ofthe communist movement to certain doom.
Over there, in the West, there are still individual
“Communists” who refuse to understand this specificfeature and continue to make play with the anti-prole-
tarian and anti revolutionary slogan: “Leave the trade
unions!” It must be said that nobody can do more harmto the communist movement in the West than these and
similar “Communists.” Regarding the trade unions as
an enemy camp, these people contemplate “attacking”them from without. They fail to understand that if they
pursue such a policy the workers will indeed regard them
as enemies. They fail to understand that the tradeunions, whether good or bad, are regarded by the
rank-and-file worker as his fortresses, which help him to
protect his wages, hours, and so forth. They fail tounderstand that such a policy, far from facilitating,
hinders Communists from penetrating among the vast
working-class masses.
The average rank-and-file worker may say to such
“Communists”: “You are attacking my fortress. You
want to wreck the organisations that took me decades tobuild, and are trying to prove to me that communism is
better than trade-unionism. I don’t know, perhaps your
theoretical arguments about communism are right. How
can I, an ordinary working man, grasp the meaning of
your theories? But one thing I do know: I have my trade-union fortresses; they have led me into the struggle, they
have protected me, well or ill, from the attacks of the cap-
italists, and whoever thinks of destroying these for-tresses wants to destroy my own cause, the workers’ cause.
Stop attacking my fortresses, join the trade unions,
work in them for five years or so, help to improve andstrengthen them. In the meantime I shall see what sort
of fellows you are, and if you turn out to be real good
fellows, I, of course, will not refuse to support you,”and so forth.
That is the attitude, or approximately the attitude,
of the average rank-and-file workers in the West todaytowards the anti-trade-unionists.
Whoever fails to understand this specific feature of
the mentality of the average worker in Europe will under-stand nothing about the position of our Communist Par-
ties at the present time.
Wherein lies the strength of Social-Democracy in
the West?
In the fact that it has the backing of the trade unions.
Wherein lies the weakness of our Communist Parties
in the West?
In the fact that they have not yet linked up with
the trade unions, and certain elements in these Commu-nist Parties do not wish to link up with them.
Hence, the main task of the Communist Parties in
the West at the present time is to develop and bring toa successful conclusion the campaign for trade-union
unity, to see that all Communists without exception join
the trade unions, to work in them systematically and
patiently for uniting the working class against capital,
and in this way to enable the Communist Parties tohave the backing of the trade unions.
Such is the meaning of the decisions of the enlarged
plenum of the Comintern concerning the immediatetasks of the Communist Parties in the West at the present
time.
III
THE  IMMEDIATE  TASKS
OF  THE  COMMUNIST  ELEMENTS
IN  THE  COLONIAL  AND  DEPENDENT
COUNTRIES
I pass to the third group of questions.
The new features in this sphere are the following:
a) owing to the increase in the export of capital from
the advanced to the backward countries, an increase
encouraged by the stabilisation of capitalism, capitalism
in the colonial countries is developing and will continueto develop at a rapid rate, breaking down the old social
and political conditions and implanting new ones;
b) the proletariat in these countries is growing and
will continue to grow at a rapid rate;
c) the revolutionary working-class movement and
the revolutionary crisis in the colonies are growing andwill continue to grow;
d) in this connection, there is a growth, which will contin-
ue, of certain strata of the national bourgeoisie, therichest and most powerful strata, which, fearing revolution
in their countries more than they fear imperialism,
will prefer a deal with imperialism to the liberation of
their countries from imperialism and will thereby be-
tray their own native lands (India, Egypt, etc.);
e) in view of all this, those countries can be liberated
from imperialism only if a struggle is waged against the
compromising national bourgeoisie;
f) but from this it follows that the question of the
alliance between the workers and peasants and of the
hegemony of the proletariat in the industrially de-
veloped and developing colonies is bound to become anurgent one, as it did before the first revolution in Russia
in 1905.
Until now the situation has been that the East was
usually spoken of as a homogeneous whole. It is now
obvious to everybody that there is no longer a single,
homogeneous East, that there are now capitalisticallydeveloped and developing colonies and backward and
lagging colonies, and they cannot all be measured with
the same yardstick.
Until now the national-liberation movement has been
regarded as an unbroken front of all the national forces
in the colonial and dependent countries, from the mostreactionary bourgeois to the most revolutionary prole-
tarians. Now, after the national bourgeoisie has split
into a revolutionary and an anti-revolutionary wing,the picture of the national movement is assuming a some-
what different aspect. Parallel with the revolutionary
elements of the national movement, compromising andreactionary elements which prefer a deal with imperia-
lism to the liberation of their countries are emerging
from the bourgeoisie.
Hence the task of the communist elements in the co-
lonial countries is to link up with the revolutionary ele-
ments of the bourgeoisie, and above all with the peas-
antry, against the bloc of imperialism and the compro-
mising elements of “their own” bourgeoisie, in order,under the leadership of the proletariat, to wage a gen-
uinely revolutionary struggle for liberation from im-
perialism.
Only one conclusion follows: a number of colonial
countries are now approaching their 1905.
The task is to unite the advanced elements of the work-
ers in the colonial countries in a single Communist
Party that will be capable of leading the growing rev-
olution.
Here is what Lenin said about the growing revolu-
tionary movement in the colonial countries as far back
as 1922:
“The present ‘victors’ in the first imperialist massacre are
unable to vanquish even a small, insignificantly small, country
like Ireland, they are not even able to unravel the tangle they have
got themselves into in financial and currency questions. And
India and China are seething. They have a population of over
seven hundred million. With the surrounding Asiatic countries
quite like them they account for more than half the population
of the world. In these countries, 1905 is approaching, irresist-
ibly and with ever increasing speed, but with this essential and
enormous difference: in 1905 the revolution in Russia could still
(at the outset at any rate) proceed in isolation, that is to say,
without immediately drawing other countries into the revolu-
tion, whereas the revolutions that are growing in India and China
are already being drawn, and have been drawn, into the revolu-
tionary struggle, into the revolutionary movement into the inter-
national revolution” (see V ol. XXVII, p. 293).*
* References in Roman numerals to Lenin's works here and
elsewhere are to the third edition of the Works .—Tr.
The colonial countries are on the threshold of their
1905—such is the conclusion.
Such is also the meaning of the resolutions on the
colonial question adopted by the enlarged plenum of
the Comintern.
IV
THE  FATE  OF  SOCIALISM
IN  THE  SOVIET  UNION
I pass to the fourth group of questions.So far I have spoken about the resolutions of our Party
conference on questions directly concerning the Comin-
tern. We shall now pass to questions which directly con-
cern both the Comintern and the R.C.P.(B.), and thusserve as a link between the external and internal
problems.
How will the temporary stabilisation of capitalism
affect the fate of socialism in our country? Does that
stabilisation mark the end, or the beginning of the end,
of the building of socialism in our country?
Is it at all possible to build socialism by our own
efforts in our technically and economically backward
country if capitalism continues to exist in the other coun-tries for a more or less prolonged period?
Is it possible to create a complete guarantee against
the dangers of intervention, and hence, against therestoration of the old order of things in our country,
while we are encircled by capitalism, and, at the pres-
ent moment, by stabilised capitalism at that?
All these are questions which inevitably confront us
as a result of the new situation in the sphere of interna-
tional relations, and which we cannot ignore. They de-
mand a precise and definite answer.
Our country exhibits two groups of contradictions.
One group consists of the internal contradictions that
exist between the proletariat and the peasantry. The
other group consists of the external contradictions thatexist between our country, as the land of socialism,
and all the other countries, as lands of capitalism.
Let us examine these two groups of contradictions
separately.
That certain contradictions exist between the prole-
tariat and the peasantry cannot, of course, be denied.It is sufficient to recall everything that has taken place,
and is still taking place, in our country in connection with
the price policy for agricultural produce, in connectionwith the price limits, in connection with the campaign to
reduce the prices of manufactured goods, and so forth, to
understand how very real these contradictions are. Wehave two main classes before us: the proletarian class and
the class of private-property-owners, i.e., the peasantry.
Hence, contradictions between them are inevitable. Thewhole question is whether we shall be able by our own
efforts to overcome the contradictions that exist between
the proletariat and the peasantry. When the question isasked: can we build socialism by our own efforts? what
is meant is: can the contradictions that exist between
the proletariat and the peasantry in our country beovercome or not?
Leninism answers that question in the affirmative:
yes, we can build socialism, and we will build it to-gether with the peasantry under the leadership of the
working class.
What is the basis, the grounds, for such an answer?
The grounds are that, besides contradictions between
the proletariat and the peasantry, there are also commoninterests between them on fundamental problems of
development, interests which outweigh, or, at all events,
can outweigh those contradictions, and are the basis,the foundation, of the alliance between the workers and
the peasants.
What are those common interests?The point is that there are two paths along which
agriculture can develop: the capitalist path and the
socialist path. The capitalist path means develop-ment by impoverishing the majority of the peas-
antry for the sake of enriching the upper strata of
the urban and rural bourgeoisie. The socialist path, onthe contrary, means development by a continuous
improvement in the well-being of the majority of the
peasantry. It is in the interest of both the proletariatand the peasantry, particularly of the latter, that
development should proceed along the second path, the
socialist path, for that is the peasantry’s only salvationfrom impoverishment and a semi-starvation exist-
ence. Needless to say, the proletarian dictatorship,
which holds in its hands the main threads of economiclife, will take all measures to secure the victory of the
second path, the socialist path. It goes without saying,
on the other hand, that the peasantry is vitally inter-ested in development proceeding along this second
path.
Hence the community of interests of the proletariat
and the peasantry which outweighs the contradictions
between them.
That is why Leninism says that we can and must build
a complete socialist society together with the peasantry
on the basis of the alliance between the workers and thepeasants.
That is why Leninism says, basing itself on the com-
mon interests of the proletarians and the peasants, thatwe can and must by our own efforts overcome the contra-
dictions that exist between the proletariat and the peas-
antry.
That is how Leninism regards the matter.
But, evidently, not all comrades agree with Leninism.
The following, for example, is what Trotsky says aboutthe contradictions between the proletariat and the peas-
antry:
“The contradictions in the position of a workers’ government
in a backward country with an overwhelmingly peasant popula-
tion could be solved only * on an international scale, in the arena of
the world proletarian revolution” (see preface to Trotsky’s book
The Year 1905 ).
In other words, it is not within our power, we are not
in a position, by our own efforts to overcome, to elimi-nate the internal contradictions in our country, the
contradictions between the proletariat and the peasantry,
because, it appears, only as a result of a world revolu-tion, and only on the basis of a world revolution, can
we eliminate those contradictions and, at last, build
socialism.
Needless to say, this proposition has nothing in com-
mon with Leninism.
The same Trotsky goes on to say:
* My italics.— J. St.
“Without direct state support from the European proletariat,
the working class of Russia will not be able to maintain itself
in power and to transform its temporary rule into a lasting social-
ist dictatorship. This we cannot doubt for an instant” (see Trotsky’s
Our Revolution , p. 278).
In other words, we cannot even dream of maintaining
power for any length of time unless the Western prole-tariat takes power and renders us state support.
Further:
“It would be hopeless to think . . . that, for example, a revo-
lutionary Russia could hold out in the face of a conservative Eu-
rope” (see Trotsky’s Works , Vol. III, Part I, p. 90).
In other words, it appears that not only are we un-
able to build socialism, but we cannot even hold outalbeit for a brief period “in the face of a conservative
Europe,” although the whole world knows that we have
not only held out, but have repulsed a number of furiousattacks upon our country by a conservative Europe.
And lastly:
“Real progress of a socialist economy in Russia,” says Trots-
ky, “will become possible only after the victory * of the proletar-
iat in the major European countries” (ibid., p. 93).
Clear, one would think.
I have quoted these passages, comrades, in order to
contrast them with passages from the works of Lenin, and
thus to enable you to grasp the quintessence of the ques-tion of the possibility of building a complete socialist
society in the land of the proletarian dictatorship, which
is surrounded by capitalist states.
* My italics.— J. St.
Let us now turn to passages from the works of
Lenin.
Here is what Lenin wrote as far back as 1915, during
the imperialist war:
“Uneven economic and political development is an absolute
law of capitalism. Hence, the victory of socialism is possible,
first in several or even in one capitalist country taken separately.
The victorious proletariat of that country, having expropriated the
capitalists and organised its own socialist production, would
stand up against  the rest of the world, the capitalist world, attract-
ing to its cause the oppressed classes of other countries, raising
revolts in those countries against the capitalists, and in the event
of necessity, coming out even with armed force against the exploit-
ing classes and their states.” . . . Because “the free union of
nations in socialism is impossible without a more or less prolonged
and stubborn struggle of the socialist republics against the back-
ward states” (see V ol. XVIII, pp. 232-33).
In other words, the land of the proletarian dictator-
ship, which is surrounded by capitalists, can, it appears,
not only by its own efforts eliminate the internal con-tradictions between the proletariat and the peasantry,
but can and must, in addition, build socialism, organ-
ise its own socialist economy and establish an armedforce in order to go to the aid of the proletarians in the
surrounding countries in their struggle to overthrow
capital.
Such is the fundamental thesis of Leninism on the
victory of socialism in one country.
Lenin said the same thing, although in a slightly
different way, in 1920, at the Eighth Congress of So-
viets, in connection with the question of the electrifi-
cation of our country:
“Communism is Soviet power plus the electrification of the
whole country. Otherwise, the country will remain a small peas-
ant country, and we have got to understand that clearly. We areweaker than capitalism, not only on a world scale, but also
within the country. Everybody knows this. We are conscious of
it, and we shall see to it that our economic base is transformedfrom a small peasant base into a large-scale industrial base. Only
when the country has been electrified, only when our industry,
our agriculture, our transport system have been placed uponthe technical basis of modern large-scale industry, shall we achieve
final * victory” (see Vol. XXVI, pp. 46-47).
In other words, Lenin was fully aware of the techni-
cal difficulties connected with the building of social-
ism in our country, but he did not by any means drawfrom this the absurd conclusion that “real progress
of a socialist economy in Russia will become possibleonly after the victory of the proletariat in the major
European countries”; on the contrary, he was of the
opinion that we could by our own efforts surmount
those difficulties and achieve “final victory,” i.e.,
build complete socialism.
And here is what Lenin said a year later, in 1921:
“Ten or twenty years of correct relations with the peasantry,
and victory on a world scale * is assured (even if the proletarian
revolutions, which are growing, are delayed)” (“Outline andSynopsis of the Pamphlet The Tax in Kind ,” 1921—see V ol. XXVI,
p. 313).
In other words, Lenin was fully aware of the po-
litical difficulties connected with the building of so-cialism in our country, but he did not by any means draw
* My italics.— J. St.
from this the false conclusion that “without direct state
support from the European proletariat, the workingclass of Russia will not be able to maintain itself inpower”; on the contrary, he was of the opinion that,given a correct policy towards the peasantry, we wouldbe quite able to ensure “victory on a world scale,” mean-ing that we could build complete socialism.
But what is a correct policy towards the peasantry?
A correct policy towards the peasantry is something thatdepends wholly and entirely upon us, and upon us alone,
as the Party which directs the building of socialism in
our country.
Lenin said the same thing, but still more definitely,
in 1922, in his notes on co-operation:
“As a matter of fact, state power over all large-scale means
of production, state power in the hands of the proletariat, the
alliance of this proletariat with the many millions of small and
very small peasants, the assured leadership of the peasantry bythe proletariat, etc.—is not this all that is necessary for building
a complete socialist society from the co-operatives, from the
co-operatives alone, which we formerly looked down upon ashuckstering and which from a certain aspect we have the right
to look down upon as such now, under the NEP? Is this not all
that is necessary for building a complete socialist society? * This
is not yet the building of socialist society, but it is all that
is necessary and sufficient * for this building” (see V ol. XXVII,
p. 392).
In other words, under the dictatorship of the prole-
tariat we possess, it appears, all that is needed to build
* My italics.— J. St.
a complete socialist society, overcoming all internal
difficulties, for we can and must overcome them by our
own efforts.
Clear, one would think.
As regards the objection that the relative economic
backwardness of our country precludes the possibility ofbuilding socialism, Lenin attacked and refuted it as
something incompatible with socialism:
“Infinitely hackneyed is the argument,” says Lenin, “that
they learned by rote during the development of West-EuropeanSocial-Democracy, namely, that we are not yet ripe for socialism,
that, as certain ‘learned’ gentlemen among them express it, the
objective economic prerequisites for socialism do not exist inour country” (see V ol. XXVII, p. 399).
Had it been otherwise, there was no point in tak-
ing power in October and carrying out the October Rev-olution. For if the possibility and necessity of building
a complete socialist society is precluded for some reason
or other, the October Revolution becomes meaningless.Anyone who denies the possibility of building socialism
in one country must necessarily deny that the October
Revolution was justified; and vice versa, anyone whohas no faith in the October Revolution cannot admit the
possibility of the victory of socialism in the conditions
of capitalist encirclement. The connection between lackof faith in October and denial of the socialist potentiali-
ties in our country is complete and direct.
“I know,” says Lenin, “that there are, of course, sages who
think they are very clever and even call themselves Socialists,
who assert that power should not have been seized until the revo-
lution had broken out in all countries. They do not suspect that
by speaking in this way they are deserting the revolution and going
over to the side of the bourgeoisie. To wait until the toiling classes
bring about a revolution on an international scale means thateverybody should stand stock-still in expectation. That is non-
sense” (see V ol. XXIII, p 9).
That is how the matter stands with the contradictions
of the first order, with the internal contradictions, with
the question of the possibility of building socialism inthe conditions of capitalist encirclement.
Let us now pass to the contradictions of the second
order, to the external contradictions that exist betweenour country, as the country of socialism, and all the
other countries, as the countries of capitalism.
What are these contradictions?They are that, as long as capitalist encirclement
exists, there is bound to be the danger of intervention
by the capitalist countries, and as long as such a dan-ger exists, there is bound to be the danger of restoration,
the danger of the capitalist order being re-established
in our country.
Can those contradictions be fully overcome by one
country? No, they cannot; for the efforts of one country,
even if that country is the land of the proletarian dicta-torship, are insufficient for the purpose of fully guaran-
teeing it against the danger of intervention. Therefore,
a full guarantee against intervention, and hence thefinal victory of socialism, are possible only on an interna-
tional scale, only as a result of the joint efforts of
the proletarians of a number of countries, or—still bet-
ter—only as a result of the victory of the proletarians ina number of countries.
What is the final victory of socialism?
The final victory of socialism is the full guarantee
against attempts at intervention, and hence against res-
toration, for any serious attempt at restoration can takeplace only with serious support from outside, only with
the support of international capital. Therefore, the sup-
port of our revolution by the workers of all countries,and still more the victory of the workers in at least sever-
al countries, is a necessary condition for fully guarantee-
ing the first victorious country against attempts at in-tervention and restoration, a necessary condition for the
final victory of socialism.
“As long as our Soviet Republic,” says Lenin, “remains an
isolated borderland of the entire capitalist world, just so long
will it be quite ludicrously fantastic and utopian to hope . . . for
the disappearance of all danger. Of course, as long as such funda-
mental opposites remain, dangers will remain too, and we cannot
escape them” (see Vol. XXVI, p. 29).
And further:
“We are living not merely in a state, but in a system of states ,
and the existence of the Soviet Republic side by side with impe-
rialist states for a long time is unthinkable. One or the other must
triumph in the end” (see Vol. XXIV , p. 122).
That is why Lenin says that:
“Final victory can be achieved only on a world scale, and
only by the joint efforts of the workers of all countries” (see
Vol. XXIII, p. 9).
That is how the matter stands with the contradictions
of the second order.
Anyone who confuses the first group of contradictions,
which can be overcome entirely by the efforts of one
country, with the second group of contradictions, the
solution of which requires the efforts of the proletarians
of several countries, commits a gross error against Lenin-ism. He is either a muddle-head or an incorrigible
opportunist.
An example of such confusion is provided by a
letter I received from a comrade in January this
year on the question of the victory of socialism in one
country. He writes in perplexity:
“You say that the Leninist theory . . . is that socialism can
triumph in one country . I regret to say that I have not found in the
relevant passages of Lenin’s works any references to the victory of
socialism in one country.”
The trouble, of course, is not that this comrade, whom
I regard as one of the best of our young student comrades,
“has not found in the relevant passages of Lenin’s worksany references to the victory of socialism in one country.”
He will read and, some day, will at last find such refer-
ences. The trouble is that he confused the internal con-tradictions with the external contradictions and got
entirely muddled up in this confusion. Perhaps it will not
be superfluous to inform you of the answer I sent to thiscomrade’s letter. Here it is:
“The point at issue is not complete  victory, but the victory
of socialism in general, i.e., driving away the landlords and
capitalists, taking power, repelling the attacks of imperialism
and beginning to build a socialist economy. In all this, the prole-
tariat in one country can be fully successful; but a complete
guarantee against restoration can be ensured only by the ‘joint
efforts of the proletarians in several countries.’
“It would have been foolish to have begun the October Revo-
lution in Russia with the conviction that the victorious proletariat
of Russia, obviously enjoying the sympathy of the proletarians
of other countries, but in the absence of victory in several coun-tries, ‘cannot hold out in the face of a conservative Europe.’ Thatis not Marxism, but the most ordinary opportunism, Trotskyism,
and whatever else you please. If Trotsky’s theory were correct,
Ilyich, who stated that we shall convert NEP Russia intosocialist Russia, and that we have ‘ all that is necessary for building
a complete  socialist society’* (see the article “On Co-operation”),
would be wrong. . . .
“The most dangerous thing in our political practice is the
attempt to regard the victorious proletarian country as something
passive, capable only of marking time until the moment whenassistance comes from the victorious proletarians in other coun-tries. Let us assume that the Soviet system will exist in Russia forfive or ten years without a revolution taking place in the West;let us assume that, nevertheless, during that period our Republic
goes on existing as a Soviet Republic, building a socialist econo-
my under the conditions of NEP—do you think that duringthose five or ten years our country will merely spend the time incollecting water with a sieve and not in organising a socialistecononny? It is enough to ask this question to realise how verydangerous is the theory that denies the possibility of the victory
of socialism in one country.
“But does that mean that this victory will be complete, final?
No, it does not . . . for as long as capitalist encirclement existsthere will always be the danger of military intervention” (Janu-ary 1925).
That is how the matter stands with the question of
the fate of socialism in our country from the stand-
point of the well-known resolution of the Fourteenth Con-
ference of our Party.
* All italics mine.— J. St.
V
THE  PARTY’S  POLICY
IN  THE  COUNTRYSIDE
I pass to the fifth group of questions.
Before passing to the resolutions of the Fourteenth
Conference dealing with the Party’s policy in the coun-
tryside, I should like to say a few words about the hulla-baloo raised by the bourgeois press in connection with
the criticism which our Party has made of our own short-
comings in the countryside. The bourgeois press leapsand dances and assures all and sundry that the open criti-
cism of our own shortcomings is a sign of the weakness
of the Soviet power, a sign of its disintegration and de-cay. Needless to say, all this hullabaloo is thoroughly
false and mendacious.
Self-criticism is a sign of our Party’s strength and
not of its weakness. Only a strong party, which has its
roots in life and is marching to victory, can afford the
ruthless criticism of its own shortcomings that it haspermitted, and always will permit, in front of
the whole people. A party which hides the truth from
the people, which fears the light and fears criticism,is not a party, but a clique of impostors, whose doom is
sealed. Messieurs the bourgeois measure us with their
own yardstick. They fear the light and assiduously hidethe truth from the people, covering up their shortcomings
with ostentatious proclamation of well-being. And so
they think that we Communists, too, must hide thetruth from the people. They fear the light, for it would
be enough for them to permit anything like serious self-
criticism, anything like free criticism of their own
shortcomings, to cause the downfall of the bourgeois sys-
tem. And so they think that if we Communists permit self-
criticism, it is a sign that we are surrounded and that theground is slipping from under our feet. Those honourable
gentlemen, the bourgeois and Social-Democrats, measure
us with their own yardsticks. Only parties which aredeparting into the past and whose doom is sealed can fear
the light and fear criticism. We fear neither the one nor
the other, we do not fear them because we are a partythat is in the ascendant, that is marching to victory.
That is why the self-criticism that has been going on for
several months already is a sign of our Party’s immensestrength, and not of its weakness, it is a means of con-
solidating and not of disintegrating the Party.
Let us now pass to the question of the Party’s policy
in the countryside.
What new facts are to be noted in the countryside
in connection with the new internal and internationalsituation?
I think that four chief facts are to be noted:
1) the change in the international situation and the
slowing down of the tempo of the revolution, which com-
pel us to choose the least painful, although slower, meth-
ods of drawing the peasantry into socialist construction,of building socialism together with the peasantry;
2) the economic progress in the countryside and the
process of differentiation among the peasantry, whichcall for the elimination of the survivals of war com-
munism in the countryside;
3) the political activity of the peasantry, which re-
quires that the old methods of leadership and admin-
istration in the countryside be changed;
4) the elections to the Soviets, which revealed the
indubitable fact that in a number of districts in our
country the middle peasants were found to be on the side
of the kulaks against the poor peasants .
In view of these new facts, what is the Party’s main
task in the countryside?
Proceeding from the fact that differentiation is going
on in the countryside, some comrades draw the con-
clusion that the Party’s main task is to foment classstruggle there. That is wrong. That is idle talk. That
is not our main task now. That is a rehash of the old
Menshevik songs taken from the old Menshevik ency-clopedia.
To foment class struggle in the countryside is not
by any means the main task at present. The main task
at present is to rally the middle peasants around the prole-
tariat, to win them over to our side again . The main
task at present is to link up with the main masses ofthe peasantry, to raise their material and cultural
level, and to move forward together with those main
masses along the road to socialism. The main task isto build socialism together with the peasantry, without
fail together with the peasantry, and without fail under
the leadership of the working class; for the leadershipof the working class is the basic guarantee that our
work of construction will proceed along the path to
socialism.
That is now the Party’s main task.
Perhaps it will not be superfluous to recall Ilyich’s
words on this subject, the words he uttered at the timeNEP was introduced, and which remain valid to this
day:
“The whole point now is to advance as an immeasurably wider
and larger mass, and only together with the peasantry” (see V ol.
XXVII, p. 272).
And further:
“Link up with the peasant masses, with the rank-and-file
toiling peas ants, and begin to move forward immeasurably, infi-nitely, more slowly than we imagined, but in such a way that theentire mass will actually move forward with us. If we do that weshall in time get such an acceleration of progress as we cannotdream of now” (ibid., pp. 231-32).
In view of this, two main tasks confront us in the
countryside.
1) Firstly, we must see to it that peasant economy
is included in the general system of Soviet economic
development. Formerly things proceeded in such a way
that we had two parallel processes: the town went itsown way and the country went its way. The capitalist
strove to include peasant economy in the system of
capitalist development, but that inclusion took placethrough the impoverishment of the peasant masses and
the enrichment of the upper stratum of the peasantry. As
is known, that path was fraught with revolution. Afterthe victory of the proletariat the inclusion of peasant
economy in the general system of Soviet economic de-
velopment must be brought about by creating conditionsthat can promote the progress of our national economy
on the basis of a gradual but steady improvement of the
welfare of the majority of the peasants, that is, alonga road which is the very opposite to the one along which
the capitalists led the peasantry and proposed that they
should go prior to the revolution.
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

But how is peasant economy to be included in the
system of economic construction? Through the co-op-
eratives. Through the credit co-operatives, agriculturalco-operatives, consumers’ co-operatives and producers’
co-operatives.
Such are the roads and paths by which peasant econ-
omy must be slowly but thoroughly drawn into the gen-
eral system of socialist construction.
2) The second task consists in gradually but steadily
pursuing the line of eliminating the old methods of admin-
istration and leadership in the countryside, the line
of revitalising the Soviets, the line of transforming theSoviets into genuinely elected bodies, the line of implant-
ing the principles of Soviet democracy in the country-
side. Ilyich said that the proletarian dictatorship is thehighest type of democracy for the majority of the working
people. Ilyich said that this highest type of democracy can
be introduced only after the proletariat has taken powerand after we have obtained the opportunity of consoli-
dating this power. Well, this phase of consolidating the
Soviet power and of implanting Soviet democracy hasalready begun. We must proceed along this path cau-
tiously and unhurriedly, and in the course of our work
we must create around the Party a numerous active con-sisting of non-Party peasants.
While the first task, the task of including peasant
economy in the general system of economic construction,makes it possible for us to put the peasantry in joint
harness with the proletariat on the road of building so-
cialism, the second task, the task of implanting Sovietdemocracy and revitalising the Soviets in the country-
side, should make it possible for us to reconstruct our
state apparatus, to link it with the masses of the people,
to make it sound and honest, simple and inexpensive,
in order to create the conditions that will facilitate thegradual transition from a society with a dictatorship
of the proletariat to communist society.
Such are the main lines of the resolutions adopted
by the Fourteenth Conference of our Party on the ques-
tion of our Party’s policy in the countryside.
Hence, the methods of Party leadership in the country-
side must change accordingly.
We have people in the Party who assert that since
we have NEP, and since capitalism is beginning tobe temporarily stabilised, our task is to pursue a policy
of the utmost pressure both in the Party and in the state
apparatus, pressure so strong as to make everythingcreak. I must say that such a policy would be wrong and
fatal. What we need now is not the utmost pressure, but
the utmost flexibility in both policy and organisation,the utmost flexibility in both political and organisa-
tional leadership. Unless we have that we shall be unable
to remain at the helm under the present complicated con-ditions. We need the utmost flexibility in order to keep
the Party at the helm and to ensure that the Party exer-
cises complete leadership.
Further. The Communists in the countryside must
refrain from improper forms of administration. We must
not rely merely on giving orders to the peasants. We mustlearn to explain to the peasants patiently the questions
they do not understand, we must learn to convince the
peasants, sparing neither time nor effort for this purpose.Of course, it is much easier and simpler to issue an or-
der and leave it at that, as some of our V olost Executive
Committee Chairmen often do. But not all that is simple
and easy is good. Not long ago, it appears, when the rep-
resentative of a Gubernia Committee asked the secre-tary of a volost Party unit why there were no newspapers
in his volost, the answer was given: “What do we want
newspapers for? It’s quieter and better without them.If the peasants begin reading newspapers they will
start asking all sorts of questions and we shall have no
end of trouble with them.” And this secretary calls him-self a Communist! It scarcely needs proof that he is not
a Communist, but a calamity. The point is that now-
adays it is utterly impossible to lead without “trouble,”let alone without newspapers. This simple truth must be
understood and assimilated if we want the Party and the
Soviet power to retain the leadership in the countryside.
Further. To lead, nowadays, one must be a good
manager, one must be familiar with and understand
economic affairs. Merely talking about “world politics,”about Chamberlain and MacDonald, will not carry one
very far now. We have entered the period of economic
construction. Hence, the one who can lead is onewho understands economic affairs, who is able to give
the peasant useful advice about economic development,
who can give the peasant assistance in economic con-struction. To study economic affairs, to be directly linked
with economic affairs, to go into all the details of eco-
nomic construction—such is now the task of the Commu-nists in the countryside. Unless they do that, it is no use
even dreaming of leadership.
It is now impossible to lead in the old way, because
the peasants are displaying more political activity, and
it is necessary that this activity should assume a Soviet
form, that it should flow through the Soviets and not
past them. A leader is one who revitalises the Soviets
and creates a peasant active around the Party in thecountryside.
It is impossible to lead in the old way nowadays,
because the economic activity of the rural populationhas increased, and it is necessary that this activity
should assume the form of co-operation, that it should
flow through the co-operatives and not past them.A leader is one who implants a co-operative communal
life in the countryside.
Such, in general, are the concrete tasks of Party
leadership in the countryside.
VI
THE  METAL  INDUSTRY
I pass to the last group of questions dealt with at
the Fourteenth Conference of our Party.
What is new and specific in our economic leadership?It is that our economic plans have begun to lag be-
hind the actual development of our economy, they turn
out to be inadequate and quite often fail to keep pacewith the actual growth of our economy.
A striking expression of this fact is our state budget.
You know that in the course of half a year we wereobliged to revise our state budget three times owing to
rapid increases in the revenue side of our budget not
foreseen in our estimates. In other words, our estimatesand our budget plans failed to keep pace with the increase
in state revenues, as a result of which the state treasury
found itself with a surplus. That means that the sap of eco-
nomic life in our country is surging upward with irre-
sistible force, upsetting all the scientific plans of our
financial experts. That means that we are experiencing anupsurge of economic and labour activity, at least as
powerful as that which America, for example, experi-
enced after the Civil War.
The growth of our metal industry can be taken as
the most striking expression of this new phenomenon in
our economic life. Last year the output of the metalindustry amounted to 191,000,000 pre-war rubles. In
November last year the annual output plan for 1924-25
was fixed at 273,000,000 pre-war rubles. In Januarythis year, in view of the discrepancy between that figure
and the actual growth of the metal industry, the plan
was revised and the figure brought up to 317,000,000.In April this year, even this enlarged plan proved to be
unsound and, as a consequence, the figure had to be
raised again, this time to 350,000,000. Now we are toldthat this plan has also proved to be inadequate, for it
will have to be enlarged once again and the figure raised
to 360-370 millions.
In other words, the output of the metal industry
this year has almost doubled compared with that of last
year. That is apart from the colossal growth of our lightindustry, of the growth of our transport system, fuel
industry, and so forth.
What does all this show? It shows that as regards
the organisation of industry, which is the chief basis of
socialism, we have already entered the broad high road
of development. As regards the metal industry, the main-spring of all industry, the period of stagnation has passed,
and our metal industry now has every opportunity
of going ahead and nourishing. Comrade Dzerzhinsky is
right in saying that our country can and must become
a land of metal.
The enormous importance of this fact both for the
internal development of our country and for the interna-
tional revolution scarcely needs proof.
There is no doubt that, from the standpoint of our
internal development, the development of our metal
industry and the significance of its growth are colossal,for this development means the growth of our entire
industry and of our economy as a whole, for the metal
industry is the chief basis of industry as a whole, forneither light industry, nor transport, nor the fuel
industry, nor electrification, nor agriculture can be
put on their feet unless the metal industry is power-fully developed. The growth of the metal industry is
the basis of the growth of industry as a whole, and of
our national economy as a whole.
Here is what Lenin says about “heavy industry,”
meaning by that mainly the metal industry:
“The salvation of Russia lies not only in a good harvest on
the peasant farms—that is not enough; and not only in the good
condition of light industry, which provides the peasantry with
consumer goods—that, too, is not enough; we also need heavy
industry. And to put it in good condition will require many
years of work.”
And further:
“Unless we save heavy industry, unless we restore it, we shall
not be able to build up any industry; and without that we shall
be doomed altogether as an independent country” (see Vol. XXVII,
p. 349).
As for the international significance of the develop-
ment of our metal industry, we may say that it is immeas-
urable. For what is the surging growth of the metal
industry under the proletarian dictatorship if not direct
proof that the proletariat is capable not only of destroy-ing the old, but also of building the new, that it is ca-
pable of building by its own efforts a new industry,
and a new society free from the exploitation of man byman? To prove this in actual fact and not from books
means advancing the cause of the international revo-
lution surely and finally. The pilgrimages of West-European workers to our country are not accidental.
They are of enormous agitational and practical signifi-
cance for the development of the revolutionary movementthroughout the world. The fact that workers come here
and probe every corner at our factories and works
shows that they do not believe books, but want to con-vince themselves by their own experience that the pro-
letariat is capable of building a new industry, of creat-
ing a new society. And when they convince themselvesof this, you may be sure that the cause of the international
revolution will make enormous strides forward.
“At the present time,” says Lenin, “we are exercising our
main influence on the international  revolution by our economic
policy. All eyes are turned on the Soviet Russian Republic, the
eyes of all toilers in all countries of the world without exception
and without exaggeration. . . . That is the field to which the
struggle has been transferred on a world-wide scale. If we solve
this problem, we shall have won on an international scale surely
and finally . That is why questions of economic construction assume
absolutely exceptional significance for us. On this front we must
win victory by slow, gradual—it cannot be fast—but steady prog-
ress upward and forward”* (see Vol. XXVI, pp. 410-11).
* All italics mine.— J. St.
Such is the international significance of the growth
of our industry in general, and of our metal industry in
particular.
At the present time we have an industrial proletariat
of about 4,000,000. A small number, of course, but it
is something to go on with in building socialism and inbuilding up the defence of our country to the terror of
the enemies of the proletariat. But we cannot and must
not stop there. We need 15-20 million industrial prole-tarians, we need the electrification of the principal
regions of our country, the organisation of agriculture
on co-operative lines, and a highly developed metalindustry. And then we need fear no danger. And then
we shall triumph on an international scale.
The historical significance of the Fourteenth Con-
ference lies precisely in the fact that it clearly mapped
the road to that great goal.
And that road is the right road, for it is Lenin’s
road, and it will lead us to final victory.
Such, in general, are the results of the work of
the Fourteenth Conference of our Party.
Pravda ,  Nos.  106  and  107,
May  12  and  13,  1925
THE  POLITICAL  TASKS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY
OF  THE  PEOPLES  OF  THE  EAST
Speech  Delivered at  a  Meeting  of  Students
of  the  Communist  University
of  the  Toilers  of  the  East
May  18,  1925
Comrades, permit me, first of all, to greet you on the
occasion of the fourth anniversary of the existence of the
Communist University of the Toilers of the East. Need-
less to say, I wish your University every success on thedifficult road of training communist cadres for the East.
And now let us pass to the matter in hand.
Analysing the composition of the student body of
the University of the Toilers of the East, one cannot help
noting a certain duality in it. This University unites
representatives of not less than fifty nations and na-tional groups of the East. All the students at this Uni-
versity are sons of the East. But that definition does not
give any clear or complete picture. The fact is that thereare two main groups among the students at the Uni-
versity, representing two sets of totally different con-
ditions of development. The first group consists of peo-ple who have come here from the Soviet  East, from coun-
tries where the rule of the bourgeoisie no longer exists,
where imperialist oppression has been overthrown, andwhere the workers are in power. The second group of
students consists of people who have come here from
colonial and dependent countries , from countries where
capitalism still reigns, where imperialist oppression is
still in full force, and where independence has still to be
won by driving out the imperialists.
Thus, we have two Easts, living different lives, and
developing under different conditions.
Needless to say, this duality in the composition of the
student body cannot but leave its impress upon the workof the University of the Toilers of the East. That explains
the fact that this University stands with one foot on
Soviet soil and the other on the soil of the colonies anddependent countries.
Hence the two lines of the University’s activity:
one line having the aim of creating cadres capable ofserving the needs of the Soviet republics of the East,
and the other line having the aim of creating cadres ca-
pable of serving the revolutionary requirements of thetoiling masses in the colonial and dependent countries
of the East.
Hence, also, the two kinds of tasks that face the
University of the Toilers of the East.
Let us examine these tasks of the Communist Univer-
sity of the Toilers of the East separately.
I
THE  TASKS  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  UNIVERSITY
OF  THE  TOILERS  OF  THE  EAST  IN  RELATION
TO  THE  SOVIET  REPUBLICS  OF  THE  EAST
What are the characteristic features of the life and
development of these countries, of these republics, whichdistinguish them from the colonial and dependent coun-
tries?
Firstly, these republics are free from imperialist
oppression.
Secondly, they are developing and becoming consoli-
dated as nations not under the aegis of the bourgeois
order, but under the aegis of Soviet power. That is a fact
unprecedented in history, but it is a fact for all that.
Thirdly, inasmuch as they are industrially under-
developed, they can in their development rely wholly
and entirely on the support of the industrial proletariatof the Soviet Union.
Fourthly, being free from colonial oppression, enjoy-
ing the protection of the proletarian dictatorship, andbeing members of the Soviet Union, these republics
can and must be drawn into the work of building socialism
in our country.
The main task is to make it easier to draw the work-
ers and peasants of these republics into the work of
building socialism in our country, to create and developthe prerequisites, applicable in the specific conditions
of life in these republics, that can promote and hasten
this process.
Hence, the immediate tasks that face the leading
cadres in the Soviet East are:
1) To create industrial centres in the Soviet repub-
lics of the East to serve as bases for rallying the peas-
ants around the working class. You know that this work
has already begun, and it will advance together with theeconomic growth of the Soviet Union. The fact that these
republics possess all kinds of raw materials is a guaran-
tee that in time this work will be completed.
2) To raise the level of agriculture, above all ir-
rigation. You know that this work has also been pushed
forward, at any rate in Transcaucasia and in Turke-
stan.
3) To start and further promote the organisation of
co-operatives for the broad masses of the peasants and
handicraftsmen as the surest way of drawing the Soviet
republics in the East into the general system of Sovieteconomic construction.
4) To bring the Soviets closer to the masses, to make
them national in composition, and in this way implantnational-Soviet statehood, close to and comprehensible
to the toiling masses.
5) To develop national culture, to set up a wide net-
work of courses and schools for both general education
and vocational-technical training, to be conducted in the
native languages for the purpose of training Soviet,Party, technical and business cadres from the local
people.
It is precisely the fulfilment of these tasks that
will facilitate the work of building socialism in the
Soviet republics of the East.
There is talk about model republics in the Soviet
East. But what is a model republic? A model repub-
lic is one which carries out all these tasks honestly
and conscientiously, thereby attracting the workers andpeasants of the neighbouring colonial and dependent
countries to the liberation movement.
I have spoken above about bringing the Soviets clos-
er to the toiling masses of the different nationalities—
about making the Soviets national in character. But what
does that mean, and how does it manifest itself in prac-tice? I think that the national delimitation recently
completed in Turkestan
30 can serve as a model of the way
the Soviets should be brought closer to the masses. The
bourgeois press regards this delimitation as “Bolshevik
cunning.” It is obvious, however, that this was a mani-festation not of “cunning,” but of the deep-rooted aspi-
ration of the masses of the people of Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan to have their own organs of power, closeto and comprehensible to them. In the pre-revolutionary
epoch, both these countries were torn to pieces and dis-
tributed among various khanates and states, thus provid-ing a convenient field for the exploiting machinations
of “the powers that be.” The time has now come when
it has become possible for these scattered pieces to bereunited  in independent states, so that the toiling masses
of Uzbekistan and of Turkmenistan may be brought
closer to the organs of power and linked solidly with them.The delimitation of Turkestan is, above all, the reunion
of the scattered parts of these countries in independent
states. That these states later expressed the wish tojoin the Soviet Union as equal members of it merely
shows that the Bolsheviks have found the key to the
deep-rooted aspirations of the masses of the people ofthe East, and that the Soviet Union is a voluntary
union of the toiling masses of different nationalities,
the only one in the world. To reunite Poland, the bour-geoisie needed a whole series of wars. To reunite
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, however, the Communists
needed only a few months of explanatory propaganda.
That is the way to bring the organs of government,
in this case the Soviets, closer to the broad masses of
the toilers of different nationalities.
That is the proof that the Bolshevik national poli-
cy is the only correct policy.
I spoke, further, about raising the level of national
culture in the Soviet republics of the East. But what
is national culture? How is it to be reconciled with pro-letarian culture? Did not Lenin say, already before the
war, that there are two cultures—bourgeois and social-
ist; that the slogan of national culture is a reactionaryslogan of the bourgeoisie, who try to poison the minds
of the working people with the venom of nationalism?
31
How is the building of national culture, the development
of schools and courses in the native languages, and the
training of cadres from the local people, to be reconciled
with the building of socialism, with the building ofproletarian culture? Is there not an irreconcilable contra-
diction here? Of course not! We are building proletarian
culture. That is absolutely true. But it is also true thatproletarian culture, which is socialist in content, as-
sumes different forms and modes of expression among
the different peoples who are drawn into the buildingof socialism, depending upon differences in language,
manner of life, and so forth. Proletarian in content,
national in form—such is the universal culture towardswhich socialism is proceeding. Proletarian culture does
not abolish national culture, it gives it content. On
the other hand, national culture does not abolish prole-tarian culture, it gives it form. The slogan of national
culture was a bourgeois slogan as long as the bourgeoisie
was in power and the consolidation of nations proceededunder the aegis of the bourgeois order. The slogan of
national culture became a proletarian slogan when the
proletariat came to power, and when the consolidation ofnations began to proceed under the aegis of Soviet power.
Whoever fails to understand the fundamental difference
between these two situations will never understand
either Leninism or the essence of the national question.
Some people (Kautsky, for instance) talk of the
creation of a single universal language and the dying
away of all other languages in the period of socialism.
I have little faith in this theory of a single, all-embracinglanguage. Experience, at any rate, speaks against rather
than for such a theory. Until now what has happened
has been that the socialist revolution has not diminishedbut rather increased the number of languages; for, by
stirring up the lowest sections of humanity and pushing
them on to the political arena, it awakens to new lifea number of hitherto unknown or little-known nation-
alities. Who could have imagined that the old, tsarist
Russia consisted of not less than fifty nations and na-tional groups? The October Revolution, however, by
breaking the old chains and bringing a number of forgot-
ten peoples and nationalities on to the scene, gave themnew life and a new development. Today, India is spoken
of as a single whole. But there can scarcely be any doubt
that, in the event of a revolutionary upheaval in India,scores of hitherto unknown nationalities, having their
own separate languages and separate cultures, will ap-
pear on the scene. And as regards implanting prole-tarian culture among the various nationalities, there can
scarcely be any doubt that this will proceed in forms
corresponding to the languages and manner of life ofthese nationalities.
Not long ago I received a letter from some Buryat
comrades asking me to explain serious and difficult ques-tions concerning the relations between universal cul-
ture and national culture. Here it is:
“We earnestly request you to explain the following, for us,
very serious and difficult questions. The ultimate aim of the Com-
munist Party is to achieve a single universal culture. How is one
to conceive the transition to a single universal culture through
the national cultures which are developing within the limits of
our individual autonomous republics? How is the assimilation
of the specific features of the individual national cultures (lan-
guage, etc.) to take place?.”
I think that what has just been said might serve as
an answer to the anxious question put by these Buryatcomrades.
The Buryat comrades raise the question of the assim-
ilation of the individual nationalities in the course ofbuilding a universal proletarian culture. Undoubtedly,
some nationalities may, and perhaps certainly will, un-
dergo a process of assimilation. Such processes havetaken place before. The point is, however, that the proc-
ess of assimilation of some nationalities does not exclude,
but presupposes the opposite process of the strength-ening and further development of quite a number
of existing and developing nations; for the partial proc-
ess of assimilation of individual nationalities is theresult of the general process of development of nations.
It is precisely for this reason that the possible assimila-
tion of some individual nationalities does not weaken,but confirms the entirely correct thesis that proletarian
universal culture does not exclude, but presupposes
and fosters the national culture of the peoples, just asthe national culture of the peoples does not annul, but
supplements and enriches universal proletarian culture.
Such, in general, are the immediate tasks that face
the leading cadres of the Soviet republics of the East.
Such are the character and content of these tasks.
Advantage must be taken of the period that has
begun of intense economic construction and of new con-
cessions to the peasantry to promote the fulfilment ofthese tasks, and thereby to make it easier to draw the
Soviet republics in the East, which are mainly peasant
countries, into the work of building socialism in theSoviet Union.
It is said that the Party’s new policy towards the
peasantry, in making a number of new concessions(land on short lease, permission to employ hired la-
bour), contains certain elements of retreat. Is that
true? Yes, it is. But those are elements of retreatthat we permit alongside  the retention of an over-
whelming superiority of forces on the side of the Party
and the Soviet power. Stable currency, developing in-dustry, developing transport, a credit system which is
growing stronger, and by means of which it is possible,
through preferential credits, to ruin or to raise to ahigher level any stratum of the population without
causing the slightest upheaval—all these are reserves
at the command of the proletarian dictatorship by meansof which certain elements of retreat on one sector of
the front can only facilitate the preparation of an of-
fensive along the whole front. Precisely for this reason, thefew new concessions that the Party has made to the peas-
antry should, at the present time, make it easier rather
than more difficult to draw the peasantry into the workof building socialism.
What can this circumstance mean for the Soviet re-
publics in the East? It can only mean that it places inthe hands of the leading cadres in these republics a new
weapon enabling these countries to be more easily and
quickly linked with the general system of Soviet eco-
nomic development.
Such is the connection between the Party’s policy in
the countryside and the immediate national tasks con-
fronting the leading cadres in the Soviet East.
In this connection, the task of the University of
the Peoples of the East in relation to the Soviet repub-
lics of the East is to train cadres for these republics
along lines that will ensure the fulfilment of the im-mediate tasks I have enumerated above.
The University of the Peoples of the East must not
isolate itself from life. It is not, nor can it be, an in-stitution standing above life. It must be connected
with actual life through every fibre of its being. Con-
sequently, it cannot ignore the immediate tasks confront-ing the Soviet republics in the East. That is why the
task of the University of the Peoples of the East is to
take the immediate tasks that face these republics intoaccount in training the appropriate cadres for them.
In this connection, it is necessary to bear in mind
the existence of two deviations in the practice of theleading cadres in the Soviet East, deviations which must
be combated within the precincts of this University if
it is to train real cadres and real revolutionaries for theSoviet East.
The first deviation lies in simplification, a simpli-
fication of the tasks of which I have spoken above, anattempt mechanically to transplant models of economic
construction which are quite comprehensible and appli-
cable in the centre of the Soviet Union, but which aretotally unsuited to the conditions of development in the
so-called border regions. The comrades who are guilty
of this deviation fail to understand two things. They fail
to understand that conditions in the centre and in the
“border regions” are not alike and are far from beingidentical. Furthermore, they fail to understand that the
Soviet republics themselves in the East are not alike,
that some of them, Georgia and Armenia, for example,are at a higher stage of national formation, whereas
others, Chechnya and Kabarda, for example, are at a
lower stage of national formation, and others again,Kirghizia, for example, occupy a middle position be-
tween these two extremes. These comrades fail to under-
stand that if the work is not adapted to local conditions,if all the various specific features of each country are
not carefully taken into account, nothing of importance
can be built. The result of this deviation is that they be-come divorced from the masses and degenerate into Left
phrasemongers. The task of the University of the Peoples
of the East is to train cadres in the spirit of uncompro-mising struggle against this simplification.
The second deviation, on the other hand, lies in
the exaggeration of local specific features, forgetful-ness of the common and main thing that links the Soviet
republics of the East with the industrial areas of the
Soviet Union, the hushing up of socialist tasks, adapta-tion to the tasks of a narrow and restricted national-
ism. The comrades who are guilty of this deviation care
little about the internal development of their coun-tries and prefer to leave that development to the nat-
ural course of things. For them, the main thing is
not internal development, but “external” policy, the ex-pansion of the frontiers of their republics, litigation
with surrounding republics, the desire to snatch an extra
piece of territory from their neighbours and thus to get
into the good graces of the bourgeois nationalists in their
respective countries. The result of this deviation is thatthey become divorced from socialism and degenerate
into ordinary bourgeois nationalists. The task of the
University of the Peoples of the East is to train cadresin the spirit of uncompromising struggle against this
concealed nationalism.
Such are the tasks of the University of the Peoples
of the East in relation to the Soviet republics of the
East.
II
THE  TASKS  OF  THE  COMMUNIST
UNIVERSITY  OF  THE TOILERS  OF  THE  EAST
IN  RELATION  TO  THE  COLONIAL
AND  DEPENDENT  COUNTRIES  OF  THE  EAST
Let us pass to the second question, the question of
the tasks of the Communist University of the Toilers of
the East in relation to the colonial and dependentcountries of the East.
What are the characteristic features of the life and
development of these countries, which distinguish themfrom the Soviet republics of the East?
Firstly, these countries are living and developing
under the oppression of imperialism.
Secondly, the existence of a double oppression, in-
ternal oppression (by the native bourgeoisie) and ex-
ternal oppression (by the foreign imperialist bourgeoisie),is intensifying and deepening the revolutionary crisis
in these countries.
Thirdly, in some of these countries, India for ex-
ample, capitalism is growing at a rapid rate, giving rise
to and moulding a more or less numerous class of localproletarians.
Fourthly, with the growth of the revolutionary move-
ment, the national bourgeoisie in such countries is split-ting up into two parts, a revolutionary part (the petty
bourgeoisie) and a compromising part (the big bour-
geoisie), of which the first is continuing the revolution-ary struggle, whereas the second is entering into a
bloc with imperialism.
Fifthly, parallel with the imperialist bloc, anoth-
er bloc is taking shape in such countries, a bloc be-
tween the workers and the revolutionary petty bourgeoi-
sie, an anti-imperialist bloc, the aim of which is com-plete liberation from imperialism.
Sixthly, the question of the hegemony of the prole-
tariat in such countries, and of freeing the masses of thepeople from the influence of the compromising national
bourgeoisie, is becoming more and more urgent.
Seventhly, this circumstance makes it much easier
to link the national-liberation movement in such coun-
tries with the proletarian movement in the advanced
countries of the West.
From this at least three conclusions follow:
1) The liberation of the colonial and dependent coun-
tries from imperialism cannot be achieved without a vic-torious revolution: you will not get independence gratis.
2) The revolution cannot be advanced and the com-
plete independence of the capitalistically developedcolonies and dependent countries cannot be won unless
the compromising national bourgeoisie is isolated,
unless the petty-bourgeois revolutionary masses are freed
from the influence of that bourgeoisie, unless the policy
of the hegemony of the proletariat is put into effect,unless the advanced elements of the working class are
organised in an independent Communist Party.
3) Lasting victory cannot be achieved in the colo-
nial and dependent countries without a real link be-
tween the liberation movement in those countries and the
proletarian movement in the advanced countries of theWest.
The main task of the Communists in the colonial
and dependent countries is to base their revolutionaryactivities upon these conclusions.
What are the immediate tasks of the revolutionary
movement in the colonies and dependent countries inview of these circumstances?
The distinctive feature of the colonies and dependent
countries at the present time is that there no longerexists a single and all-embracing colonial East. Former-
ly the colonial East was pictured as a homogeneous
whole. Today, that picture no longer corresponds tothe truth. We have now at least three categories of colo-
nial and dependent countries. Firstly, countries like
Morocco, which have little or no proletariat, and areindustrially quite undeveloped. Secondly, countries like
China and Egypt, which are under-developed industri-
ally, and have a relatively small proletariat. Thirdly,countries like India, which are capitalistically more
or less developed and have a more or less numerous na-
tional proletariat.
Clearly, all these countries cannot possibly be put
on a par with one another.
In countries like Morocco, where the national bour-
geoisie has, as yet, no grounds for splitting up into a
revolutionary party and a compromising party, the taskof the communist elements is to take all measures to
create a united national front against imperialism. In
such countries, the communist elements can be groupedin a single party only in the course of the struggle
against imperialism, particularly after a victorious revo-
lutionary struggle against imperialism.
In countries like Egypt and China, where the na-
tional bourgeoisie has already split up into a revolu-
tionary party and a compromising party, but wherethe compromising section of the bourgeoisie is not yet
able to join up with imperialism, the Communists can
no longer set themselves the aim of forming a united national front against imperialism. In such countries the
Communists must pass from the policy of a united na-
tional front to the policy of a revolutionary bloc of theworkers and the petty bourgeoisie. In such countries
that bloc can assume the form of a single party, a work-
ers’ and peasants’ party, provided, however, that thisdistinctive party actually  represents a bloc of two forces
—the Communist Party and the party of the revolu-
tionary petty bourgeoisie. The tasks of this bloc areto expose the half-heartedness and inconsistency of
the national bourgeoisie and to wage a determined
struggle against imperialism. Such a dual party isnecessary and expedient, provided it does not bind
the Communist Party hand and foot, provided it does
not restrict the freedom of the Communist Party toconduct agitation and propaganda work, provided it
does not hinder the rallying of the proletarians around
the Communist Party, and provided it facilitates the
actual leadership of the revolutionary movement by
the Communist Party. Such a dual party is unnecessaryand inexpedient if it does not conform to all these con-
ditions, for it can only lead to the communist elements
becoming dissolved in the ranks of the bourgeoisie, tothe Communist Party losing the proletarian army.
The situation is somewhat different in countries
like India. The fundamental and new feature of the con-ditions of life of colonies like India is not only that
the national bourgeoisie has split up into a revolution-
ary party and a compromising party, but primarily thatthe compromising section of this bourgeoisie has already
managed, in the main, to strike a deal with impe-
rialism. Fearing revolution more than it fears imperial-ism, and concerned more about its money-bags than
about the interests of its own country, this section of
the bourgeoisie, the richest and most influential section,is going over entirely to the camp of the irreconcilable
enemies of the revolution, it is forming a bloc with
imperialism against the workers and peasants of its owncountry. The victory of the revolution cannot be achieved
unless this bloc is smashed. But in order to smash this
bloc, fire must be concentrated on the compromisingnational bourgeoisie, its treachery exposed, the toiling
masses freed from its influence, and the conditions nec-
essary for the hegemony of the proletariat systemat-ically prepared. In other words, in colonies like India
it is a matter of preparing the proletariat for the role
of leader of the liberation movement, step by stepdislodging the bourgeoisie and its mouthpieces from
this honourable post. The task is to create a revolu-
tionary anti-imperialist bloc and to ensure the hegem-
ony of the proletariat in this bloc. This bloc can
assume, although it need not always necessarily do so,the form of a single workers’ and peasants’ party, for-
mally bound by a single platform. In such countries,
the independence of the Communist Party must bethe chief slogan of the advanced communist elements,
for the hegemony of the proletariat can be prepared
and brought about only by the Communist Party. Butthe Communist Party can and must enter into an open
bloc with the revolutionary wing of the bourgeoisie
in order, after isolating the compromising national bourgeoisie, to lead the vast masses of the urban and rural
petty bourgeoisie in the struggle against imperialism.
Hence, the immediate tasks of the revolutionary
movement in the capitalistically developed colonies and
dependent countries are:
1) To win the best elements of the working class to
the side of communism and to create independent Com-
munist Parties.
2) To form a national-revolutionary bloc of the work-
ers, peasants and revolutionary intelligentsia against
the bloc of the compromising national bourgeoisie and
imperialism.
3) To ensure the hegemony of the proletariat in that
bloc.
4) To fight to free the urban and rural petty bour-
geoisie from the influence of the compromising national
bourgeoisie.
5) To ensure that the liberation movement is linked
with the proletarian movement in the advanced countries.
Such are the three groups of immediate tasks
confronting the leading cadres in the colonial and
dependent countries of the East.
These tasks assume a particularly important charac-
ter and particularly great significance when examined
in the light of the present international situation. The
characteristic feature of the present international situa-tion is that the revolutionary movement has entered a
period of temporary lull. But what is a lull, what does
it mean at the present time? It can only mean an in-tensification of the pressure on the workers of the West,
on the colonies of the East, and primarily on the Soviet
Union as the standard-bearer of the revolutionary move-ment in all countries. There can scarcely be any doubt
that preparation for this pressure on the Soviet Union
has already begun in the ranks of the imperialists. Thecampaign of slander launched in connection with the
insurrection in Estonia,
32 the infamous incitement against
the Soviet Union in connection with the explosion inSofia, and the general crusade that the bourgeois press
is conducting against our country, all mark the prepara-
tory stage of an offensive. It is the artillery prepara-tion of public opinion intended to accustom the general
public to attacks against the Soviet Union and to create
the moral prerequisites for intervention. What willbe the outcome of this campaign of lies and slander,
whether the imperialists will risk undertaking a se-
rious offensive, remains to be seen; but there can scarce-ly be any doubt that those attacks bode no good for
the colonies. Therefore, the question of preparing a coun-
ter-blow by the united forces of the revolution to theblow likely to be delivered by imperialism is an inevi-
table question of the day.
That is why the unswerving fulfilment of the imme-
diate tasks of the revolutionary movement in the colo-
nies and dependent countries acquires particular impor-tance at the present time.
What is the mission of the University of the Peoples
of the East in relation to the colonial and dependentcountries in view of all these circumstances? Its mis-
sion is to take into account all the specific features of
the revolutionary development of these countries andto train the cadres coming from them in a way that will
ensure the fulfilment of the various immediate tasks
I have enumerated.
In the University of the Peoples of the East there
are about ten different groups of students who have come
here from colonial and dependent countries. We all knowthat these comrades are thirsting for light and knowl-
edge. The task of the University of the Peoples of the
East is to make them into real revolutionaries, armedwith the theory of Leninism, equipped with practical
experience of Leninism, and capable of carrying out
the immediate tasks of the liberation movement in thecolonies and dependent countries with all their heart
and soul.
In this connection it is necessary to bear in mind
two deviations in the practice of the leading cadres in
the colonial East, two deviations which must be combat-
ed if real revolutionary cadres are to be trained.
The first deviation lies in an under-estimation of
the revolutionary potentialities of the liberation move-
ment and in an over-estimation of the idea of a united,all-embracing national front in the colonies and depend-
ent countries, irrespective of the state and degree of
development of those countries. That is a deviation to
the Right, and it is fraught with the danger of the
revolutionary movement being debased and of thevoices of the communist elements becoming drowned
in the general chorus of the bourgeois nationalists. It
is the direct duty of the University of the Peoples ofthe East to wage a determined struggle against that
deviation.
The second deviation lies in an over-estimation of
the revolutionary potentialities of the liberation move-
ment and in an under-estimation of the role of an alli-
ance between the working class and the revolutionarybourgeoisie against imperialism. It seems to me that
the Communists in Java, who not long ago mistakenly
put forward the slogan of Soviet power for their country,are suffering from this deviation. That is a deviation to
the Left, and it is fraught with the danger of the Com-
munist Party becoming divorced from the masses andconverted into a sect. A determined struggle against
that deviation is an essential condition for the training
of real revolutionary cadres for the colonies and depend-ent countries of the East.
Such, in general, are the political tasks of the Uni-
versity of the Peoples of the East in relation to the peo-ples of the Soviet East and of the colonial East.
Let us hope that the University of the Peoples of
the East will succeed in carrying out these tasks withhonour.
Pravda ,  No.  115,
May  22,  1925
TO  ALL  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE  EDITORIAL
BOARD  OF  KOMSOMOLSKAYA  PRAVDA33
Comrades, in view of the great importance of Kom-
somolskaya Pravda , I should like to share with you my
first impressions of some of the articles in that news-
paper.
1) We are of the opinion that certain passages in
Stetsky’s articles “A New Stage in the New Economic
Policy” evoke doubts. In those articles, in a mild formit is true, countenance is given to the slogan “enrich
yourselves.” That is not our slogan, it is incorrect, it
gives rise to a whole series of doubts and misunderstand-ings and has no place in a leading article in Komsomol-
skaya Pravda . Our slogan is socialist accumulation.
We are removing the administrative obstacles to animprovement of the welfare of the countryside. That
operation will undoubtedly facilitate all accumulation,
both private-capitalist and socialist. But the Party hasnever yet said that it makes private accumulation its
slogan. We are giving NEP full scope and permit-
ting private accumulation in order  to facilitate the
implementation of our slogan of socialist accumulation
within the framework of our national economy. Perhaps
some of our comrades regard this as a debatable question.If so, it should be stated that the slogan “enrich your-
selves” is a debatable one, and that articles in favour
of such a slogan are printed for discussion. On the other
hand it is obvious that Komsomolskaya Pravda  is not
an organ for discussion, but primarily a positive organ,which presents its readers with the slogans and proposi-
tions generally accepted by the Party.
In short, whichever way you look at the question,
from the formal standpoint, or from the standpoint of
the substance of the matter, in this respect Stetsky’s ar-
ticle must be regarded as unsatisfactory. You must bemore careful in future.
2) The point in Stetsky’s articles about non-capi-
talist development in the countryside is also not quiteacceptable. Formerly it was possible to speak of a non-
capitalist path of development. Now, however, when an
actual struggle between the elements of socialist devel-opment and the elements of capitalist development has
begun and is expanding to the full, it would be more
correct to speak of the socialist path of development.Otherwise, the impression may be created that besides
the two paths of development, capitalist and socialist,
there is a third path, which is wrong, and at any rateunconvincing.
3) It seems to me that the passage in Slepkov’s ar-
ticle “Lenin’s Legacy,” about the Communists andYoung Communist Leaguers having to compete  with the
non-Party peasant active in organisational and politi-
cal work, is also wrong. Up to now we have raised the
question of forming such an active around the Party
and of training that active, and that was regarded as
correct. Now Slepkov is raising a new question about
the Communists and Young Communist Leaguers hav-
ing to compete with a non-Party active which has still
to be formed. That is wrong, and it is out of accord with
the whole of our campaign under the slogan of revitalising
the Soviets. We must not compete with this active, butform and train it.
4) It would be good to arrange for systematic pub-
lication of supplements to Komsomolskaya Pravda  in the
shape of popular pamphlets by outstanding exponents of
Marxist theory, on communism, the dictatorship of the
proletariat, the October Revolution, and also on variousbranches of economy and administration that are di-
rectly related to the practical work of the active of the
Young Communist League in town and country. Suchsupplements, in the shape of small pamphlets, could
later form a sort of little library for the activists of the
Young Communist League, which could not fail to be ofgreat importance for training the active of the Young
Communist League.
5) It would be good to simplify the style of the ar-
ticles in Komsomolskaya Pravda , to make the contribu-
tors write in a simple way, in short sentences, and, as
far as possible, without employing foreign terms, asIlyich knew how to write. At least, it should be pos-
sible to publish, also in the shape of a supplement to
Komsomolskaya Pravda , a small glossary of foreign words,
or at any rate to give in the text of the articles explana-
tions of foreign words if the latter really cannot be
avoided.
J. Stalin
V . Molotov
A. Andreyev
Moscow,  June  2,  1925
Published  for  the  first  time
QUESTIONS  AND  ANSWERS
Speech  Delivered  at  the  Sverdlov  University
June  9,  1925
Comrades, I shall answer the questions you have sub-
mitted in writing. I shall deal with them in the order
in which they are given in your note. As you know,there are ten questions.
Let us begin with the first question.
I
What measures and what conditions would help to
strengthen the bond between the working class and the peas-
antry under the proletarian dictatorship if the Soviet
Union is not supported by a social revolution of the West-ern proletariat during the next ten to fifteen years?
I think that this question embraces all your other
written questions. Therefore, my answer will be of a
general, and hence far from exhaustive, character. Other-
wise, there will be nothing left to say in answer to theother questions.
I think that the decisions of the Fourteenth Party
Conference give an exhaustive answer to this question.These decisions say that the chief guarantee that the
bond will be strengthened is a correct policy towards
the peasantry.
But what is a correct policy towards the peasantry?
It can consist only of a series of measures—econom-
ic, administrative-political and cultural-educational—that will ensure the strengthening of the bond.
Let us start with the economic sphere.
First of all, the survivals of war communism in the
countryside must be eliminated. Further, a correct pol-
icy must be pursued in relation to the prices of manu-
factured goods and agricultural produce, a policy thatwill ensure the rapid growth of industry and agricul-
ture and the elimination of the “scissors.” Further-
more, the total amount of the agricultural tax must bereduced and the tax must be gradually transferred from
the state budget to the local budgets. The vast masses
of the peasantry must be organised in co-operatives,primarily in agricultural and credit co-operatives, as
a means of drawing peasant economy into the general
system of socialist construction. The countryside mustbe supplied with the maximum amount of tractors as
a means of bringing about a technical revolution in ag-
riculture and as the way towards creating culturaland technical centres in the countryside. Finally, the
plan for electrification must be carried out as a means
of bringing the countryside closer to the towns and ofabolishing the antithesis between them.
Such is the path along which the Party must proceed
if it wants to ensure the bond between town and countryin the economic sphere.
I should like to draw your attention to the question
of transferring the agricultural tax from the statebudget to the local budgets. It may seem strange to you,
but it is nevertheless a fact, that the agricultural tax is
assuming, and will steadily more and more assume, the
character of a local tax. You know, for example, that
formerly, a year or two ago, the agricultural tax was thechief, or almost the chief, item of revenue in our state
budget. But now? Now it is a small item in the state
budget. Today, the state budget amounts to 2,500 mil-lion rubles, but the revenue from the agricultural tax
will amount, may amount, this year to 250-260 mil-
lion rubles at most, that is, 100 million rubles less thanlast year. As you see, it is not very much. And the more
the state budget grows, the smaller will be the propor-
tion represented by this tax. Secondly, 100 million outof the 260 million obtained from the agricultural tax
will go to the local budgets. That is more than a third
of the total revenue from this tax. What is the explana-tion of this? The fact that of all the existing taxes, the
agricultural tax is most closely connected with local
conditions and can be most easily utilised for local needs.There can scarcely be any doubt that the local budgets in
general will grow, but it is also beyond doubt that they will
grow primarily on account of the agricultural tax, whichshould be adapted to the utmost to local conditions. That
is all the more probable for the reason that the bulk of
our state revenues is already coming, and in futurewill in general increasingly come, from other sources,
from our state enterprises, indirect taxes and so forth.
That is why the transfer of the agricultural tax from
the state budget to the local budgets may in time become
likely and quite expedient from the standpoint of strength-
ening the bond.
Let us pass to the measures for ensuring the bond
in the administrative and political sphere.
Implanting Soviet democracy in town and coun-
try and revitalising the Soviets with a view to sim-
plifying, cheapening, and morally improving the stateapparatus, with a view to expelling elements of
bureaucracy and bourgeois corruption from this ap-
paratus, with a view to completely linking the stateapparatus with the vast masses—such is the path along
which the Party must proceed if it wants to strengthen
the bond in the sphere of administrative and politicaldevelopment.
The dictatorship of the proletariat is not an end
in itself. The dictatorship is a means, a way of achiev-ing socialism. But what is socialism? Socialism is the
transition from a society with the dictatorship of the pro-
letariat to a stateless society. To effect this transition,however, preparations must be made for altering the state
apparatus in such a way as to ensure in fact that the
society with the dictatorship is transformed into commu-nist society. That purpose is served by the slogan of
revitalising the Soviets, the slogan of implanting Soviet
democracy in town and country, the slogan of drawing thebest elements of the working class and the peasantry into
the direct work of governing the country. It will be im-
possible to reform the state apparatus, to alter it thor-oughly, to expel elements of bureaucracy and corruption
from it and to make it near and dear to the broad masses
unless the masses themselves render the state apparatusconstant and active assistance. But on the other hand,
active and continuous assistance of the masses is im-
possible unless the best elements of the workers andpeasants are drawn into the organs of government, un-
less direct and close connection is established between
the state apparatus and the “rank and file” of the toiling
masses.
What distinguishes the Soviet state apparatus from
the apparatus of the bourgeois state?
Above all, the fact that the bourgeois state appara-
tus stands above  the masses and, as a consequence, it is
separated from the population by an impassable barrier
and by its very spirit is alien to the masses of the peo-
ple. The Soviet state apparatus, however, merges  with
the masses, for it cannot and must not stand above the
masses if it wants to remain a Soviet state apparatus,
for it cannot be alien to these masses if it really wantsto embrace the millions of working people. That is one
of the fundamental differences between the Soviet state
apparatus and the apparatus of the bourgeois state.
Lenin once said in his pamphlet Can the Bolsheviks
Retain State Power?  that the 240,000 members of the
Bolshevik Party could undoubtedly govern the countryin the interests of the poor and against the rich, for they
were in no way inferior to the 130,000 landlords who
governed the country in the interests of the rich andagainst the poor. On these grounds, some Communists
think that the state apparatus can consist merely of
several hundred thousand Party members, and that thisis quite enough for the purpose of governing a vast coun-
try. From this standpoint they are sometimes not averse
to identifying the Party with the state. That is wrong,comrades. It is a distortion of Lenin’s idea. When speak-
ing of the 240,000 members of the Bolshevik Party, Lenin
did not in the least mean that this figure indicated, orcould indicate, the total personnel and general scope of
the Soviet state apparatus. On the contrary, in addition
to the members of the Party, he included in the state
apparatus the million electors who cast their votes for
the Bolsheviks at that time, before October, stating thatwe had the means by which at one stroke to enlarge tenfold
our state apparatus, that is to say, to increase its personnel
to at least 10,000,000 by drawing the working peopleinto the daily work of governing the state.
“These 240,000,” said Lenin, “are already backed by not
less than a million votes of the adult population, for this is pre-
cisely the proportion between the number of Party members and
the number of votes cast for it established by the experience of
Europe and the experience of Russia, as shown, for example, by
the August elections to the Petrograd Duma. Thus, we already
have a ‘state apparatus’ of one million  people who will be devoted
to the socialist state for the sake of their ideals and not for the
sake of receiving a fat sum on the 20th of every month.
“Not only that. We have a ‘magic means’ by which at once,
at one stroke to enlarge tenfold  our state apparatus, a means which no
capitalist state ever possessed nor could possess. This magic means
is that of drawing the working people, drawing the poor, into the
daily work of governing the state” (see Vol. XXI, pp. 264-65).
How does this “drawing the working people, drawing
the poor, into the daily work of governing the state”take place?
It takes place through organisations based on
mass initiative, all kinds of commissions and com-mittees, conferences and delegate meetings, that spring
up around the Soviets, economic bodies, factory commit-
tees, cultural institutions, Party organisations, youthleague organisations, all kinds of co-operative associa-
tions, and so on and so forth. Our comrades some-
times fail to see that around the low units of our
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

Party, Soviet, cultural, trade-union, educational, Y .C.L.
and army organisations, around the departments for work
among women and all other kinds of organisations, thereare whole teeming ant-hills—organisations, commissions
and conferences which have sprung up of their own accord
and embrace millions of non-Party workers and peasants—ant-hills which, by their daily, inconspicuous, painstak-
ing, quiet work, provide the basis and the life of the
Soviets, the source of strength of the Soviet state. If ourSoviet and Party organs did not have the help of these
organisations embracing millions, the existence and
development of Soviet power, the guidance and adminis-tration of a great country would be absolutely inconceiv-
able. The Soviet state apparatus does not consist solely
of Soviets. The Soviet state apparatus, in the profoundmeaning of the term, consists of the Soviets plus all the
diverse non-Party and Party organisations, which embrace
millions, which unite the Soviets with the “rank and file,”which merge  the state apparatus with the vast masses
and, step by step, destroy everything that serves as a
barrier between the state apparatus and the people.
That is how we must strive to “enlarge tenfold” our
state apparatus, making it near and dear to the vast
masses of the working people, expelling the survivalsof bureaucracy from it, merging it with the masses and
thereby preparing the transition from a society with
the dictatorship of the proletariat to communist society.
Such is the meaning and significance of the slogan of
revitalising the Soviets and implanting Soviet democracy.
Such are the principal measures for strengthening
the bond that must be taken in the administrative and
political sphere of the Party’s work.
As regards the measures for ensuring the bond in the
cultural and educational sphere of work, little need be
said about them, for they are obvious and commonlyknown, and therefore need no explanation. I should
only like to indicate the main line of work in this sphere
for the immediate future. This main line lies in pre-paring the conditions necessary for introducing universal,
compulsory, primary education throughout the coun-
try, throughout the Soviet Union. That is a very import-ant reform, comrades. Its achievement will be a great
victory not only on the cultural front, but also on the
political and economic fronts. That reform must serveas the basis of an immense advance of the country. But it
will cost hundreds of millions of rubles. Suffice it to say
that to carry it out a whole army of men and womenschool-teachers, almost half a million, will be needed.
But we must, in spite of everything, carry out this re-
form in the very near future if we really intend to raisethe country to a higher cultural level. And we shall do
it, comrades. There can be no doubt about that.
Such is the answer to your first question.Let us now pass to the second question.
II
What dangers are there of our Party degenerating
as a result of the stabilisation of capitalism , if this stabi-
lisation lasts a long time?
Are we faced by such dangers at all?
Such dangers, as possible and even real dangers,
undoubtedly exist. They face us quite apart from
stabilisation. Stabilisation merely makes them more pal-
pable. Of those dangers, taking the most important of
them, I think there are three:
a) the danger of losing the socialist perspective in
our work of building up our country, and the danger of
liquidationism connected with it;
b) the danger of losing the international revolution-
ary perspective, and the danger of nationalism connect-
ed with it;
c) the danger of a decline of Party leadership and the
possibility connected with it of the Party’s conversion
into an appendage of the state apparatus.
Let us begin with the first danger.
The characteristic feature of this danger is lack
of confidence in the internal forces of our revolution;lack of confidence in the alliance between the workers
and peasants; lack of confidence in the leading role of
the working class within that alliance; lack of confidencein the conversion of “NEP Russia” into “socialist
Russia”; lack of confidence in the victory of socialist
construction in our country.
That is the path of liquidationism and degeneration,
for it leads to the liquidation of the principles and aims
of the October Revolution, to the degeneration of theproletarian state into a bourgeois-democratic state.
The source of this “frame of mind,” the soil on which
it has arisen in the Party, is the growth of bourgeoisinfluence on the Party in the conditions of the New Eco-
nomic Policy and of the desperate struggle between the
capitalist and socialist elements in our national econ-omy. The capitalist elements are fighting not only in
the economic sphere; they are trying to carry the fight
into the sphere of proletarian ideology, trying to infect
the least stable detachments of the Party with lack of
confidence in the possibility of building socialism, withscepticism concerning the socialist prospects of our work
of construction, and it cannot be said that their efforts
have been entirely fruitless.
Some of these infected “Communists” say: “How
can a backward country like ours build a complete so-
cialist society? The state of the productive forces of ourcountry makes it impossible for us to set ourselves such
utopian aims. God grant that we hold on somehow. How
can we dream of building socialism? Let us build in oneway or another, and we shall see what happens. . . .”
Others say: “We have already fulfilled our revolution-
ary mission by making the October Revolution. Noweverything depends on the international revolution,
for we cannot build socialism unless the Western pro-
letariat first gains victory. Strictly speaking, a revolu-tionary has nothing more to do in Russia.” . . . As you
know, in 1923, on the eve of the German revolution, some
of our young students were ready to throw down theirbooks and go to Germany. They said: “A revolutionary
has nothing to do in Russia. We must throw down our
books and go to Germany to make a revolution.”
As you see, both these groups of “Communists,” the
first and the second, adopt the standpoint of denying
the socialist potentialities of our work of construction,they adopt a liquidationist standpoint. The difference
between them is that the first group cover up their liqui-
dationism with the “scientific” “theory of productiveforces” (no wonder Milyukov praised them in Posledniye
Novosti
34 the other day, calling them “serious Marxists”),
whereas the second group cover it up with Left and
“terribly revolutionary” phrases about world revolution.
Indeed, let us assume that a revolutionary has nothing
to do in Russia; let us assume that it is inconceivable,
impossible, to build socialism in our country until
socialism is victorious in other countries; let us assumethat the victory of socialism in the advanced countries
is delayed for another ten or twenty years—can we
suppose that under those circumstances the capitalistelements in our economy, acting in the conditions of
capitalist encirclement of our country, will agree to
cease their mortal struggle against the socialist ele-ments in this economy and wait with folded arms for the
victory of the world revolution? It is enough to put
this question to realise how utterly absurd that suppo-sition is. But if that supposition is excluded, what is
there left for our “serious Marxists” and “terrible revo-
lutionaries” to do? Obviously, only one thing is leftfor them: to loaf around, surrender to the elemental
forces and gradually degenerate into ordinary bour-
geois democrats.
One thing or the other: either  we regard our country
as the base of the proletarian revolution, either we have, as
Lenin said, all that is needed to build a complete social-ist society—in which case we can and must build such
a society in expectation of complete victory over the
capitalist elements in our national economy; or we do
not regard our country as the base of the revolution,
we have not got what is needed to build socialism, and
we cannot build a socialist society—in which case, if thevictory of socialism in other countries is delayed, we
must resign ourselves to the prospect that the capitalist
elements in our national economy will gain the upper
hand, that the Soviet regime will decay, and the Party
will degenerate.
One thing or the other.
That is why lack of confidence in the socialist po-
tentialities of our work of construction leads to liqui-dationism and to degeneration.
That is why the struggle against the liquidationist
danger is an immediate task of our Party, particularlyat the present time, particularly during the temporary
stabilisation of capitalism.
Let us pass to the second danger.The characteristic feature of that danger is lack of
confidence in the international proletarian revolution;
lack of confidence in its victory; a sceptical attitudetowards the national-liberation movement in the colo-
nies and dependent countries; failure to understand that
without the support of the revolutionary movement inother countries our country would not be able to hold
out against world imperialism; failure to understand
that the victory of socialism in one country alone cannotbe final because it has no guarantee against intervention
until the revolution is victorious in at least a number
of countries; failure to understand the elementary de-mand of internationalism, by virtue of which the victory
of socialism in one country is not an end in itself, but
a means of developing and supporting the revolutionin other countries.
That is the path of nationalism and degeneration,
the path of the complete liquidation of the proletariat’sinternational policy, for people afflicted with this dis-
ease regard our country not as a part of the whole that
is called the world revolutionary movement, but as the
beginning and the end of that movement, believing that
the interests of all other countries should be sacrificedto the interests of our country.
Support the liberation movement in China? But
why? Wouldn’t that be dangerous? Wouldn’t it bringus into conflict with other countries? Wouldn’t it be
better if we established “spheres of influence” in China
in conjunction with other “advanced” powers and snatchedsomething from China for our own benefit? That would
be both useful and safe. . . . Support the liberation
movement in Germany? Is it worth the risk? Wouldn’t itbe better to agree with the Entente about the Ver-
sailles Treaty and bargain for something for ourselves by
way of compensation?. . . Maintain friendship withPersia, Turkey and Afghanistan? Is the game worth
the candle? Wouldn’t it be better to restore the “sphere
 of influence” with one or other of the Great Powers?And so on and so forth.
Such is the new type of nationalist “frame of mind,”
which is trying to liquidate the foreign policy of theOctober Revolution and is cultivating the elements of
degeneration.
Whereas the first danger, the danger of liquidation-
ism, springs from the growth of bourgeois influence on
the Party in the sphere of internal policy, in the sphere
of the struggle between the capitalist and socialist ele-ments in our national economy, the second danger, the
danger of nationalism, must be regarded as springing
from the growth of bourgeois influence on the Partyin the sphere of foreign policy, in the sphere of the struggle
that the capitalist states are waging against the state
of the proletarian dictatorship. There can scarcely be
any doubt that the pressure of the capitalist states on our
state is enormous, that the people who are handling ourforeign policy do not always succeed in resisting this
pressure, that the danger of complications often gives
rise to the temptation to take the path of least resistance,the path of nationalism.
On the other hand, it is obvious that the first country
to be victorious can retain the role of standard-bearerof the world revolutionary movement only on the basis
of consistent internationalism, only on the basis of the
foreign policy of the October Revolution, and that thepath of least resistance and of nationalism in foreign
policy is the path of the isolation and decay of the first
country to be victorious.
That is why losing the international revolutionary
perspective leads to the danger of nationalism and degen-
eration.
That is why the struggle against the danger of na-
tionalism in foreign policy is an immediate task of the
Party.
Finally, about the third danger.
The characteristic feature of that danger is lack of
confidence in the Party’s internal forces; lack of confi-dence in the Party’s leadership; the efforts of the state
apparatus to weaken the Party’s leadership, to free
itself from it; failure to understand that without theParty’s leadership there can be no proletarian dicta-
torship.
This danger arises on three sides.Firstly. The classes that have to be led have changed.
The workers and peasants today are no longer what they
were in the period of war communism. Formerly, the
working class was declassed and scattered, and the peas-
ants were in dread of the return of the landlords inthe event of defeat in the civil war, while in that period
the Party was the only concentrated force, which direct-
ed affairs in military fashion. The situation is differentnow. There is no war now. Consequently, there is no war
danger to rally the toiling masses around the Party.
The proletariat has recovered and has risen to a higherlevel, both culturally and materially. The peasantry
has also developed and risen to a higher level. The polit-
ical activity of both classes is growing and will con-tinue to grow. It is now no longer possible to lead in
the military fashion. Firstly, there must be the utmost
flexibility in leadership. Secondly, there must be extremesensitiveness to the requirements and needs of the work-
ers and peasants. Thirdly, there must be the ability
to draw into the Party the best of the workers and peas-ants who have come to the fore as a result of the devel-
opment of the political activity of these classes. But
these conditions and qualities are not created at onestroke, as we know. Hence the discrepancy between
what is demanded of the Party and the possibilities at
the disposal of the Party at the present time. Hence, also,the danger of a weakening of the Party’s leadership, the
danger of the Party losing the leadership.
Secondly. During the recent period, during the pe-
riod of economic development, the apparatuses of the
state and public organisations have considerably grown
and gained in strength. The trusts and syndicates, thetrading and credit institutions, the administrative-
political and cultural-educational organisations, and,
finally, the co-operatives of all kinds, have grown and
expanded considerably, having absorbed hundreds of
thousands of new people, mainly non-Party people.But these apparatuses are not only growing in per-
sonnel; their power and influence are growing too.
And the more their importance grows the more pal-pable becomes their pressure on the Party, the more
 persistently do they strive to weaken the Party’s lead-
ership, and the stronger becomes their resistance tothe Party. The forces in those apparatuses must be
regrouped and the leading people in them must be
distributed in such a way as to ensure the Party’sleadership in the new situation. But that cannot be
achieved at one stroke, as we know. Hence the danger
of the state apparatus becoming divorced from the Party.
Thirdly. The work itself has become more complicat-
ed and differentiated. I am speaking of the present work
of construction. Entire branches and sub-branches ofwork have arisen and developed in both town and country.
Accordingly, leadership has become more concrete. For-
merly, it was customary to speak of leadership “in gener-al.” Today, leadership “in general” is mere talk, for
there is no leadership in it whatever. Today we must
have concrete, specific leadership. The past perioddeveloped a know-all type of Party worker who was
ready to answer all questions of theory and practice.
Today, this old, know-all type of Party worker mustgive way to a new type, who strives to become an
expert in a given branch of work. To give real leadership,
one must know the work, one must study the work con-scientiously, patiently and perseveringly. One cannot give
leadership in the countryside without a knowledge of
agriculture, without a knowledge of the co-operatives,
without being familiar with the price policy, without
having studied the laws that directly concern the country-side. One cannot give leadership in a town without a knowl-
edge of industry, without studying the life of the workers,
without paying heed to the requirements and needs ofthe workers, without a knowledge of co-operative, trade-
union and club affairs. But can all this be acquired at
one stroke? Unfortunately, it cannot. To raise Partyleadership to the requisite level, it is first of all necessary
to raise the qualifications of the Party workers. Today
the quality of the Party worker must be the firstconsideration. But it is not so easy to improve the qual-
ity of the Party worker at one stroke. The old habit
of hastily issuing orders, which, unfortunately, servedas a substitute for knowledge, still persists in Party organ-
isations. That explains why it is that so-called Party
leadership sometimes degenerates into the ridiculouspiling up of totally useless orders, into empty verbal
“leadership,” which affects nobody and nothing. Herein
lies one of the gravest dangers of the weakening anddecline of the Party’s leadership.
Such, in general, are the reasons why the danger of
the Party losing the leadership leads to the decay anddegeneration of the Party.
That is why a determined struggle against that
danger is an immediate task of our Party.
Such is the answer to your second question.
Let us pass to the third question.
III
How can a struggle be waged against the kulaks with-
out fomenting class struggle?
I think that the question is confused and, there-
fore, presented incorrectly. What class struggle ismeant? If it means class struggle in the countryside in
general, then the proletariat is waging such a struggle
not only against the kulaks. What about the contradic-tions between the proletariat and the peasantry as a
whole—is that not class struggle, even though it assumes
a rather unusual form? Is it not true that at the presenttime the proletariat and the peasantry constitute the
two main classes of our society, that between these
classes there are contradictions, soluble and in the longrun surmountable it is true, but contradictions for all
that, which give rise to a struggle between these two
classes?
I think that the class struggle in our country, if
we have in mind the relations between town and country,
between the proletariat and the peasantry, has threemain fronts:
a) the front of the struggle between the proletariat
as a whole (in the shape of the state) and the peasantryin the matter of establishing maximum prices for manu-
factures and agricultural produce, in the matter of nor-
malising taxation, and so forth;
b) the front of the struggle between the proletariat
as a whole (in the shape of the state) and the kulaks in
the matter of liquidating profiteering prices of agricul-tural produce, in the matter of shifting the main burden
of taxation on to the kulaks, and so forth;
c) the front of the struggle between the rural poor,
above all the agricultural labourers, and the kulaks.
You see that these fronts cannot be equal either in
importance or in the character of the struggle that is
being waged on them. Hence, our attitude towards the
forms of the class struggle that is being waged on thesefronts must be differentiated, it cannot be the same
for all.
Let us examine this more closely.The first front . The proletariat (in the shape of the
state), taking into consideration the weakness of our
industry and the impossibility of obtaining loans forit, took a series of fundamental measures capable of
protecting it from the competition of foreign industry
and of accelerating its development for the benefit ofour entire national economy, including agriculture.
Those measures are: the monopoly of foreign trade, the
agricultural tax, state forms of procurement of agricul-tural produce, the introduction of the planning principle
in the development of the national economy as a whole.
All these are based on the nationalisation of the prin-cipal branches of industry, transport and credit. You
know that those measures have led to what they were
intended to lead to: that is to say, they have checked boththe precipitous fall in the price of manufactured goods
and also the precipitous rise in the price of agricultural
produce. On the other hand, it is obvious that the peas-antry as a whole, as buyers of manufactured goods
and sellers of agricultural produce, prefer to buy those
goods at the lowest possible price and to sell theirproduce at the highest possible price. Equally, the
peasantry would like to have the agricultural tax
abolished altogether, or at least to have it reduced to a
minimum.
Here, then, is the ground for the struggle between
the proletariat and the peasantry.
Can the state abandon the fundamental measures
enumerated above? No, it cannot, for the abandon-ment of those measures would lead at the present time to
the ruin of our industry, to the utter defeat of the
proletariat as a class, to the conversion of our countryinto an agrarian colony of the industrially developed
capitalist countries, to the failure of our entire rev-
olution.
Would it be in the interests of the peasantry as a
whole to abolish those fundamental measures taken by
our state? No, it would not, for their abolition at thepresent time would mean the triumph of the capitalist
path of development, and this path is that of develop-
ment through the impoverishment of the majority ofthe peasants for the sake of the enrichment of a hand-
ful of rich people, a handful of capitalists. Who would
dare to assert that the peasantry is interested in its ownimpoverishment, that it is interested in the conversion
of our country into a colony, that it is not vitally inter-
ested in the triumph of the socialist path of developmentof our national economy?
Here, then, is the ground for the alliance between
the proletariat and the peasantry.
Does that mean that our industrial bodies, relying
on their monopoly, can screw up the prices of manu-
factured goods to the detriment of the interests of thebulk of the peasantry, and to the detriment of industry
itself? No, it does not. Such a policy, above all, would
injure industry, for it would make it impossible to
transform it from the feeble, hothouse plant that
it was only yesterday into the strong and mightyindustry that it must become tomorrow. Hence our
campaign to reduce the prices of manufactured goods
and to raise productivity of labour. You know that thiscampaign is meeting with fairly wide success.
Furthermore, does it mean that our procurement
bodies, relying on their monopoly, can force downthe prices of agricultural produce and make them ruinous
for the peasantry, to the detriment of our entire na-
tional economy? No, it does not. Such a policy, aboveall, would ruin industry, for, firstly, it would make
it difficult to supply the workers with agricultural prod-
uce; and, secondly, it would utterly dislocate and disor-ganise the home market for our industry. Hence our
campaign against the so-called “scissors.” You know
that this campaign has already produced favourableresults.
Finally, does it mean that our local or central bodies,
relying on the agricultural tax law and exercis-ing their right to collect taxes, can regard that law as
something unquestionable and go to such lengths in
actual practice as to demolish the barns and remove theroofs from the houses of impoverished taxpayers, as
happened in some districts of the Tambov Gubernia?
No, it does not. Such a policy would completely destroythe peasants’ confidence in the proletariat, in the state.
Hence the Party’s latest measures to reduce the agri-
cultural tax, to give that tax a more or less local charac-ter, to normalise our taxation affairs in general, to
put a stop to the scandalous practices in the collec-
tion of taxes that have occurred in some places. You know
that those measures have already produced the desired
results.
Thus, we have, firstly, the community of interests of
the proletariat and the peasantry on fundamental ques-
tions, their common interest in the triumph of the social-ist path of development of our national economy. Hence
the alliance of the working class and the peasantry.
We have, secondly, the contradictions between the in-terests of the working class and those of the peasantry
on current questions. Hence the struggle within this al-
liance, a struggle whose importance is outweighed by thatof the community of interests, and which should disappear
in the future, when the workers and the peasants cease to
be classes—when they become working people of a class-less society. We have, thirdly, the ways and means
of solving these contradictions between the working
class and the peasantry within the framework of main-taining and strengthening the alliance between the
workers and the peasants in the interest of both allies.
We not only have those ways and means at our disposal,but we are already employing them successfully in the
complicated conditions of NEP and the temporary
stabilisation of capitalism.
Does it follow from this that we must foment class
struggle on this front? No, it does not. On the contrary!
What follows from this is merely that we must do every-thing to moderate the struggle on this front, to regulate
it by means of agreements and mutual concessions, and
under no circumstances permit it to assume acute forms,to reach the point of clashes. And we are doing this, for
we have every possibility of doing it; for here the
community of interests is stronger and deeper than
the contradiction between them.
As you see, the slogan of fomenting class struggle
is totally unsuitable for the conditions of the struggle
on this front.
The second front . The forces operating here are the
proletariat (in the shape of the Soviet state) and the
kulaks. The forms of the class struggle here are as peculiar
as they are under the conditions of the struggle on thefirst front.
Wishing to give the agricultural tax very definitely
the character of an income tax, the state is shifting themain burden of this tax on to the kulaks. In retaliation,
the kulaks are trying, “by hook or by crook,” to evade
paying, and are exercising all their power and all theirinfluence in the countryside to shift the burden of this
tax on to the middle and poor peasants.
Combating the high cost of living, and endeavouring
to maintain the stability of wages, the state is trying
to take measures of an economic character for the pur-
pose of establishing fair maximum prices for agricul-tural produce which fully meet the interests of peasant
economy. In retaliation, the kulaks buy up the produce
of the poor and middle peasants, accumulate large stocks,hoard them in their barns, and withhold them from the
market in order artificially to screw up the price of prod-
uce to a profiteering level; only then do they releasethose stocks on the market with the object of making
fabulous speculatory profits. You are no doubt aware that
this year, in some gubernias of our country, the kulakshave succeeded in forcing up the price of grain to the
utmost limit.
Hence the class struggle on this front, and its pecu-
liar and more or less hidden forms.
It might seem that the slogan of fomenting class
struggle is quite suitable for the conditions of the struggle
on this front. But that is not true, for here, too, it is not
in our interest to foment class struggle; for here we arequite able to avoid, and must avoid, fomenting class
struggle and the complications resulting from it.
We can and must revitalise the Soviets, win over the
middle peasants and organise the poor peasants in the So-
viets in order to secure relief of taxation for the bulk
of the peasants and actually to shift the main burdenof taxation on to the kulaks. You know that measures
in that direction are being taken and are already pro-
ducing favourable results.
We can and must hold at the disposal of the state
sufficiently large food stocks to be able to bring pres-
sure to bear on the food market, to intervene, when nec-essary, to maintain prices at a level acceptable to the
masses of the working people, and in this way to frus-
trate the profiteering machinations of the kulaks. Youknow that this year we have used several tens of mil-
lions of poods of grain for this purpose. You no doubt
know that we have achieved quite favourable resultsin this field, for we have not only succeeded in keeping
the price of grain at a low level in districts like Lenin-
grad, Moscow, the Donets Basin, Ivanovo-Voznesenskand other places, but have also forced the kulaks to sur-
render in a number of districts, compelling them to put
on to the market old stocks of grain at moderate prices.
Of course, things here do not depend upon us alone.
It is quite possible that in some cases the kulaks
themselves will begin to foment class struggle, will try
to bring the struggle to boiling point, will try to give it
the form of bandit or insurrectionary outbreaks. If thathappens, however, the slogan of fomenting class struggle
will not be our slogan, but that of the kulaks, and, there-
fore, a counter-revolutionary one. Moreover, there isno doubt that the kulaks themselves will then get a taste
of all the disadvantages of this slogan against the Soviet
state.
As you see, the slogan of fomenting class struggle
on this front is not our slogan.
The third front . The forces operating here are two: the
rural poor, primarily the agricultural labourers, on the
one hand, and the kulaks, on the other. Formally, the
state stands aside. As you see, this front is not as wideas the preceding fronts. On the other hand, on this front
the class struggle is quite evident and open, whereas
it is hidden and more or less masked on the first twofronts.
Here it is a matter of the direct exploitation of wage-
workers, or semi-wage-workers, by kulak employers.That is why the Party cannot here conduct a policy of
allaying, or moderating the struggle. Here our task is
to organise the struggle waged by the rural poor and tolead this struggle against the kulaks.
But does that mean that we thereby undertake to
foment class struggle? No, it does not. Fomenting astruggle means something more than organising and
leading the struggle. It also means artificially stirring
up and deliberately fanning the class struggle. Is thereany necessity for these artificial measures now, when
we have the dictatorship of the proletariat, and when
the Party and trade-union organisations are operating
quite freely in our country? Of course, not.
Therefore, the slogan of fomenting class struggle is
also unsuitable for this third front.
That is how the matter stands with the third ques-
tion.
As you see, the question of the class struggle in the
countryside is not as simple as it might appear to be
at first sight.
Let us pass to the fourth question.
IV
A workers ’ and peasants ’ government—is it a fact or
an agitational slogan?
It seems to me that the formulation of the question
is rather absurd.
What is the meaning of the formulation: a workers’
and peasants’ government—is it a fact or an agitational
slogan? It suggests that the Party can issue slogans thatare not in accordance with the truth, but merely serve
the purpose of some cunning manoeuvre, here, for some
reason, called “agitation.” It suggests that the Partycan issue slogans that do not have, and cannot have,
scientific substantiation. Is that correct? Of course, not.
Such a party would deserve to vanish like a soap-bubbleafter a brief existence. Our Party would not then be the
Party of the proletariat pursuing a scientific policy;
it would be mere froth on the surface of political events.
Our Government, by its nature, by its programme
and tactics, is a workers’, proletarian, communist
government. There should be no misconception or doubt
on this score. Our Government cannot simultaneously
have two programmes: a proletarian one and some otherkind. Its programme and practical activities are prole-
tarian, communist, and in this sense our Government is
undoubtedly proletarian, communist.
Does that mean that our Government is not at the
same time a workers’ and peasants’ government? No,
it does not. By its programme and activities, our Gov-ernment is proletarian, but at the same time it is a
workers’ and peasants’ government.
Why?Because, under our conditions, the fundamental
interests of the bulk of the peasant masses wholly and
entirely coincide with the interests of the proletariat.
Because, in view of that, the interests of the
peasantry are fully expressed in the programme of the
proletariat, in the programme of the Soviet Govern-ment.
Because the Soviet Government rests on the alliance
of the workers and peasants, which is based on the com-mon fundamental interests of these classes.
Because, finally, in the organs of government, in
the Soviets, there are not only workers, but also peas-ants, who are fighting the common enemy and building
the new life jointly with the workers, under the leader-
ship of the workers.
That is why the slogan “a workers’ and peasants’
government” is not an empty “agitational” slogan, but
the revolutionary slogan of the socialist proletariat,scientifically substantiated in the programme of com-
munism.
That is how the matter stands with the fourth ques-
tion.
Let us pass to the fifth question.
V
Some comrades interpret our policy towards the peas-
antry as an extension of democracy for the peasantry and
as a change in the character of the governmental power
in our country. Is this interpretation correct?
Are we actually extending democracy in the country-
side?
Yes, we are.
Is that a concession to the peasantry?
Certainly, it is.Is it a big concession, and does it keep within the-
 bounds of the Constitution of our country?
I think the concession is not very big, and it does-
 not alter our Constitution one iota.
In that case, what are we changing, and what is the-
 nature of this concession?
We are changing the way in which work in the coun-
tryside is carried out, for the old way is totally unsat-
isfactory under the new conditions of development.We are changing the established state of affairs in the
countryside, which is impeding the bond and disorganis-
ing the work of the Party in rallying the peasantryaround the proletariat.
Until now, the situation was that quite a number of
rural districts were governed by small groups of peopleconnected more with the uyezd and gubernia administra-
tions than with the rural population. The result of this
was that those who governed the rural districts mostly
looked to the top, to the uyezd, and least of all looked to
the bottom, to the rural population; they felt responsiblenot to the villages, not to their electors, but to the uyezd
and gubernia administrations, evidently failing to un-
derstand that the “top” and the “bottom” constitutehere a single chain, and that if the chain is broken below,
the whole of it must collapse. The result of this was
unchecked arbitrariness and tyranny of the rulers,on the one hand, and discontent and murmuring in the
countryside, on the other. We are now putting an end
to this state of affairs in the countryside, resolutely,once and for all.
Until now the situation was that in quite a number
of districts elections to the Soviets in the countrysidewere not real elections, but merely a bureaucratic proce-
dure of smuggling in “deputies” by means of all kinds of
trickery and of pressure exercised by the small groupsof rulers who were afraid of losing power. The result of
this was that the Soviets stood in danger of being trans-
formed from bodies that are near and dear to the massesinto bodies alien to the masses; and the leadership of
the peasants by the workers, that foundation and for-
tress of the proletarian dictatorship, stood in dangerof becoming a fiction. You know that in view of
this the Party was obliged to arrange for new elections
of Soviets, and these elections showed that the old elec-tion practices in quite a number of districts were a
survival of war communism, and that they had to be
abolished as harmful and utterly rotten. We are nowputting an end to such election practices in the coun-
tryside.
That is the basis of the concession, the basis of
the extension of democracy in the countryside.
It is not only the peasantry who need this conces-
sion. It is needed just as much by the proletariat, for
it strengthens the proletariat, raises its prestige in the
countryside and increases the peasants’ confidence inthe proletariat. As is known, the main purpose of con-
cessions, and of compromises generally, is that they
should, in the long run, reinforce and strengthen the pro-letariat.
What are the limits of these concessions at the pres-
ent time?
The limits of these concessions were laid down by
the Fourteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) and by the
Third Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R.
35 You know
that they are not very wide; they are restricted to the
limits I have just spoken about. That, however, does
not mean that they will remain unalterable forever.On the contrary, they will undoubtedly be expanded,
in proportion to the development of our national economy,
in proportion to the growth in strength of the economicand political might of the proletariat, in proportion to
the development of the revolutionary movement in the
West and East, in proportion to the growth in strengthof the international positions of the Soviet state. In 1918,
Lenin spoke of the necessity of “extending the Soviet
Constitution to the   e n t i r e  population   i  n  p  r  o -
p o r t i o n  a s  the resistance of the exploiters ceases”
(see V ol. XXII, p. 372). As you see, it is a matter of
extending the Constitution to the entire  population,
including the bourgeoisie. That was said in March 1918.
From that time until Lenin died more than five years
passed; but not once during that period did Lenin even
hint that it was time to put that proposition into prac-
tice. Why? Because the time to make that extensionhad not yet come. There can be no doubt, however, that
it will come some day, when the internal and interna-
tional positions of the Soviet state are finally consoli-dated.
That is why, although foreseeing the further exten-
sion of democracy in the future, we nevertheless considerit necessary at the present time to restrict the conces-
sions in the sphere of democracy to the limits laid down
by the Fourteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) and bythe Third Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R.
Do these concessions change the character of the
governmental power in the country?
No, they do not.
Do they introduce into the system of the proletarian
dictatorship any changes that would weaken it?
Not in the least, not in the slightest degree.
Far from being weakened, the proletarian dictator-
ship is strengthened by revitalising the Soviets anddrawing the best elements of the peasantry into the work
of administration. The leadership of the peasantry by
the proletariat is not only maintained by the expansionof democracy, but it acquires additional strength, creating
an atmosphere of confidence around the proletariat. And
surely that is the chief thing in the dictatorship of theproletariat, as regards the relations between the prole-
tariat and the peasantry in the system of the dicta-
torship.
Those comrades who assert that the concept of the
dictatorship of the proletariat is limited to the concept of
violence are wrong. The dictatorship of the proletariat is
not only violence ; it is also leadership  of the toiling masses
of the non-proletarian classes, it is also the building
of a socialist economy, which is a higher type of economy
than capitalist economy, with a higher productivity
of labour than capitalist economy. The dictatorship ofthe proletariat is: 1) violence, unrestricted by law, in
relation to the capitalists and landlords , 2) leadership
by the proletariat in relation to the peasantry , 3) the
building of socialism in relation to the whole of society .
Not one of these three aspects of the dictatorship can be
excluded without running the risk of distorting the con-cept of the dictatorship of the proletariat. Only by taking
all these three aspects together do we get a complete and
finished concept of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Does the Party’s new course in the sphere of Soviet
democracy introduce any deterioration into the system
of the proletarian dictatorship?
No, it does not. On the contrary! The new course can
but improve matters by strengthening the system of
the proletarian dictatorship. As regards the element ofviolence  in the system of the dictatorship, the instru-
ment of that violence being the Red Army, it scarcely
needs proof that the implanting of Soviet democracyin the countryside can but improve the state of the
Red Army by rallying it more closely around the So-
viet power, for our army consists mainly of peasants.As regards the element of leadership  in the system of
the dictatorship, there can be scarcely any doubt that the
slogan of revitalising the Soviets can but facilitate theproletariat’s leadership by strengthening the peasants’
confidence in the working class. And as regards the
element of building  in the system of the dictatorship, it
scarcely needs proof that the Party’s new course can but
facilitate the building of socialism, for it has been putinto effect for the purpose of strengthening the bond,
and it is impossible to build socialism without this bond.
Only one conclusion follows: concessions to the
peasantry in the present situation strengthen the prole-
tariat and consolidate its dictatorship without chang-
ing the character of the governmental power in thecountry one iota.
That is how the matter stands with the fifth ques-
tion.
Let us pass to the sixth question.
VI
Is our Party making any concessions to the Right
deviation in the Comintern in connection with the stabili-
sation of capitalism , and if so , is such a tactical manoeuvre
really necessary?
Evidently, this refers to the Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia and the agreement concluded with thegroup headed by Comrades Šmeral and Zapotocky against
the Right elements in that Party.
I do not think our Party has made any concessions
to the Right deviation in the Comintern. On the contrary,
the key-note of the entire enlarged plenum of the Execu-
tive Committee of the Comintern
36 was the isolation of
the Right elements in the Comintern. Read the Comin-
tern’s resolution on the Communist Party of Czechoslo-
vakia, read the resolution on Bolshevisation, and you
will easily see that the Comintern’s chief target was the
Right elements in the communist movement.
That is why it is impossible to say that our Party
has made concessions to the Right deviation in the Com-
intern.
Strictly speaking, Comrades Šmeral and Zapotocky
are not Rights. They do not accept the platform of the
Rights, the platform of the Brünnites. The nearest descrip-
tion would be that they are vacillators between theLeninists and the Rights, with an inclination toward the
Rights. The specific feature of their behaviour at the en-
larged plenum of the Executive Committee of the Comin-tern was that, under the pressure of our criticism, on the
one hand, and as a result of the dangerous prospect of a
split created by the Rights, on the other, they, on thisoccasion, swung to our side, the side of the Leninists,
and pledged themselves to keep in alliance with the
Leninists against the Rights. That is to their credit.But do the comrades think that we should not have of-
fered a hand to the vacillators when the latter swung to the
side of the Leninists, when they made concessions to theLeninists against the Rights? It would be strange and
deplorable if people were to be found among us who are
incapable of understanding the elementary truths ofBolshevik tactics. Has not experience already shown that
the Comintern’s policy on the question of the Communist
Party of Czechoslovakia is the only correct policy? Are notComrades Šmeral and Zapotocky continuing to fight in the
ranks of the Leninists against the Rights? Are not the
Brünnites in the Czechoslovak Party already isolated?
It may be asked: will this be for long? Of course,
I do not know whether this will be for long; I do not
undertake to prophesy. It is obvious, at all events, that
as long as the Šmeralites fight the Rights, the agreement
with the former will remain in force; but as soon as theŠmeralites abandon their present position, the agreement
with them will cease to hold good. But that is not at
all the point now. The point now is that the presentagreement against the Rights strengthens  the Leninists,
creates new possibilities  for them to carry the vacillators
with them. That is the main thing now, and not howComrades Šmeral and Zapotocky may vacillate again
in the future.
Some people think that it is the duty of the Leninists
to support every Left tub-thumper and neurasthenic,
that everywhere and in everything the Leninists are the
inveterate Lefts among the Communists. That is nottrue, comrades. We are Lefts in relation to the non-
communist parties of the working class; but we have never
pledged ourselves to be “more Left than everybody,” asthe late Parvus demanded at one time, and for which he
received a severe telling-off from Lenin. Among Commu-
nists we are neither Lefts nor Rights, we are simplyLeninists. Lenin knew what he was doing when he fought
on two fronts, against both the Left and the Right
deviations in the communist movement. It is not for no-thing that one of Lenin’s best pamphlets deals with the
subject: “ Left-Wing ” Communism, an Infantile Disorder .
I think that the comrades would not have asked me
the sixth question had they paid timely attention to this
latter circumstance.
That is how the matter stands with the sixth ques-
tion.
Let us pass to the seventh question.
VII
Owing to the weakness of the Party organisations in
the countryside, is there not a danger that , with the adoption
of the new course , anti-Soviet agitation in the countryside
will assume a definite ideological form?
Yes, there is such a danger. There can be scarcely
any doubt that conducting elections to the Soviets under
the slogan of revitalising the Soviets means freedom oflocal election propaganda. Needless to say, the anti-
Soviet elements will not miss such a convenient opportu-
nity to squeeze through the loop-hole and once moremake trouble for the Soviet regime. Hence the danger that
anti-Soviet agitation in the countryside will increase
and assume definite form. The elections in the Kuban,in Siberia and in the Ukraine provide eloquent proof of
this. Undoubtedly, the weakness of our rural organi-
sations in a number of districts enhances this danger.It is beyond doubt, too, that the interventionist
proclivities of the imperialist powers also enhance this
danger.
What fosters this danger, what are its sources?
There are at least two such sources.
Firstly, the anti-Soviet elements sense that a cer-
tain change in favour of the kulaks has taken place re-
cently in the countryside, that in a number of districts
the middle peasants have turned towards the kulaks.That might have been guessed before the elections;
after the elections the guess became a certainty. That
is the first and chief basis of the danger that anti-Sovietagitation in the countryside will assume a definite ideo-
logical form.
Secondly, in quite a number of districts our conces-
sions to the peasantry were regarded as a sign of weak-
ness. Before the elections there might have been somedoubt about that; after the elections, there is no room
for doubt. Hence the cry issued by the whiteguard ele-
ments in the countryside: “Press harder!” That is the sec-ond, although less important, basis of the danger that
anti-Soviet agitation in the countryside will increase.
Communists must understand, first of all, that the
present period in the countryside is a period of struggle
to win over the middle peasants , that to win the middle
peasants to the side of the proletariat is the Party ’s par-
amount task in the countryside , that unless this task is
carried out, the danger that anti-Soviet agitation will
assume definite form will increase, and the Party’s newcourse may benefit only the whiteguard elements.
Communists must understand, secondly, that the
middle peasants can be won over now only on the basisof the Party’s new policy in the sphere of the Soviets,
co-operation, credit, the agricultural tax, local budg-
ets, and so forth; that measures of administrativepressure can only do harm and ruin the work; that
the middle peasants must be convinced of the cor-
rectness of our policy by means of measures of aneconomic and political character; that the middle
peasants can be “captured” only by means of example,
by practical proof.
Communists must understand, furthermore, that
the new course has been taken not to stimulate the anti-
Soviet elements, but to revitalise the Soviets and towin over the bulk of the peasant masses, that the new
course does not preclude, but presupposes, a deter-
mined struggle against the anti-Soviet elements, that
if the anti-Soviet elements, regarding the concessions
to the peasantry as a sign of our weakness and utilisingthem for the benefit of counter-revolution, say: “Pres
 harder,” then we must, without fail, show them that the
Soviet power is strong, and remind them of the prisons,which have long been waiting to receive them.
I think that the danger that anti-Soviet agitation
in the countryside will assume a definite ideologicalform and increase will certainly be completely removed
if these tasks of ours are understood and carried out.
That is how the matter stands with the seventh
question.
Let us pass to the eighth question.
VIII
In view of the increased influence of the non-Party
people , is there not a danger that non-Party groups will
be formed in the Soviets?
One can speak of danger in this case only with res-
ervations. There is nothing dangerous in the growth of
the influence of more or less organised non-Party people
in places where the influence of Communists has not yetpenetrated. Such is the case, for example, with the
trade unions in the towns and with non-Party, more or
less Soviet organisations in the countryside. Danger arisesthe moment non-Party organisations begin to think of
usurping the place of the Party.
What is the source of this danger?It is characteristic that no sign, or very little sign
of such danger is to be observed in our working class.
How is this to be explained? By the fact that around our
Party in the working class there is a large active of
non-Party workers who surround the Party with anatmosphere of confidence and link it with the vast
masses of the working class.
It is no less characteristic that such a danger is espe-
cially acute among the peasantry. Why? Because the
Party is weak among the peasantry, the Party has not
yet a large active of non-Party peasants to link it withthe tens of millions of peasants. And yet nowhere, per-
haps, is the need of a non-Party active felt as acutely as
it is among the peasantry.
Only one conclusion follows: to remove the danger
of the non-Party peasant masses becoming divorced
and alienated from the Party we must create aroundthe Party a large non-Party peasant active.
But such an active cannot be created at one stroke,
or in a couple of months. It can be created and singledout from the mass of the peasantry only in the course of
time, in the course of work, in the course of revitalising
the Soviets, in the course of implanting a co-operativecommunal life. For this purpose the Communist must
change his very approach to the non-Party person. For this
purpose the Communist must treat the non-Party personas an equal. For this purpose the Communist must learn
to treat the non-Party person with confidence, to
treat him as a brother. The non-Party person cannotbe expected to display confidence when treated with
distrust in return. Lenin said that the relations between
Party and non-Party people must be those of “mutualconfidence.” Those words of Lenin’s must not be for-
gotten. The creation of an atmosphere of mutual confi-
dence between Party and non-Party people—that is
what is needed first of all in order to prepare the condi-
tions for the creation of a large non-Party peasant activearound the Party.
But how is this mutual confidence to be created?
Not at one stroke, of course, and not by order. It can becreated, as Lenin said, only by means of “mutual testing”
of Party and non-Party people, mutual testing in the
course of the daily practical work. During the first purgeof the Party, the Party members were tested through the
medium of non-Party people, and this was beneficial
for the Party, for it created around it an atmosphere ofextraordinary confidence. Already at that time Lenin
said in this connection that the lessons of the first purge
as regards the mutual testing of Party and non-Partypeople should be extended to all branches of activity.
I think it is high time to recall this advice of Lenin’s
and to take measures to put it into practice.
Thus, mutual criticism and mutual testing of Party
and non-Party people in the course of the daily practical
work as the means of creating an atmosphere of mutualconfidence between them—such is the path along which
the Party must proceed if it wants to remove the danger
of the alienation of the millions of non-Party peoplefrom the Party, if it wants to create a large non-Party
peasant active around its organisations in the country-
side.
That is how the matter stands with the eighth ques-
tion.
Let us pass to the ninth question.
IX
Shall we really be able to carry out the re-equipment
and considerable enlargement of the fixed capital of large-scale industry without foreign assistance?
This question can be interpreted in two ways.
Either  that the questioners have in mind immediate
assistance to the Soviet state in the shape of credits
from the existing capitalist states as an essential condi-tion for the development of Soviet industry—in which
case one answer would have to be given, corresponding
to that way of presenting the question
Or that the questioners have in mind assistance
to the Soviet state on the part of the Western proletar-
iat in the future, after it has achieved victory, as anessential condition for the building of a socialist econ-
omy—in which case a different answer would have to
be given.
To avoid offending anybody, I shall try to answer
both possible interpretations of this question.
Let us start with the first interpretation.Is it possible to develop large-scale Soviet industry
in the conditions of capitalist encirclement without
credits from abroad?
Yes, it is possible. It will be accompanied by great
difficulties, we shall have to go through severe trials,
nevertheless we can industrialise our country withoutcredits from abroad, in spite of all those difficulties.
History up to now knows three ways of the formation
and development of powerful industrial states.
The first way is the seizure and plunder of colonies.
That was the way Britain, for example, developed.
After seizing colonies in all parts of the world, she for
two centuries squeezed “extra capital” out of them for
the purpose of strengthening her industry, and eventuallyshe became the “workshop of the world.” You know that
this path of development is unacceptable for us, for the
seizure and plunder of colonies are incompatible withthe nature of the Soviet system.
The second way is the military defeat of one country
by another and the imposition of indemnities upon thedefeated country. Such was the case with Germany,
for example. After defeating France in the Franco-Prus-
sian war, Germany squeezed an indemnity of 5,000 mil-lions out of France and poured this money into the chan-
nels of her own industry. You know that this path of
development is also incompatible with the nature ofthe Soviet system, for, in essence, it differs in no way
from the first.
The third way is for capitalistically backward coun-
tries to grant concessions to and accept loans from capi-
talistically developed countries on enslaving terms.
Such was the case with tsarist Russia, for example. Shegranted concessions to and accepted loans from the West-
ern powers on such terms and thereby imposed upon
herself the yoke of a semi-colonial existence, which,however, did not preclude the possibility of her even-
tually emerging on to the road of independent industrial
development, not, of course, without the aid of more orless “successful” wars, and, of course, not without plun-
dering neighbouring countries. It scarcely needs proof
that this path is also unacceptable for the Land of So-viets. We did not shed our blood in the three-years’ war
against the imperialists of all countries in order to go
into voluntary bondage to imperialism the very next
day after the victorious termination of the civil war.
It would be wrong to think that in real life each
of these paths of development is necessarily travelled in
its pure form, and is absolutely isolated from the others.
Actually, in the history of individual countries thosepaths often intercrossed and supplemented one another,
presenting an interwoven pattern. An example of such
an interweaving of paths is provided by the history ofthe development of the United States of America. That
is explained by the fact that, notwithstanding all the
differences between them, those diverse paths of devel-opment have certain features in common, which bring
them close to one another and make their interweaving
possible: firstly, all lead to the formation of capitalist
industrial states; secondly, all presuppose an influx
from outside of “extra capital,” obtained in one way or
another, as an essential condition  for the formation of
such states. It would be still more wrong, however, on
these grounds to confuse those paths, to jumble them
together, failing to understand that, after all, thosethree paths of development imply three different modes
of formation of industrial capitalist states, that each of
those paths puts its own special impress upon the com-plexion of those states.
What, then, is the Soviet state to do if the old paths
of industrialisation are unacceptable for it, and if aninflux of new capital on other than enslaving terms is still
out of the question?
It can take a new path of development, a path not
yet fully explored by other countries, the path of devel-
oping large-scale industry without credits from abroad,
the path of industrialising the country without necessar-
ily having an influx of foreign capital, the path indi-
cated by Lenin in his article “Better Fewer, but Better.”
“We must strive,” says Lenin, “to build up a state in which
the workers retain their leadership of the peasants, in which
they retain the confidence of the peasants, and, by exercising the
greatest economy, remove every trace of extravagance from their
social relations.
“We must bring our state apparatus to the utmost degree of
economy. . . . If we see to it that the working class retains the
leadership of the peasantry, we shall be able, by exercising the
greatest possible economy in the economic life of our state, to
use every kopek we save to develop our large-scale machine in-
dustry, to develop electrification. . . . Only when we have done
this,” says Lenin further, “will we, speaking figuratively, be able to
change horses, to change from the peasant, muzhik, horse of poverty,
from the horse of economies adapted to a ruined peasant country,
to the horse which the proletariat is seeking and cannot but seek
—the horse of large-scale machine industry, of electrification, of
Volkhovstroi, etc.” (see Vol. XXVII, p. 417).
That is the path our country has already taken, and
along which it must proceed, in order to develop its
large-scale industry and in order that it may itself de-velop into a powerful, industrial, proletarian state.
As I have already said, that path has not been ex-
plored by the bourgeois states, but that does not meanin the least that it cannot be taken by the proletarian
state. What in this case is impossible, or almost im-
possible, for bourgeois states, is quite possible for theproletarian state. The fact of the matter is that, in this
respect, the proletarian state possesses advantages which
bourgeois states do not, and, perhaps, cannot possess.Nationalised land, nationalised industry, nationalised
transport and credit, monopoly of foreign trade and state-
regulated home trade—these are all new sources of
“extra capital,” which can be used for developing ourcountry’s industry, and which hitherto no bourgeois
state has possessed. You know that the proletarian gov-
ernment is already using these and similar new sourcesfor developing our industry. You know that along
this path we have already achieved some successes of no
little importance.
That is why the path of development that is impos-
sible for bourgeois states is quite possible for the pro-
letarian state, in spite of all the difficulties and trialsinvolved.
Furthermore, it must be noted that the absence at
the present time of an influx of capital from abroad onother than enslaving terms cannot be eternal and abso-
lute. You know that some influx of capital into our coun-
try from abroad has already begun. There is scarcely anyroom for doubt that this influx will increase in proportion
as our national economy grows and becomes consol-
idated.
That is how the matter stands with the first interpre-
tation of the question.
Let us pass to the second interpretation of the
question.
Is it possible to build a socialist economy in our
country before socialism is victorious in the major Euro-pean countries, without direct assistance in machinery
and equipment from the victorious European prole-
tariat?
Before dealing with this question, which, by the by,
I have already answered in the beginning of my speech,
I should like to dispel a very widespread misconception
concerning it. The misconception is that some comrades
are inclined to identify the question of “the re-equipmentand enlargement of the fixed capital of large-scale indus-
try” with the question of building a socialist economy in
our country. Can we agree to such an identification? No,we cannot. Why? Because the scope of the first question
is narrower than that of the second. Because the first
question concerning the enlargement of the fixed capi-tal of industry embraces only a part  of the national econ-
omy, namely, industry, whereas the question concern-
ing the building of a socialist economy embraces thewhole  national economy, namely, both  industry and agri-
culture. Because the problem of building socialism is
the problem of organising  the national economy as a
whole, the problem of correctly combining  industry and
agriculture, whereas, strictly speaking, the question of
enlarging the fixed capital of industry does not eventouch that problem. We can picture to ourselves that the
fixed capital of industry is already being re-equipped
and enlarged, but that would not at all mean that theproblem of building a socialist economy has already been
solved. Socialist society is a producers’ and consumers’
association of those who work in industry and agricul-ture. If, in this association, industry is not linked up
with agriculture, which provides raw materials and food
and absorbs the products of industry, if industry and ag-riculture do not thus constitute a single, national-eco-
nomic whole, there will be no socialism whatever.
That is why the question of the relations between
industry and agriculture, the question of the rela-
tions between the proletariat and the peasantry, is a
fundamental question in the problem of building a so-
cialist economy.
That is why the question of the re-equipment and
enlargement of the fixed capital of large-scale industry
cannot be identified with the question of building a so-
cialist economy.
And so, is it possible to build a socialist economy in
our country before socialism is victorious in other coun-
tries, without direct assistance in machinery and equip-ment from the victorious Western proletariat?
Yes, it is possible. It is not only possible, but neces-
sary and inevitable. For we are already building so-cialism by developing nationalised industry and linking
it with agriculture, implanting co-operatives in the
countryside and drawing peasant economy into the gen-eral system of Soviet development, revitalising the
Soviets and merging the state apparatus with the vast
masses of the people, building a new culture and implant-ing a new social life. Undoubtedly, a multitude of
difficulties face us on this path, and we shall have to
go through a number of trials. Undoubtedly, thingswould be vastly easier if the victory of socialism in the
West came to our aid. But, firstly, the victory of so-
cialism in the West is not “happening” as quickly as wewould like; and, secondly, those difficulties can be sur-
mounted and we are already surmounting them, as you
know.
I spoke about all this in the beginning of my speech.
I spoke about it even before, in my report to the Moscow
active.* And still earlier I spoke about it in my “Pref-
* See this volume, pp. 90-134.— Ed.
ace” to the book On the Road to October . I said that de-
nial of the possibility of building socialism in our coun-
try is liquidationism, which leads to the degenerationof the Party. It is scarcely worth while repeating now
what has already been said several times before. There-
fore, I refer you to the works of Lenin, where you willfind sufficient material and propositions on this subject.
I should like, however, to say a few words about the
history of the question, and about the significance ithas for the Party at the present time.
If we leave out of account the discussion that took
place in 1905-06, we can say that the question of thepossibility of building socialism in one country was
first raised in the Party during the imperialist war, in
1915. As is known, Lenin then for the first time formulat-ed his proposition about “the possibility of the victory
of socialism” first of all “in one capitalist country taken
separately” (see V ol. XVIII, p. 232). That was the period ofthe turn from the bourgeois-democratic revolution to the
socialist revolution. As is known, Trotsky, already at that
time, disputed this proposition of Lenin’s, declaring that“it would be hopeless to think . . . that, for example,
a revolutionary Russia could hold out in the face of a
conservative Europe” (see V ol. III of Trotsky’s Works ,
Part I, p. 90).
In 1921, after the October Revolution and the civil
war, when questions of construction came to the fore,the question of building socialism again rose in the Party.
That was the period when some comrades regarded the
turn towards the “New Economic Policy” as the abandon-ment of socialist aims, as the abandonment of the build-
ing of socialism. As is known, Lenin, in his pamphlet
The Tax in Kind ,37 then defined the turn towards the
“New Economic Policy” as a necessary condition for
linking industry with peasant economy, as a conditionfor building the foundation of a socialist economy, as the
path to the successful building of socialism. That was
in April 1921. As if in answer to this, Trotsky, in January1922, in the preface to his book The Year 1905 , advanced
a totally opposite proposition on the question of build-
ing socialism in our country, declaring that “the con-tradictions in the position of a workers’ government
in a backward country with an overwhelmingly peas-
ant population can be solved only on an internationalscale, in the arena of the world proletarian revolu-
tion.”
    A year later (in 1922) we again get two statementsin opposition to one another: that of Lenin at the ple-
num of the Moscow Soviet, saying “NEP Russia will be-
come socialist Russia,” and that of Trotsky in the post-script to his Peace Programme , saying “real progress
of a socialist economy in Russia will become possible
only after the victory of the proletariat in the majorEuropean countries.”
    Finally, still another year later, shortly before his
death, Lenin reverted to this question again in his ar-ticle “On Co-operation” (May 1923), stating that here
in the Soviet Union, we have “all that is necessary for
building a complete socialist society.”    Such is the brief history of the question.
    This reference to history alone is sufficient to show
that the problem of building socialism in our countryis one of the major problems of our Party’s practical
work. It scarcely needs proof that Lenin would not have
reverted to it repeatedly had he not regarded it as a major
problem of our practical work.
The subsequent development of our economy, the
intensification of the struggle between the socialist and
the capitalist elements within it, and particularly the
temporary stabilisation of capitalism, only served tomake the question of the possibility of building social-
ism in our country more acute and to enhance its im-
portance.
Why is this question so important from the stand-
point of the Party’s practical work?
Because it affects the question of the prospects of
our work of construction, the question of the aims and
objects of that work. You cannot build effectively if
you do not know what you are building for. You cannotmove a step forward if you do not know in what direction
to go. The question of prospects is a cardinal question
for our Party, which is accustomed to have a clear anddefinite goal. Are we building for socialism, in antici-
pation of victory in the building of socialism? Or are
we building at haphazard, blindly, so as, “in anticipa-tion of a socialist revolution throughout the world”
to manure the soil for bourgeois democracy? That is a
fundamental question today. We cannot work and buildeffectively unless we have a clear answer to this no less
clear question. Hundreds and thousands of Party work-
ers, trade-unionists and co-operators, business execu-tives and cultural workers, military men and Young
Communist Leaguers turn to us, asking us, asking our
Party: What is the aim of our work? What are we build-ing for? Woe betide those leaders who are unable, or
unwilling, to give a clear and definite answer to that
question, who begin to shuffle, to send people from
Pontius to Pilate, and drown the socialist prospects of
our work of construction in intellectualist scepticism.
The great significance of Leninism lies, among other
things, in that it does not recognise building at haphaz-
ard, blindly, that it cannot conceive of building withoutprospects, that it gives a clear and definite answer to
the question of the prospects of our work, declaring
that we have all that is needed to build a socialist econ-omy in our country, that we can and must build a com-
plete socialist society.
That is how the matter stands with the question of
the possibility of building a socialist economy.
Whether we shall succeed for certain in building a
socialist economy is another question. That does not de-pend upon us alone. It also depends upon the strength,
or weakness, of our enemies and of our friends outside
our country. We shall build it if we are allowed to doso, if we succeed in prolonging the period of “respite,”
if there is no serious intervention, if intervention is not
victorious, if the international revolutionary movementon the one hand, and our own country on the other, are
sufficiently strong and mighty to make a serious attempt
at intervention impossible. And vice versa, we shall notbuild it if we are crushed as the result of successful inter-
vention.
That is how the matter stands with the ninth
question.
Let us pass to the last question.
X
Indicate the greatest forthcoming difficulties in our
Party and Soviet affairs arising from stabilisation and thedelay of the world revolution, especially difficulties in the
sphere of the relations between the Party and the working
class , and between the working class and the peasantry.
I have counted five such difficulties, having in mind
the chief ones. The part played by the stabilisation ofcapitalism is that it somewhat increases these diffi-
culties.
The first difficulty . This consists of the difficulties
arising from the danger of foreign armed intervention.
That does not mean that we are confronted with the im-
mediate danger of intervention, that the imperialists arealready prepared and fully in a position to intervene in
our country immediately. To be able to do that, impe-
rialism would have to be at least as strong as it was,for example, before the war, which is not the case, as
is known. The present war in Morocco
38 and intervention
in China,39 those rehearsals of future wars and interven-
tion, clearly demonstrate that the backbone of imperial-
ism has weakened. Therefore, it is not a matter of im-
mediate intervention; the point is that, as long as capi-talist encirclement exists, there will always be the dan-
ger of intervention in general, and as long as the danger
of intervention exists we shall have to maintain, forthe purpose of defence, an army and navy, which cost
us hundreds of millions of rubles every year. What does
the annual expenditure of hundreds of millions of rubleson the army and navy mean? It means a corresponding
reduction of expenditure on cultural and economic
development. Needless to say, if there were no danger of
intervention we could use these sums, or at least the
greater part of them, to strengthen industry, to improveagriculture, to introduce, for example, a reform like
universal compulsory primary education, and so forth.
Hence the difficulties in the sphere of constructive workwhich arise from the danger of intervention.
The characteristic feature of this difficulty, which
distinguishes it from all the others, is that to overcomeit does not depend upon us alone, that it can be removed
only by the joint efforts of our country and of the revo-
lutionary movement in all other countries.
The second difficulty . This consists of the difficulties
arising from the contradictions between the proletariat
and the peasantry. I spoke about those contradictionswhen dealing with the question of the class struggle
in the countryside. There is no need whatever to repeat
what has already been said. Those contradictions manifestthemselves in the sphere of the policy relating to prices
of agricultural produce and manufactured goods, in the
sphere of the agricultural tax, rural administration, and soforth. The danger here is that the bond may be disrupted
and that the idea of the proletariat leading the peasantry
may be discredited. Hence the difficulty arising from thisdanger.
The characteristic feature of this difficulty, which
distinguishes it from the preceding one, is that it canbe overcome by our own internal forces. The new course
in the countryside—such is the path that must be taken
to overcome this difficulty.
The third difficulty . This consists of the difficulties
arising from the national contradictions within our
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

Union, from the contradictions between the “centre” and
the “border regions.” Those contradictions develop as a
result of the dissimilarity between the economic and cultu-ral conditions of development at the “centre” and those in
the “border regions,” as a result of the fact that the latter
lag behind the former. Whereas the political contradic-tions in this sphere may be regarded as already over-
come, the cultural, and more especially, the economic
contradictions, are only just arising and taking shape;consequently, they still have to be overcome. The danger
here is twofold: on the one hand, the danger of domi-
nant-nation arrogance and bureaucratic arbitrariness onthe part of those central institutions in the Union which
are unable, or unwilling, to display the necessary sensi-
tiveness to the requirements of the national republics,and, on the other hand, the danger of the republics and
regions becoming imbued with national distrust and na-
tional insularity in relation to the “centre.” To combatthose dangers, especially the first—such is the path
that must be taken to overcome the difficulties in the
sphere of the national question.
The characteristic feature of this difficulty is that,
like the second one, it can be overcome by the internal
forces of the Union.
The fourth difficulty . This consists of the difficulties
arising from the danger that the state apparatus may
become divorced from the Party, the danger that theParty’s leadership of the state apparatus may be weak-
ened. I spoke about that danger when dealing with the
dangers of the Party’s degeneration. It is hardly neces-sary to repeat what has already been said. That danger
is fostered by the presence of bourgeois-bureaucratic
elements in the state apparatus. It is intensified and
aggravated by the growth of the state apparatus and
its increased importance. The task is to reduce the stateapparatus as much as possible, systematically to expel
the elements of bureaucracy and bourgeois decay from
it, to place leading Party forces in the key positions ofthe state apparatus and thus ensure the Party’s leader-
ship of it.
The characteristic feature of this difficulty is that,
like the third one, it can be overcome by our own
forces.
The fifth difficulty . This consists of the danger of a
partial divorce of the Party organisations and trade
unions from the broad working-class masses, from the
needs and requirements of these masses. That dangerarises and develops as a result of the domination of
bureaucratic elements in quite a number of Party and
trade-union bodies, not excluding Party units and fac-tory committees. That danger has increased lately
owing to the slogan “face to the countryside,” which has
shifted the attention of our organisations from the townto the country, from the proletariat to the peasantry.
Many comrades have failed to understand that when
turning to face the countryside they must not turn theirbacks on the proletariat, that the slogan “face to the
countryside” can be implemented only through the me-
dium of the proletariat and with the forces of the prole-tariat, that inattention to the requirements of the work-
ing class can only increase the danger of the Party and
trade-union organisations becoming divorced from themasses of the workers.
What are the signs of this danger?
Firstly, loss of sensitiveness and inadequate atten-
tion of our Party and trade-union organisations to the re-
quirements and needs of the broad working-class masses;secondly, failure to understand that the workers now have
a higher sense of dignity and a sense of being the ruling
class, that they will not understand or tolerate a bureau-cratic attitude on the part of Party and trade-union
organisations; thirdly, failure to understand that one
should not thrust oneself on the workers with ill-con-sidered orders, that attention must now be focussed not on
such “measures,” but on winning for the Party the con-
fidence of the whole working class; fourthly, failure tounderstand that no measures at all extensive affecting
the masses of the workers (for example, going over to
the three-loom system in the textile area) should becarried out without first conducting a campaign among
the workers, without first holding broad production
conferences.
All this results in a number of Party and trade-union
organisations becoming divorced from the broad work-
ing-class masses and in conflicts in the factories. As isknown, the conflicts which flared up in the textile
area recently revealed the existence of all these evils
in a number of our Party and trade-union organisa-tions.
Such are the characteristic features of the fifth diffi-
culty on our path of development.
To overcome these difficulties it is necessary above
all to rid our Party and trade-union organisations of the
manifestly bureaucratic elements, to set about renewingthe composition of the factory committees, to revive
without fail the production conferences, to centre Party
work on the large Party units in industrial enterprises
and to assign the best Party workers to them.
    More attention and thought to the requirements andneeds of the working class, less bureaucratic formalism
in the practical work of our Party and trade-union organ-
isations, more sensitiveness and responsiveness to thesense of class dignity of the working class—such is now
the task.
    That is how the matter stands with the tenthquestion.
Pravda ,  Nos.  139,  141,
142  and  145,  June  21,24,  25  and  28,  1925
TO  THE  SVERDLOV  UNIVERSITY
On  the  Occasion  of  the  Second  Graduation  of  Students
of  Basic  and  Trade-Union  Courses
The Sverdlov University is one of the most powerful
instruments in training the Party’s commanding person-
nel for leading the masses.
During the years it has been in existence the Sverd-
lov University has already given the Party whole detach-
ments of active workers who are now operating on all thefronts of socialist construction.
The University is now handing over for Party work
another detachment of 214 students, the majority ofwhom are workers.
In order that the forthcoming work of this detach-
ment may be fruitful in view of the complex tasks ofconstruction that confront the Party, this detachment
must bear in mind certain new circumstances in our situa-
tion which are of decisive importance at the presenttime.
What are these circumstances?
Firstly, the fact that the basic classes in our coun-
try, the proletariat and the peasantry, have lately under-
gone a substantial change. They have become more active
both in the political and in the economic field, and thisrequires that the Party should adopt a new approach
to them. We no longer have a declassed working class;
that class is now a fully-formed and full-blooded prole-
tarian class, culturally and politically developed. Thisrequires that the Party’s leadership should become more
flexible and thought-out. The same can be said about
the peasantry. It is no longer the old peasantry, underthe scourge of the old scorpions, dreading the loss
of the land that formerly belonged to the landlords
and cowed by the rigours of the surplus appropriationsystem. It is now a new peasantry, which has culturally
developed, which has already forgotten about the land-
lords and the surplus appropriation system, which isdemanding cheap goods and high prices for grain and
is able to exploit to the full the Party’s slogan of
revitalising the Soviets. The utmost flexibility inrelation to the present-day peasantry—that is what is
demanded of the Party now. To win the peasantry anew
to the side of the proletariat—that is now the Party’stask.
Secondly, the circumstance that in a number of dis-
tricts the middle peasants have been found to be in a blocwith the kulaks. That is a fundamental fact that must
not be forgotten for a single moment. From the stand-
point of the alliance between the workers and the peas-ants, the dictatorship of the proletariat is leadership
of the peasantry by the proletariat. But what does lead-
ing the peasantry mean? It means fully restoring theconfidence of the bulk of the peasantry in the work-
ing class and its Party. If there is no such confidence
there is no proletarian leadership, and if there is nosuch leadership there is no proletarian dictatorship.
Hence, to work in the direction of fully restoring the
confidence of the bulk of the peasantry in the working
class—that is the task of the Party and of the Party
workers.
Thirdly, the circumstance that, because of the slo-
gan “face to the countryside,” our Party workers have
of late gradually begun to forget the workers, they havelost sight of the fact that in facing the countryside we
must not turn our backs on the towns, especially on the
proletariat. That, too, is a new fact which must not beforgotten for a single moment. It must be borne in mind
that of late a sense of its power and dignity has especially
developed and grown strong in the working class. Itis the sense of being the master which has developed
in the class which in our country is the ruling class.
That, comrades, is an immense achievement in all ourwork, for a working class that feels that it is not only
the class that works, but also the class that governs—
such a class can perform miracles. But from this it followsthat a Communist who in his work fails to reckon with
this sense of being the master felt by the proletarian
class, fails to understand anything about the new situ-ation; strictly speaking, he is not a Communist, he is
certainly riding for a fall. Therefore, when speaking
about the slogan “face to the countryside” we must atthe same time remember that the main class which is
called upon to implement this slogan is the working class,
that this slogan can be put into practice only to thedegree that the working class really becomes the leading
force in the country. That is why the Party’s immediate
task is to make our local Party workers understand,at last, the absolute necessity of adopting a most
attentive and thoughtful attitude to absolutely all
the requirements of the working class, whether material
or cultural.
The task of your detachment of graduates is to take
all these circumstances into account in your work in the
localities.
I have no doubt that you will be able to carry out
this task.
Permit me to wish you complete success in your forth-
coming work.
With communist greetings,       
J. Stalin 
Pravda ,  No.  132,
June  13,  1925
THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  ONCE  AGAIN
Concerning  the  Article by  Semich
One can only welcome the fact that now, after the
discussion that took place in the Yugoslav Commission,
Semich, in his article, wholly and entirely associateshimself with the stand taken by the R.C.P.(B.) delega-
tion in the Comintern. It would be wrong, however, to
think on these grounds that there were no disagreementsbetween the R.C.P.(B.) delegation and Semich before
or during the discussion in the Yugoslav Commission.
Evidently, that is exactly what Semich is inclined tothink about the disagreements on the national question,
in trying to reduce them just to misunderstandings. Un-
fortunately, he is profoundly mistaken. He asserts in hisarticle that the dispute with him is based on a “series of
misunderstandings” caused by “one, not fully translated,”
speech he delivered in the Yugoslav Commission. In otherwords, it follows that we must make a scapegoat of the
person who, for some reason, did not translate Semich’s
speech in full. In the interests of the truth I must declarethat this assertion of Semich’s is quite contrary to the
facts It would have been better, of course, had Semich
supported his assertion with passages from the speechhe delivered in the Yugoslav Commission, the report of
which is kept in the Comintern files. But for some reason
he did not do this. Consequently, I am compelled to go
through this not very pleasant, but very necessary, pro-cedure for him.
This is all the more necessary since even now, after
Semich has wholly associated himself with the standtaken by the R.C.P.(B.) delegation, there is still much
that is unclear in his present position.
In my speech in the Yugoslav Commission (see Bol-
shevik ,
40 No. 7)* I spoke of disagreements on three ques-
tions: 1) the question of the ways of solving the national
question, 2) the question of the internal social contentof the national movement in the present historical epoch,
and 3) the question of the role of the international fac-
tor in the national question.
On the first question I said that Semich had “not
fully understood the main essence of the Bolshevik
presentation of the national question,” that he sep-arated the national question from the general question
of the revolution, and that, consequently, he was in-
clined to reduce the national question to a constitutionalissue.
Is all that true?
Read the following passage from Semich’s speech
in the Yugoslav Commission (March 30, 1925) and judge
for yourselves:
“Can the national question be reduced to a constitutional issue?
First of all, let us make a theoretical supposition. Let us
suppose that in state X there are three nations A, B, and C. These
three nations express the wish to live in one state. What is the
* See this volume, pp. 69-76. —Ed.
issue in this case? It is, of course, the regulation of the internal
relationships within this state. Hence, it is a constitutional issue.
In this theoretical case the national question amounts toa constitutional issue. . . . If, in this theoretical case, we
reduce the national question to a constitutional issue, it must
be said—as I have always emphasised—that the self-determina-tion of nations, including secession, is a condition for the solu-
tion of the constitutional issue. And it is solely on this plane
that I put the constitutional issue.”
I think that this passage from Semich’s speech
needs no further comment. Clearly, whoever regards the
national question as a component part of the generalquestion of the proletarian revolution cannot reduce it
to a constitutional issue. And vice versa, only one
who separates the national question from the generalquestion of the proletarian revolution can reduce it to
a constitutional issue.
Semich’s speech contains a statement to the effect
that the right to national self-determination cannot be
won without a revolutionary struggle. Semich says:
“Of course, such rights can be won only by means of arevolutionary struggle. They cannot be won by parlia-
mentary means; they can result only from mass revolu-
tionary actions.” But what do “revolutionary struggle”and “revolutionary actions” mean? Can “revolutionary
struggle” and “revolutionary actions” be identified with
the overthrow of the ruling class, with the seizure ofpower, with the victory of the revolution as a condition
for the solution of the national question? Of course not.
To speak of the victory of the revolution as the funda-mental condition for the solution of the national ques-
tion is one thing; but it is quite another thing to put
“revolutionary actions” and “revolutionary struggle” as
the condition for the solution of the national question. It
must be observed that the path of reforms, the consti-tutional path, by no means excludes “revolutionary ac-
tions” and “revolutionary struggle.” Decisive in deter-
mining whether a given party is revolutionary or reform-ist are not “revolutionary actions” in themselves, but
the political aims and objects for the sake of which the
party undertakes and employs these actions. As is known,in 1906, after the first Duma was dispersed, the Rus-
sian Mensheviks proposed the organisation of a “general
strike” and even of an “armed uprising.” But thatdid not in the least prevent them from remaining Men-
sheviks, for why did they propose all this at that time?
Not, of course, to smash tsarism and to organise the com-plete victory of the revolution, but in order to “exert
pressure” on the tsarist government with the object of
winning reforms, with the object of widening the “con-stitution,” with the object of securing the convocation
of an “improved” Duma. “Revolutionary actions” for
the purpose of  reforming the old order, while  power
remains in the hands of the ruling class is one thing—
that is the constitutional path. “Revolutionary actions”
for the purpose of breaking up the old order, for over-throwing the ruling class, is another thing—that is the
revolutionary path, the path of the complete victory
of the revolution. There is a fundamental differencehere.
That is why I think that Semich’s reference to “rev-
olutionary struggle” while  reducing the national ques-
tion to a constitutional issue does not refute, but,
on the contrary, only confirms my statement that Semich
had “not fully understood the main essence of the Bol-
shevik presentation of the national question,” for he
failed to understand that the national question mustbe regarded not in isolation from, but in inseparable
connection with, the question of the victory of the
revolution, as part of the general question of the rev-olution.
While insisting on this, I do not in the least mean
to imply that I have said anything new about Semich’smistake on this question. Not at all. This mistake of
Semich’s was already mentioned by Comrade Manuil-
sky at the Fifth Congress of the Comintern
41 when he
said:
“In his pamphlet The National Question in the Light of Marxism ,
and in a number of articles published in Radnik , the organ of
the Communist Party of Yugoslavia, Semich advocates a
struggle for the revision of the Constitution as a practical slogan
for the Communist Party, that is, he in fact reduces the whole
question of self-determination of nations exclusively to a con-
stitutional issue” (see Stenographic Report of the Fifth Congress ,
pp. 596-97).
Zinoviev, too, spoke about this same mistake in the
Yugoslav Commission, when he said:
“In the prospect drawn by Semich it appears that only one
little thing is lacking, namely, revolution,” that the national
question is a “revolutionary and not a constitutional” problem
(see Pravda , No. 83).
These remarks by representatives of the R.C.P.(B.)
in the Comintern concerning Semich’s mistake couldnot have been accidental, groundless. There is no smoke
without fire.
That is how matters stand with Semich’s first and
fundamental mistake.
His other mistakes arise directly from this funda-
mental mistake.
Concerning the second question, I said in my speech
(see Bolshevik , No. 7) that Semich “refuses to regard
the national question as being, in essence, a peasant
question.”*
Is that true?Read the following passage from Semich’s speech
in the Yugoslav Commission and judge for yourselves:
“What is the social significance of the national movement
in Yugoslavia?” asks Semich, and he answers there: “Its so-
cial content is the competitive struggle between Serb capital on
the one hand and Croat and Slovene capital on the other” (see
Semich’s speech in the Yugoslav Commission).
There can be no doubt, of course, that the competi-
tive struggle between the Slovene and Croat bourgeoisieand the Serb bourgeoisie is bound to play a certain role
here. But it is equally beyond doubt that a man who
thinks that the social significance of the national move-ment lies in the competitive struggle between the bour-
geoisies of the different nationalities cannot regard the
national question as being, in essence, a peasant question.What is the essence of the national question today, when
this question has been transformed from a local, intra-
state question into a world question, a question of thestruggle waged by the colonies and dependent national-
ities against imperialism? The essence of the national
* See this volume, p. 71.— Ed.
question today lies in the struggle that the masses of
the people of the colonies and dependent nationalities
are waging against financial exploitation, against thepolitical enslavement and cultural effacement of those
colonies and nationalities by the imperialist bourgeoisie
of the ruling nationality. What significance can the com-petitive struggle between the bourgeoisies of different
nationalities have when the national question is presented
in that way? Certainly not decisive significance, and,in certain cases, not even important significance. It
is quite evident that the main point here is not that
the bourgeoisie of one nationality is beating, or maybeat, the bourgeoisie of another nationality in the
competitive struggle, but that the imperialist group
of the ruling nationality is exploiting and oppressingthe bulk of the masses, above all the peasant masses, of
the colonies and dependent nationalities and that, by op-
pressing and exploiting them, it is drawing them intothe struggle against imperialism, converting them into
allies of the proletarian revolution. The national question
cannot be regarded as being, in essence, a peasant questionif the social significance of the national movement is
reduced to the competitive struggle between the bourgeoi-
sies of different nationalities. And vice versa, the compet-itive struggle between the bourgeoisies of different nation-
alities cannot be regarded as constituting the social
significance of the national movement if the nationalquestion is regarded as being, in essence, a peasant
question. These two formulas cannot possibly be taken
as equivalent.
Semich refers to a passage in Stalin’s pamphlet
Marxism and the National Question , written at the end
of 1912. There it says that “the national struggle under
the conditions of rising  capitalism is a struggle of the bour-
geois classes among themselves.” Evidently, by thisSemich is trying to suggest that his formula defining
the social significance of the national movement under
the present historical conditions is correct. But Stalin’spamphlet was written before the imperialist war, when
the national question was not yet regarded by Marxists
as a question of world significance, when the Marxists’fundamental demand for the right to self-determination
was regarded not as part of the proletarian revolution,
but as part of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. Itwould be ridiculous not to see that since then the inter-
national situation has radically changed, that the war,
on the one hand, and the October Revolution in Russia,on the other, transformed the national question from a
part of the bourgeois-democratic revolution into a part
of the proletarian-socialist revolution. As far backas October 1916, in his article, “The Discussion on
Self-Determination Summed Up,”
42 Lenin said that
the main point of the national question, the right toself-determination, had ceased to be a part of the general
democratic movement, that it had already become a
component part of the general proletarian, socialist revo-lution. I do not even mention subsequent works on the
national question by Lenin and by other representatives
of Russian communism. After all this, what significancecan Semich’s reference to the passage in Stalin’s
pamphlet, written in the period of the bourgeois -democrat-
ic revolution in Russia, have at the present time, when,as a consequence of the new historical situation, we have
entered a new epoch, the epoch of proletarian  revolution?
It can only signify that Semich quotes outside of space
and time, without reference to the living historical sit-
uation, and thereby violates the most elementary re-quirements of dialectics, and ignores the fact that what
is right for one historical situation may prove to be
wrong in another historical situation. In my speech inthe Yugoslav Commission I said that two stages must
be distinguished in the presentation of the national ques-
tion by the Russian Bolsheviks: the pre-October stage,when the bourgeois-democratic revolution was the issue
and the national question was regarded as a part of
the general democratic movement; and the Octoberstage, when the proletarian revolution was already the
issue and the national question had become a component
part of the proletarian revolution. It scarcely needsproof that this distinction is of decisive significance.
I am afraid that Semich still fails to understand the
meaning and significance of this difference betweenthe two stages in the presentation of the national ques-
tion.
That is why I think Semich’s attempt to regard the
national movement as not being, in essence, a peasant
question, but as a question of the competition between the
bourgeoisies of different nationalities “is due to an un-der-estimation of the inherent strength of the national
movement and a failure to understand the profoundly
popular and profoundly revolutionary character of thenational movement” (see Bolshevik , No. 7).*
That is how the matter stands with Semich’s second
mistake.
* See this volume, p. 72.— Ed.
It is characteristic that the same thing about this
mistake of Semich’s was said by Zinoviev in his speech
in the Yugoslav Commission:
“Semich is wrong when he says that the peasant movement
in Yugoslavia is headed by the bourgeoisie and is therefore not
revolutionary” (see Pravda , No. 83).
Is this coincidence accidental? Of course, not!
Once again: there is no smoke without fire.
Finally, on the third question I stated that Semich
makes an “attempt to treat the national question in Yugo-slavia in isolation from the international situation
and the probable prospects in Europe.”*
Is that true?Yes, it is, for in his speech Semich did not even
remotely hint at the fact that the international situation
under present conditions, especially in relation to Yugo-slavia, is a major factor in the solution of the national
question. The fact that the Yugoslav state itself was
formed as a result of the clash between the two majorimperialist coalitions, that Yugoslavia cannot escape
from the big play of forces that is now going on in the
surrounding imperialist states—all this remained out-side of Semich’s field of vision. Semich’s statement
that he can fully conceive of certain changes taking
place in the international situation which may cause thequestion of self-determination to become an urgent and
practical one, must now, in the present international
situation, be regarded as inadequate. Now it is by nomeans a matter of admitting that the question of the
* Ibid.—Ed.
right of nations to self-determination may become ur-
gent, given certain changes in the international situation,
in a possible and distant future; this could, if need be,now be admitted as a prospect even by bourgeois demo-
crats. That is not the point now. The point now is
to avoid making the present frontiers of the Yugoslavstate, which came into being as a result of war and vio-
lence, the starting point and legal basis for the solution of
the national question. One thing or the other: either thequestion of national self-determination, i.e., the question
of radically altering the frontiers of Yugoslavia, is an
appendage  to the national programme, dimly looming
in the distant future, or it is the basis  of the national
programme. At all events it is clear that the point about
the right to self-determination cannot be at one and thesame time both  an appendage to and the basis of the
national programme of the Yugoslav Communist Party.
I am afraid that Semich still continues to regard theright to self-determination as an appendage concerning
prospects added to the national programme.
That is why I think that Semich divorces the nation-
al question from the question of the general interna-
tional situation and, as a consequence, for him the ques-
tion of self-determination, i.e., the question of alteringthe frontiers of Yugoslavia, is, in essence, not an urgent
question, but an academic one.
That is how the matter stands with Semich’s third
mistake.
It is characteristic that the same thing about this
mistake of Semich’s was said by Comrade Manuilskyin his report to the Fifth Congress of the Comin-
tern:
“The fundamental premise of Semich’s whole presentation
of the national question is the idea that the proletariat must accept
the bourgeois state within those frontiers which have been set up by
a series of wars and acts of violence ”* (see Stenographic Report of
the Fifth Congress of the Comintern , p. 597).
Can this coincidence be regarded as accidental? Of
course, not!
Once again: there is no smoke without fire.
The  magazine  Bolshevik ,  No.  11-12,
June  30,  1925
Signed:  J.  Stalin
* My italics.— J. St.
THE  REVOLUTIONARY  MOVEMENT
IN  THE  EAST
Interview  Given  to  Mr.  Fuse,
Japanese  Correspondent  of  Nichi-Nichi
MR.  FUSE’S  QUESTIONS
AND  J.  V .  STALIN’S  ANSWERS
    First question .  The Japanese people, being the most
advanced of the peoples of the East, are most of all in-
terested in the successes of the liberation movement ofthe peoples of the East. They would willingly become
the ally of the U.S.S.R. in this great cause, the cause
of liberating the enslaved peoples of the East from theimperialist yoke of the Western powers. Being, however,
at the same time a capitalist state, Japan is sometimes
obliged to go against this movement, joining in thesame front as the Western powers. (For example: the
Anglo-Japanese alliance, by virtue of which Japan had
to help Britain in her struggle against the insurgents inIndia, and Japan’s joint action with Britain, America
and France against the Chinese workers during the recent
events in Shanghai.)    What, in your opinion, could be the way out of
this embarrassing situation created by the contradiction
between the national strivings of the Japanese people, onthe one hand, and the political and social structure of
the Japanese state, on the other?
Answer .  It is true that the Japanese people are the
most advanced of the peoples of the East and that they
are interested in the successes of the liberation movementof the oppressed peoples. An alliance between the Japa-
nese people and the peoples of the Soviet Union would
be a decisive step towards the liberation of the peoplesof the East. Such an alliance would mark the beginning
of the end of the big colonial empires, the beginning of
the end of world imperialism. That alliance would beinvincible.
But it is also true that the political and social struc-
ture of Japan impels the Japanese people along thepath of imperialism and makes them an instrument of
the enslavement and not of the liberation of the peoples
of the East.
You ask: What is the way out of this contradiction
between the interests of the Japanese people and the po-
litical and social structure of Japan?
There is only one way out: change the political and
social structure of Japan to make it fit the fundamental
interests of the Japanese people.
Russia, at one time, was the terror of the peoples
of the East, the gendarme against every liberation move-
ment. What is the explanation of the fact that Russia,formerly the gendarme against the liberation movement,
has become its friend and standard-bearer? The only expla-
nation is that Russia’s political and social structure hasbeen changed.
Second question .  The Eastern nationalities who in-
habit the U.S.S.R. are many centuries behind the timesas a result of the despotic tsarist regime, and they
acquired the right to an independent development of
industry, agriculture, culture, etc., only after the rev-
olution.
Approximately how many years, in your opinion,
will it take the Eastern nationalities in the U.S.S.R. to
reach the cultural level of the other nationalities of the
U.S.S.R.?
Answer .  You ask: Approximately how many years
will it take the Eastern peoples of the Soviet Union to
reach the cultural level of the other peoples of the SovietUnion?
It is hard to say. The tempo of cultural development
of these peoples will depend upon numerous internaland external conditions. In general, I must say that
forecasts about the tempo of development have never
been very accurate, especially as regards number ofyears. The main thing that facilitates the cultural devel-
opment of these countries is that the chief obstacles to
development, such as tsarism, Russian imperialism, theregime of exploitation of the border regions by the centre,
have already been removed from the path. This circum-
stance gives a tremendous impulse to the cultural develop-ment of the Eastern peoples of the Soviet Union. But how
fully this main facilitating circumstance will be taken ad-
vantage of depends upon the Eastern peoples themselves,and primarily, upon the stage of cultural development
in which they were at the time of the Soviet revolution.
At any rate, one thing can be said without hesita-
tion: under present conditions of development, the East-
ern peoples of the Soviet Union have far more chances of
a rapid and all-round development of their national cul-ture than they could have under the most “free” and
most “cultured” capitalist regime.
Third question .  You say that the link between the
national-liberation movement of the enslaved peoples of
the East and the proletarian movement in the advancedWestern countries will ensure the victory of the world
revolution. We, the Japanese people, have the slogan:
“Asia for the Asiatics.” Do you not think that thereis something in common between our strivings and your
revolutionary tactics in regard to the colonial countries
of the East?
Answer .  You ask: Is there not something in com-
mon between the slogan “Asia for the Asiatics” and the
Bolsheviks’ revolutionary tactics in regard to the colo-nial countries of the East?
To the extent that the slogan “Asia for the Asiatics”
is a call for a revolutionary war against Western impe-rialism—but only to that extent—there is, undoubtedly,
something in common between them.
But the slogan “Asia for the Asiatics” embraces not
only that aspect of the matter. It contains two other
component elements that are totally incompatible with
the Bolsheviks’ tactics. Firstly, it evades the questionof Eastern imperialism, as if suggesting that Eastern im-
perialism is better than Western, and that there is no
need to fight Eastern imperialism. Secondly, that slo-gan imbues the workers of Asia with a feeling of distrust
towards the European workers, alienates the former from
the latter, breaks the international ties between themand thereby saps the very foundations of the liberation
movement.
The revolutionary tactics of the Bolsheviks are di-
rected not only against Western imperialism, but against
imperialism in general, including Eastern imperialism.
These tactics are directed not towards weakening the in-
ternational ties between the workers of Asia and the work-
ers of the European and American countries, but to-wards expanding and strengthening them.
Hence, as you see, in addition to something in com-
mon, there are points of fundamental difference betweenthe slogan “Asia for the Asiatics” and the Bolshevik
tactics in the East.
Fourth question . In answer to my question: “Where
has communism the greater chances of success, in the West
or in the East?” Vladimir Ilyich, in my interview with
him in 1920, said: “For the time being real communismcan achieve success only in the West. The West, however,
lives at the expense of the East. The European capitalist
powers amass their wealth mainly by exploiting the East-ern colonies; but at the same time they are arming their
colonies and teaching them how to fight, and thereby
the West is digging its own grave in the East.” Do younot think that the events that are occurring more and
more often in China, India, Persia, Egypt and other
Eastern countries are a sign that the time is drawingnear when the Western powers will have to bury them-
selves in the grave they have dug for themselves in the
East?
Answer .  You ask: Do I not think that the growth of
the revolutionary movement in China, India, Persia,
Egypt and other Eastern countries is a sign that the timeis drawing near when the Western powers will bury them-
selves in the grave they have dug for themselves in the
East?
Yes, I do. The colonial countries constitute the prin-
cipal rear of imperialism. The revolutionisation of this
rear is bound to undermine imperialism not only in the
sense that imperialism will be deprived of its rear, but
also in the sense that the revolutionisation of the Eastis bound to give a powerful impulse to the intensifica-
tion of the revolutionary crisis in the West. Attacked
on two sides—in the rear as well as in front—imperialismwill be forced to admit that it is doomed.
Pravda ,  No.  150,
July  4,  1925
A  LETTER  TO  COMRADE  YERMAKOVSKY
Comrade Yermakovsky,
Many apologies for this late reply. I have been on
holiday these last two months, returned to Moscowyesterday and was able to read your note only today.
However, better late than never.
Engels’s negative answer to the question: “Can this
revolution take place in one country alone?” wholly re-
flects the epoch of pre-monopolist capitalism, the pre-
imperialist epoch, when the conditions did not yet existfor the uneven, spasmodic development of the capitalist
countries, when, consequently, the premises did not yet
exist for the victory of the proletarian revolution in onecountry (as is known, the possibility of the victory of
such a revolution in one country follows from the law
of uneven development of capitalist countries under im-perialism). The law of uneven development of capitalist
countries, and the concomitant thesis that the victory
of the proletarian revolution is possible in one country,were, and could be, advanced by Lenin only in the period
of imperialism. That, incidentally, explains why Lenin-
ism is Marxism of the epoch of imperialism, why it is
a further development of Marxism, which arose in the
pre-imperialist epoch. Genius though he was, Engels
could not see what did not yet exist in the pre-monopo-list period of capitalism, in the forties of the last cen-
tury, when he wrote his Principles of Communism ,
43
and which arose only later, in the monopolist period of
capitalism. On the other hand, Lenin, being a Marx-
ist of genius, could not fail to see what had already
arisen after Engels’s death, in the period of imperialism.The difference between Lenin and Engels is the dif-
ference between the two historical periods that separate
them.
The idea that “Trotsky’s theory is identical with
Engels’s doctrine” is quite out of the question. Engels
had grounds for giving a negative reply to Question 19(see his Principles of Communism ) in the pre-monopolist
period of capitalism, in the forties of the last century,
when there could be no question of the law of uneven devel-opment of capitalist countries. Trotsky, on the contrary,
has no grounds whatever for repeating in the twentieth
century Engels’s old answer, taken from an epoch that hasalready passed away, and applying it mechanically to
the new, imperialist epoch, when the law of uneven
development is a widely known fact. Engels based hisanswer on an analysis  of the pre-monopolist capitalism
of his time. Trotsky, however, does not analyse, but ig-
nores  the present epoch, forgets that he is not living in
the forties of the last century, but in the twentieth
century, in the epoch of imperialism, and slyly adds the
nose of Ivan Ivanovich of the forties of the nineteenthcentury to the chin of Ivan Nikiforovich of the begin-
ning of the twentieth century, evidently in the belief
that it is possible in that way to outwit history. I do
not think that these two diametrically opposite methods
can give grounds for saying that “Trotsky’s theory isidentical with Engels’s doctrine.”
With communist greetings,
J. Stalin
15.IX.25
Published  for  the  first  time
INTERVIEW  WITH  THE  PARTICIPANTS
IN  THE  CONFERENCE  OF  AGITATION
AND  PROPAGANDA  DEPARTMENTS
October  14,  1925
Question . Have any changes taken place in the stabil-
isation of capitalism since the last congress of the Com-
intern?
Answer . In our Party circles we usually speak of
two stabilisations: the stabilisation of capitalism and
the stabilisation of the Soviet system. The stabilisation
of capitalism signifies a certain temporary relaxationof the crisis of capitalism accompanied by a growth
within capitalism of irreconcilable contradictions, the
development of which must lead to the next, freshcrisis of capitalism. No matter what changes take place
in this sphere, a new crisis cannot be averted. As regards
the stabilisation of the Soviet system, it is developingwith increasing tempo, consolidating the forces of social-
ism in our country and uprooting the capitalist elements.
There can be no doubt that the complete victory ofthe socialist elements in our country over the capitalist
elements is a matter of the next few years.
Question . Will not the growing Left-wing movement
in the Western trade unions lead to some part of the
proletariat becoming divorced from the Communist Par-
ties?
Answer . No, it should not. On the contrary, the
swing of the trade unions to the Left should strengthen
the influence of the Communist Parties in the working-class movement. The social-reformists are strong in the
working-class movement not only, and even not so much,
because they have Social-Democratic parties at theircommand, but mainly because they have the backing of
the workers’ trade unions. It will be enough to deprive
them of this backing for them to be left hanging in mid-air. The swing of the trade unions to the Left means that a
considerable section of the organised workers is begin-
ning to desert the old, reformist leaders and is seeking new,Left leaders. The mistake that the Communist Parties
make is that they fail to understand this beneficent
process, and instead of offering a hand to the Social-Dem-ocratic workers who are moving to the Left and helping
them to extricate themselves from the mire, they begin
to abuse them as traitors and repel them.
It must be borne in mind that the situation as regards
the trade unions in the West is different from what it is
here, in our country. Here, the trade unions arose after theParty had appeared, after the Party had already become
strong and had gained great prestige among the workers.
Here, the trade unions were implanted and organisedby the efforts of the Party, under the leadership of the
Party, with the assistance of the Party. It is this, inci-
dentally, that explains the fact that, here, the Party’sprestige among the workers is much higher than that
of the trade unions. We see an entirely different picture
in the West. There, the trade unions arose much earlierthan the working-class political parties. There were no
parties yet in the West when the trade unions were leading
the workers in strikes, organising them and helping
them to defend their interests in the struggle against
the capitalists. More than that. There, the parties aroseout of the trade unions. It is this, incidentally, that ex-
plains the fact that the trade unions in the West enjoy
much more prestige among the masses than the parties.Whether the trade unions and their leaders there are good
or bad, one thing is clear, namely, that the workers re-
gard the trade unions as their bastions against the capi-talists. All these specific features must be taken into ac-
count when exposing the reformist trade-union leaders.
Hurling abuse and violent epithets at the reformist leaderswill not help. On the contrary, abuse and violent epithets
can only create the impression among the workers that
the aim is not to secure the removal of bad leaders,but to wreck the trade unions.
Question . What is the position of the German Commu-
nist Party after the removal of the “ultra-Lefts”?
Answer . Undoubtedly, the removal of the “ultra-
Lefts” has improved the position of the German Commu-
nist Party. The “ultra-Lefts” are people alien to the work-ing class. What can Ruth Fischer and Maslow
44 have
in common with the working class of Germany? The
result of the removal of the “ultra-Lefts” has been thatnew leaders of the Communist Party have come to the
fore from the workers. That is a great gain for the
German working-class movement.
Question . Is a new orientation of the U.S.S.R. con-
templated in connection with the pact with Ger-
many?
Answer . No. We have always had and always will have
but one orientation: our orientation is on the U.S.S.R.
and its success both at home and abroad. We need no
other orientation. Whatever pacts are concluded, they
cannot change anything in this respect.
Question . What is our chief method of Party work
among the broad masses?
Answer . The elimination of the survivals of war
communism in Party work and transition to the meth-
od of persuasion. In relation to the exploiting ele-
ments in our country, we have the old, tried method—the method of coercion. In relation to the working
people of our country, the workers, peasants, and so
forth, we must employ the method of persuasion. Thepoint is not that the Party’s instructions and direc-
tives are correct. That, of course, is a good thing,
but it is not enough. The point now is to convincethe broad masses of the working people that these
directives and instructions are correct. The point is
that the masses themselves should by their own experi-ence become convinced that the Party’s directives and
instructions are correct. That calls for extensive, intri-
cate, flexible and patient Party work; but that is theonly correct method of work under present conditions,
when the activity of the masses of the working people is
growing.
Question . What questions should the agitation and
propaganda departments pay attention to in view of the
forthcoming Party Congress?
Answer . Firstly, the question of the industrialisa-
tion of our country; and secondly, the peasant question.
On the first question, the point must be stressed thatindustrialisation is the principal means by which we can
preserve the economic independence of our country, that
if we do not industrialise our country it will run the
risk of becoming an appendage of the world capitalist
system. On the second question, more efforts must be de-voted to the problem of strengthening the bond between
the working class and the peasantry, between industry
and peasant economy, for without this bond it will beimpossible to build socialism in our country.
Question . What problems arise out of the Party’s
growth and the necessity of regulating its member-ship?
Answer . The growth of the Party membership has
been proceeding rapidly of late. That, of course, is good,for the Party’s rapid growth is an indication of the
growing confidence of the working class in our Party.
But it also has serious drawbacks. The drawbacks arethat the Party’s rapid growth leads to a certain lowering
of the level of political understanding of the Party mem-
bership, to some deterioration of the Party’s quality.But quality should be of no less, if not more, importance
to us than quantity. To remove those drawbacks we must
put an end to the excessive passion of some of ourcomrades for a quantitative growth of the Party; we
must stop the wholesale influx into the Party and make
it a rule in future to accept new members with greatdiscrimination. That is the first thing. Secondly, we
must organise intensive political education of the new
Party members in order to raise their political under-standing to the requisite level.
Question . What can now best ensure contact with the
non-Party peasant masses—drawing the peasants intothe Party, or the creation of a non-Party active around
the Party?
Answer . We need both. It will be very difficult to
create a broad, non-Party, peasant active around our
Party unless we have in the countryside a certain mini-mum of peasants organised in the Party. It will be still
more difficult to create effective Party organisations in
the countryside unless we have a broad, non-Party,peasant active, for Party organisations are usually created
out of such an active. Nevertheless, the creation of a
broad, non-Party, peasant active is the more impor-tant task.
What makes the Party strong from the standpoint
of its connections with the masses? The fact that it hasaround itself a broad, non-Party active of sympathisers.
The Party could not have led the vast working-class
masses into the struggle if it had not had this broad ac-tive of sympathisers around itself. Without the aid of
such an active the Party cannot exercise leadership of
the vast masses of the people. That is one of the funda-mental laws of leadership.
Do you remember the Lenin Enrolment, when, in the
course of a few days, 200,000 new members, the finestsons of the working class, joined the Party? Where did
those 200,000 come from? They came from the ranks of
the broad, non-Party active of workers in sympathywith our Party.
Hence, the non-Party active is the medium that
provides the sap on which the Party lives anddevelops. That is true not only in relation to the
working class. It is also true in relation to the labouring
peasantry.
Question . What concrete results for the expansion
of industry are expected from concessions?
Answer . Lenin in his day already said that nothing
had come of concessions in our country. We are now in
possession of new data which confirm Lenin’s words. Wecan now quite confidently say that there are no prospects
for concessions in our country. It is a fact that the pro-
portion of the output of concession industry to our to-tal industrial output is insignificant, and that propor-
tion is tending to drop to zero.
Published  for  the  first  time
THE  TASKS  OF  THE  YOUNG
COMMUNIST  LEAGUE
Answer  to  Questions  Submitted  by  the  Editorial
Board  of  Komsomolskaya  Pravda
I
What , in the main , are the duties of the Young Com-
munist League resulting from the Soviet Union ’s pres-
ent international and internal position?
The formulation of the question is too general; hence,
the answer can be couched only in general terms.In the main, the Soviet Union’s present international
and internal position imposes upon the Young Commu-
nist League the duty of supporting by word and deedthe revolutionary movement of the oppressed classes in
all countries and the struggle of the proletariat of the
Soviet Union to build socialism, and for the freedomand independence of the proletarian state. It follows
from this, however, that the Young Communist League
will be able to perform this general duty only if it isguided in all its work by the directives issued by the
Communist International and the Russian Communist
Party.
II
What tasks confront the Young Communist League in
connection with the dangers of  l i q u i d a t i o n i s m
(loss of perspective in the building of socialism) , o f
n a t i o n a l i s m  (loss of the international revolutionary
perspective) and of the  b e l i t t l i n g  of the Party lead-
ership , i.e., in connection with the dangers mentioned in
the pamphlet Questions and Answers?
Briefly, the task of the Young Communist League in
this sphere is to educate our young workers and peasantsin the spirit of Leninism. But what does educating the
youth in the spirit of Leninism mean? It means, firstly,
imbuing them with the consciousness that victory in thebuilding of socialism in our country is fully possible and
necessary. It means, secondly, strengthening their con-
viction that our workers’ state is the offspring of the in-ternational proletariat, that it is the base for developing
the revolution in all countries, that the final victory
of our revolution is the cause of the international prole-tariat. It means, thirdly, educating the young people
in a spirit of confidence in the leadership of the Rus-
sian Communist Party. It is necessary to create in theYoung Communist League such cadres and such an active
as will be able to educate the youth precisely along
those lines.
Young Communist Leaguers are active in all spheres
of construction: industry, agriculture, the co-opera-
tives, the Soviets, cultural and educational organ-isations, and so forth. Every member of the Young
Communist League active must link his daily work in
all spheres of construction with the prospect of build-ing socialist society. He must be able to conduct his
daily work in the spirit and direction of realising this
prospect.
Young Communist Leaguers conduct work among the
workers and peasants of the most diverse nationalities.
The Young Communist League itself is something in the
nature of an International. A role is played here not
only by the national composition of the Young Commu-nist League, but also by the fact that the latter is directly
linked with the R.C.P.(B.), one of the most important
detachments of the world proletarian International. In-ternationalism is the fundamental idea that permeates the
work of the Young Communist League. That is what
makes it strong. That is what makes it mighty. Thespirit of internationalism must always hover over the
Young Communist League. The successes and setbacks
in the struggle that the proletariat of our country iswaging must be linked in the minds of Young Communist
Leaguers with the successes and setbacks of the interna-
tional revolutionary movement. Young CommunistLeaguers must learn to regard our revolution not as
an end in itself, but as a means and an aid towards
the victory of the proletarian revolution in all coun-tries.
Formally, the Young Communist League is a non-
Party organisation. But it is at the same time a com-munist organisation. This means that, while being for-
mally a non-Party organisation of workers and peas-
ants, the Young Communist League must, neverthe-less, work under the leadership of our Party. The task
is to ensure that the youth has confidence in our Party,
to ensure our Party’s leadership in the Young CommunistLeague. The Young Communist Leaguer must remember
that ensuring the Party’s leadership is the chief and
most important thing in the entire work of the YoungCommunist League. The Young Communist Leaguer must
remember that without that leadership the Young
Communist League will be unable to fulfil its main task
namely, that of educating the young workers and peasants
in the spirit of the proletarian dictatorship and of com-
munism.
III
How should the question of the growth of the Young
Communist League be presented at the present time: should
it continue , in the main, the policy of drawing all the
young workers, agricultural labourers and poor peasants
and the best of the young middle peasants into its ranks ,
or should it concentrate attention mainly on holding and
educating the mass of the youth already in the League?
It is wrong to say: either—or. Both must be done.
As far as possible, all the young workers and the bestelements of the young poor and middle peasants mustbe drawn into the League. At the same time, attentionmust be concentrated on the education of the new mem-
bers by the Young Communist League active. The most
important immediate task of the Young CommunistLeague is to strengthen its proletarian core. The carryingout of this task will be a guarantee that the YoungCommunist League will proceed along the right road. Butthe Young Communist League is not only a young work-
ers organisation. It is a young workers’ and peasants’
organisation. Therefore, in addition to strengthening itsproletarian core, it must work to recruit the best ele-ments of the peasant youth, it must work to ensure a firmalliance between the proletarian core and the peasantsection of the League. If that is not done, leadership
of the young peasants in the League by the proletarian
core will be impossible.
IV
Some Gubernia Committees of the Russian Leninist
Young Communist League, taking as their example the wom-
en’s delegate meetings , have begun to organise delegate
meetings of young non-Party peasants , attended by perma-
nent delegates. The function of those meetings is to form
a young peasant , mainly middle peasant , active , under the
leadership of the Young Communist League. Is that stand-point correct? Does not this harbour the danger of those del-egate meetings degenerating into a sort of non-Party peas-
ant-youth leagues , which may set themselves up against
our Young Communist League?
In my opinion that standpoint is incorrect. Why?
For the following reasons.
Firstly, there is concealed here a fear of the middle
peasant, a desire to keep the young middle peasants at
a distance, an attempt to wash one’s hands of them. Is
that a proper desire? Of course not. We must not keepthe young middle peasants at a distance; on the cont-rary, we must draw them closer to us, draw them closerto the Young Communist League. Only in this way willit be possible to imbue the young middle peasants with
confidence in the workers, with confidence in the prole-
tarian core of the Young Communist League, with con-fidence in our Party.
Secondly, there is no doubt that, under present cir-
cumstances, when all sections of the peasantry are be-coming more active, special delegate meetings of young
middle peasants convened by the Young Communist
League will inevitably be transformed into a separatemiddle-peasant youth league. This separate league will byforce of necessity be compelled to set itself up against
the existing youth league and its leader, the R.C.P.(B.);
it will draw towards itself the peasant section of the
Young Communist League and thereby create the dangerof the League splitting into two leagues—a young workers’
league and a young peasants’ league. Can we ignore
such a danger? Of course not. Do we want such a split,especially under present circumstances, especially under
the present conditions of our development? Of course
not. On the contrary, what is necessary now is not tokeep the young peasants at a distance, but to draw them
closer to the proletarian core of the Young Communist
League, not discord, but a firm alliance between them.
Thirdly, the organisation of delegate meetings of
young middle peasants cannot be justified on the plea
of the existence of delegate meetings of working womenand peasant women. The young workers and peasants,
who have their own separate organisation in the shape of
the Young Communist League, cannot be put on a parwith the working women and peasant women, who have
no separate organisation of their own, just as the young
middle peasants  must not be confused with working
women, who are a part of the working class . The existence
of delegate meetings of young middle peasants gives rise
to a danger for the Young Communist League, whereas theexistence of delegate meetings of working women and
peasant women creates no danger to anybody, for at
the present time the working women and peasant womenhave no separate permanent organisation of their own
like the Young Communist League.
That is why I think that the organisation of special
delegate meetings of young middle peasants by the Young
Communist League is superfluous.
I think that the Sixth Congress of the Young Commu-
nist League45 acted rightly in confining itself to the pro-
posal to form around the Young Communist League inthe countryside auxiliary organisations, such as self-edu-
cation circles, groups for the study of agriculture, and
so forth.
V
Is it possible, under our conditions, for the active of the
Young Communist League to combine practical work with a
thorough study of Marxism and Leninism; and what must
the Young Communist League organisations and the individ-ual Young Communist Leaguers do in this direction?
First of all, a brief remark about Marxism and Lenin-
ism. Such a formulation of the question might leadone to think that Marxism is one thing and Leninism
another, that one can be a Leninist without being a
Marxist. Such an idea cannot be regarded as correct.Leninism is not Lenin’s teaching minus  Marxism. Lenin-
ism is Marxism of the epoch of imperialism and proletar-
ian revolutions. In other words, Leninism includes allthat was taught by Marx plus Lenin’s new contribu-
tion to the treasury of Marxism, and what necessarily
follows from all that was taught by Marx (teaching onthe dictatorship of the proletariat, the peasant question,
the national question, the Party, the question of the
social roots of reformism, the question of the prin-cipal deviations in communism, and so forth). It would
be better, therefore, to formulate the question in such
a way as to speak of Marxism or of Leninism (whichfundamentally are the same) and not of Marxism and
Leninism.
Secondly, there cannot be the slightest doubt that
unless the practical work of the active of the Young
Communist League is combined  with theoretical training
(“the study of Leninism”), no kind of intelligent com-
munist work in the Young Communist League will
be possible. Leninism is the generalisation of the ex-perience of the revolutionary movement of the work-
ers of all countries. That experience is the guiding star
which lights up the path of the practical workers in theirdaily work and gives them direction. The practical work-
ers cannot have confidence in their work or know wheth-
er it is correct without having mastered that expe-rience, at least to some degree. To grope, to work in the
dark—such is the lot of practical workers if they do not
study Leninism, if they do not strive to master Leninism,if they refuse to combine their practical work with
the necessary theoretical training. Therefore, the study
of Leninism, Leninist education, is an essential con-dition for converting the present active of the Young
Communist League into a genuine Leninist active,
capable of educating the many millions of YoungCommunist Leaguers in the spirit of the dictatorship
of the proletariat and of communism.
But is such a combination of theory and practice
possible under present conditions, when the active of the
Young Communist League is so overworked? Yes, it
is. It is difficult, that goes without saying; but it isquite possible, since it is so necessary, since a gen-
uine Leninist active in the Young Communist League
cannot be created without it. We must not behavelike weaklings who run away from difficulties and
look for easy work. Difficulties exist to be combated
and overcome. The Bolsheviks would certainly have
perished in their struggle against capitalism had they not
learned to overcome difficulties. The Young CommunistLeague would not be a Young Communist League if
it were daunted by difficulties. The active of the Young
Communist League has undertaken a great task. There-fore, it must find the strength to overcome all dif-
ficulties in the path to the goal.
The patient and persevering study of Leninism —such
is the path the active of the Young Communist League
must travel if it really wants to educate the mil-
lions of young people in the spirit of the proletarianrevolution.
Komsomolskaya  Pravda ,  No.  133,
October  29,  1925
Signed:  J.  Stalin
SPEECH  AT  THE  FUNERAL
OF  M.  V .  FRUNZE
November  3,  1925
Comrades, I cannot make a long speech. In my pres-
ent state of mind I am not in the mood for that. I shall
say, merely, that in Comrade Frunze we have lost one
of the purest, most honest and most fearless revolution-aries of our time.
In Comrade Frunze, the Party has lost one of its
most faithful and most disciplined leaders.
In Comrade Frunze, the Soviet Government has lost
one of the boldest and wisest builders of our country and
of our state.
In Comrade Frunze, the Army has lost one of its most
beloved and respected leaders and creators.
That is why the Party so deeply mourns the loss of
Comrade Frunze.
Comrades, this year has been an affliction to us. It
has torn a number of leading comrades from our midst.But it appears that this was not enough; still another
sacrifice was needed. Perhaps it is indeed necessary that
our old comrades should so easily and simply go downto their graves. Unfortunately, our young comrades do
not so easily and by no means so simply come to the
fore to take the place of the old ones.
Let us believe and hope that the Party and the work-
ing class will take all measures to facilitate the forging
of new cadres to take the place of the old.
The Central Committee of the Russian Communist
Party has instructed me to express the grief of the whole
Party at the loss of Comrade Frunze.
Let my short speech be the expression of that grief,
which is boundless, and does not need long speeches.
Pravda ,  No.  253,
November  5,  1925
OCTOBER,  LENIN,  AND  THE  PROSPECTS
OF  OUR  DEVELOPMENT
I think that the period of preparation for October,
eight years ago, and the present period, eight years after
October, have a certain common feature notwithstand-
ing the enormous difference between them. This commonfeature is that both periods mark turning points in the
development of our revolution. Then, in 1917, the task
was to make the transition from the power of the bourgeoi-sie to the power of the proletariat. Now, in 1925, the
task is to make the transition from the present economy,
which cannot, as a whole, be called socialist, to social-ist economy, to the economy that must serve as the ma-
terial basis of a socialist society.
What was the situation in the period of October,
when, on October 10, 1917, the Central Committee of
our Party, under Lenin’s leadership, took the decision
to organise the armed uprising?
Firstly, the war between the two European coali-
tions, the growth of the elements of a socialist revolution
all over Europe, and the threat of a separate peace withGermany with the object of strangling the revolution in
Russia. That was the external situation. Secondly, the
fact that our Party had won a majority in the Soviets,peasant revolts throughout the country, the upsurge of
the revolutionary movement at the front, the isolation
of the bourgeois Kerensky Government and the threat
of another Kornilov revolt. That was the internal situa-tion.
That was mainly a front of political struggle.
At that time the turning point resulted in the victo-
rious uprising of the workers and peasants and the estab-
lishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
What is the situation now, eight years after the
overthrow of bourgeois rule?
Firstly, there are two camps in the world: the camp
of capitalism , which is temporarily undergoing stabi-
lisation, along with an obvious growth of the revolu-
tionary movement in the colonial and dependent coun-
tries (China, Morocco, Syria, etc.); and the camp ofsocialism , the Soviet Union, the economic development
of which is increasing and which is rallying around it-
self both the workers of the advanced countries and theoppressed peoples of the colonial and dependent coun-
tries—a circumstance which makes it possible to convert
the brief “respite” into a whole period of “respite.”That is the external situation. Secondly, the increasing
industrial and co-operative development of our country,
the improvement in the material conditions of the work-ers and peasants, the undoubted improvement in the
relations between the proletariat and the peasantry, and
the enhanced prestige of the Party among the workersand peasants—a circumstance which makes it possible to
go ahead with the building of socialism in conjunction
with the peasantry and under the leadership of the pro-letariat and its Party. That is the internal situation.
That is mainly a front of economic construction.
Whether the present turning-point period will end
with the victory of the proletariat depends primarily
upon the successes we achieve in our work of construc-tion, upon the successes achieved by the revolutionary
movement in the West and East, upon the development
of the contradictions that are corroding the capitalistworld.
Eight years ago, the task was to link the proletar-
iat with the poorest strata of the peasantry, to neu-tralise the middle strata of the peasantry, to take advan-
tage of the mortal struggle between the two imperialist
coalitions and to overthrow the bourgeois government inRussia in order to organise the dictatorship of the pro-
letariat, to get out of the imperialist war, to strengthen
the ties with the proletarians of all countries and topromote the cause of the proletarian revolution in all
countries.
Now, eight years later, the task is, on the one hand,
to link the proletariat and poor peasants with the middle
peasants on the basis of a firm alliance between them,
to ensure the leadership of the proletariat within thatalliance, to accelerate the development and re-equip-
ment of our industry, to draw the vast masses of the peas-
antry into the co-operatives and thereby ensure the vic-tory of the socialist core of our economy over the capi-
talist elements; on the other hand, the task is to estab-
lish an alliance both with the proletarians of all coun-tries and with the colonial peoples of the oppressed coun-
tries in order to help the revolutionary proletariat in its
struggle for victory over capitalism.
The neutralisation of the middle peasants is not
enough now. The task now is to establish a firm alliance
with the middle peasants in order to establish correct
relations between the proletariat and the peasantry; for
if Lenin’s thesis that “ ten or twenty years of correct re-
lations with the peasantry , and victory on a world scale
is assured ”46* is true, then Lenin’s words “ . . . to advance
now as an immeasurably wider and larger mass , and only
together with the peasantry ”47* are equally true.
The simple development of state industry is not
enough now. Still less is the pre-war level of industryenough. The task now is to push forward the re-equip-
ment  of our state industry and to expand it fur-
ther on a new technical basis ; for our state industry is
a socialist type of industry, it is the principal base of
the proletarian dictatorship in our country. Without
such a base it is impossible to talk of transforming ourcountry into an industrial country, of converting NEP
Russia into socialist Russia.
The simple development of the co-operatives in the
countryside is not enough now. The task now is to draw
the vast masses of the peasantry into the co-operatives and
to implant a co-operative communal life in the countryside ;
for under the dictatorship of the proletariat, and with
the existence of a socialist type of industry, co-operation
is the principal  means by which the peasantry can be
drawn into the work of building socialism.
Such, in general, are the necessary conditions for
victory in building socialism in our country.
Eight years ago, the Party achieved victory over
bourgeois rule because it was able to display Leninist
firmness in carrying out the tasks of the proletariat in
* My italics.— J. St .
spite of incredible difficulties, in spite of the wavering
of some of its detachments.
Today, eight years later, the Party has every possi-
bility of ensuring victory over the capitalist elements
in our national economy, provided it is able to display
the old, Leninist firmness in carrying out its tasks inspite of the host of difficulties that confront it, in spite
of the possible wavering of some of its detachments.
Leninist firmness in carrying out the immediate
tasks of the proletariat is also one of the essential condi-
tions for victory in building socialism.
Pravda ,  No.  255,
November  7,  1925
Signed:  J.  Stalin
A  LETTER  TO  THE  PRESIDIUM
OF  THE  TWENTY-SECOND  LENINGRAD
GUBERNIA  PARTY  CONFERENCE48
Dear comrades,
Information has reached the Secretariat of the Cen-
tral Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) to the effect that cer-
tain members of your conference are of the opinion thatthe resolution adopted by the Fourteenth Moscow Party
Conference on the Central Committee’s report
49 is di-
rected against the Leningrad organisation, and that thosecomrades are calling for an open fight by the Leningrad
delegation at the Party congress. If that information is
correct, I consider it my duty to declare to you the fol-lowing.
At the Moscow conference a resolution based on prin-
ciple was adopted on questions of principle. The steno-graphic reports of the speeches delivered at the Moscow
conference and at the district conferences, as well as the
above-mentioned resolution, can easily convince one thatnobody in Moscow thought either of discrediting the
Leningrad organisation or of calling for a fight against
it. In view of this, it seems to me that the speeches deliv-ered by Sarkis, Safarov and others at the district con-
ferences and repeated at your gubernia conference give
cause for alarm. Particularly alarming, it seems to me,are the speeches made during the last few days by
certain comrades at your conference calling for an open
fight at the Party congress. Under present conditions,
unity among the Leninists, even if there is some disagree-ment between them on certain questions, is more neces-
sary than ever before. Unity among the Leninists can be
not only maintained, but also strengthened if you firmlywish it. The Leningrad organisation is and must remain
one of our Party’s most important supports.
I consider it my duty to inform you of all this as a
member of the presidium of your conference.
Member   of   the   Presidium   of
the conference of the Leningrad
organisation
J. Stalin
December  8,  1925
The  magazine  Krasnaya  Letopis,
No.  1  (58),  1934
THE  FOURTEENTH  CONGRESS
OF  THE  C.P.S.U.(B.)50
December  18-31,  1925
Pravda ,  Nos.  291,  292  and  296,
December  20,  22,  and  29,  1925

POLITICAL  REPORT
OF  THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE
December  18
    Comrades, during the past two weeks you have had
an opportunity of hearing reports on the activities ofthe C.C. between the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Con-
gresses from a number of members of the C.C. and
members of the Political Bureau; extensive reportswhich, fundamentally, were certainly correct. I believe
that there would hardly be any point in repeating those
reports. I think that this circumstance eases my task atthe present moment, and in view of this I consider it ex-
pedient to confine myself to presenting a number of prob-
lems connected with the activities of the C.C. of ourParty between the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Congresses.
     Usually, the report of the C.C. begins with the exter-
nal situation. I am not going to violate that custom. I,too, will begin with the external situation.
I
THE  INTERNATIONAL  SITUATION
    The basic and new feature, the decisive feature thathas affected all the events in the sphere of foreign rela-tions during this period, is the fact that a certain tempo-
rary equilibrium of forces has been established be-
tween our country, which is building socialism, and the
countries of the capitalist world, an equilibrium which
has determined the present period of “peaceful co-exist-
ence” between the Land of Soviets and the capitalist coun-tries. What we at one time regarded as a brief respite after
the war has become a whole period of respite. Hence a cer-
tain equilibrium of forces and a certain period of “peace-ful co-existence” between the bourgeois world and the
proletarian world.
At the bottom of all this lies an internal weakness,
the weakness and infirmity of world capitalism, on the
one hand, and the growth of the workers’ revolutionary
movement in general, and particularly the growth ofstrength in our country, the Land of Soviets, on the other.
What lies at the bottom of this weakness of the capi-
talist world?
At the bottom of this weakness lie the contradictions
which capitalism cannot overcome, and within the
framework of which the entire international situation istaking shape—contradictions which the capitalist coun-
tries cannot overcome, and which can be overcome only
in the course of development of the proletarian revolutionin the West.
What are these contradictions? They can be reduced
to five groups.
The first group of contradictions are those between
the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in the capitalist
countries.
The second group of contradictions are those between
imperialism and the liberation movement in the colonies
and dependent countries.
The third group of contradictions are those that are
developing, and cannot but develop, between the
countries that were victorious in the imperialist war
and those that were defeated.
The fourth group of contradictions are those that are
developing, and cannot but develop, among the victor
countries themselves.
And the fifth group of contradictions are those
that are developing between the Land of Soviets and the
countries of capitalism as a whole.
Such are the five principal groups of contradictions,
within the framework of which the development of our
international position is proceeding.
Comrades, unless we briefly examine the nature and
the growth of these contradictions, we shall not be able
to understand the present international position of our
country. Therefore, a brief review of these contradic-tions must necessarily form part of my report.
1.  The  Stabilisation  of  Capitalism
And so, let us begin with the first series of contradic-
tions, those between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in
the capitalist countries. In this sphere, the basic facts
may be reduced to the following.
Firstly . Capitalism is emerging, or has already
emerged, from the chaos in production, trade and in the
sphere of finance which set in, and in which it found it-self, after the war. The Party called this the partial,
or temporary, stabilisation of capitalism. What does
that mean? It means that the production and trade of thecapitalist countries, which had become terribly low at
one time in the period of the post-war crisis (I have in
mind the years 1919-20), have begun to make progress,
and the political power of the bourgeoisie has begun
to become more or less consolidated. It means that
capitalism has temporarily extricated itself from thechaos in which it found itself after the war.
Here are the figures, if we take Europe.
Production in all the advanced countries of Europe
is either making progress compared with 1919, is grow-
ing, reaching in some places 80-90 per cent of the pre-war
level, or is keeping on one level. Only in Britain arethere some branches of production which have not yet
straightened themselves out. In the main, if we take
Europe as a whole, production and trade are makingprogress, although they have not yet reached the pre-
war level. If we take the production of grain, we find
that Britain has reached 80-85 per cent of the pre-warlevel, France 83 per cent, and Germany 68 per cent. In
Germany, the production of grain is rising very slowly.
In France it is not rising, and in Britain it is sinking. Allthis is compensated for by imports of grain from America.
Coal output in Britain in 1925 amounts to 90 per
cent of the pre-war level, in France to 107 per cent ofthe pre-war level, in Germany to 93 per cent. Steel pro-
duction in Britain amounts to 98 per cent of the pre-war
level, in France to 102 per cent, in Germany to 78 percent. Consumption of raw cotton in Britain is equal to
82 per cent of the pre-war level, in France to 83 per cent,
in Germany to 81 per cent. Britain’s foreign trade showsan unfavourable balance and amounts to 94 per cent of
pre-war; that of Germany is slightly higher than in 1919
and also shows an unfavourable balance; that of Franceis now higher than the pre-war level—102 per cent. The
level of European trade as a whole, taking 1921, was
63 per cent of the pre-war level, but now, in 1925, it has
reached 82 per cent of that level. The budgets of these
countries balance in one way or another, but the balanceis obtained by imposing a frightful burden of taxation
upon the population. There is a fluctuation in the cur-
rency in some countries, but, in general, the former chaosis not observed.
The general picture is that the post-war economic
crisis in Europe is passing away, production and tradeare approaching the pre-war level. One of the European
countries, France, has already surpassed the pre-war
level in the sphere of trade and production, while anotherEuropean country—I refer to Britain—still remains at
one and the same, or almost one and the same, level
without reaching the pre-war level.
Secondly . Instead of the period of flow of the revo-
lutionary tide that we observed in Europe in the years
of the post-war crisis, we now see a period of ebb. Thismeans that the question of taking power, of the prole-
tariat capturing power any day, is not now on the order
of the day in Europe. The period of rising revolutionarytide, when the movement pushes forward and upward
and the Party’s slogans cannot keep pace with the move-
ment, as was the case in our country, for example, in1905 or in 1917—that period of rising tide still lies
ahead. At present, however, it does not exist; instead,
there is a period of temporary ebb, a period in whichthe proletariat is accumulating forces, a period which is
giving big results as regards indicating new forms of the
movement, as regards the existence and growth of a massmovement under the banner of the struggle for trade-
union unity, as regards establishing and strengthening
ties between the working-class movement in the West
and the working-class movement in the Soviet Union,
as regards a swing to the Left—the British working-class movement for example—as regards the disintegra-
tion of Amsterdam, the deep fissure in it, etc., etc. I
repeat, we are in a period of accumulation of forces,which is of great importance for future revolution-
ary actions. It is the period in which the conquest of
the mass organisations of the proletariat (the trade un-ions, etc.) and the “removal from their posts” of the
Social-Democratic leaders becomes the slogan of the
communist movement, as was the case in our countryin 1911-12.
Thirdly . The centre of financial power in the capi-
talist world, the centre of the financial exploitation ofthe whole world, has shifted from Europe to America.
Formerly, France, Germany and Britain usually formed
the centre of the financial exploitation of the world.That cannot be said now without special reservations.
Now, the centre of the financial exploitation of the world
is mainly the United States of America. That country isgrowing in every respect: as regards production, as re-
gards trade, and as regards accumulation. I shall quote
some figures. The production of grain in North Americahas risen above the pre-war level; it is now 104 per cent
of that level. Coal output has reached 90 per cent of the
pre-war level, but the deficit is compensated for by anenormous increase in the output of oil. And it must be
pointed out that the oil output of America amounts to
70 per cent of world output. Steel production has risento 147 per cent—47 per cent above the pre-war level.
The national income amounts to 130 per cent of pre-war—
exceeding the pre-war level by 30 per cent. Foreign trade
has reached 143 per cent of the pre-war level and
has an enormous favourable balance in relation to the Euro-pean countries. Of the total world gold reserve amount-
ing to 9,000 millions, about 5,000 millions are in America.
United States currency is the most stable of all curren-cies. As regards export of capital, America, at the pres-
ent time, is almost the only country that is exporting
capital in ever-growing proportions. The amount exportedby France and Germany is terribly small; Britain has
also considerably reduced her export of capital.
Fourthly . The temporary stabilisation of European
capitalism to which I referred above has been achieved
mainly with the aid of American capital, and at the
price of the financial subordination of Western Europeto America. To prove this, it is sufficient to quote the
figure of Europe’s state indebtedness to America. That
figure amounts to no less than 26,000 million rubles.This is apart from private debts to America, i.e., Ameri-
can investments in European enterprises, amounting for
Europe to the sum of several thousand millions. Whatdoes that show? It shows that Europe has begun to get
on its feet, more or less, as a result of the influx of capi-
tal from America (and partly from Britain). At whatprice? At the price of Europe’s financial subordination
to America.
Fifthly . In view of this, in order to be able to pay
interest and principal, Europe is forced to increase the
burden of taxation on the population, to worsen the con-
ditions of the workers. That is precisely what is happen-ing now in the European countries. Already, before the
payment of principal and interest has properly started,
in Britain, for example, the burden of taxation as a per-
centage of the total national income has increased from
11 per cent (in 1913) to 23 per cent in 1924; in Franceit has increased from 13 per cent of the national income
to 21 per cent, and in Italy—from 13 per cent to 19 per
cent. Needless to say, in the very near future the burdenof taxation will grow still heavier. In view of this, the
material conditions of the working people in Europe,
and primarily those of the working class, will certainlydeteriorate and the working class will inevitably become
revolutionised. Symptoms of this revolutionisation are
already to be observed in Britain and in other Europeancountries. I have in mind the definite swing to the Left
of the working class in Europe.
Such are the principal facts which show that the
temporary stabilisation of capitalism which Europe has
achieved is a putrid stabilisation that has grown up on
putrid soil.
It is very likely—I do not exclude the possibility—
that production and trade in Europe will reach the pre-
war level. But that does not mean that capitalism willthereby reach the degree of stability it possessed before
the war. That degree of stability it will never reach again.
Why? Because, firstly, Europe has purchased her tempo-rary stability at the price of financial subordination to
America, which is leading to a colossal increase in the
burden of taxation, to the inevitable deterioration ofthe conditions of the workers, and to the revolutionisa-
tion of the European countries; secondly, because of a
number of other reasons—about which I will speak lat-er—that make the present stabilisation undurable, un-
stable.
The general conclusion, if we sum up all that I have
just said about the analysis of the first series of contra-
dictions—the general conclusion is that the circle of ma-jor states exploiting the world has shrunk to an extreme
degree compared with the period before the war. For-
merly, the chief exploiters were Britain, France, Ger-many, and partly America; that circle has now shrunk
to an extreme degree. Today, the major financial exploit-
ers of the world, and hence its major creditors, are NorthAmerica and to some extent her assistant—Britain.
That does not mean that Europe has sunk to the posi-
tion of a colony. The European countries, while continu-ing to exploit their colonies, have themselves now fal-
len into a state of financial subordination to America
and, as a consequence, are in their turn being exploited,and will continue to be exploited by America. In that
sense, the circle of major states which exploit the world
financially has shrunk to a minimum, whereas thecircle of exploited countries has expanded.
That is one of the reasons for the instability and-
 internal weakness of the present stabilisation of capi-talism.
2.  Imperialism,  the  Colonies
and  Semi-Colonies
Let us pass to the second series of contradictions,
those between the imperialist countries and the colo-
nial countries.
The basic facts in this sphere are: the development
and growth of industry and of the proletariat in the
colonies, especially during and after the war; the growth
of culture in general, and of the national intelligentsia
in particular, in these countries; the growth of the nation-
al-revolutionary movement in the colonies and the cri-sis in the world domination of imperialism in general;
the struggle for liberation waged by India and Egypt
against British imperialism; the war for liberation wagedby Syria and Morocco against French imperialism;
China’s struggle for liberation against Anglo-Japanese-
American imperialism, etc.; the growth of the working-class movement in India and China and the increasingly
important role of the working class in these countries in
the national-revolutionary movement.
From this it follows that the Great Powers are faced
with the danger of losing their chief rear, i.e., the
colonies. Here, the stabilisation of capitalism is in abad way; for the revolutionary movement in the op-
pressed countries, growing step by step, is beginning in
some places to assume the form of open war against im-perialism (Morocco, Syria, China), while imperialism is
obviously unable to cope with the task of curbing “its”
colonies.
It is said—especially by bourgeois writers—that the
Bolsheviks are to blame for the growing crisis in the
colonies. I must say that they do us too much honour byblaming us for that. Unfortunately, we are not yet strong
enough to render all the colonial countries direct
assistance in securing their liberation. It is neces-sary to delve deeper to find the cause. The cause is,
apart from everything else, that the European states,
being obliged to pay interest on debts to America, arecompelled to intensify oppression and exploitation in
the colonies and dependent countries, and this cannot
but lead to an intensification of the crisis and of the revo-
lutionary movement in these countries.
    All this goes to show that, in this sphere, the affairsof world imperialism are more than in a bad way. Where-
as, in the sphere of the first series of contradictions,
European capitalism has become partly stabilised andthe question of the proletariat seizing power any day
does not arise for the time being, in the colonies the
crisis has reached a climax and the question of expellingthe imperialists from a number of colonies is on the or-
der of the day.
3.  Victors  and  Vanquished
I pass to the third series of contradictions, those
between the victor countries and the defeated coun-
tries.
The basic facts in this sphere are the following.
Firstly, after the Versailles Peace, Europe found herself
split up into two camps—the camp of the vanquished(Germany, Austria and other countries) and the camp of
the victors (the Entente plus America). Secondly, the
circumstance must be noted that the victors, who hadpreviously tried to strangle the defeated countries by
means of occupation (I remind you of the Ruhr),
have abandoned this line and have adopted a differentmethod, the method of financial exploitation—of Ger-
many in the first place, and of Austria in the second
place. This new method finds expression in the DawesPlan, the unfavourable results of which are only now
making themselves felt. Thirdly, the Locarno Confer-
ence,
51 which was supposed to have eliminated all the
contradictions between the victors and the vanquished,
but which, actually, in spite of all the hullabaloo around
this question, did not eliminate any of the contradic-tions but only aggravated them.
The intention of the Dawes Plan is that Germany must
pay the Entente no less than some 130,000 million goldmarks in several instalments. The results of the Dawes
Plan are already making themselves felt in the deterio-
ration of Germany’s economic position, in the bankrupt-cy of a whole group of enterprises, in growing unemploy-
ment, etc. The Dawes Plan, which was drawn up in Amer-
ica, is as follows: Europe is to pay her debts to Americaat the expense of Germany, who is obliged to pay Europe
reparations; but as Germany is unable to pump this sum
out of a vacuum, she must be given a number of freemarkets, not yet occupied by other capitalist countries,
from which she could gain fresh strength and fresh blood
for the reparation payments. In addition to a number ofunimportant markets, America has in view our Russian
markets. According to the Dawes Plan, they are to be
placed at Germany’s disposal in order that she may beable to squeeze something out of them and have the
wherewithal to make reparation payments to Europe,
which, in its turn, must make payments to Americaon account of state debts. The whole plan is well
constructed, but it reckons without the host, for it
means for the German people a double yoke—theyoke of the German bourgeoisie on the German pro-
letariat, and the yoke of foreign capital on the whole
German people. To say that this double yoke willhave no effect upon the German people would be a mis-
take. That is why I think that in this respect the Dawes
Plan is fraught with an inevitable revolution in Ger-
many. It was created for the pacification of Germany,-
 but it, the Dawes Plan, must inevitably lead to a revo-lution in Germany. The second part of this plan, which
says that Germany must squeeze money out of the Rus-
sian markets for the benefit of Europe, is also a decisionthat reckons without the host. Why? Because, we
have not the least desire to be converted into an
agrarian country for the benefit of any other countrywhatsoever, including Germany. We ourselves will manu-
facture machinery and other means of production. There-
fore, to reckon that we shall agree to convert our Mother-land into an agrarian country for the benefit of Ger-
many, means reckoning without the host. In this respect,
the Dawes Plan stands on feet of clay.
As for Locarno, it is merely a continuation of Ver-
sailles, and the only object it can have is to preserve the
“status quo,” as they say in the language of diplomacy,i.e., to preserve the existing order of things, under which
Germany is the defeated country and the Entente
the victor. The Locarno Conference gives this order ofthings juridical sanction in the sense that Germany’s
new frontiers are preserved to the advantage of Poland,
are preserved to the advantage of France; that Germanyloses her colonies, and at the same time, pinioned and
forced into a Procrustean bed, must take all meas-
ures to pump out 130,000 million gold marks. To believethat Germany, which is growing and pushing forward,
will resign herself to this situation means counting on
a miracle. If, in the past, after the Franco-Prussian War,the question of Alsace-Lorraine, one of the key points
of the contradictions of that time, served as one of the
gravest causes of the imperialist war, what guarantee is
there that the Versailles Peace and its continuation,
Locarno, which legalise and give juridical sanction toGermany’s loss of Silesia, the Danzig Corridor and Dan-
zig; the Ukraine’s loss of Galicia and Western V olhynia;
Byelorussia’s loss of her western territory; Lithuania’sloss of Vilna, etc.—what guarantee is there that this
treaty, which has carved up a number of states and has
created a number of key points of contradiction, will notshare the fate of the old Franco-Prussian Treaty which,
after the Franco-Prussian War, tore Alsace-Lorraine
from France?
There is no such guarantee, nor can there be.
If the Dawes Plan is fraught with a revolution in
Germany, Locarno is fraught with a new war in Europe.
The British Conservatives think that they can both
maintain the “status quo” against Germany and use
Germany against the Soviet Union. Are they not wantingtoo much?
There is talk about pacifism, there is talk about peace
among the states of Europe. Briand and Chamberlainembrace, Stresemann lavishes compliments on Britain.
That is all nonsense. We know from the history of
Europe that every time treaties were concluded aboutthe disposition of forces for a new war, those trea-
ties were called peace treaties. Treaties were concluded
that determined the elements of the subsequent war,and the conclusion of such treaties was always accompa-
nied by a hullabaloo and clamour about peace. False
bards of peace were always found on those occasions. Irecall facts from the history of the period after the Franco-
Prussian War, when Germany was the victor, when France
was the vanquished, when Bismarck did everything to
maintain the “status quo,” i.e., the order of things that
was created after Germany’s victorious war against France.At that time Bismarck stood for peace, because that
peace gave him a whole series of privileges over France.
France, too, stood for peace, at all events at the beginning,until she had recovered from the unsuccessful war. Well,
in that period, when everybody was talking about peace
and the false bards were lauding Bismarck’s peacefulintentions, Germany and Austria concluded an agree-
ment, an absolutely peaceful and absolutely pacifist
agreement, which later served as one of the bases of thesubsequent imperialist war. I am speaking of the agree-
ment between Austria and Germany in 1879. Against
whom was that agreement directed? Against Russia andFrance. What did that agreement say? Listen:
“Whereas close collaboration between Germany and
Austria threatens nobody and is calculated to consoli-date peace in Europe on the principles laid down in the
Berlin Treaty, their Majesties, i.e., the two Sovereigns,
have resolved to conclude a peace alliance and a mu-tual agreement.”
Do you hear: close collaboration between Germany
and Austria for the sake of peace in Europe . That agree-
ment was treated as a “peace alliance,” nevertheless all
historians agree that the agreement served as a direct
preparation for the imperialist war of 1914. A conse-quence of that agreement for peace in Europe, but actu-
ally for war in Europe, was another agreement, the agree-
ment between Russia and France of 1891-93—also forpeace—for nothing else! What did that agreement say?
It said:
“France and Russia, animated by an equal desire
to maintain peace, have reached the following agree-
ment.”
What agreement—was not openly  stated at that time.
But the secret text of the agreement said: in the event
of war, Russia must put up against Germany 700,000troops and France (I think) 1,300,000.
Both these agreements were officially called agree-
ments for peace, friendship and tranquillity throughoutEurope.
To crown all this, six years later, in 1899, the Hague
Peace Conference assembled and the question of reductionof armaments was brought up there. That was at the
time when, on the basis of the agreement between France
and Russia, French General Staff officers came to Rus-sia to draw up plans for troop movements in the event
of war, and Russian General Staff officers went to France
to draw up plans in conjunction with the French gener-als for future military operations against Germany. That
was at the time when the General Staffs of Germany
and Austria were drawing up a plan and drafting theterms on which Austria and Germany were jointly to
attack their neighbours in the West and in the East.
At that very time (all this, of course, was done on thequiet, behind the scenes) the Hague Conference of 1899
assembled, and there peace was proclaimed and a lot
of hypocritical noise was raised about reducing arma-ments.
There you have an example of the matchless hypocrisy
of bourgeois diplomacy, when by shouting and singingabout peace they try to cover up preparations for a
new war.
Have we any grounds, after this, for believing the
songs about the League of Nations and Locarno? Of
course not. That is why we can believe neither Cham-berlain and Briand when they embrace, nor Stresemann
when he is lavish with his compliments. That is why we
think that Locarno is a plan for the disposition of forcesfor a new war and not for peace.
Interesting is the role played by the Second Inter-
national in this question. It is the leaders of the SecondInternational who most of all are leaping and dancing,
assuring the workers that Locarno is an instrument of
peace and the League of Nations an ark of peace, that theBolsheviks refuse to join the League of Nations because
they are opposed to peace, etc. What does all this noise
made by the Second International amount to, takinginto account what has been said above and, in particu-
lar, the historical information that I cited about the con-
clusion after the Franco-Prussian War of a whole seriesof agreements that were called peace agreements, but
which actually proved to be war agreements? What does
the present position of the Second International in rela-tion to Locarno show? That the Second International is
not only an organisation for the bourgeois corruption of
the working class, but also an organisation for the moraljustification of all the injustices of the Versailles Peace;
that the Second International is a subsidiary of the En-
tente, an organisation whose function is, by its activi-ties and its clamour in support of Locarno and the
League of Nations, to give moral justification to all the
injustices and all the oppression that have been createdby the Versailles-Locarno regime.
4.  The  Contradictions  between  the  Victor
Countries
I pass to the fourth series of contradictions, to those
between the victor countries. The basic facts here are
that, in spite of the existence of a sort of bloc be-tween America and Britain, a bloc founded on an agree-
ment between America and Britain against the annul-
ment of Allied debts, in spite of this bloc, I say, the con-flict of interests between Britain and America is not
being allayed, on the contrary, it is becoming more in-
tense. One of the principal problems now facing the worldpowers is the problem of oil. If, for example, we take
America, we find that she produces about 70 per cent of
the world output of oil and accounts for over 60 per centof total world consumption. Well, it is just in this sphere,
which is the principal nerve of the entire economic and
military activities of the world powers, that Americaeverywhere and always encounters opposition from Brit-
ain. If we take the two world oil companies—Standard
Oil and Royal Dutch-Shell, the former representing Amer-ica and the latter Britain—we find that the struggle
between those companies is going on in all parts of the
world, wherever oil is obtainable. It is a struggle betweenAmerica and Britain. For the problem of oil is a vital
one; because who will command in the next war depends
on who will have most oil. Who will command world in-dustry and trade depends on who will have most oil. Now
that the fleets of the advanced countries are passing over
to oil propulsion, oil is the vital nerve of the strug-gle among the world states for supremacy both in peace
and in war. It is precisely in this sphere that the struggle
between the British oil companies and the American oil
companies is a mortal one, not always coming into
the open, it is true, but always going on and smoulder-ing, as is evident from the history of the negotiations and
from the history of the clashes between Britain and Amer-
ica on this ground. It is sufficient to recall the series ofNotes of Hughes, when he was United States Secretary
of State, directed against Britain on the oil question.
The struggle is going on in South America, in Persia, inEurope, in those districts of Rumania and Galicia where
oil is to be found, in all parts of the world, sometimes in
a concealed and sometimes in an open form. That is apartfrom such a fact of no little importance as the conflict of
interests between Britain and America in China. You no
doubt know that the struggle there is a concealed one,and that very often America, operating in a more flexi-
ble manner and refraining from the crude colonial methods
which the British lords have not yet abandoned, succeedsin putting a spoke in Britain’s wheel in China in order
to oust Britain and pave the way for herself in China. Ob-
viously, Britain cannot look upon this with indifference.
I shall not dwell at length on the opposition of in-
terests between France and Britain arising from the strug-
gle for supremacy on the European continent. That is agenerally known fact. It is also clear that the conflict
of interests between Britain and France takes place not
only over the question of hegemony on the continent,but also in the colonies. Information has got into the press
that the war in Syria and Morocco against French impe-
rialism was organised not without Britain’s participa-tion. I have no documents, but I think that this informa-
tion is not altogether groundless.
Nor shall I dwell on the opposition of interests be-
tween America and Japan—that, too, is common knowl-
edge. It is enough to recall the recent American navalmanoeuvres in the Pacific and the Japanese naval
manoeuvres to understand why they took place.
Lastly, I must mention a fact which must surprise
everybody, namely, the colossal growth of armaments
in the victor countries. I am speaking about the victors,
about the contradictions among the victor states. Thesevictors are called allies. True, America does not be-
long to the Entente, but she fought in alliance with it
against Germany. Well, those allies are now arming them-selves to the utmost. Against whom are they arming? In
the past, when the Entente countries piled up armaments,
they usually referred to Germany, saying that she wasarmed to the teeth and constituted a danger to world
peace, owing to which it was necessary to arm for defence.
But what about now? Germany as an armed force no long-er exists; she has been disarmed. Nevertheless, the growth
of armaments in the victor countries is proceeding as
never before. How, for example, is the monstrous growthof the air force in France to be explained? How is the
monstrous growth of armaments, and especially of the
navy, in Britain to be explained? How is the monstrousgrowth of the navies of America and Japan to be ex-
plained? What and whom are Messieurs the “Allies,” who
jointly defeated Germany and disarmed her, afraidof? What are they afraid of, and why are they arming?
And where is the pacifism of the Second International,
which shouts about peace and does not see—pretendsthat it does not see—that the “Allies,” who have officially
called each other friends, are feverishly arming against
a “non-existent” enemy? What have the League of
Nations and the Second International done to put a
stop to this furious growth of armaments? Don’t theyknow that with the growth of armaments “the guns begin
to go off of their own accord”? Don’t expect a reply from
the League of Nations and the Second International.The point here is that the conflict of interests among the
victor countries is growing and becoming more intense,
that a collision among them is becoming inevitable, and,in anticipation of a new war, they are arming with might
and main. I shall not be exaggerating if I say that in
this case we have not a friendly peace among the victorcountries, but an armed peace, a state of armed peace
that is fraught with war. What is now going on in the
victor countries reminds us very much of the situationthat prevailed before the war of 1914—a state of armed
peace.
The rulers of Europe are now trying to cover up
this fact with clamour about pacifism. But I have al-
ready said what this pacifism is worth and what value
should be attached to it. The Bolsheviks have been de-manding disarmament ever since the time of Genoa.
52 Why
do not the Second International and all the others who
are chattering about pacifism support our proposal?
This circumstance shows once again that the stabili-
sation, the temporary, partial stabilisation, that Europe
has achieved at the price of its own enslavement, is notlasting, for the contradictions between the victor coun-
tries are growing and becoming more intense, not to speak
of the contradictions between the victor countries andthe defeated countries.
5.  The  Capitalist  World
and  the  Soviet  Union
I pass to the fifth series of contradictions, those
between the Soviet Union and the capitalist world.
The basic fact in this sphere is that an all-embrac-
ing world capitalism no longer exists. After the Land of
Soviets came into being, after the old Russia was trans-
formed into the Soviet Union, an all-embracing worldcapitalism ceased to exist. The world split up into two
camps: the camp of imperialism and the camp of the
struggle against imperialism. That is the first point thatmust be noted.
The second point that must be noted in this sphere is
that two major countries—Britain and America, as anAnglo-American alliance—are coming to stand at the
head of the capitalist countries. Our country—the So-
viet Union—is coming to stand at the head of those dis-contented with imperialism and who are engaged in
mortal struggle against it.
The third point is that two major, but opposite,
centres of attraction are being created and, in conformity
with this, two lines of attraction towards those centres
all over the world: Britain and America—for the bourgeoisgovernments, and the Soviet Union—for the workers of the
West and for the revolutionaries of the East. The power
of attraction of Britain and America lies in their wealth;credits can be obtained there. The power of attraction of the
Soviet Union lies in its revolutionary experience, its ex-
perience in the struggle for the emancipation of the work-ers from capitalism and of the oppressed peoples from im-
perialism. I am speaking of the attraction of the workers
of Europe and of the revolutionaries of the East towards
our country. You know what a visit to our country meansto a European worker or to a revolutionary from an op-
pressed country, how they make pilgrimages to our coun-
try, and what an attraction our country has for all thatis honest and revolutionary all over the world.
Two camps, two centres of attraction.
The fourth point is that in the other camp, the camp
of capitalism, there is no unity of interests and no soli-
darity; that what reigns there is a conflict of interests, dis-
integration, a struggle between victors and vanquished, astruggle among the victors themselves, a struggle among
all the imperialist countries for colonies, for profits; and
that, because of all this, stabilisation in that camp cannotbe lasting. On the other hand, in our country there is a
healthy process of stabilisation, which is gaining strength,
our economy is growing, our socialist construction isgrowing, and in the whole of our camp all the discon-
tented elements and strata of both the West and the
East are gradually and steadily rallying around theproletariat of our country, rallying around the Soviet
Union.
Over there, in the camp of capitalism, there is dis-
cord and disintegration. Over here, in the camp of social-
ism, there is solidarity and an ever-increasing unity of
interests against the common enemy—against impe-rialism.
Such are the basic facts which I wanted to point out
in the sphere of the fifth series of contradictions—thecontradictions between the capitalist world and the Soviet
world.
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

    I should like to dwell particularly on the fact which
I have called the attraction of the revolutionary and
socialist elements of the whole world towards the prole-tariat of our country. I have in mind the workers’ dele-
gations which come to our country, delegations which
carefully probe every detail of our work of constructionin order to convince themselves that we are able not
only to destroy, but also to build the new. What is the
significance of these workers’ delegations—this pilgrim-age of workers to our country—delegations which today
reflect an entire stage in the development of the working-
class movement in the West? You have heard how lead-ers of the Soviet state met a British workers’ delegation,
and a German workers’ delegation. Have you noticed
that our comrades, directors of various spheres of admin-istration, not only provided the representatives of the
workers’ delegations with information, but actually ren-
dered account to them? I was not in Moscow at the time, Iwas away, but I read the newspapers, and I read that
Comrade Dzerzhinsky, head of the Supreme Council of
National Economy, not merely gave the German workers’delegation information, but rendered account to them.
That is something new and special in our life, and special
attention should be paid to it. I have read that the di-rectors of our oil industry—Kosior in Grozny and Sereb-
rovsky in Baku—not merely gave the workers’ delegates
information as is done to tourists, but rendered account tothese workers’ delegations as if to a higher supervising
authority. I have read that all our higher institutions, the
Council of People’s Commissars and the Central Execu-tive Committee of Soviets, right down to the local Exec-
utive Committees of Soviets, were prepared to render
account to the workers’ delegations, whose visits to us
they regarded as the friendly, fraternal supervision by
the working class of the West of our work of construction,of our workers’ state.
What do all those facts show? They show two things.
Firstly, that the working class of Europe, at all eventsthe revolutionary part of the working class of Europe,
regards our state as its own child, that the working class
sends its delegations to our country not out of curiosity,but in order to see how things are here, and what is being
done; for, evidently, they regard themselves as being
morally responsible for everything that we are buildinghere. Secondly, that the revolutionary part of the prole-
tariat of Europe, having adopted our state, and regard-
ing it as its child, is ready to defend it and to fightfor it if need be. Name another state, even the most dem-
ocratic, that would dare to submit to fraternal supervision
by workers’ delegations from other countries! You cannotname such a state, because there is no such state in
the world. Only our state, the workers’ and peasants’
state, is capable of taking such a step. But, in placingthe utmost confidence in the workers’ delegations, our
country thereby wins the utmost confidence of the work-
ing class of Europe. And that confidence is more val-uable to us than any loans, because the workers’ confi-
dence in our state is the fundamental antidote to impe-
rialism and its interventionist machinations.
That is what lies at the bottom of the change in the
mutual relations between our state and the proletariat
of the West that has taken place, or is taking place, onthe basis of the workers’ pilgrimages to our country.
That is the new factor, which many have failed to
discern, but which is decisive at the present time. For if
we are regarded as a part, as the child, of the working
class of Europe, if on those grounds the working class ofEurope assumes moral responsibility, undertakes the
task of defending our state in case, say, of intervention
by capitalism, the task of defending our interestsagainst imperialism, what does that show? It shows that
our forces are growing and will continue to grow very
rapidly. It shows that the weakness of capitalism willincrease very rapidly. For without the workers it is im-
possible to wage war nowadays. If the workers refuse to
fight against our Republic, if they regard our Republicas their child in whose fate they are closely concerned,
then war against our country becomes impossible. That is
the secret, that is the root, that is the significance of thepilgrimages to our country that we have had, which we
shall have more of, and which it is our duty to encourage to
the utmost as a pledge of solidarity and a pledge that theties of friendship between the workers of our country and
the workers of the Western countries will be strengthened.
Perhaps it will not be superfluous to say a word or
two about the number of the delegations that have visit-
ed our country. I heard recently that at the Moscow
Conference a comrade asked Rykov: “Are not those dele-gations costing us too much?” Comrades, we must not
say such things. We must never talk in that strain about
the workers’ delegations that visit us. It is disgracefulto talk like that. We cannot and must not shrink from
any expense, or any sacrifice, to help the working class
in the West to send their delegates to us, to help them toconvince themselves that the working class, after captur-
ing power, is capable not only of destroying capitalism,
but also of building socialism. They, the workers of the
West, many of them at any rate, are still convinced that
the working class cannot do without the bourgeoisie.That prejudice is the chief disease of the working class
in the West, injected into it by the Social-Democrats.
We shall not shrink from any sacrifice to give the work-ing class in the West the opportunity, through their dele-
gates, to convince themselves that the working class,
after capturing power, is capable not only of destroyingthe old order, but also of building socialism. We shall
not shrink from any sacrifice to give the working class in
the West the opportunity to convince themselves thatour country is the only state in the world that is a workers’
state, which they in the West ought to fight for, and which
is worth defending against their own capitalism. ( Ap-
plause .)
Three kinds of delegations have visited us: delega-
tions of intellectuals—teachers and so forth; delegationsof adult workers, I think there have been, roughly,
about ten of them; and delegations of young workers. In
all, 550 delegates and tourists have visited our country.Another sixteen delegations, registered with the All-
Union Central Council of Trade Unions, are expected.
We shall continue to promote these visits in the futurein order to strengthen the ties between the working class
of our country and the working class in the West, and
thereby erect a barrier against any possibility of inter-vention.
Such are the characteristic features of the basic con-
tradictions that are corroding capitalism.
What follows from all these contradictions? What-
 do they show? They show that the capitalist world is
being corroded by a whole series of internal contradic-
tions which are enfeebling capitalism; that, on the other
hand, our world, the world of socialism, is becoming moreand more closely welded, more united; that because
of this, on precisely this basis, there arose that tem-
porary equilibrium of forces that put an end to waragainst us, that ushered in the period of “peaceful
co-existence” between the Soviet state and the capitalist
states.
I must mention two other facts which also helped to
bring it about that instead of a period of war we have a
period of “peaceful co-existence.”
The first fact is that at the present moment America
does not want war in Europe. It is as though she were say-
ing to Europe: I have loaned you thousands of millions;sit still and behave yourself if you want to get more mon-
ey in future, if you don’t want your currency to get into
a mess; get down to work, earn money and pay the inter-est on your debts. It scarcely needs proof that this
advice of America’s, even if it is not decisive for Europe,
is bound to have some effect.
The second fact is that since the victory of the pro-
letarian revolution in our country, a whole vast country
with tremendous markets and tremendous sources ofraw materials has dropped out of the world capitalist sys-
tem, and this, of course, was bound to affect the economic
situation in Europe. The loss of one-sixth of the globe,the loss of the markets and sources of raw materials of
our country, means for capitalist Europe that its produc-
tion is reduced and experiences a severe shaking. Andso, in order to put a stop to this alienation of European
capital from our country, from our markets and sources
of raw materials, it was found necessary to agree to a
certain period of “peaceful co-existence” with us, in order
to be able to find a way to our markets and sources ofraw materials—without this, it appears, it is impossible
to achieve any economic stability in Europe.
6.  The  External  Position
of  the  U.S.S.R.
Such are all those factors that have led to a certain
equilibrium of forces between the camp of socialismand the camp of capitalism all over the world; that have
caused the period of war to be replaced by a period of
respite; that have converted the brief respite into a wholeperiod of respite, and have enabled us to carry out a sort
of “collaboration,” as Ilyich called it, with the capital-
ist world.
Hence the series of “recognitions” of the Soviet
Union which has commenced, and which is bound to
continue.
I shall not enumerate the countries that have “rec-
ognised” us. I think that America is the only one of
the big countries that has not done so. Nor shall I dilateon the fact that after these “recognitions” we concluded
trade agreements, with Germany and Italy, for example.
I shall not deal at length with the fact that our foreigntrade has grown considerably, that America, a country
which exports cotton to us, and Britain and Germany,
countries which import our grain and agricultural prod-uce, are particularly interested in this trade. There
is one thing I must gay, namely, that this year is the
first year since the advent of the period of “co-existence”
with the capitalist states in which we are entering into
rich and wide commercial relations with the capitalist
world on a more or less large scale.
That, of course, does not mean that we have already
done away with all those, so to speak, reservations, and
all those claims and counter-claims, as they mightbe called, that have existed and still exist between our
state and the states of the West. We know that payment
of debts is being demanded of us. Europe has not yetforgotten this, and probably will not forget it, at any
rate, not so soon. We are told that our pre-war debts to
Europe amount to 6,000 millions, that the war debtsare estimated at over 7,000 million rubles, hence, a total
of 13,000 millions. Allowing for depreciation of cur-
rency, and subtracting from this sum the share of theborder countries, it works out that we owe the West-
European states not less than 7,000 millions. It is known
that our counter-claims in connection with the interven-tion of Britain, France and America during the civil
war amount, I think, to the figure (if we take Larin’s
 calculations) of 50,000 million rubles. Consequently,they owe us five-times more than we owe them. ( Larin ,
from his seat : “We shall get it.”) Comrade Larin says
that in good time we shall get all of it. ( Laughter .) If,
however, we make a more conservative calculation, as
the People’s Commissariat of Finance does, it will amount
to no less than 20,000 million. Even then we stand togain. ( Laughter .) But the capitalist countries refuse to
reconcile themselves to this, and we still figure in their
lists as debtors.
It is on this ground that snags and stumbling-blocks
arise during our negotiations with the capitalists. That
was the case with Britain, and it will probably be the
case with France as well.
What is the position of the Central Committee of
our Party on this question?
It is still what it was when the agreement was being
concluded with MacDonald.53
We cannot repeal the well-known law of our country,
promulgated in 1918, annulling the tsarist debts.54 W e
stand by that law. We cannot repeal the decrees whichwere proclaimed, and which gave legal sanction to the
expropriation of the expropriators in our country. We
stand by those laws and will continue to do so. But weare not averse to making certain exceptions in the course
of practical negotiations, in the case of both Britain and
France, concerning the former tsarist debts, on the un-derstanding that we pay a small part and get something
for it. We are not averse to satisfying the former private
owners by granting them concessions, but again on theunderstanding that the terms of those concessions are
not enslaving. On that basis we were able to reach agree-
ment with MacDonald. The underlying basis of thosenegotiations was the idea of virtually annulling the war
debts. It was precisely for this reason that this agreement
was frustrated. By whom? Undoubtedly, by America.Although America did not take part in the negotiations
between Rakovsky and MacDonald, although MacDon-
ald and Rakovsky arrived at a draft agreement, andalthough that draft agreement provided a way out
for both parties and more or less satisfied the interests
of both parties, nevertheless, since that draft was basedon the idea of annulling the war debts, and America did
not want to create such a precedent, for she would then
have stood to lose the thousands of millions that Europe
owed her, she, i.e., America, “advised,” and the agree-
ment did not come about.
Nevertheless, we still take our stand on the basis of
the above-mentioned draft.
Of the questions concerning our foreign policy, of
the questions that arose in the period under review,
questions that are exceptionally delicate and urgent,
that concern the relations between our government andthe governments of the West-European countries, I should
like to mention two: firstly, the question that the Brit-
ish Conservatives have raised more than once and willraise again—that of propaganda; and, secondly, the
question of the Communist International.
We are accused of conducting special propaganda
against imperialism both in Europe and in the colonies
and dependent countries. The British Conservatives
assert that the Russian Communists are people whosemission it is to destroy the might of the British Empire.
I should like to state here that all this is utter nonsense.
We do not need any special propaganda, either in theWest or in the East, now that workers’ delegations
visit our country, see for themselves the state of things
here and carry their information about the state of thingshere to all the Western countries. We do not need any
other propaganda. That is the best, the most potent and
most effective propaganda for the Soviet system andagainst the capitalist system. ( Applause .)
We are told that we are conducting propaganda in
the East. I assert that this, too, is utter nonsense. We donot need any special propaganda in the East, now that,
as we know, the whole of our state system rests on the
basis of the co-existence and fraternal co-operation of
the extremely diverse nationalities in our country. Any
Chinese, any Egyptian, any Indian, who comes to ourcountry and stays here six months, has an opportunity
of convincing himself that our country is the only country
that understands the spirit of the oppressed peoples andis able to arrange co-operation between the proletarians
of the formerly dominant nationality and the proletar-
ians of the formerly oppressed nationalities. We needno other propaganda, no other agitation, in the East
except that the delegations that come here from China,
India and Egypt, after working here and looking aboutthem, should carry their information about our state
of things all over the world. That is the best propaganda,
and it is the most effective of all forms and typesof propaganda.
But there is a force that can and certainly will destroy
the British Empire. That force is the British Conserva-tives. That is the force that will certainly, inevitably,
lead the British Empire to its doom. It is sufficient to
recall the Conservatives’ policy when they came topower.
55 What did they begin with? They began by
putting the curb on Egypt, by increasing the pressure
on India, by intervening in China, and so forth. Thatis the policy of the Conservatives. Who is to blame,
who is to be accused, if the British lords are incapable of
any other policy? Is it difficult to understand that by pro-ceeding on these lines the Conservatives must, inevi-
tably, as surely as twice two are four, lead the British
Empire to its doom?
A few words about the Comintern. Hirelings of the
imperialists and authors of forged letters are spreading
rumours in the West to the effect that the Comintern
is an organisation of conspirators and terrorists, that
Communists are touring the Western countries for thepurpose of hatching plots against the European rulers.
Among other things, the Sofia explosion in Bulgaria
is being linked with Communists. I must declare whatevery cultured person must know, if he is not an utter
ignoramus, and if he has not been bribed—I must declare
that Communists never had, do not have, and cannothave, anything in common with the theory and practice
of individual terrorism; that Communists never had,
do not have, and cannot have, anything in commonwith the theory of conspiracies against individual per-
sons. The theory and practice of the Comintern consists
in organising the mass revolutionary movement againstcapitalism. That is true. That is the task of the Commu-
nists. Only ignoramuses and idiots can confuse plots and
individual terrorism with the Comintern’s policy in themass revolutionary movement.
Two words about Japan. Some of our enemies in the
West are rubbing their hands with glee, as much as tosay: See, a revolutionary movement has begun in China.
It is, of course, the Bolsheviks who have bribed the Chi-
nese people—who else could bribe a people numbering400 millions?—and this will lead to the “Russians”
fighting the Japanese. All that is nonsense, comrades.
The forces of the revolutionary movement in China areunbelievably vast. They have not yet made themselves
felt as they should. They will make themselves felt in the
future. The rulers in the East and West who do not seethose forces and do not reckon with them to the degree
that they deserve will suffer for this. We, as a state,
cannot but reckon with this force. We consider that
China is faced with the same problem that faced North
America when she was uniting in a single state, thatfaced Germany when she was taking shape as a state
and was uniting, and that faced Italy when she was unit-
ing and freeing herself from external enemies. Here,truth and justice are wholly on the side of the Chinese
revolution. That is why we sympathise and will continue
to sympathise with the Chinese revolution in its struggleto liberate the Chinese people from the yoke of the impe-
rialists and to unite China in a single state. Whoever
does not and will not reckon with this force will cer-tainly lose. I think that Japan will understand that she,
too, must reckon with this growing force of the national
movement in China, a force that is pushing forward andsweeping everything from its path. It is precisely because
he has not understood this that Chang Tso-lin is going
under. But he is going under also because he based hiswhole policy on conflicts between the U.S.S.R. and
Japan, on a deterioration of relations between them.
Every general, every ruler of Manchuria, who baseshis policy on conflicts between us and Japan, on a dete-
rioration of our relations with Japan, is certain to go un-
der. Only the one who bases his policy on an improvementof our relations with Japan, on a rapprochement between
us and Japan, will remain on his feet; only such a gen-
eral, and such a ruler, can sit firmly in Manchuria, be-cause we have no interests that lead to our relations with
Japan becoming strained. Our interests lie in the direct-
ion of rapprochement between our country and Japan.
7.  The  Party’s  Tasks
I pass to the question of our Party’s tasks in con-
nection with the external situation.
I think that here our Party’s tasks, in the sense of
its work, should be outlined in two spheres: the sphere
of the international  revolutionary movement, and then
in the sphere of the Soviet Union’s foreign policy .
What are the tasks in the sphere of the international
revolutionary movement?
The tasks are, firstly, to work in the direction of
strengthening the Communist Parties in the West, of
their winning a majority among the masses of the workers.
Secondly, to work in the direction of intensifying thestruggle of the workers in the West for trade-union unity,
for strengthening the friendship between the proletariat
in our Union and the proletariat in the capitalist coun-tries. This includes the pilgrimages of which I have
spoken and the significance of which I described above.
Thirdly, to work in the direction of strengthening thelink between the proletariat in our country and the
movement for liberation in the oppressed countries, for
they are our allies in the struggle against imperialism.And fourthly, to work in the direction of strengthening
the socialist elements in our country, in the direction
of the victory of these elements over the capitalist ele-ments, a victory that will be of decisive significance for
revolutionising the workers of all countries. Usually,
when speaking about our Party’s tasks in the sphereof the international revolutionary movement, our comrades
confine themselves to the first three tasks and forget
about the fourth task, namely, that our struggle in our
country, the struggle for the victory of the socialist
elements in our country over the capitalist elements,
our struggle in the work of construction, is also of inter-national significance, for our country is the base of the
international revolution, for our country is the principal
lever for expanding the international revolutionarymovement; and if our work of construction here, in our
country, proceeds at the proper tempo, it means that
we are performing our work in all the other channelsof the international revolutionary movement precisely
in the way the Party demands that we should per-
form it.
Such are the Party’s tasks in the sphere of the in-
ternational revolutionary movement.
Now about the Party’s tasks in the sphere of our
Union’s foreign  policy.
Firstly, to work in the direction of fighting against
new wars, in the direction of maintaining peace andensuring so-called normal relations with the capitalist
countries. The basis of our government’s policy, of its
foreign policy, is the idea of peace. The struggle forpeace, the struggle against new wars, the exposure of
all the steps that are being taken to prepare a new war, the
exposure of those steps that cover up actual preparationof war with the flag of pacifism—such is the task. It is
precisely for this reason that we refuse to join the League
of Nations, for the League of Nations is an organisationfor covering up the preparations for war; for, to join the
League of Nations, we must choose, as Comrade Litvinov
has rightly expressed it, between the hammer and theanvil. Well, we do not wish to be either a hammer for
the weak nations or an anvil for the strong ones. We want
neither the one nor the other; we stand for peace, we
stand for the exposure of all those steps that lead to war,
no matter by what pacifist bunting they may be con-cealed. Whether the League of Nations or Locarno, it
makes no difference—they can’t fool us with a flag, nor
frighten us with noise.
Secondly, to work in the direction of expanding our
trade with the outside world on the basis of the monopoly
of foreign trade.
Thirdly, to work in the direction of rapprochement
with the countries that were defeated in the imperial-
ist war, with those capitalist countries which weremost humiliated and came off worst, and which, owing to
this, are in opposition to the ruling alliance of Great
Powers.
Fourthly, to work in the direction of strengthening
our link with the dependent and colonial countries.
Such are the tasks that face the Party at the present
time in the sphere of international relations and the in-
ternational working-class movement.
II
THE  INTERNAL  SITUATION
IN  THE  SOVIET  UNION
I pass to the second part of the Central Committee’s
report. This part deals with the internal situation inour state and with the Central Committee’s policy on
questions concerning the internal situation. I should
like to quote some figures. Although quite a numberof figures have been published in the press recently, we
cannot, unfortunately, avoid quoting some here.
1.  The  National  Economy  as  a  Whole
But, before passing to the figures, permit me to set
out several general propositions which define our work
in the building of a socialist economy (I intend to start
with our economy).
The first proposition . We are working and building in
the circumstances of capitalist encirclement. That means
that our economy and work of construction will devel-op in the contradiction, in conflicts, between our system
of economy and the capitalist system of economy. We
cannot possibly avoid this contradiction. It is the frame-work within which the struggle between the two sys-
tems, the socialist and the capitalist systems, must
proceed. It means, furthermore, that our economy must bebuilt not only amidst its opposition to the capitalist econo-
my outside our country, but also amidst the opposition
between the different elements within it, the opposi-tion between the socialist elements and the capitalist ele-
ments.
Hence the conclusion: we must build our economy
in such a way as to prevent our country from becoming
an appendage of the world capitalist system, to prevent
it from being drawn into the general system of capitalistdevelopment as a subsidiary enterprise of this system,
so that our economy develops not as a subsidiary en-
terprise of world capitalism, but as an independenteconomic unit, based mainly on the home market, based
on the bond between our industry and peasant economy
in our country.
There are two general lines: one takes as its starting
point that our country must for a long time yet remain
an agrarian country, must export agricultural produce
and import equipment, that we must adopt this stand-
point and develop along this line in the future. In es-sence, this line demands that we should wind up our
industry. It found expression recently in Shanin’s theses
(perhaps some of you have read them in Ekonomicheskaya
Zhizn
56). To follow this line would mean that our country
would never be able, or almost never be able, to become
really industrialised; that instead of being an economi-cally independent unit based on the home market, our
country would, objectively, have to become an append-
age of the general capitalist system. That line meansthe abandonment of our construction tasks.
That is not our line.
There is another general line, which takes as its
starting point that we must exert all efforts to make
our country an economically self-reliant, independent
country based on the home market; a country that willserve as a centre of attraction for all other countries that
little by little drop out of capitalism and enter the channel
of socialist economy. That line demands the utmostexpansion of our industry, but proportionate to and in
conformity with the resources at our command. It emphat-
ically rejects the policy of converting our country into anappendage of the world capitalist system. That is our line
of construction, the line followed by the Party and which
it will continue to follow in the future. That line isimperative as long as the capitalist encirclement exists.
Things will be different when the revolution is
victorious in Germany or France, or in both countriestogether, when the building of socialism begins there
on a higher technical basis. We shall then pass from the
policy of transforming our country into an independent
economic unit to the policy of drawing our country into
the general channel of socialist development. But untilthat happens, it will be absolutely essential for us to
have that minimum of independence for our national
economy without which it will be impossible to safe-guard our country from economic subordination to the
world capitalist system.
That is the first proposition.The second proposition , by which we must be guided
in our work of construction as much as by the first, is that
we must on each occasion take into account the specificfeatures of our management of the national economy dis-
tinguishing it from such management in capitalist coun-
tries There, in the capitalist countries, private capitalreigns; there, the mistakes committed by individual cap-
italist trusts, syndicates, or one or other group of capital-
ists, are corrected by the elemental forces of the marketIf too much is produced—a crisis ensues; but later,
after the crisis, the economy resumes its normal course.
If they indulge too much in imports and an unfavour-able balance of trade results—the rate of exchange will
be shaken, inflation will ensue, imports will drop and
exports will rise. All this in the form of crises. No mistakeof any magnitude, no overproduction of any magnitude,
or serious discrepancy between production and total
demand takes place in capitalist countries without theblunders, mistakes and discrepancies being corrected
by some crisis or other. That is how they live in capi-
talist countries. But we cannot live like that. Therewe see economic, commercial and financial crises,
which affect individual groups of capitalists. Here, in
our country, things are different. Every serious hitch
in trade, in production, every serious miscalculation in
our economy, results not in some individual crisisor other, but hits the whole of our national economy.
In our country, every crisis, whether commercial, finan-
cial or industrial, may develop into a general crisis thatwill hit the whole state. That is why special circumspec-
tion and foresight in construction are demanded of us.
That is why we here must manage our economy in aplanned way so that there are fewer miscalculations,
so that our management of economy is conducted
with supreme foresight, circumspection and accuracy.But since, comrades, we, unfortunately, do not pos-
sess exceptional foresight, exceptional circumspection,
or an exceptional ability to manage our economy withouterror, since we are only just learning to build, we make
mistakes, and will continue to do so in the future. That
is why, in building, we must have reserves; we must havereserves with which to correct our blunders. Our entire
work during the past two years has shown that we are
not guaranteed either against fortuities or against errors.In the sphere of agriculture, very much depends in our
country not only on the way we manage, but also on the
forces of nature (crop failures, etc.). In the sphere ofindustry, very much depends not only on the way we
manage, but also on the home market, which we have
not yet mastered. In the sphere of foreign trade, verymuch depends not only on us, but also on the behaviour
of the West-European capitalists; and the more our ex-
ports and imports grow, the more dependent we becomeupon the capitalist West, the more vulnerable we be-
come to the blows of our enemies. To guarantee our-
selves against all these fortuities and inevitable mistakes,
we need to accept the idea that we must accumulate
reserves.
We are not guaranteed against crop failures in agri-
culture. Hence we need reserves. We are not guaranteed
against the fortuities of the home market in the sphereof the development of our industry. That is apart from
the fact that, living on the funds that we ourselves
accumulate, we must be exceptionally frugal and re-strained in spending accumulated funds; we must try to
invest every kopek wisely, i.e., in such undertakings
as it is absolutely essential to develop at the givenmoment. Hence the need for reserves for industry. We are
not guaranteed against fortuities in the sphere of foreign
trade (covert boycott, covert blockade, etc.). Hencethe need for reserves.
We could double the sum allocated for agricultural
credits; but then the necessary reserve for financingindustry would not be left, the development of industry
would lag far behind agriculture, the output of manu-
factured goods would shrink, resulting in inflated pricesof manufactured goods and all the consequences follow-
ing from that.
We could double the assignments for the expansion
of industry; but that would mean a rapid rate of indus-
trial development which we would not be able to main-
tain owing to the great shortage of free capital, and itwould certainly lead to a breakdown, not to speak of
the fact that the reserve from which to provide credits
for agriculture would be lacking.
We could push forward the growth of our imports,
chiefly import of equipment, to twice the amount
we import now, in order to promote the rapid develop-
ment of industry; but that might cause an excess of
imports over exports, which would result in an unfa-vourable balance of trade and in the depreciation of our
currency, i.e., the only basis on which it is possible to
plan and develop industry would be undermined.
We could recklessly develop exports to the utmost,
ignoring the state of the home market; but that would
certainly cause great complications in the towns in theform of a rapid rise in the prices of agricultural produce
and, consequently, in the form of the undermining of
wages and a certain degree of artificially organisedfamine with all the consequences resulting from that.
We could raise wages of the workers to the utmost,
not merely to the pre-war level, but higher; but thatwould reduce the tempo of development of our industry,
because under our conditions, in the absence of loans
from abroad, in the absence of credits, etc., the expan-sion of industry is possible only on the basis of the ac-
cumulation of a certain amount of profit necessary for
financing and promoting industry, which, however, wouldbe excluded, i.e., accumulations of any serious mag-
nitude would be excluded if the tempo of raising wages
was excessively accelerated.
And so on, and so forth.
Such are the two fundamental guiding propositions
that must serve as the torch, the beacon, in our workof construction in our country.
Permit me now to pass to the figures.
But just one more digression. Our system of econ-
omy exhibits a certain diversity, it contains no less than
five forms. There is one form of economy that is almost
on the level of natural economy: the peasant farms that
produce very little for the market. There is a second form
of economy, the commodity production form—the peas-ant farms which produce chiefly for the market. There
is a third form of economy—private capitalism, which
is not dead, which has revived and will continue to re-vive, within certain limits, as long as we have NEP. The
fourth form of economy is state capitalism, i.e., the capi-
talism that we have permitted and are able to controland restrict in the way the proletarian state wishes.
Lastly, there is the fifth form—socialist industry, i.e.,
our state industry, in which production does not involvetwo antagonistic classes—the proletariat and the bour-
geoisie—but only one class—the proletariat.
I should like to say a word or two about these five
forms of economy, because otherwise it will be difficult
to understand the group of figures I intend to quote and
the trend that is observed in the development of ourindustry; the more so that Lenin already dealt in consid-
erable detail with these five forms of economy in our
social system
57 and taught us to take the struggle among
these forms into account in our work of construction.
I should like to say a word or two about state capi-
talism and about state industry, the latter being ofa socialist type, in order to clear up the misunderstand-
ings and confusion that have arisen in the Party around
this question.
Would it be right to call our state industry,
state-capitalist industry? No. Why? Because under the
dictatorship of the proletariat, state capitalism isa form of organisation of production involving two
classes: an exploiting class which owns the means of
production, and an exploited class which does not own
the means of production. No matter what special form
state capitalism may assume, it must neverthelessremain capitalist in its nature. When Ilyich analysed
state capitalism, he had in mind primarily concessions.
Let us take concessions and see whether two classes areinvolved in them. Yes, they are. The class of capitalists,
i.e., the concessionaires, who exploit and temporarily
own the means of production, and the class of proletar-ians, whom the concessionaire exploits. That we have
no elements of socialism here is evident if only from
the fact that nobody would dare turn up at a concessionenterprise to start a campaign to increase productivity
of labour; for everybody knows that a concession en-
terprise is not a socialist enterprise, but one alien tosocialism.
Let us take another type of enterprise—state enter-
prises. Are they state-capitalist enterprises? No, they arenot. Why? Because they involve not two classes, but
one class, the working class, which through its state
owns the instruments and means of production andwhich is not exploited; for the maximum amount of what
is produced in these enterprises over and above wages
is used for the further expansion of industry, i.e., forthe improvement of the conditions of the working class
as a whole.
It may be said that, after all, this is not complete
socialism, bearing in mind the survivals of bureaucracy
persisting in the managing bodies of our enterprises.
That is true, but it does not contradict the fact thatstate industry belongs to the socialist type of produc-
tion. There are two types of production: the capitalist,
including the state-capitalist, type, where there are two
classes, where production is carried on for the profit of the
capitalist; and there is the other type, the socialist typeof production, where there is no exploitation, where
the means of production belong to the working class,
and where the enterprises are run not for the profit ofan alien class, but for the expansion of industry in the
interests of the workers as a whole. That is just what
Lenin said, that our state enterprises are enterprisesof a consistently socialist type.
Here an analogy with our state could be drawn.
Our state, too, is not called a bourgeois state, for, accord-ing to Lenin, it is a new type of state, the proletarian
type of state. Why? Because our state apparatus does
not function for the purpose of oppressing the workingclass, as is the case with all bourgeois states without
exception, but for the purpose of emancipating the work-
ing class from the oppression of the bourgeoisie. Thatis why our state is a proletarian type of state, although
any amount of trash and survivals of the past
can be found in the state apparatus. Lenin, who pro-claimed our Soviet system a proletarian type of state,
castigated it for its bureaucratic survivals more strongly
than anybody else. Nevertheless, he asserted all the timethat our state is a new proletarian type of state. A distinc-
tion must be drawn between the type of state and the
heritage and survivals still persisting in the system andapparatus of the state. It is equally imperative to draw
a distinction between the bureaucratic survivals in
state enterprises and the type of structure of industrythat we call the socialist type. It is wrong to say that
because our economic bodies, or our trusts, suffer
from mistakes, bureaucracy, and so forth, our state
industry is not socialist. It is wrong to say that. If that
were true, our state, which is of the proletarian type,would also not be proletarian. I can name quite a num-
ber of bourgeois apparatuses that function better and
more economically than our proletarian state apparatus;but that does not mean that our state apparatus is not
proletarian, that our type of state apparatus is not
superior to the bourgeois type. Why? Because, althoughthat bourgeois apparatus functions better, it functions
for the capitalist, whereas our proletarian state appara-
tus, even if it does fumble sometimes, after all func-tions for the proletariat and against the bourgeoisie.
That fundamental difference must not be forgotten.
The same must be said about state industry. We
must not, because of the defects and survivals of bureauc-
racy that are to be found in the managing bodies of our
state enterprises, and which will exist for some timeyet, we must not, because of those survivals and defects,
forget that, in their nature, our enterprises are socialist
enterprises. At the Ford plants, for example, which func-tion efficiently, there may be less thieving, nevertheless
they function for the benefit of Ford, a capitalist, where-
as our enterprises, where thieving takes place some-times, and things do not always run smoothly, nev-
ertheless function for the benefit of the proletariat.
That fundamental difference must not be forgotten.Let us now pass to the figures concerning our national
economy as a whole.
Agriculture. Its gross output in 1924-25, comparing
its level with the pre-war level, that of 1913, reached
71 per cent. In other words, the output in 1913 amounted
to something over 12,000 million rubles at pre-war prices,
and in 1924-25, the output amounted to some-
thing over 9,000 million rubles. In the coming year,1925-26, we anticipate, on the basis of data of our
planning bodies, a further rise that will bring the output
up to 11,000 million rubles, i.e., up to 91 per cent ofthe pre-war level. Agriculture is growing—such is the
natural conclusion to be drawn.
Industry. Taking all industry—state, concession and
private—its gross output in 1913 amounted to 7,000 mil-
lion rubles; in 1924-25, the gross output amounted to
5,000 million. That is 71 per cent of the pre-war level.Our planning bodies anticipate that next year output
will reach 6,500 million, i.e., it will amount to about
93 per cent of the pre-war level. Industry is rising.This year it rose faster than agriculture.
Special reference must be made to the question of
electrification. The GOELRO plan in 1921 provided forthe erection in the course of 10-15 years of thirty electric
power stations of a total capacity of 1,500,000 kw. at
a cost of 800,000,000 gold rubles. Before the OctoberRevolution, the total capacity of electric power stations
amounted to 402,000 kw. Up to the present we have
built stations with a total capacity of 152,350 kw. andit is planned to put into operation in 1926 a total capac-
ity of 326,000 kw. If development continues at that
rate, the plan for the electrification of the U.S.S.R.will be fulfilled in ten years, i.e., approximately by
1932 (the earliest date planned for). Parallel with the
growth in electric power construction runs the growthof the electrical engineering industry, the 1925-26 pro-
gramme of which provides for bringing output up to
165-170 per cent of the pre-war level. It must be observed,
however, that the erection of big hydro-electric power
stations leads to a large over-expenditure of funds com-pared with what had been planned. For example, the
original estimate for the V olkhov project amounted to
24,300,000 “conventional” rubles, but by September 1925it had risen to 95,200,000 chervonets rubles, which is 59
per cent of the funds spent on the erection of the first prior-
ity stations, although the capacity of the V olkhov projectamounts to 30 per cent of the capacity of those stations.
The original estimate for the Zemo-Avchaly station
amounted to 2,600,000 gold rubles, but the latest requestamounts to about 16,000,000 chervonets rubles, of which
about 12,000,000 have already been spent.
If we compare the output of state and co-operative
industry, associated in one way or another, with
the output of private industry, we get the following:
in 1923-24, the output of state and co-operative industryamounted to 76.3 per cent of the total industrial output
for the year, while that of private industry amounted
to 23.7 per cent; in 1924-25, however, the output ofstate and co-operative industry amounted to 79.3 per
cent of the total, and that of private industry was no
longer 23.7 per cent, but 20.7 per cent.
The relative importance of private industry declined
in this period. It is anticipated that next year the share
of state and co-operative industry will amount to about80 per cent, while that of private industry will sink to
20 percent. In absolute figures, private industry is grow-
ing, but as state and co-operative industry is growingfaster, the relative importance of private industry is
progressively declining.
That is a fact that must be reckoned with, and which
shows that the preponderance of socialist industry over
private industry is an indisputable fact.
If we take property concentrated in the hands of the
state and property in the hands of private business
people, we find that in this sphere too—I have the StatePlanning Commission’s control figures in mind—prepon-
derance is on the side of the proletarian state, for the
state possesses capital funds amounting to not less than11,700 millions (chervonets rubles), whereas private
owners, mainly peasant farms, possess funds amounting
to not more than 7,500 millions.
This fact shows that socialised funds constitute
a very large share of the total, and this share is growing
compared with the share of property in the non-social-ised sector.
For all that, our system as a whole cannot yet be
called either capitalist or socialist. Our system as awhole is transitional from capitalism to socialism—
a system in which privately-owned peasant production
still preponderates as regards volume of output, butin which the share of socialist industry is steadily
growing. The share of socialist industry is growing in
such a way that, taking advantage of its concentrationand organisation, taking advantage of the fact that we
have the dictatorship of the proletariat, that transport
is in the hands of the state, that the credit system andthe banks are ours—taking advantage of all this, our
socialist industry, the share of which in the total volume
of national production is growing step by step, thisindustry is advancing and is beginning to gain the
upper hand over private industry and to adapt to itself
and take the lead over all the other forms of economy.
Such is the fate of the countryside—it must follow the
lead of the towns, of large-scale industry.
That is the fundamental conclusion that follows if
we raise the question of the character of our system, of
the share of socialist industry in this system, of theshare of private capitalist industry in it and, lastly, of the
share of small commodity—chiefly peasant—production
in the total national economy.
A word or two about the state budget. You no doubt
know that it has grown to 4,000 million rubles. Count-
ing in pre-war rubles, our state budget amounts to notless than 71 per cent of the state budget of the pre-war
period. Further, if to the amount of the general state
budget we add the amounts of the local budgets, as faras they can be calculated, our total state budget will
amount to not less than 74.6 per cent of the 1913 budget.
A characteristic feature is that in our state budget theproportion of non-tax revenues is much higher than
that of revenues from taxes. All this also shows that
our economy is growing and making progress.
The question of the profits that we obtained from
our state and co-operative enterprises last year is of
very great importance, because ours is a country poorin capital, a country that does not obtain big loans from
abroad. We must closely scrutinise our industrial and
trading enterprises, our banks and co-operatives, in orderto ascertain what we can have at our disposal for the
purpose of further expanding our industry. In 1923-24,
state industry of Union importance and industry underthe Chief Metal Board yielded a profit of, I think, about
142,000,000 chervonets rubles. Of this sum, 71,000,000
were assigned as state revenue. In 1924-25 we already
have 315,000,000. Of this sum, it is planned to assign
173,000,000 as state revenue.
State trade of Union importance yielded in 1923-24
about 37,000,000, of which 14,000,000 went as state
revenue. In 1925, the amount is smaller—22,000,000,as a result of the policy of reducing prices. Of this sum
about 10,000,000 will go as state revenue.
From our foreign trade in 1923-24 we obtained a
profit of something over 26,000,000 rubles, of which about
17,000,000 went as state revenue. In 1925, foreign trade
will yield or, rather, has already yielded, 44,000,000.Of this sum 29,000,000 will go as state revenue.
According to the calculations of the People’s Com-
missariat of Finance, in 1923-24 the banks yielded a profitof 46,000,000, of which 18,000,000 went as state revenue;
in 1924-25 the profit amounted to over 97,000,000,
of which 51,000,000 have gone as state revenue.
The consumer co-operatives in 1923-24 yielded
a profit of 57,000,000 and the agricultural co-operatives—
4,000,000.
The figures I have just quoted are more or less under-
stated. You know why. You know how our economic
bodies calculate with a view to keeping as muchas possible for the expansion of their enterprises. If
these figures seem small to you, as indeed they are,
then bear in mind that they are slightly understated.
A few words about our foreign trade turn-over.
If we take our trade turn-over for 1913 as 100, we
shall find that our foreign trade in 1923-24 reached 21 percent of the pre-war level, and in 1924-25—26 per cent
of the pre-war level. Exports in 1923-24 amounted to
522,000,000 rubles; imports—439,000,000; total turn-
over—961,000,000; favourable balance—83,000,000.
In 1923-24 we had a favourable balance of trade. In1924-25 exports amounted to 564,000,000; imports—
708,000,000; total turn-over—1,272 million; balance—
minus 144,000,000. This year we ended our foreign tradewith an unfavourable balance of 144,000,000.
Permit me to dwell on this somewhat.
People here are often inclined to attribute this un-
favourable balance of trade in the past economic year
to the fact that we imported a large quantity of grain
this year owing to the crop failure. But we importedgrain amounting to 83,000,000, whereas the trade deficit
amounts to 144,000,000. What does that deficit lead to?
To this: by buying more than we sell, by importing morethan we export, we put in jeopardy our balance of pay-
ments and therefore our currency as well. We received a
directive from the Thirteenth Party Congress that theParty should at all costs secure a favourable balance of
trade.
58 I must admit that all of us, both the Soviet bodies
and the Central Committee, committed a gross error herein failing to carry out the directive given us. It was
difficult to carry it out; nevertheless we could have ob-
tained at least a small favourable balance if we hadmade a real effort. We committed this gross error and the
congress must rectify it. Incidentally, the Central Com-
mittee itself attempted to rectify it in November thisyear at a special meeting at which it examined the figures
of our imports and exports and adopted a decision that
next year—at that meeting we outlined the chief elementsof our foreign trade for the coming year—that next year
our foreign trade should end with a favourable balance
of at least 100,000,000. That is essential. That is abso-
lutely essential for a country like ours, where we have
little capital, where import of capital from abroad doesnot take place, or only to a minimal degree, and where
the balance of payments, its equilibrium, must be main-
tained by the balance of trade in order to prevent ourchervonets currency from being shaken and in order, by
maintaining our currency, to preserve the possibility of
further expanding our industry and agriculture. You haveall experienced what an unstable currency means. We
must not fall into such an unfortunate position again;
we must take all measures to eradicate all factors thatcould later on result in conditions capable of shaking
our currency.
Such are the figures and considerations concerning
our national economy as a whole, concerning industry
and agriculture in particular, concerning the relative
importance of socialist industry in relation to the otherforms of economy, and concerning those leading ideas
in the building of socialism of which I have spoken,
and which the Central Committee of our Party takes asthe basis for its stand.
2.  Industry  and  Agriculture
If, further, we take the questions that directly con-
cern the interrelations of industry and agriculture now
and in the immediate future, they can be reduced to
the following points.
Firstly . We are still an agrarian country: agri-
cultural output predominated over industrial output.
As regards industry, the main thing is that it has
already approached the limit of the pre-war level, that
further steps in industry mean developing it on a new
technical basis, with the utilisation of new equipmentand the building of new plants. That is a very diffi-
cult matter. To step across this threshold, to pass
from the policy of utilising to the utmost all that wehave had in industry to the policy of building up a new
industry on a new technical basis, on the basis of build-
ing new plants, to cross this threshold calls for largeamounts of capital. As, however, we suffer from a con-
siderable shortage of capital, the further development
of our industry will, in all probability, proceed at a lessrapid tempo than it has done up to now.
That is not the case in agriculture. It cannot be
said that all the potentialities latent in agriculture onits present technical basis are already exhausted. Unlike
industry, agriculture can make rapid progress for a cer-
tain time even on its present technical basis. Even simplyraising the culture of the peasant, literacy, even a sim-
ple thing like cleaning seed, could increase the gross
output of agriculture 10-15 per cent. Just reckon upwhat that means for the entire country. Such are the
potentialities still latent in agriculture. That is why the
further development of agriculture does not, for the timebeing, encounter the technical difficulties that our in-
dustry does. That is why the discrepancy between the bal-
ance of output of industry and the balance of output of ag-riculture will continue to grow during the next few years,
because agriculture possesses a number of inherent
potentialities which are far from being utilised yet, andwhich are due to be utilised during the next few years.
What are our tasks in view of this circumstance?
First of all, to raise our large-scale state industry
at all costs, overcoming the difficulties that confront
us. Next, to raise the local  type of Soviet industry.
Comrades, we cannot concentrate only on the develop-
ment of Union industry, because Union industry, our
centralised trusts and syndicates, cannot satisfy all thediverse tastes and requirements of a 140,000,000-popu-
lation. To be able to satisfy these requirements, we
must see to it that life, industrial life, is pulsating inevery district, in every okrug, in every gubernia, region
and national republic. Unless we unleash the forces
latent in the localities for the purpose of economic con-struction, unless we lend local industry every support,
beginning with the districts and okrugs, unless we un-
leash all these forces, we shall not be able to achievethat general upswing of economic construction in our
country that Lenin spoke about. Unless we do this,
unless we link the interests and benefits of the centrewith the interests and benefits of the localities, we shall
not solve the problem of stimulating initiative in the
work of construction, the problem of a general economicupswing in the country, the problem of securing the
speediest industrialisation of the country.
Secondly . Formerly, the problem in relation to fuel
was that of over-production. Now we are approaching the
problem of a fuel crisis, because our industry is grow-
ing faster than the fuel supply. We are approaching thelevel on which our country stood under the bourgeois
system, when there was a shortage of fuel and we were
obliged to import it. In other words, the position is thatthere is a discrepancy between the balance of fuel output
and the balance of output of industry, the requirements
of industry. Hence the task of accelerating the develop-
ment of our fuel industry, of improving its technical
equipment, so that its development should overtake,should be able to overtake, the development of industry.
Thirdly . There is some discrepancy between the bal-
ance of output of metals and the balance of the nationaleconomy as a whole. If we calculate the minimum metal
requirements and the maximum possibility of producing
metals, we shall find that we have a shortage running intotens of millions. Under these conditions, our economy,
and our industry in particular, cannot make further
progress. That is why this circumstance must receivespecial attention. Metal is the foundation of foundations
of our industry, and its balance of output must be made
to correspond to the balance of industry and transport.
Fourthly . The discrepancy between the balance of our
skilled labour power and the balance of our industry.
A number of figures have been published in the pressand I will not quote them; I will merely say that the
additional skilled labour power required for the whole
of industry in 1925-26 amounts to 433,000 people, andwe can supply only a fourth of the number required.
Fifthly . I should like to mention one other defect
and discrepancy, namely, that the standards for usingrailway rolling stock exceed all limits. The demand for
rolling stock is so great that next year we shall be
obliged to use locomotives and freight wagons, not to 100per cent of their capacity, but to 120-130 per cent. Thus,
the fixed capital of the People’s Commissariat of Trans-
port will be subjected to excessive wear and tear, andwe may be faced with disaster in the near future if we
do not take resolute measures.
Such are all the defects and discrepancies which ex-
ist in our national economy in general, and in our in-
dustry in particular, and which must be overcome.
3.  Questions  Concerning  Trade
Permit me now to pass to questions concerning
trade. The figures show that in this sphere, as in theindustrial sphere, the relative importance of state-based
trade is increasing as compared with trade on a private
capitalist basis. If we take the total internal trade turn-over before the war as being equal to 20,000 million
commodity rubles, we find that the turn-over for 1923-24
amounted to 10,000 million, i.e., 50 per cent of pre-war,while that for 1924-25 equals 14,000 million, i.e., 70 per
cent. The general growth of the internal turn-over is
beyond doubt. Speaking of the state’s share in that turn-over, we find that in 1923-24, the state’s share amounted
to 45 per cent of the total internal trade turn-over; the
share of the co-operatives was 19 per cent, and the shareof private capital 35 per cent. In the following year,
i.e., in 1924-25, the state’s share amounted to 50 per
cent; the share of the co-operatives, instead of 19 percent, was 24.7 per cent, and the share of private capital,
instead of 35 per cent, was 24.9 per cent. The share of
private capital in the total turn-over is falling; theshares of the state and of the co-operatives are rising.
If we divide the turn-over into two parts, wholesale and
retail, we shall see the same trend. The state’s share ofwholesale trade in 1923-24 amounted to something over
62 per cent of the total turn-over; in 1924-25 it amount-
ed to 68.9 per cent. An obvious increase. The share of
the co-operatives shows an increase from 15 to 19 per
cent. The share of private trade was 21 per cent; now
it is 11 per cent. In retail trade, the state’s share in1923-24 amounted to 16 per cent; in 1924-25 it was al-
most 23 per cent. The co-operatives’ share of retail
trade last year was 25.9 per cent, and in 1924-25 it was32.9 per cent. The growth is beyond doubt. Private
capital’s share of the retail trade in 1923-24 amounted
to 57 per cent; now it is 44.3 per cent. We have obviouslycrossed the threshold in the sphere of retail trade. Last
year, private capital predominated in retail trade; this
year, the state and the co-operatives predominate.
The growth of the importance of the state and the
co-operatives in the procurement of raw materials and
grain is shown by the following figures: oil seeds in1924-25—65 per cent; flax—94 per cent; raw cotton—
almost 100 per cent; grain in 1923-24—75 per cent and
in 1924-25—70 per cent. Here we have a slight drop.On the whole, the growth of the state and co-operative
bases in the sphere of internal trade is beyond doubt,
both as regards wholesale and retail trade.
Although the state’s share of grain procurement is
preponderant, nevertheless, it is not growing as much
as it did last year, and that points to mistakes committedin the procurement of grain. The fact of the matter is
that the miscalculation in regard to procurement was
a miscalculation not only on the part of the Sovietbodies, but also of the Central Committee, for it is
the latter’s duty to supervise the Soviet bodies, and it
is responsible for everything they do. The miscalcula-tion consists in the fact that when planning we failed
to take into account that this year the state of the mar-
ket, the conditions for grain procurement, presented some-
thing new, something special, compared with last year
and the year before. This is the first year in which wehave come into the grain market without resorting to coer-
cive administrative measures, in which we have reduced
the burden of taxation, the tax pressure, to a minimum,and in which the peasants and the government’s agents
come face to face in the market as equals. These were
the circumstances that were left out of account by ourplanning bodies, which intended by January 1, 1926, to
procure 70 per cent of the total grain procurement for the
year. We failed to take into account the fact that thepeasant is also able to manoeuvre, that he puts his cur-
rency commodity—wheat—into store for the future
in anticipation of a further rise in prices, and prefers,for the time being, to come into the market with other,
less valuable grain. That is what we failed to take into
account. In view of this, the plan for grain procurementhas been revised, and the plan for grain exports has
been reduced, just as the plan for imports is also being
correspondingly reduced. The exports and imports planis being revised; it has to show a favourable balance
of trade of not less than a hundred million rubles, but
it has not yet been finally drawn up.
4.  Classes,  Their  Activity,
Their  Correlation
The development of the national economy in the
country has led to an improvement in the material con-
ditions primarily of the working class. The declassing
of the working class has become a thing of the remote
past. The restoration and growth of the working class
are proceeding at a rapid rate. Here are the figures accord-
ing to data of the People’s Commissariat of Labour:on April 1,1924, counting all workers, in all forms of in-
dustry, including small-scale industry, including season-
al workers and agricultural labourers, we had 5,500,000workers, of whom 1,000,000 were agricultural labourers
and 760,000 unemployed. On October 1, 1925, we already
had over 7,000,000 workers, of whom 1,200,000 wereagricultural labourers and 715,000 unemployed. The
growth of the working class is beyond doubt.
The average monthly wage per worker in industry as
a whole, in chervonets rubles, amounted in April 1925
to 35 rubles, or 62 per cent of the pre-war average. In
September 1925 it was 50 rubles, or 88.5 per cent of thepre-war average. Some branches have exceeded the pre-
war level. The average daily real wage per worker in
commodity rubles amounted in April 1925 to 0.88 rubleand in September 1925 to 1 ruble 21 kopeks. The average
output per man-day worked in industry as a whole
amounted, in pre-war rubles, to 4.18 in April 1924, butin 1925 it amounted to 6.14, i.e., 85 per cent of the pre-
war average. If we take the relation between wages and
productivity of labour month by month we shall findthat they run in parallel lines: when wages rise, pro-
ductivity of labour rises. But in June and July wages
rose; productivity of labour, however, rose less thanwages. That was due to holidays and to the influx of
new strata of workers—semi-peasants—into the mills
and factories.
Now as regards wage  funds. According to data
of the People’s Commissariat of Labour, wage funds
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

(I have in mind industry, leaving out other branches)
amounted in 1923-24 to 808,000,000; in 1924-25 they
amounted to over 1,200 million; the estimate for 1925-26is 1,700 million rubles.
I shall not, comrades, speak of the needs for which
the social insurance  funds are used, everybody knows
that. Permit me to mention one general figure to enable
you to judge how much the proletarian state spends on
workers’ insurance. The total number of insured workersin 1924-25 was 6,700,000; the estimate for 1925-26 is
7,000,000. The average assignment calculated on the
wage budget amounted in 1924-25 to 14.6 per cent; theestimate for 1925-26 is 13.84 per cent. Expressing this
in gross figures, the amount expended on this in 1924-25
was 422,000,000 rubles; the estimate for 1925-26 is588,000,000. Perhaps it will not be superfluous to in-
form you that from the fund that was allocated last
year a certain sum was left in the social insurance coffers,amounting to 71,000,000 rubles.
As regards the peasants, the increase in the output
of agriculture was naturally bound to be reflected in animprovement in the material conditions of the peas-
ant population. According to data of our planning
bodies, the personal consumption of the peasant popula-tion, the percentage increase in this consumption, is
higher than the percentage increase in the consumption
of the urban population. The peasant has begun to feedbetter, and he retains a far larger share of his produc-
tion for himself, for his personal consumption, than was
the case last year.
What assistance did the proletarian state render
the households of the poor peasants, those who had
suffered from the crop failure? The People’s Commissariat
of Finance calculates that financial assistance to poor
peasants in 1924-25 amounted, in preliminary figures,not quite exact, to 100-105 million rubles, of which tax
and insurance exemptions constituted about 60,000,000
rubles; furthermore, disbursements from the fund forcombating the consequences of the crop failure amounted
to 24,000,000 rubles, and credits to 12,000,000 rubles.
Assistance to victims of the crop failure in 1924 cov-ered an area with a population of over 7,000,000. The
total spent for this purpose amounted to 108-110 million
rubles, of which 71,000,000 came from the state budgetand 38,000,000 from the funds of public organisa-
tions and banking institutions. In addition to this, a
fund of 77,000,000 was set up for combating drought.Such was the assistance that the proletarian state
rendered the poor strata of the peasantry, inadequate
assistance, of course, but such as deserves a word or twoof comment.
Improvement of the material conditions of the work-
ing class and of the peasantry is a fundamental prem-ise of all progress in the sphere of our construction work.
We see that this premise already exists.
A few words about the increase in the activity of the
masses. The chief thing in our internal situation, that
which strikes the eye and which one cannot possibly
get away from, is that as a consequence of the improve-ment in the material conditions of the workers and
peasants there has been an increase in their political
activity, they have become more critical in their attitudetowards our shortcomings, they are speaking more loudly
about the defects in our practical work. We have entered
a period of greater activity of all classes and all
social groupings. The working class has become more
active, the peasantry, with all its groupings, has be-come more active, as also the new bourgeoisie, its agents
in the countryside (the kulaks) and its representatives
among the intelligentsia. This fact served as the basis forthe turn in our policy which is expressed in the decisions
of the Fourteenth Party Conference. The policy of revi-
talising the Soviets, the policy of revitalising the co-operatives and the trade unions, the concessions to
the peasantry as regards precise regulation of questions
of renting and leasing land and hiring labour, the materialassistance for the poor peasants, the policy of a stable alli-
ance with the middle peasants, the elimination of the
remnants of war communism—it is these, chiefly, thatexpress the Party’s new course in the countryside. You are
well aware what the situation was in the countryside at
the end of last year and in the beginning of this year.General discontent among the peasantry was growing,
and here and there even attempts at revolt occurred.
Those were the circumstances which determined the Par-ty’s new course in the countryside.
Such are the foundations of the Party’s policy to-
wards the peasantry in the period of the rise in the activ-ity and organisation of the masses; a policy calculat-
ed to regulate relationships in the countryside, to raise
there the prestige of the proletariat and its Party, andto ensure a stable alliance of the proletariat and poor
peasants with the middle peasantry.
You know that this policy has fully justified
itself.
 5.  Lenin’s  Three  Slogans
on  the  Peasant  Question
Did we act rightly in steering a course towards the
middle peasantry? How does the matter stand with the
new course from the aspect of principle? Have we anydirectives from Lenin on this score?
It is said that the Second Congress of the Comintern
adopted a resolution on the peasant question statingthat only the poor peasants can be the ally of the prole-
tariat in the epoch of the struggle for power, that the
middle peasants can only be neutralised. Is that true?It is true. In writing that resolution,
59 Lenin had in mind
parties advancing towards power. We, however, are
a party that has already come to power. That is wherethe difference lies. On the question of the peasantry,
on the question of the alliance between the workers and
the peasantry, or individual strata of the peasantry,Leninism has three basic slogans, corresponding to the
three periods of the revolution. The whole point is cor-
rectly to discern the transition from one slogan to thenext, and from that to the third.
Formerly, when we were advancing towards the
bourgeois revolution, when we Bolsheviks first outlinedour tactics in relation to the peasantry, Lenin said:
alliance with the whole  of the peasantry against the tsar
and the landlords, at the same time neutralising theCadet bourgeoisie. With that slogan we, at that time,
advanced towards the bourgeois revolution and we
achieved victory. That was the first stage of our revolution.
Later, when we had reached the second stage, Octo-
ber, Lenin issued a new slogan, corresponding to the new
situation: alliance of the proletariat with the poor peas-
antry  against all the bourgeois, at the same time neutral-
ising  the middle peasantry. That is a slogan essential
for Communist Parties which are advancing towards
power. And even when they have won power, but have
not yet consolidated it, they cannot count on an alliancewith the middle peasant. The middle peasant is a cau-
tious man. He looks round to see who is going to come
out on top, he waits, and only when you have gained theupper hand, when you have expelled the landlords and
the bourgeois, does he enter into alliance with you.
That is the nature of the middle peasant. Hence, at thesecond stage of the revolution we no longer advanced
the slogan of alliance of the workers with the whole  o f
the peasantry, but the slogan of alliance of the prole-tariat with the poor  peasantry.
And after that? After that, when we had sufficiently
consolidated our power, when we had repulsed the at-tacks of the imperialists and had entered the period of
extensive socialist construction, Lenin advanced a third
slogan— a stable alliance  of the proletariat and poor peas-
antry with the middle peasantry. That is the only cor-
rect slogan corresponding to the new period of our revo-
lution, the period of extensive construction. It is cor-rect not only because we can now count on an alliance,
but also because, in building socialism, we have to oper-
ate not only with millions, but tens of millions ofpeople of the countryside. It is impossible to build social-
ism otherwise. Socialism does not embrace only the
towns. Socialism is that organisation of economy whichunites industry and agriculture on the basis of the social-
isation of the means and instruments of production.
If those two branches of economy are not united, social-
ism is impossible.
That is how the matter stands with the slogans
of Leninism on alliance with the peasantry.
What Lenin said at the Second Congress of the Comin-
tern was absolutely correct, for when you are advancingtowards power, or have not yet managed to consolidate
power after capturing it, you can count only on an alli-
ance with the poor peasantry and on neutralising themiddle peasantry. But when you have consolidated your
position, after you have captured power, have begun to
build, and when you already have to operate with tensof millions of people, alliance of the proletariat and
poor peasants with the middle peasants is the only correct
slogan.
This transition from the old slogan “alliance of the
proletariat with the poor peasantry,” from the old slogan
of neutralising the middle peasantry to the slogan of astable alliance with the middle peasantry, took place
as far back as the Eighth Congress of our Party. Permit
me to quote a passage from Ilyich’s speech in openingthe congress. Here it is:
“The best representatives of socialism of the old days—
when they still believed in revolution and served it theoretically
and ideologically—spoke of neutralising  the peasantry, i.e., of
turning the middle peasantry into a social stratum which, if it
did not actively aid the revolution of the proletariat, at least
would not hinder it, would be neutral and not take the side of
our enemies. This abstract, theoretical presentation of the problem
is perfectly clear to us. But it is not enough . We have entered a
phase of socialist construction in which we must  draw up concrete
and detailed basic rules and instructions which have been tested
by the experience of our work in the countryside, and by which
we must be guided in order to achieve a stable alliance with the middle
peasantry. ”*60
Such is the theoretical basis of the Party’s policy,
calculated to achieve in the present historical period
a stable alliance with the middle peasantry.
Whoever thinks of using the resolution of the Second
Congress of the Comintern, which Lenin wrote, to refute
these words of Lenin’s, let him say so frankly.
That is how the question stands in theory. We do
not take a separate part of Lenin’s teaching, we take
the whole. Lenin had three slogans in relation to thepeasantry: one—during the bourgeois revolution, another
—during the October Revolution, and a third—after
the consolidation of the power of the Soviets. Whoeverthinks of substituting some single general slogan for
these three, commits a very gross error.
That is how the question stands in theory. In prac-
tice, it stands as follows: after carrying through the
October Revolution, after expelling the landlords and
distributing the land among the peasants, it is clearthat we have made Russia into a more or less middle-
peasant country, as Lenin expressed it, and today
the middle peasants constitute the majority in thecountryside, notwithstanding the process of differen-
tiation.
Differentiation is, of course, proceeding. Under
NEP at the present stage, it cannot be otherwise. But
it is proceeding at a slow pace. Recently, I read a hand-
book, issued, I think, by the Agitation and Propaganda
* All italics mine.— J. St.
Department of the Central Committee, and another
handbook, issued, if I am not mistaken, by the Agita-
tion and Propaganda Department of the Leningradorganisation. If we are to believe these handbooks, it
appears that under the tsar the poor peasants in this
country constituted somewhere about 60 per cent, butnow they constitute 75 per cent; that under the tsar the
kulaks constituted 5 per cent, but now—8 or 12 per cent;
under the tsar there were so many middle peasants, butnow there are fewer. I don’t want to indulge in strong
language, but it must be said that these figures are worse
than counter-revolution. How can a man who thinks ina Marxist way invent a thing like that, and print it, too,
and in a handbook at that? As a member of the Central
Committee, I, too, of course, am answerable for thisincredible blunder. If, under the tsar, a policy of creat-
ing kulaks was practised, private property in land
existed and land could be bought and sold (which excep-tionally aggravates differentiation), if the government
was such that it forced differentiation to the utmost,
and, for all that, the poor peasants constituted no morethan 60 per cent, how could it happen that under our
government, under the Soviet Government, when pri-
vate property in land does not exist, i.e., the land iswithdrawn from circulation and, consequently, this
obstacle to differentiation exists, after we have been
busy with dekulakisation for a couple of years and tothis day have not abandoned all methods of dekulakisa-
tion, when we are conducting a special credit and co-
operative policy which is unfavourable to differentiation—how could it happen that with these obstacles it turns
out, allegedly, that there is much more differentiation
today than under the tsar, many more kulaks and poor
peasants than in the past? How can people who call
themselves Marxists talk such absurd nonsense? It isat once comic and tragic. ( Laughter .)
The same must be said about the ill-starred grain
and fodder balance sheet issued by the Central StatisticalBoard in June, according to which the well-to-do peas-
ants held 61 per cent of the surplus market grain, the
poor peasants none, while the middle peasants held therest. The funny thing about this is that a few months
later the C.S.B. came out with a different figure: not
61 per cent, but 52 per cent. And recently, the C.S.B. hasgiven a figure, not 52 per cent this time, but 42 per cent.
Is that the way to calculate? We believe that the C.S.B.
is a citadel of science. We are of the opinion that withoutthe C.S.B.’s figures not a single administrative body could
calculate or plan. We consider that the C.S.B. should pro-
vide objective statistics free from all pre-conceived opin-ions, for the attempt to fit statistics to any pre-con-
ceived opinion is a crime. But, after this, how can we
believe the C.S.B.’s figures if it has ceased to believethem itself?
More briefly. Since we have made the countryside
middle-peasant in character as a result of the agrarian rev-olution, since the middle peasants constitute the majori-
ty in the countryside, in spite of the process of differen-
tiation, and since our work of construction and Lenin’s co-operative plan call for the enlistment of the bulk of the
peasant masses in this work, then the policy of alliance
with the middle peasants is, under NEP conditions, theonly correct policy.
Such is the practical aspect of the question.
See how Lenin formulated our tasks when he gave
the grounds for the New Economic Policy. Before me
lies the draft of the pamphlet The Tax in Kind , written
by Lenin, in which he clearly and distinctly gives the
fundamental guiding lines:
“Now, increasing the output of produce is becoming (has
become) the pivot , the touchstone . . . . Consequently: ‘stake’ on
the middle peasants in agriculture.
“The diligent peasant as the ‘central figure’ of our economic
upsurge” (see V ol. XXVI, pp. 312-13).
Thus, stake on the middle peasant in agriculture,
the diligent peasant as the central figure of our eco-
nomic upsurge. That is what Comrade Lenin wrote
in 1921.
It was this idea, comrades, that served as the basis
of the decisions and of the concessions to the peasantry
adopted at the Fourteenth, April, Conference of ourParty.
In what relation do the resolutions of the Fourteenth,
April, Party Conference stand to the resolution on workamong the poor peasants that the Central Committee
unanimously adopted in October,
61 just as it unani-
mously adopted the resolutions of the Fourteenth Con-ference? The main task that confronted us at the October
Plenum of the Central Committee was to prevent the
disruption of the policy we had worked out at the AprilConference, the policy of a stable alliance with the middle
peasants; to prevent the disruption of this policy, for
sentiments were observed in the Party expressing theview that the policy of a stable alliance with the middle
peasants was wrong or unsuitable. Sentiments were also
observed expressing the view that the policy of a stable
alliance with the middle peasants implied forgetting
the poor peasants, that somebody was trying to bringabout a stable alliance with the middle peasants over
the heads of the poor peasants. That is silly, comrades,
but it is a fact, for such sentiments did exist. Was thequestion of the poor peasants something new for us when
we gathered at the October Plenum? Of course not.
As long as there are poor peasants, we must be in alliancewith them. We learned that as far back as 1903, when
Lenin’s pamphlet To the Village Poor
62 first appeared.
Precisely because we are Marxists, because we are Com-munists, we must lean on the poor peasants in the coun-
tryside. Upon whom else can we lean? This question is
not a new one; there was nothing new in it for us, whetherin April or in October, whether at the conference or at
the plenum of the Central Committee, nor could there
be anything new in it. If the question of the poor peasantsdid come up after all, it did so in connection with the
experience we had gained during the elections to the
Soviets. What did we find? We had revitalised the So-viets. We had begun to implant Soviet democracy.
But what for? After all, Soviet democracy means leader-
ship by the working class. No Soviet democracy can becalled genuinely Soviet and genuinely proletarian de-
mocracy if there is no leadership there by the proletar-
iat and by its Party. But what does Soviet democracywith the leadership of the proletariat mean? It means
that the proletariat must have its agents in the coun-
tryside. Who must those agents be? Representatives ofthe poor peasants. But in what condition did the poor
peasants find themselves when we revitalised the Soviets?
In the most scattered and dispersed condition. It seemed,
not only to certain elements among the poor peasants,
but also to certain Communists, that abandoning deku-lakisation and administrative pressure meant abandon-
ing the poor peasants, forgetting their interests. And
instead of conducting an organised struggle against thekulaks, they began to whine in the most disgraceful
manner.
What had to be done to overcome those sentiments?
Firstly, it was necessary to carry out the task that the
Fourteenth Party Conference had set the Party, i.e.,
to define the conditions, methods and measures for pro-viding material assistance for the poor peasants. Secondly,
it was necessary to issue the slogan of organising special
groups of poor peasants for conducting an open polit-ical struggle to win over the middle peasants and to
isolate the kulaks during the elections to the Soviets,
elections in the co-operatives, etc.
That is exactly what Comrade Molotov did in the
theses on work among the poor peasants, as a result of
his three months’ work on the Rural Commission of theCentral Committee, theses that were unanimously ap-
proved by the October Plenum of the Central Com-
mittee.
As you see, the resolution of the October Plenum
of the Central Committee is the direct continuation of
the decisions of the Fourteenth Conference.
It was necessary, firstly, to present the question of
material assistance concretely, so as to improve the
material conditions of the poor peasants; and, secondly,it was necessary to issue the slogan of organising the
poor peasants. That is the new feature, the credit for
which belongs wholly to Comrade Molotov; the slogan
of organising groups of poor peasants was his idea.
Why was the slogan of organising groups of poor
peasants needed? It was needed in order to put an end
to the dispersion of the poor peasants and to give them
an opportunity of organising, with the aid of the Com-munists, into an independent political force capable
of serving as an organised bulwark of the proletariat
in the countryside in the struggle against the kulaks,in the struggle to win over the middle peasants. The
poor peasants are still imbued with a dependent men-
tality; they put their hopes in the GPU, in officials,in whatever you like, except in themselves, in their
own strength. It is from this passivity and dependent
mentality that the minds of the poor peasants must befreed. We must issue the slogan for the poor peasants
that they must, at last, stand on their own feet, that
they must, with the aid of the Communist Party andwith the aid of the state, organise themselves into groups;
that in the arena of the Soviets, in the arena of the co-
operatives, in the arena of the Peasant Committees, inall the arenas of rural public life, they must learn to
fight the kulaks, to fight, however, not by appealing
to the GPU, but by a political struggle, by an organisedstruggle. Only in that way can the poor peasants become
steeled, only in that way can the poor peasants be organ-
ised, only in that way can the poor peasants be trans-formed from a dependent group into a bulwark of the
proletariat in the countryside.
That is why the question of the poor peasants was
brought forward in October.
6.  Two  Dangers  and  Two  Deviations
in  Regard  to  the  Peasant  Question
In connection with the peasant question, two devia-
tions are observed in our Party. A deviation in the direc-
tion of belittling the kulak danger, and a deviation inthe direction of exaggerating it, in the direction of be-
littling and under-estimating the role of the middle peas-
ants. I will not say that there is anything fatal for usin these deviations. A deviation is a deviation; a devia-
tion is something that has not yet taken definite shape.
A deviation is the beginning of an error. Either weallow this error to develop—and then things will
become serious; or we nip it in the bud—and then the
danger will be removed. A deviation is something errone-ous that will produce its results later if not checked in
time.
A word or two about under-estimating the kulak
danger. There is talk about a kulak deviation. That is
foolish, of course. There cannot be a kulak deviation in
the Party. The point at issue is not a kulak deviation,but a deviation in the direction of under-estimating the
kulak danger. Even if nobody had fallen victim to this
deviation, even if nobody had adopted the standpointof this deviation, some people would have done so even-
tually, because development in our country is proceeding
in the direction of some revival of capitalism, and therevival of capitalism is bound to create confusion
around our Party. On the other hand, socialist industry
is developing in our country, and a struggle is going onbetween it and private capital. Which will outstrip the
other? At present, preponderance is on the side of the
socialist elements. We shall get both the kulaks and the
urban private capitalists under our control. So far, how-
ever, the fact remains that the kulaks are growing, and wehave not beaten them economically by a long way yet. The
kulaks are mustering their forces, that is indisputable;
and whoever fails to see this, whoever says that this isof no importance, that the kulak is a bogey, puts the
Party in danger of losing its vigilance and of finding
itself disarmed in the struggle against the kulaks, inthe struggle against capitalism, for the kulak is the agent
of capitalism in the countryside.
There is talk about Bogushevsky. Of course, his is
not a kulak deviation. His deviation is in the direction
of under-estimating the kulak danger. If his were a kulak
deviation, he would have to be expelled from the Party.Up to now, however, as far as I know, nobody has demand-
ed his expulsion from the Party. This deviation is in
the direction of under-estimating the kulak danger inthe countryside, a deviation which hinders us from
keeping the Party in a constant state of readiness for the
struggle, and which disarms the Party in its struggleagainst the capitalist elements; as is known, this devia-
tion was condemned by the decision of the Central Com-
mittee of the Party.
But there is another deviation—in the direction of
over-estimating the kulak danger, in the direction of
consternation in face of the kulak danger, in the direc-tion of panic: “The kulak is coming, help!” A strange
thing! People introduced NEP, knowing that NEP
is a revival of capitalism, a revival of the kulaks,that the kulaks would inevitably raise their heads.
But it was enough for the kulaks to appear for people
to start shouting “help!” and to lose their heads. And
their consternation reached such a point that they forgot
about the middle peasants. And yet, the basic task inthe countryside at the present time lies in the fight to
win over the middle peasants, the fight to wrest the middle
peasants from the kulaks, the fight to isolate the kulaksby establishing a stable alliance with the middle peas-
ants. That is forgotten by those comrades who have
become panic-stricken in the face of the kulak danger.
I think that if we delved down to the roots of these
two deviations it would be possible to trace them to the
following starting points.
The first deviation consists in belittling the role of
the kulaks, and of the capitalist elements generally, in
the countryside, in slurring over the kulak danger. Itstarts out from the wrong assumption that the develop-
ment of NEP does not lead to the revival of the capi-
talist elements in the countryside, that in our countrythe kulaks, and the capitalist elements generally, are
passing, or have already passed, into the sphere of his-
tory, that differentiation is not taking place in the coun-tryside, that the kulaks are an echo of the past, a bogey,
and nothing more.
What does that deviation lead to?In practice, that deviation leads to the denial of
the class struggle in the countryside.
The second deviation consists in exaggerating the
role of the kulaks, and of the capitalist elements general-
ly, in the countryside, in becoming panic-stricken in
the face of those elements, in denying that an alliance ofthe proletariat and poor peasants with the middle peas-
ants is possible and expedient.
That deviation starts from the belief that what is
taking place in the countryside is a simple restoration
of capitalism, that this process of the restoration of capi-talism is an all-absorbing process that also embraces the
whole, or the overwhelming part, of our co-operatives,
that the result of such a development must be a continuousand large-scale growth of differentiation among the
peasantry, that the extreme groups, i.e., the kulaks and
the poor peasants, must grow in strength and numbersyear by year, while year by year, too, the middle groups,
i.e., the middle peasants, grow weaker and melt away.
In practice, that deviation leads to fomenting class
struggle in the countryside, to a reversion to the deku-
lakisation policy of the Poor Peasants’ Committees,
consequently, to proclaiming civil war in our country,and thus to the disruption of all our work of con-
struction, and thereby to the repudiation of Lenin’s
co-operative plan for drawing the millions of peasantfarms into the system of socialist construction.
You will ask: which deviation is worse? It is wrong
to put the question that way. One is as bad as the other.And if those deviations are allowed to develop they may
disintegrate and destroy the Party. Fortunately there
are forces in our Party capable of ridding it of both de-viations. ( Applause .) Although one deviation is as bad
as the other, and it is foolish to ask which of them is
more dangerous, nevertheless, there is another point ofview from which these two deviations must be approached.
Against which deviation is the Party best prepared
to fight—the first or the second? That is how, in practice,the question should be put. Both deviations are dangerous,
one is as bad as the other; it is wrong to ask which of
them is more dangerous; but it is possible and necessary
to ask: against which deviation is the Party best prepared
to fight? If we were to ask Communists what the Partyis better prepared for—to strip the kulaks, or not to do
that but to go in for an alliance with the middle peas-
ants—I think that 99 Communists out of 100 would saythat the Party is best prepared for the slogan: strike at
the kulaks. Just let them—they would strip the kulaks
in a moment. As for refraining from dekulakisationand pursuing the more complex policy of isolating
the kulaks by entering into an alliance with the middle
peasants—that is something not so easily assimilated.That is why I think that in its struggle against both devia-
tions, the Party must, after all, concentrate its fire on
the second deviation. ( Applause .) No talk of Marxism,
no talk of Leninism can cover up the thesis that the kulaks
are dangerous. The kulaks are kulaks, they are dangerous,
no matter how much Bogushevsky may talk about bogeys.No quotations can obliterate this from the mind of a
Communist. But the thesis that a stable alliance with
the middle peasants is necessary—although Ilyich, inthe resolution of the Second Congress, wrote about neu-
tralising the middle peasants—this thesis can always
be slurred over, obscured with phrases about Leninism,about Marxism. Here there is a rich field for quotations,
here there is a rich field for everyone who wants to con-
fuse the Party, who wants to conceal the truth from theParty, the truth that in relation to the peasantry Lenin
had not one, but three slogans. Here, all sorts of manip-
ulations can be performed in regard to Marxism. Andprecisely for that reason, fire must be concentrated on
the second deviation.
That is how the matter stands with the question of
the internal situation in the Union, its economy, its in-
dustry and agriculture, the classes, the activity of theclasses, the revitalisation of the Soviets, the peasantry,
and so forth.
I shall not stop to deal with certain questions con-
cerning the state apparatus, which is growing and is
striving to escape from leadership by the Party, in
which, of course, it will not succeed.
Nor shall I speak about the bureaucracy of our state
apparatus; I shall not do so because my report has al-
ready taken too long. I shall not deal with that questionbecause it is in no way a new one for the Party.
7.  The  Party’s  Tasks
I pass to the Party’s tasks in the sphere of internal
policy.
In the sphere of developing the national economy  as
a whole we must conduct work:
a) in the direction of further increasing the output
of the national economy;
b) in the direction of transforming our country from
an agrarian into an industrial country;
c) in the direction of ensuring within the national
economy a decisive preponderance of the socialist ele-ments over the capitalist elements;
d) in the direction of ensuring for the national econ-
omy of the Soviet Union the necessary independence inthe circumstances of capitalist encirclement;
e) in the direction of increasing the proportion of
non-tax revenue in the total state budget.
In the sphere of industry and agriculture  we must
conduct work:
a) in the direction of expanding our socialist industry
on a higher technical level, of increasing the productiv-
ity of labour, reducing the cost of production and accel-
erating the turn-over of capital;
b) in the direction of bringing the balance of output
of fuel and metals, and also the fixed capital of railway
transport, into conformity with the country’s growingrequirements;
c) in the direction of accelerating the development
of Soviet local industry;
d) in the direction of increasing the fertility of the
soil, raising the technical level of agriculture, devel-
oping the cultivation of industrial crops, industrialisingagriculture;
e) in the direction of drawing the scattered peasant
farms into socialist construction by organising co-opera-tives on a mass scale and by raising the cultural level
of the peasantry.
In the sphere of trade  we must conduct work:
a) in the direction of expanding further and improv-
ing the quality of the network of trading channels (co-
operatives of all kinds, state trade);
b) in the direction of accelerating trade turn-over to
the utmost;
c) in the direction of reducing retail prices and fur-
ther increasing the preponderance of Soviet and co-opera-
tive trade over private trade;
d) in the direction of establishing a united front and
strict discipline in procurement among all the procure-
ment bodies;
e) in the direction of increasing the trade turn-over
with the outside world, while ensuring a favourable
balance of trade, and hence, a favourable balance ofpayments, which is an indispensable condition for main-
taining the stability of our currency and a necessary guar-
antee against inflation.
In the sphere of planning , we must conduct work
in the direction of absolutely ensuring the necessary re-
serves.
A word or two, by the way, about one of the sources-
 of reserves—vodka. There are people who think that it
is possible to build socialism in white gloves. That isa very gross mistake, comrades. Since we are not re-
ceiving loans, since we are poor in capital, and since,
furthermore, we cannot go into bondage to the West-European capitalists, not being able to accept the enslav-
ing terms that they offer us and which we have rejected,
only one alternative remains—to seek sources in otherspheres. After all, that is better than bondage. Here we
have to choose between bondage and vodka, and those
people who think that it is possible to build socialismin white gloves are grievously mistaken.
In the sphere of the correlation of classes  we must con-
duct work:
a) in the direction of ensuring an alliance of the pro-
letariat and the poor peasants with the middle peasants;
b) in the direction of ensuring the leadership of the
proletariat in this alliance;
c) in the direction of politically isolating and econom-
ically ousting the kulaks and the urban capitalists.
In the sphere of Soviet affairs  we must work in the
direction of a resolute struggle against bureaucracy, in
the direction of enlisting the broad masses of the working
class in this struggle.
I should like to say a word or two about the new bour-
geoisie and its ideologists—the Smena-Vekhites. Smena-
Vekhism is the ideology of the new bourgeoisie, which
is growing and little by little linking up with the kulaksand the intelligentsia in the government service. The
new bourgeoisie has put forward its own ideology, the
Smena-Vekh ideology, which consists in the view thatthe Communist Party is bound to degenerate and the
new bourgeoisie to consolidate itself, while it appears
that, without ourselves noticing it, we Bolsheviks arebound to reach the threshold of the democratic republic,
then to cross that threshold and, with the assistance
of some “Caesar,” who will come forward, perhaps fromthe ranks of the military, or perhaps from the govern-
ment service officials, to find ourselves in the position
of an ordinary bourgeois republic.
Such is the new ideology with which attempts are
being made to fool our government service intelligentsia,
and not only them, but also certain circles that stand closeto us. I shall not refute the thesis that our Party is degen-
erating. It is not worth while refuting nonsense. Our
Party is not degenerating, and will not do so. It is notmade of such stuff, and it was not forged by such a man,
that it should degenerate. ( Applause .) Our cadres, young
and old, are growing ideologically. It is a fortunate thingfor us that we have managed to publish several editions
of Lenin’s Works . People are now reading, learning and
beginning to understand. Not only the leaders, but alsothe average Party members are beginning to understand,
and they cannot be fooled. Shouting about degeneration
will not frighten anybody now. People will be able to see
clearly for themselves. Those others can shout as much as
they please, they may try to frighten us with quotationsas much as they please, but the average Party member
will listen and see clearly, because he now has the works
of Lenin in his hands. ( Applause .) That fact is one of
the fundamental guarantees that our Party will not
depart from the path of Leninism. ( Loud applause .)
If I have mentioned the Smena-Vekhites after all,
it is only in order to answer in a few words all those who
are counting on the degeneration of our Party and our
Central Committee. Ustryalov is the author of this ideol-ogy. He is in the transport service. It is said that he
is serving well. I think that if he is serving well, let
him go on dreaming about the degeneration of our Party.Dreaming is not prohibited in our country. Let him dream
to his heart’s content. But let him know that while dream-
ing about our degeneration, he must, at the same time,bring grist to our Bolshevik mill. Otherwise, it will go
badly with him. ( Applause .)
III
THE  PARTY
I pass to the question of the Party. I do not put the
Party at the end of my report because it is the last inimportance of all the factors of our development. No,
not because of that, but because, with us, the Party crowns
the whole edifice.
I have spoken about the successes that the proletarian
dictatorship has achieved in the sphere of foreign and in-
ternal policy, in the sphere of manoeuvring abroad, in
the circumstances of the capitalist encirclement, and in
the sphere of socialist construction within the country.
But these successes would not have been possible had ourParty not been equal to its tasks, had it not grown and
gained strength. The Party’s importance in this respect,
as the guiding force, is immeasurable. The dictatorshipof the proletariat is not exercised automatically; it is
exercised primarily by the Party’s forces, under its leader-
ship. Without the Party’s leadership, in the presentconditions of capitalist encirclement, the dictator-
ship of the proletariat would be impossible. It would
be enough to shake the Party, to weaken it, for the dic-tatorship of the proletariat to be shaken and weakened in
an instant. It is precisely for this reason that all the bour-
geois in all countries talk with such fury about our Party.     By that I do not at all mean to say that our Party
is identical with the state. Not in the least. The Party
is the guiding force in our state. It would be foolish tosay on these grounds, as some comrades do, that the Polit-
ical Bureau is the supreme organ in the state. That is
not true. It is a confusion that brings grist to the millof our enemies. The Political Bureau is the supreme organ
not of the state, but of the Party, while the Party is
the supreme guiding force in the state. The Central Com-mittee and the Political Bureau are organs of the Party.
I do not want to identify the state institutions with the
Party. All I want to say is that in all the fundamentalquestions of our internal and foreign policy, the Party
has played the leading role. And it was solely due to
this that we achieved successes in our internal and foreignpolicy. That is why the question of the Party’s composi-
tion, of its ideological level, of the Party’s cadres, of
its ability to guide in the presentation of questions
concerning economic construction and Soviet affairs,
of its weight in the working class and among the peasant-ry, and, lastly, of its internal condition generally—is a
fundamental question of our policy.
First of all, about the Party’s composition. The to-
tal numerical strength of the Party by April 1, 1924,
not including the Lenin Enrolment, amounted to 446,000
Party members and candidates. Of these, workers num-bered 196,000, i.e., 44 per cent; peasants, 128,000, i.e.,
28.8 per cent; office employees and others, 121,000,
i.e., 27.2 per cent. By July 1, 1925, we had in the Partynot 446,000, but 911,000 members and candidates; of
these, workers—534,000, i.e., 58.6 per cent; peasants—
216,000, i.e., 23.8 per cent; office employees and others—160,000, i.e., 17.6 per cent. On November 1, 1925, we
had 1,025,000 Communists.
What percentage of the working class (if we take the
whole working class) is organised in our Party? At the
Thirteenth Congress I said in my report on organisation
that the total number of workers in our country was4,100,000 (including agricultural workers). I did not then
include the workers employed in small industry who could
not be counted, as social insurance had not yet been ex-tended to them and statistics did not deal with them. At
that time I gave the figures for January 1924. Later,
when it became possible to take into account the workersemployed in small industry, it was found that by July 1,
1924, the total number of workers was 5,500,000,
including agricultural workers. Of these, 390,000workers, i.e., 7 per cent of the entire working class,
were in the Party. By July 1, 1925, the workers
numbered 6,500,000; of these, 534,000, i.e., 8 per cent
of the entire working class, were in the Party. By
October 1, 1925, we had 7,000,000 workers, agricul-tural and industrial, of small, medium and large-scale
industry without distinction. Of these, 570,000, i.e.,
8 per cent, were in the Party.
I am saying all this in order to show how unreason-
able it is to talk about getting 90 per cent of the entire
working class in the country organised in the Party inone or two years.
Now let us see in what proportion the working class
section of the R.C.P.(B.) stands to the number of workersemployed in statistically registered industry. The num-
ber of permanent workers, not seasonal, in large-scale
statistically registered industry, state and non-state,including also the war industry, the chief railway
workshops and main depots—the number of workers
in all these branches, by January 1, 1924, was 1,605,000.At that time we had 196,000 workers in the Party.
That amounts to 12 per cent of the total number of
workers employed in large-scale industry. If, however,we take the number of workers at the bench who are
Party members and see what percentage of the total
number of workers employed in large-scale industrythey represent, we shall find that by January 1 we had
in the Party 83,000 workers at the bench, and that they
constituted 5 per cent of the total number of workersemployed in large-scale industry. All this was by Janu-
ary 1, 1924. By June 1, 1924, 1,780,000 workers were
employed in large-scale industry; in the Party at thattime there were 389,000 workers, i.e., 21.8 per cent of
the total number of workers employed in large-scale
industry. Of workers at the bench, there were 267,000
in the Party, i.e., 15 per cent of the total number of work-
ers employed in large-scale industry. By January 1, 1925,1,845,000 workers were employed in large-scale statisti-
cally registered industry; the total number of workers in
the Party, those at the bench and those not at thebench, was 429,000, i.e., 23.2 per cent of the total number
of workers employed in large-scale industry; of workers at
the bench, we had in the Party 302,000, i.e., 16.3 percent of the total number of workers employed in large-
scale industry. By July 1, 1925, 2,094,000 workers were
employed in large-scale industry; the number of workersin the Party was 534,000, i.e., 25.5 per cent; the number of
workers at the bench was 383,000, i.e., 18.2 percent of the
total number of workers employed in large-scale industry.
You see that, whereas in relation to the entire work-
ing class the growth of the proportion of workers organ-
ised in the Party to the total working class is slower thanthe growth of the working class itself, in large-scale
industry we have the opposite: the growth of the percent-
age of workers in the Party is faster than the growth ofthe working class in large-scale industry. That must
be noted in order to have in mind what our Party’s
complexion is like when we speak of its working-classcore; it consists mainly of workers employed in large-
scale industry.
Can we now, looking at all this, speak of bringing
the number of workers at the bench in the Party up to
90 per cent in the course of one year? No, we cannot,
because we do not want to indulge in fantasy. Because,since we have 380,000 workers at the bench in the Party,
then, to get all the rest—that is about 700,000 not at the
bench—to constitute 10 per cent, we would have to raise
the Party membership in the course of one year to
7,000,000. The comrades have simply failed to count, andhave put their foot in it with their figure of 90 per cent.
Is the Party’s weight in the working class growing?
This self-evident truth scarcely needs proof. You knowthat our Party is, in essence, a party elected by the work-
ing class. In this respect we have achieved what no other
party in the world has achieved. This fact alone showsthat our Party’s weight in the ranks of the working
class is immeasurable, and that our Party enjoys a mo-
nopoly in the working class.
As regards our Party’s weight in the countryside,
the situation is rather displeasing. At the time of the
Thirteenth Congress, the rural population from the ageof 18 to 60 in our country amounted to 53,000,000; at
the time of the Fourteenth Congress it is over 54,000,000.
But the Communists in village units of the Party at thetime of the Thirteenth Congress numbered 136,000, i.e.,
0.26 per cent of the total adult rural population; at the
time of the Fourteenth Congress we have 202,000 peasantsin the Party, i.e., 0.37 per cent. Our Party’s growth in
the countryside is terribly slow. I do not mean to say
that it ought to grow by leaps and bounds, but the per-centage of the peasantry that we have in the Party is,
after all, very insignificant. Our Party is a workers’
party. Workers will always preponderate in it. That isan expression of the fact that we have the dictator-
ship of the proletariat. But it is also clear that without
an alliance with the peasantry the dictatorship of theproletariat is impossible, that the Party must have a
certain percentage of the best people among the peas-
antry in its ranks as an essential foothold in the
countryside. From this aspect, matters are still far
from well.
Further, I must note a general rise in our Party’s
ideological level. As regards the organisational side,
Comrade Molotov will report to you and, therefore, I shallnot dwell on it; but I cannot refrain from saying one
thing, namely, that all the evidence shows that the ideo-
logical level of our leading cadres, young and old, hasrisen considerably. One could take as an example the dis-
cussion we had with Trotskyism last year. As you know,
the point at issue was the revision of Leninism, changingthe leadership of the Party while on the march, so to
speak. How solidly the Party encountered that anti-Party
wave, you all know. What does that show? It shows thatthe Party has grown up. Its cadres have become strong;
it is not afraid of discussion. Today, unfortunately, we
have entered the period of a new discussion. I am surethat the Party will quickly get over this discussion too
and nothing exceptional can happen. ( Voices : “Quite
right!” Applause .) In order not to anticipate events
and not to irritate people, I shall not at the present
moment touch upon the essence of the Leningrad com-
rades’ behaviour at their conference and upon the way theMoscow comrades reacted to it. I think that the members
of this congress will speak about that themselves, and I
shall sum up in my reply to the discussion.
I am coming to the end of my report.
I have spoken about our foreign policy, about the
contradictions that are corroding the capitalist world.I said that those contradictions can be overcome only by
a workers’ revolution in the West.
Furthermore, I have spoken about the contradictions
within the framework of which our interrelations, the
interrelations between the Soviet Union and the capi-talist states, develop. I said that those states will strive
to convert our country into an appendage of the capitalist
system, that they will try intervention against us, butthat we shall repel them; that in this we count on the
utmost support of the working class in the West, partic-
ularly after the workers of the West have begun to visitus frequently and to fraternise with us. Moreover, we
are of the opinion that for the capitalists this fraterni-
sation will not be without its cost. We are overcomingthose contradictions too. But in the last analysis, we
cannot overcome the contradictions outside our country
between the capitalist world and the socialist world solelyby our own efforts; for that we need the assistance of a
victorious proletarian revolution in a number of countries.
Furthermore, I have spoken about the contradictions
within our country, between the capitalist elements and
the socialist elements. I said that we can overcome these
contradictions by our own efforts. Whoever does not be-lieve that this is possible is a liquidator, does not believe
that we can build socialism. We shall overcome these con-
tradictions; we are already doing so. Of course, thesooner assistance comes from the West the better, the
sooner shall we overcome these contradictions in order
to deliver the finishing stroke to private capital and toachieve the complete victory of socialism in our country,
the building of a complete socialist society. But even if we
do not receive outside assistance we shall not become de-spondent, we shall not cry out for help, we shall not aban-
don our work ( applause ) and we shall not be daunted
by difficulties. Whoever is weary, whoever is scared
by difficulties, whoever is losing his head, let him make
way for those who have retained their courage and staunch-ness. ( Applause .) We are not the kind of people to
be scared by difficulties. We are Bolsheviks, we have been
steeled by Lenin, and we do not run away from difficul-ties, but face them and overcome them. ( Voices : “Quite
right!” Applause .)
Furthermore, comrades, I have spoken about our
Party’s successes and mistakes. Of mistakes there
have been not a few. In the field of foreign trade, in
the field of procurement, and in several other of ourfields of work there have been not a few mistakes. Ilyich
taught us not to become conceited. We shall not become
conceited. There have been not a few mistakes. But thereare also successes. Whatever the case may be, we have
achieved one thing that cannot possibly be taken from
us, namely, that by our extensive constructive work, byour Bolshevik assault on the economic front, by the suc-
cesses we have gained in this field, we have shown the
whole world that the workers, after capturing power,are able not only to beat capitalism, not only to destroy,
but also to build the new society, to build socialism.
That achievement, the fact that we have made this truthobvious, nobody can take from us. That is the biggest and
most difficult of all our achievements up to now. For we
have shown the working class of the West and the op-pressed peoples of the East that the workers, who through-
out history were able only to work for masters, while
the masters governed, that these workers, after capturingpower, have proved capable of governing a great country,
of building socialism under the most difficult conditions.
What is needed to enable the proletarians of the West
to win? First of all, confidence in their own strength,
the consciousness that the working class can do withoutthe bourgeoisie, that the working class is capable not
only of destroying the old, but also of building the new,
of building socialism. The entire work of Social-Democ-racy consists in imbuing the workers with scepticism, with
distrust in their own strength, with disbelief in the pos-
sibility of achieving victory over the bourgeoisie by force.The significance of all our work, of all our construc-
tion, lies in that this work and this construction con-
vince the working class in the capitalist countries thatit can do without the bourgeoisie and can build the new
society by its own efforts.
The workers’ pilgrimages to our country, the fact
that the workers’ delegations that come to our country
probe every detail of our work of construction and try
to get the feel of our successes in construction, allthis shows that, in spite of the Social-Democrats, the
working class in the capitalist countries is beginning
to acquire confidence in its own strength and in the abil-ity of the working class to build the new society on the
ruins of the old.
I do not say that we have achieved much during the
year under review, but, after all, one thing must be admit-
ted, namely, that by our successes in socialist con-
struction we have demonstrated and proved that the work-ing class, after overthrowing the bourgeoisie and taking
power into its own hands, is capable of rebuilding
capitalist society on a socialist basis. This we haveachieved, and nobody can take this from us, whatever
happens. This success is inestimable. For what does its
achievement mean? It means giving the workers in the
capitalist countries confidence in their own strength, con-
fidence in their victory. It means placing into their handsa new weapon against the bourgeoisie. That they are
taking up this weapon and are prepared to use it is evi-
dent if only from the fact that workers’ pilgrimages toour country are not ceasing, but are becoming more nu-
merous. And when the workers in the capitalist countries
become imbued with confidence in their own strength,you may be sure that this will be the beginning of the
end of capitalism and a sure sign of the victory of the
proletarian revolution.
That is why I think that we are not working in vain
in building socialism. That is why I think that in this
work we are bound to achieve victory on an internation-al scale. ( Loud and prolonged applause. An ovation from
the entire congress .)
REPLY  TO  THE  DISCUSSION
ON  THE  POLITICAL  REPORT
OF  THE  CENTRAL  COMMITTEE
December  23
Comrades, I shall not answer separately the notes on
particular questions, because the whole of my speech inreply to the discussion will in substance be an answer to
these notes.
Nor do I intend to answer personal attacks or any
verbal thrusts of a purely personal character, for I think
that the congress is in possession of sufficient material
with which to verify the motives of those attacks andwhat is behind them.
Nor shall I deal with the “cave men,” the people who
gathered somewhere near Kislovodsk and devised allsorts of schemes in regard to the organs of the Central
Committee. Well, let them make schemes, that is their
business. I should only like to emphasise that Lashe-vich, who spoke here with aplomb against politics of
scheming, was himself found to be one of the schemers
and, it turns out, at the “cave men’s” conference nearKislovodsk he played a role that was far from unimpor-
tant. Well, so much for him. ( Laughter .)
I pass to the matter in hand.
1.  SOKOLNIKOV  AND  THE  DAWESATION
OF  OUR  COUNTRY
First of all, a few rejoinders. First rejoinder—to
Sokolnikov. He said in his speech: “When Stalin indicat-
ed two general lines, two lines in the building of oureconomy, he misled us, because he should have formu-
lated these two lines differently, he should have talked
not about importing equipment, but about importingfinished goods.” I assert that this statement of Sokolni-
kov’s utterly exposes him as a supporter of Shanin’s
theses. I want to say that here Sokolnikov in point offact speaks as an advocate of the Dawesation of our coun-
try. What did I speak about in my report? Did I speak
about the exports and imports plan? Of course not. Every-body knows that we are obliged at present  to import equip-
ment. But Sokolnikov converts this necessity into a prin-
ciple, a theory, a prospect of development. That iswhere Sokolnikov’s mistake lies. In my report I spoke
about two fundamental, guiding, general lines in build-
ing our national economy. I spoke about that in orderto clear up the question of the ways of ensuring for our
country independent economic development in the
conditions of capitalist encirclement. In my reportI spoke about our general line, about our prospects as
regards transforming our country from an agrarian into
an industrial country. What is an agrarian country?An agrarian country is one that exports agricultural prod-
uce and imports equipment, but does not itself manu-
facture, or manufactures very little, equipment (machin-ery, etc.) by its own efforts. If we get stranded at the
stage of development at which we have to import equip-
ment and machinery and not produce them by our own
efforts, we can have no guarantee against the conversion
of our country into an appendage of the capitalist system.That is precisely why we must steer a course towards the
development of the production of the means of production
in our country. Can it be that Sokolnikov fails to un-derstand such an elementary thing? Yet it was only about
this that I spoke in my report.
What does the Dawes Plan demand? It demands that
Germany should pump out money for the payment of
reparations from markets, chiefly from our Soviet mar-
kets. What follows from this? From this it follows thatGermany will supply us with equipment, we shall import
it and export agricultural produce. We, i.e., our industry,
will thus find itself tethered to Europe. That is preciselythe basis of the Dawes Plan. Concerning that, I said in
my report, in so far as it affects our country, the Dawes
Plan is built on sand. Why? “Because,” I said, “we havenot the least desire to be converted into an agrarian
country for the benefit of any other country whatsoever,
including Germany,” because, “we ourselves will manu-facture machinery and other means of production.” The
conversion of our country from an agrarian into an in-
dustrial country able to produce the equipment it needsby its own efforts—that is the essence, the basis of our
general line. We must so arrange things that the thoughts
and strivings of our business executives are directed pre-cisely towards this aspect, the aspect of transforming our
country from one that imports equipment into one that
manufactures this equipment. For that is the chief guar-antee of the economic independence of our country.
For that is the guarantee that our country will not be
converted into an appendage of the capitalist coun-
tries. Sokolnikov refuses to understand this simple and
obvious thing. They, the authors of the Dawes Plan,would like to restrict us to the manufacture of, say,
calico; but that is not enough for us, for we want to
manufacture not only calico, but also the machineryneeded for manufacturing calico. They would like us to
restrict ourselves to the manufacture of, say, automo-
biles; but that is not enough for us, for we want to manu-facture not only automobiles, but also the machinery for
making automobiles. They want to restrict us to the
manufacture of, say, shoes; but that is not enough forus, for we want to manufacture not only shoes, but also
the machinery for making shoes. And so on, and so forth.
That is the difference between the two general lines;
and that is what Sokolnikov refuses to understand.
To abandon our line means abandoning the tasks of
socialist construction, means adopting the standpoint ofthe Dawesation of our country.
 2.  KAMENEV  AND  OUR  CONCESSIONS
TO  THE  PEASANTRY
Second rejoinder—to Kamenev. He said that by
adopting at the Fourteenth Party Conference the well-
known decisions on economic development, on revitalis-ing the Soviets, on eliminating the survivals of war
communism, on precise regulation of the question of
renting and leasing land and hiring labour, we had madeconcessions to the kulaks and not to the peasants, that
these are concessions not to the peasantry, but to the
capitalist elements. Is that true? I assert that it is not
true; that it is a slander against the Party. I assert that
a Marxist cannot approach the question in that way; that
only a Liberal can approach the question in that way.
What are the concessions that we made at the Four-
teenth Party Conference? Do those concessions fit into
the framework of NEP, or not? Undoubtedly they do.Perhaps we expanded NEP at the April Conference?
Let the opposition answer: Did we expand NEP in
April, or not? If we expanded it, why did they vote forthe decisions of the Fourteenth Conference? And is it
not well known that we are all opposed to an expansion
of NEP? What is the point, then? The point is thatKamenev has got himself mixed up; for NEP includes
permission of trade, capitalism, hired labour; and the
decisions of the Fourteenth Conference are an expressionof NEP, which was introduced when Lenin was with
us. Did Lenin know that in the first stages, NEP
would be taken advantage of primarily by the capital-ists, the merchants, the kulaks? Of course he knew.
But did Lenin say that in introducing NEP we were
making concessions to the profiteers and capitalist ele-ments and not to the peasantry? No, he did not and
could not say that. On the contrary, he always said that,
in permitting trade and capitalism, and in changingour policy in the direction of NEP, we were making
concessions to the peasantry for the sake of maintaining
and strengthening our bond with it; since under the givenconditions, the peasantry could not exist without trade,
without some revival of capitalism being permitted;
since at the given time we could not establish the bond inany way except through trade; since only in that way
could we strengthen the bond and build the foundations of
a socialist economy. That is how Lenin approached the
question of concessions. That is how the question of the
concessions made in April 1925 should be approached.
Allow me to read to you Lenin’s opinion on this
subject. This is how he substantiated the Party’s trans-
ition to the new policy, to the policy of NEP, in hisaddress on “The Tax in Kind” at the conference of
secretaries of Party units of the Moscow Gubernia:
“I want to dwell on the question how this policy can be
reconciled with the point of view of communism, and how it
comes about that the communist Soviet state is facilitating the de-
velopment of free trade. Is this good from the point of view ofcommunism? In order to answer this question we must carefully
examine the changes that have taken place in peasant economy.
At first the position was that we saw the whole of the peasantryfighting against the rule of the landlords. The landlords were
equally opposed by the poor peasants and the kulaks, although,
of course, with different intentions: the kulaks fought withthe aim of taking the land from the landlords and developing
their own farming on it. It was then that it became revealed
that the kulaks and the poor peasants had different interestsand different aims. In the Ukraine, even today, we see this differ-
ence of interests much more clearly than here. The poor peasants
could obtain very little direct advantage from the transfer of theland from the landlords because they had neither the materials nor
the implements for that. And we saw the poor peasants organising
to prevent the kulaks from seizing the land that had been takenfrom the landlords. The Soviet Government assisted the Poor
Peasants’ Committees that sprang up in Russia and in the Ukraine.
What was the result? The result was that the middle peasants became
the predominant element in the countryside . . . . The extremes of
kulaks and poor peasants have diminished; the majority of the
population has come nearer to the position of the middle peasant.If we want to raise the productivity of our peasant economy we must
first of all reckon with the middle peasant. It was in accordance
with this circumstance that the Communist Party had to mould its
policy. . . . Thus , the change in the policy towards the peasantry
is to be explained by the change in the position of the peasantry
itself. The countryside has become more middle-peasant , and in order
to increase the productive forces we must reckon with this ”* (see
Vol. XXVI, pp. 304-05).
And in the same volume, on page 247, Lenin draws
the general conclusion:
“We must build our state economy in relation to the econ-
omy of the middle peasants ,** which we have been unable to trans-
form in three years, and will not be able to transform in ten years.”
In other words, we introduced freedom of trade, we
permitted a revival of capitalism, we introduced NEP,
in order to accelerate the growth of productive forces,
to increase the quantity of products in the country, tostrengthen the bond with the peasantry. The bond, the
interests of the bond with the peasantry as the basis
of our concessions along the line of NEP—such wasLenin’s approach to the subject.
Did Lenin know at that time that the profiteers, the
capitalists, the kulaks would take advantage of NEP,of the concessions to the peasantry? Of course he did.
Does that mean that these concessions were in point of
fact concessions to the profiteers and kulaks? No, it doesnot. For NEP in general, and trade in particular, is
being taken advantage of not only by the capitalists
and kulaks, but also by the state and co-operativebodies; for it is not only the capitalists and kulaks
who trade, but also the state bodies and co-operatives;
and when our state bodies and co-operatives learn
* All italics mine.— J. St.
** My italics.— J. St.
how to trade, they will gain (they are already gaining!)
the upper hand over the private traders, linking our in-
dustry with peasant economy.
What follows from this? It follows from this that our
concessions proceed basically in the direction of strengthen-
ing our bond, and for the sake of our bond, withthe peasantry.
Whoever fails to understand that, approaches the
subject not as a Leninist, but as a Liberal.
3.  WHOSE  MISCALCULATIONS?
Third rejoinder—to Sokolnikov. He says: “The con-
siderable losses that we have sustained on the economicfront since the autumn are due precisely to an over-esti-
mation of our forces, to an over-estimation of our social-
ist maturity, an over-estimation of our ability, the abili-ty of our state economy, to guide the whole of the nation-
al economy already at the present time.”
It turns out, then, that the miscalculations in regard
to procurement and foreign trade—I have in mind the un-
favourable balance of trade in 1924-25—that those mis-
calculations were due not to the error of our regulatingbodies, but to an over-estimation of the socialist maturity
of our economy. And it appears that the blame for this
rests upon Bukharin, whose “school” deliberately culti-vates exaggerated ideas about the socialist maturity of
our economy.
Of course, in making speeches one “can” play all
sorts of tricks, as Sokolnikov often does. But, after all,
one should know how far one can go. How can one talk
such utter nonsense and downright untruth at a congress?
Does not Sokolnikov know about the special meeting of
the Political Bureau held in the beginning of November,
at which procurement and foreign trade were discussed,at which the errors of the regulating bodies were recti-
fied by the Central Committee, by the majority of the
Central Committee, which is alleged to have over-esti-mated our socialist potentialities? How can one talk such
nonsense at a congress? And what has Bukharin’s
“school,” or Bukharin himself, to do with it? What a wayof behaving—to blame others for one’s own sins! Does
not Sokolnikov know that the stenographic report of the
speeches delivered at the meeting of the Central Commit-tee on the question of miscalculations was sent to all the
Gubernia Party Committees? How can one fly in the
face of obvious facts? One “can” play tricks when makingspeeches, but one should know how far one can go.
4.  HOW  SOKOLNIKOV  PROTECTS
THE  POOR  PEASANTS
Fourth rejoinder—also to Sokolnikov. He said here
that he, as People’s Commissar of Finance, don’t you
see, strives in every way to ensure that our agriculturaltax is collected in proportion to income, but he is hin-
dered in this, he is hindered because he is not allowed to
protect the poor peasants and to curb the kulaks. Thatis not true, comrades. It is a slander against the Party.
The question of officially revising the agricultural tax
on the basis of income—I say officially, because actuallyit is an income tax—this question was raised at the ple-
num of the Central Committee in October this year, but
nobody except Sokolnikov supported the proposal that
it be raised at the congress, because it was not yet ready
for presentation at the congress. At that time Sokolni-
kov did not insist on his proposal. But now it turns outthat Sokolnikov is not averse to using this against the
Central Committee, not in the interests of the poor peas-
ants, of course, but in the interests of the opposition.Well, since Sokolnikov talks here about the poor peasants,
permit me to tell you a fact which exposes the actual stand
taken by Sokolnikov, this alleged thorough-going protec-tor of the poor peasants. Not so long ago, Comrade Milyu-
tin, People’s Commissar of Finance of the R.S.F.S.R.,
took a decision to exempt poor peasant farms from taxa-tion in cases where the tax amounts to less than a ruble.
From Comrade Milyutin’s memorandum to the Central
Committee it is evident that the total revenue from taxa-tion of less than a ruble, taxation which irritates the
peasantry, amounts to about 300-400 thousand rubles
for the whole of the R.S.F.S.R., and that the cost aloneof collecting this tax is only a little less than the revenue
from it. What did Sokolnikov, this protector of the poor
peasants, do? He annulled Comrade Milyutin’s decision.The Central Committee received protests about this from
fifteen Gubernia Party Committees. Sokolnikov would not
give way. The Central Committee had to exercise pressureto compel Sokolnikov to rescind his veto on the absolute-
ly correct decision of the People’s Commissar of Fi-
nance of the R.S.F.S.R. not to collect taxes of less thana ruble. That is what Sokolnikov calls “protecting” the
interests of the poor peasants. And people like that, with
such a weight on their conscience, have the—what’s themildest way of putting it?—the audacity to speak against
the Central Committee. It is strange, comrades, strange.
5.  IDEOLOGICAL  STRUGGLE  OR  SLANDER?
Lastly, one more rejoinder. I have in mind a rejoin-
der to the authors of A Collection of Materials on Con-
troversial Questions . Yesterday, A Collection of Materials
on Controversial Questions , only just issued, was secretly
distributed here, for members of the congress only. In
this collection it is stated, among other things, that in
April this year I received a delegation of village corre-spondents and expressed sympathy with the idea of
restoring private property in land. It appears that anal-
ogous “impressions” of one of the village correspondentswere published in Bednota
63; I did not know about these
“impressions,” I did not see them. I learned about them
in October this year. Earlier than that, in April, theRiga news agency, which is distinguished from all other
news agencies by the fact that it fabricates all the false
rumours about us, had circulated a similar report to theforeign press, about which we were informed by our peo-
ple in Paris, who telegraphed to the People’s Commis-
sariat of Foreign Affairs demanding that it be refuted.At the time I answered Comrade Chicherin, through
my assistant, saying: “If Comrade Chicherin thinks it
necessary to refute all kinds of nonsense and slander,let him refute it” (see archives of the Central Com-
mittee).
Are the authors of this sacramental “ Collection ” aware
of all that? Of course they are. Why, then, do they contin-
ue to circulate all kinds of nonsense and fable? How
can they, how can the opposition, resort to the methodsof the Riga news agency? Have they really sunk so low
as that? ( A voice : “Shame!”)
Further, knowing the habits of the “cave men,”
knowing that they are capable of repeating the methods
of the Riga news agency, I sent a refutation to the edito-rial board of Bednota . It is ridiculous to refute such
nonsense, but knowing with whom I have to deal, I, for
all that, sent a refutation. Here it is:
“To the Editorial Board of Bednota .
“Comrade editor, recently I learned from some comrades
that in a sketch, published in Bednota  of 5/IV , 1925, of a village
correspondent’s impressions of an interview with me by a delegationof village correspondents, which I had not the opportunity toread at the time, it is reported that I expressed sympathy withthe idea of guaranteeing ownership of land for 40 years or more,
with the idea of private property in land, etc. Although this fan-
tastic report needs no refutation because of its obvious absurdity,nevertheless, perhaps it will not be superfluous to ask your per-mission to state in Bednota  that this report is a gross mistake
and must be attributed entirely to the author’s imagination.
“J. Stalin. ”
Are the authors of the “ Collection ” aware of this letter?
Undoubtedly they are. Why, then, do they continue to
circulate tittle-tattle, fables? What method of fighting isthis? They say that this is an ideological struggle. But
no, comrades, it is not an ideological struggle. In our
Russian language it is called simply slander .
Permit me now to pass to the fundamental questions
of principle.
6.  CONCERNING  NEP
The question of NEP. I have in mind Comrade
Krupskaya and the speech she delivered on NEP.She says: “In essence, NEP is capitalism permitted
under certain conditions, capitalism that the proletarian
state keeps on a chain. . . .” Is that true? Yes, and no.
That we are keeping capitalism on a chain, and willkeep it so as long as it exists, is a fact, that is true.
But to say that NEP is capitalism—that is nonsense,
utter nonsense. NEP is a special policy of the prole-tarian state aimed at permitting capitalism while the
commanding positions are held by the proletarian state,
aimed at a struggle between the capitalist and socialistelements, aimed at increasing the role of the socialist
elements to the detriment of the capitalist elements,
aimed at the victory of the socialist elements over thecapitalist elements, aimed at the abolition of classes
and the building of the foundations of a socialist econ-
omy. Whoever fails to understand this transitional,dual nature of NEP departs from Leninism. If NEP
were capitalism, then NEP Russia that Lenin spoke
about would be capitalist Russia. But is present-day Russia a capitalist country and not a country
that is in transition from capitalism to socialism?
Why then, did Lenin not say simply: “ Capitalist
Russia will be socialist Russia,” but preferred a differ-
ent formula: “ NEP  Russia will become socialist Rus-
sia”? Does the opposition agree with Comrade Krupskayathat NEP is capitalism, or does it not? I think that
not a single member of this congress will be found
who would agree with Comrade Krupskaya’s formula.Comrade Krupskaya (may she forgive me for saying so)
talked utter nonsense about NEP. One cannot come out
here in defence of Lenin against Bukharin with non-sense like that.
7.  CONCERNING  STATE  CAPITALISM
Connected with this question is Bukharin’s mistake.
What was his mistake? On what questions did Lenin dis-
pute with Bukharin? Lenin maintained that the category
of state capitalism is compatible with the system of theproletarian dictatorship. Bukharin denied this. He was
of the opinion, and with him the “Left” Communists,
too, including Safarov, were of the opinion that the cate-gory of state capitalism is incompatible with the system
of the proletarian dictatorship. Lenin was right, of course.
Bukharin was wrong. He admitted this mistake of his.Such was Bukharin’s mistake. But that was in the
past. If now, in 1925, in May, he repeats that he dis-
agrees with Lenin on the question of state capitalism, Isuppose it is simply a misunderstanding. Either he
ought frankly to withdraw that statement, or it is a
misunderstanding; for the line he is now defending onthe question of the nature of state industry is Lenin’s
line. Lenin did not come to Bukharin; on the contrary,
Bukharin came to Lenin. And precisely for that reasonwe back Bukharin. ( Applause .)
The chief mistake of Kamenev and Zinoviev is that
they regard the question of state capitalism scholas-tically, undialectically, divorced from the historical situa-
tion. Such an approach to the question is abhorrent to
the whole spirit of Leninism. How did Lenin present thequestion? In 1921, Lenin, knowing that our industry
was under-developed and that the peasantry needed goods,
knowing that it (industry) could not be raised at onestroke, that the workers, because of certain circumstances,
were engaged not so much in industry as in making
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

cigarette lighters—in that situation Lenin was of the
opinion that the best of all possibilities was to invite
foreign capital, to set industry on its feet with its aid,to introduce state capitalism in this way and through  i t
to establish a bond between Soviet power and the country-
side. That line was absolutely correct at that time, be-cause we had no other means then of satisfying the peas-
antry; for our industry was in a bad way, transport was
at a standstill, or almost at a standstill, there was a lack,a shortage, of fuel. Did Lenin at that time consider state
capitalism permissible and desirable as the predominant
form in our economy? Yes, he did. But that was then, in1921. What about now? Can we now say that we have no
industry, that transport is at a standstill, that there is
no fuel, etc.? No, we cannot. Can it be denied that ourindustry and trade are already establishing a bond be-
tween industry ( our industry) and peasant economy di-
rectly , by their own efforts? No, it cannot. Can it be de-
nied that in the sphere of industry “state capitalism”
and “socialism” have already exchanged roles, for social-
ist industry has become predominant and the relativeimportance of concessions and leases (the former have
50,000 workers and the latter 35,000) is minute? No, it
cannot. Already in 1922 Lenin said that nothing hadcome of concessions and leases in our country.
What follows from this? From this it follows that
since 1921, the situation in our country has undergone asubstantial change, that in this period our socialist in-
dustry and Soviet and co-operative trade have already
succeeded in becoming the predominant force, that wehave already learned to establish a bond between town
and country by our own efforts, that the most striking
forms of state capitalism—concessions and leases—have
not developed to any extent during this period, that to
speak now, in 1925, of state capitalism as the predomi-
nant form in our economy, means distorting the socialist
nature of our state industry, means failing to understand
the whole difference between the past and the presentsituation, means approaching the question of state
capitalism not dialectically, but scholastically, meta-
physically.
Would you care to hear Sokolnikov? In his speech he
said:
“Our foreign trade is being conducted as a state-capitalist
enterprise. . . . Our internal trading companies are also state-cap-
italist enterprises. And I must say, comrades, that the State Bank
is just as much a state-capitalist enterprise. What about our mone-
tary system? Our monetary system is based on the fact that in
Soviet economy, under the conditions in which socialism is being
built, there has been adopted a monetary system which is per-
meated with the principles of capitalist economy.”
That is what Sokolnikov says.
Soon he will go to the length of declaring that the
People’s Commissariat of Finance is also state capitalism.
Up to now I thought, and we all thought, that the State
Bank is part of the state apparatus. Up to now I thought,and we all thought, that our People’s Commissariat of
Foreign Trade, not counting the state-capitalist institu-
tions that encompass it, is part of the state apparatus,that our state apparatus is the apparatus of a proletarian
type of state. We all thought so up to now, for the prole-
tarian state is the sole master of these institutions. Butnow, according to Sokolnikov, it turns out that these in-
stitutions, which are part of our state apparatus, are
state-capitalist institutions. Perhaps our Soviet appara-
tus is also state capitalism and not a proletarian type
of state, as Lenin declared it to be? Why not? Doesnot our Soviet apparatus utilise a “monetary system
which is permeated with the principles of capitalist
economy?” Such is the nonsense a man can talk him-self into.
Permit me first of all to quote Lenin’s opinion on
the nature and significance of the State Bank. I shouldlike, comrades, to refer to a passage from a book written
by Lenin in 1917. I have in mind the pamphlet: Can the
Bolsheviks Retain State Power?  in which Lenin still held
the viewpoint of control of industry (and not nationali-
sation) and, notwithstanding that, regarded the State
Bank in the hands of the proletarian state as being nine-tenths a socialist apparatus. This is what he wrote about
the State Bank:
“The big banks are the ‘state apparatus’ we need  for bringing
about socialism, and which we take ready-made  from capitalism;
our task here is merely to lop off  what capitalistically distorts
this excellent apparatus, to make it still bigger , still more democrat-
ic, still more all-embracing. Quantity will be transformed into
quality. A single State Bank, the biggest of the biggest, with
branches in every volost, in every factory, will already be nine-
tenths of the socialist  apparatus. That will be nation-wide book-
keeping , nation-wide accounting  of the production and distribution
of goods, that will be, so to speak, something in the nature of the
skeleton  of socialist society” (see Vol. XXI, p. 260).
Compare these words of Lenin’s with Sokolnikov’s
speech and you will understand what Sokolnikov is slip-
ping into. I shall not be surprised if he declares the Peo-
ple s Commissariat of Finance to be state capitalism.
What is the point here? Why does Sokolnikov fall
into such errors?
The point is that Sokolnikov fails to understand the
dual nature of NEP, the dual nature of trade under
the present conditions of the struggle between the social-
ist elements and the capitalist elements; he fails to under-stand the dialectics of development in the conditions
of the proletarian dictatorship, in the conditions of
the transition period, in which the methods and weaponsof the bourgeoisie are utilised by the socialist elements
for the purpose of overcoming and eliminating the capi-
talist elements. The point is not at all that trade and themonetary system are methods of “capitalist economy.”
The point is that in fighting the capitalist elements, the
socialist elements of our economy master these methodsand weapons of the bourgeoisie for the purpose of overcom-
ing the capitalist elements, that they successfully  use
them against  capitalism, successfully  use them for the pur-
pose of building the socialist foundation of our economy.
Hence, the point is that, thanks to the dialectics of our
development, the functions and purpose of those instru-ments of the bourgeoisie change in principle , fundamen-
tally; they change in favour of socialism to the detriment
of capitalism. Sokolnikov’s mistake lies in his failure tounderstand all the complexity and contradictory nature
of the processes that are taking place in our economy.
Permit me now to refer to Lenin on the question of
the historical character of state capitalism, to quote a
passage on the question as to when and why he proposed
state capitalism as the chief form, as to what inducedhim to do that, and as to precisely under what concrete
conditions he proposed it. ( A voice : “Please do!”)
“We cannot under any circumstances forget what we very
often observe, namely, the socialist attitude of the workers in fac-
tories belonging to the state, where they themselves collect fuel
raw materials and produce, or when the workers try properly to dis-
tribute the products of industry among the peasantry and to deliver
them by means of the transport system. That is socialism . But side
by side with it there is small economy, which very often exists inde-
pendently  of it. Why can it exist independently of it? Because
large-scale industry has not been restored, because  the socialist
factories can receive only one-tenth, perhaps, of what they should
receive; and in so far as they do not receive what they should,
small economy remains independent of the socialist factories. The
incredible state of ruin of the country, and the shortage of fuel, raw
materials and transport facilities, lead to small production exist-
ing separately  from socialism. And I say: Under these circumstances,
what is state capitalism? It will mean the amalgamation of small
production. Capital amalgamates small production, capital grows
out of small production. It is no use closing our eyes to this fact. Of
course, freedom of trade means the growth of capitalism ; one cannot get
away from it. And whoever thinks of getting away from it and
brushing it aside is only consoling himself with words. If small
economy exists, if there is freedom of exchange, capitalism will
appear. But has this capitalism any terrors  for us if we hold the
factories , works , transport and foreign trade in our hands ? And so I
said then, and will say now, and I think it is incontrovertible, that
this capitalism has no terrors for us. Concessions are capitalism
of that kind”* (see Vol. XXVI, p. 306).
That is how Lenin approached the question of state
capitalism.
In 1921, when we had scarcely any industry of our
own, when there was a shortage of raw materials, andtransport was at a standstill, Lenin proposed state capi-
talism as a means by which he thought of linking peasant
economy with industry. And that was correct. But does
* All italics mine.— J. St.
that mean that Lenin regarded this line as desirable un-
der all  circumstances? Of course not. He was willing to
establish the bond through the medium of state capital-ism because we had no developed socialist industry.
But now? Can it be said that we have no developed state
industry now? Of course not. Development proceededalong a different channel, concessions scarcely took root,
state industry grew, state trade grew, the co-operatives
grew, and the bond between town and country began tobe established through socialist industry. We found our-
selves in a better position than we had expected. How
can one, after this, say that state capitalism is the chiefform of managing our economy?
The trouble with the opposition is that it refuses to
understand these simple things.
 8.  ZINOVIEV  AND  THE  PEASANTRY
The question of the peasantry. I said in my report,
and speakers here have asserted, that Zinoviev is deviat-ing in the direction of under-estimating the middle peas-
ants; that only recently he definitely held the viewpoint
of neutralising the middle peasants, and is only now,after the struggle in the Party, trying to go over to, to
establish himself on, the other viewpoint, the viewpoint
of a stable alliance with the middle peasants. Is all thattrue? Permit me to quote some documents.
In an article on “Bolshevisation,” Zinoviev wrote
this year:
“There are a number of tasks which are absolutely common to
all the Parties of the Comintern . Such, for example, are . . . the prop-
er approach to the peasantry. There are three strata among the agri-
cultural population of the whole world, which can and must be won
over by us and become the allies of the proletariat (the agricultur-
al proletariat, the semi-proletarians—the small-holder peasants
and the small peasantry who do not hire labour). There is another
stratum of the peasantry (the middle peasants), which must be at
least neutralised by us ”* (Pravda , January 18, 1925).
That is what Zinoviev writes about the middle peas-
antry six years after the Eighth Party Congress, atwhich Lenin rejected the slogan of neutralising the
middle peasants and substituted for it the slogan of a
stable alliance with the middle peasants. Bakayevasks, what is there terrible about that? But I will ask
you to compare Zinoviev’s article with Lenin’s thesis
on staking on the middle peasants and to answer thequestion: has Zinoviev departed from Lenin’s thesis
or not. . . ? ( A voice from the hall : “It refers to coun-
tries other than Russia.” Commotion .) It is not so, com-
rade, because in Zinoviev’s article it says: “tasks
which are absolutely  common to all  the Parties of the
Comintern.” Will you really deny that our Party is alsoa part of the Comintern? Here it is directly stated:
“to all the Parties.” ( A voice from the benches of the
Leningrad delegation : “At definite moments.” General
laughter .)
Compare this passage from Zinoviev’s article about
neutralisation  with the passage from Lenin’s speech at
the Eighth Party Congress in which he said that we must
have a stable alliance  with the middle peasants, and
you will realise that there is nothing in common be-tween them.
* All italics mine.— J. St.
It is characteristic that after reading these lines
in Zinoviev’s article, Comrade Larin, that advocate of
“a second revolution” in the countryside, hastened toassociate himself with them. I think that although
Comrade Larin spoke in opposition to Kamenev and
Zinoviev the other day, and spoke rather well, this doesnot exclude the fact that there are points on which we
disagree with him and that we must here dissociate
ourselves from him. Here is the opinion Comrade Larinexpressed about this article of Zinoviev’s:
“‘The proper approach to the peasantry’ from the point of
view of the common tasks of all* the Parties of the Comintern was
quite correctly formulated by its Chairman, Zinoviev” (Larin,
The Soviet Countryside , p. 80).
I see that Comrade Larin protests, saying that he
makes a reservation in his book about his disagreeingwith Zinoviev in so far as Zinoviev extends the slogan
of neutralising the middle peasants to Russia as well.
It is true that in his book he makes this reservation andsays that neutralisation is not enough for us, that we
must take “a step farther” in the direction of “agreement
with the middle peasants against the kulaks.” But here,unfortunately, Comrade Larin drags in his scheme
of “a second revolution” against kulak domination,
with which we disagree, which brings him near to Zino-viev and compels me to dissociate myself from him to
some extent.
As you see, in the document I have quoted, Zinoviev
speaks openly and definitely in favour of the slogan
* My italics.— J. St.
of neutralising the middle peasants, in spite of Lenin,
who proclaimed that neutralisation was not enough,
and that a stable alliance with the middle peasants wasnecessary.
The next document. In his book Leninism , Zinoviev,
quoting from Lenin the following passage dating from1918: “With the peasantry to the end of the bourgeois-
democratic revolution; with the poor, the proletarian
and the semi-proletarian section of the peasantry, for-ward to the socialist revolution!”, draws the following
conclusion:
“The fundamental . . . problem that is engaging our minds
at the present moment . . . is elucidated fully and to the end in
the above-quoted theses of Lenin’s. To this nothing can be added ,
not a single word can be subtracted .* Here everything is said with
Ilyich’s terseness and explicitness, concisely and clearly, so that
it simply asks to be put into a textbook” ( Leninism , p. 60).
Such, according to Zinoviev, is the exhaustive  charac-
terisation of the peasant question given by Leninism.
With the peasantry as a whole against the tsar and the
landlords—that is the bourgeois revolution. With thepoor peasants against the bourgeoisie—that is the Octo-
ber Revolution. That is all very well. It gives two of
Lenin’s slogans. But what about Lenin’s third slogan—with the middle peasants against the kulaks for
building socialism? What has become of Lenin’s third
slogan? It is not in Zinoviev’s book. It has disappeared.Although Zinoviev asserts that “to this nothing can
be added,” nevertheless, if we do not add here Lenin’s
third slogan about a stable alliance of the proletariat
* My italics.— J. St.
and poor peasants with the middle peasants, we run the
risk of distorting Lenin, as Zinoviev distorts him. Can
we regard it as an accident that Lenin’s third slogan,which is our most urgent slogan today, has disappeared,
that Zinoviev has lost it? No, it cannot be regarded as an
accident, because he holds the viewpoint of neutralisingthe middle peasants. The only difference between the
first and second document is that in the first he opposed
the slogan of a stable alliance with the middle peasants,while in the second he kept silent about this slogan.
The third document is Zinoviev’s article “The Phi-
losophy of the Epoch.” I am speaking of the originalversion of that article, which does not contain the changes
and additions that were made later by members of
the Central Committee. The characteristic feature ofthat article is that, like the second document, it is com-
pletely silent about the question of the middle peasants
and, evading this most urgent question, talks about somekind of indefinite, Narodnik equality, without pointing
to the class background of equality. You will find in it the
rural poor, the kulaks, the capitalists, attacks on Bukha-rin, Socialist-Revolutionary equality, and Ustryalov;
but you will not find the middle peasants or Lenin’s
co-operative plan, although the article is entitled “ThePhilosophy of the Epoch.” When Comrade Molotov sent
me that article (I was away at the time), I sent back a
blunt and sharp criticism. Yes, comrades, I am straight-forward and blunt; that’s true, I don’t deny it. ( Laugh-
ter.) I sent back a blunt criticism, because it is intoler-
able that Zinoviev should for a whole year systemati-cally ignore or distort the most characteristic features
of Leninism in regard to the peasant question, our Party’s
present-day slogan of alliance with the bulk of the
peasantry. Here is the answer that I sent then to Com-
rade Molotov:
“Zinoviev’s article ‘The Philosophy of the Epoch’ is a distor
tion of the Party line in the Larin spirit. It treats of the Four-
teenth Conference, but the main theme of this conference—the
middle peasants and the co-operatives—is evaded. The middle
peasants and Lenin’s co-operative plan have vanished. That is no
accident. To talk, after this, about a ‘struggle around the inter-
pretation’ of the decisions of the Fourteenth Conference—means
pursuing a line towards the violation of those decisions. To mix
up Bukharin with Stolypin, as Zinoviev does—means slandering
Bukharin. On such lines it would be possible to mix up with Sto-
lypin even Lenin, who said: ‘trade, and learn to trade.’ At the
present time the slogan about equality is Socialist-Revolutionary
demagogy. There can be no equality so long as classes exist, and so
long as skilled and unskilled labour exist (see Lenin’s State and
Revolution ). We must speak not about an indefinite equality, but
about abolishing classes, about socialism. To say that our revolution
is ‘not classical’ means slipping into Menshevism. In my opinion,
the article must be thoroughly revised in such a way that it should
not bear the character of a platform for the Fourteenth Congress.
“September 12, 1925 “J. Stalin. ”
I am ready to defend the whole of this today. Every
word, every sentence.
One must not speak about equality in a principal
leading article without strictly defining what kind ofequality is meant—equality between the peasantry
and the working class, equality among the peasantry,
equality within the working class, between skilled andunskilled workers, or equality in the sense of abolishing
classes. One must not in a leading article keep silent
about the Party’s immediate slogans on work in thein countryside. One must not play with phrases about equal-
ity, because that means playing with fire, just as one
must not play with phrases about Leninism while keep-
ing silent about the immediate slogan of Leninism onthe question of the peasantry.
     Such are the three documents: Zinoviev’s article
(January 1925) in favour of neutralising the middlepeasants, Zinoviev’s book Leninism  (September 1925),
which kept silent about Lenin’s third slogan about the
middle peasants, and Zinoviev’s new article “The Philo-sophy of the Epoch” (September 1925), which kept si-
lent about the middle peasants and Lenin’s co-opera-
tive plan.     Is this constant wobbling of Zinoviev’s on the peas-
ant question accidental?
You see that it is not accidental.
     Recently, in a speech delivered by Zinoviev in Lenin-
grad on the report of the Central Committee, he at last
made up his mind to speak in favour of the slogan ofa stable alliance with the middle peasants. That was
after the struggle, after the friction, after the conflicts
in the Central Committee. That is all very well. But I amnot sure that he will not repudiate it later on. For, as
facts show, Zinoviev has never displayed the firmness of
line on the peasant question that we need. ( Applause .)
     Here are a few facts illustrating Zinoviev’s vacil-
lations on the’ peasant question. In 1924, at a plenum
of the Central Committee, Zinoviev insisted on a “peas-ant” policy of organising non-Party peasant groups, at
the centre and in the localities, with a weekly news-
paper. That proposal was rejected because of the objec-tions raised in the Central Committee. Shortly before
that, Zinoviev had even boasted that he had a “peasant
deviation.” Here is what he said, for example, at the
Twelfth Congress of the Party: “When I am told: You
have a ‘deviation,’ you are deviating towards the peas-antry—I answer: Yes, we should not only ‘deviate’
towards the peasantry and its economic requirements,
but bow down  and, if need be, kneel down  before the
economic requirements of the peasant who follows our
proletariat.” Do you hear: “deviate,” “bow down,”
“kneel down.” ( Laughter , applause .) Later, when things
improved with the peasantry, when our position in the
countryside improved, Zinoviev made a “turn” from
his infatuation, cast suspicion upon the middle peasantsand proclaimed the slogan of neutralisation. A little
later he made a new “turn” and demanded what was in
point of fact a revision of the decisions of the Fourteenth Conference (“The Philosophy of the Epoch”) and, ac-
cusing almost the whole of the Central Committee of
a peasant deviation, began to “deviate” more emphat-ically against the middle peasants. Finally, just before
the Fourteenth Congress of the Party he once more made
a “turn,” this time in favour of alliance with the middlepeasants and, perhaps, he will yet begin to boast that
he is again ready to “adore” the peasantry.
What guarantee is there that Zinoviev will not
vacillate once again?
But, comrades, this is wobbling, not politics. ( Laugh-
ter
, applause .) This is hysterics, not politics. ( Voices :
“Quite right!”)
We are told that there is no need to pay special atten-
tion to the struggle against the second deviation. Thatis wrong. Since there are two deviations among us—
ogushevsky’s deviation and Zinoviev’s deviation—
you must understand that Bogushevsky is not to be
compared with Zinoviev. Bogushevsky is done for. ( Laugh-
ter.) Bogushevsky does not have an organ of the press.
But the deviation towards neutralising the middle peas-
ants, the deviation against a stable alliance with the
middle peasants, the Zinoviev deviation, has its organof the press and continues to fight against the Central
 Committee to this day. That organ is called Leningrad-
skaya Pravda .
64 For what is the term “middle-peasant
Bolshevism” recently concocted in Leningrad, and
about which Leningradskaya Pravda  foams at the mouth,
if not an indication that that newspaper has departedfrom Leninism on the peasant question? Is it not clear,
if only from this circumstance alone, that the struggle
against the second deviation is more difficult than thestruggle against the first, against Bogushevsky’s de-
viation? That is why, being confronted by such a rep-
resentative of the second deviation, or such a defenderand protector of the second deviation, as Leningradskaya
Pravda , we must adopt all measures to make the Party
specially prepared to fight that deviation, which isstrong, which is complex, and against which we must
concentrate our fire. That is why this second deviation
must be the object of our Party’s special attention.(Voices : “Quite right!” Applause .)
9.  CONCERNING  THE  HISTORY
OF  THE  DISAGREEMENTS
Permit me now to pass to the history of our internal
struggle within the majority of the Central Committee.What did our disaccord start from? It started from
the question: “What is to be done with Trotsky?” That
was at the end of 1924. The group of Leningrad comrades at
first proposed that Trotsky be expelled from the Party.
Here I have in mind the period of the discussion in 1924.The Leningrad Gubernia Party Committee passed a reso-
lution that Trotsky be expelled from the Party. We,
i.e., the majority on the Central Committee, did notagree with this ( voices : “Quite right!”), we had some
struggle with the Leningrad comrades and persuaded
them to delete the point about expulsion from theirresolution. Shortly after this, when the plenum of the
Central Committee met and the Leningrad comrades,
together with Kamenev, demanded Trotsky’s immediateexpulsion from the Political Bureau, we also disagreed
with this proposal of the opposition, we obtained a
majority on the Central Committee and restricted our-selves to removing Trotsky from the post of People’s
Commissar of Military and Naval Affairs. We dis-
agreed with Zinoviev and Kamenev because we knew thatthe policy of amputation was fraught with great dan-
gers for the Party, that the method of amputation,
the method of blood-letting—and they demandedblood—was dangerous, infectious: today you ampu-
tate one limb, tomorrow another, the day after tomor-
row a third—what will we have left in the Party? ( Ap-
plause .)
This first clash within the majority on the Central
Committee was the expression of the fundamental dif-ference between us on questions of organisational policy
in the Party.
The second question that caused disagreements among
us was that connected with Sarkis’s speech against
Bukharin. That was at the Twenty-First Leningrad
Conference in January 1925. Sarkis at that time accused
Bukharin of syndicalism. Here is what he said:
“We have read in the Moscow Pravda  Bukharin’s article on
worker and village correspondents. The views that Bukharin de-
velops have no supporters in our organisation. But one might say
that such views, which in their way are syndicalist , un-Bolshevik ,
anti-Party, are held even by a number of responsible comrades (I
repeat, not in the Leningrad organisation, but in others). Those
views treat of the independence and extra-territoriality of various
mass public organisations of workers and peasants in relation to
the Communist Party” (Stenographic Report of the Twenty-First
Leningrad Conference).
That speech was, firstly, a fundamental mistake
on Sarkis’s part, for Bukharin was absolutely right
on the question of the worker and village correspond-
ent movement; secondly, it was, not without theencouragement of the leaders of the Leningrad organ-
isation, a gross violation of the elementary rules
of comradely discussion of a question. Needless tosay, this circumstance was bound to worsen rela-
tions within the Central Committee. The matter ended
with Sarkis’s open admission of his mistake in thepress.
This incident showed that open admission of a mis-
take is the best way of avoiding an open discussion andof eliminating disagreements privately.
The third question was that of the Leningrad Young
Communist League. There are members of Gubernia Par-ty Committees here, and they probably remember that
the Political Bureau adopted a decision relating to the
Leningrad Gubernia Committee of the Young Commu-nist League, which had tried to convene in Leningrad
almost an all-Russian conference of the Young Commu-
nist League without the knowledge and consent of
the Central Committee of the youth league. With thedecision of the C.C. of the R.C.P.(B.) you are familiar.
We could not permit the existence, parallel with the
Central Committee of the Young Communist League,of another centre, competing with and opposing the
first. We, as Bolsheviks, could not permit the existence
of two centres. That is why the Central Committeeconsidered it necessary to take measures to infuse
fresh blood into the Central Committee of the youth
league, which had tolerated this separatism, and toremove Safarov from the post of leader of the Lenin-
grad Gubernia Committee of the Young Communist
League.
This incident showed that the Leningrad comrades
have a tendency to convert their Leningrad organisa-
tion into a centre of struggle against the Central Com-mittee.
The fourth question was the question, raised by
Zinoviev, of organising in Leningrad a special magazineto be called Bolshevik , the editorial board of which was
to consist of Zinoviev, Safarov, Vardin, Sarkis and
Tarkhanov. We did not agree with this and said thatsuch a magazine, running parallel with the Moscow
Bolshevik , would inevitably become the organ of a group,
a factional organ of the opposition; that such a step wasdangerous and would undermine the unity of the Party.
In other words, we prohibited the publication of that
magazine. Now, attempts are being made to frighten uswith the word “prohibition.” But that is nonsense,
comrades. We are not Liberals. For us, the interests of
the Party stand above formal democracy. Yes, we pro-
hibited the publication of a factional organ, and we shall
prohibit things of that kind in future. ( Voices : “Quite
right! Of course!” Loud applause .)
This incident showed that the Leningrad leadership
wants to segregate itself in a separate group.
Next, the question of Bukharin. I have in mind the
slogan “enrich yourselves.” I have in mind the speech
Bukharin delivered in April, when he let slip the phrase“enrich yourselves.” Two days later the April Conference
of our Party opened. It was I who, in the Conference Pre-
sidium, in the presence of Sokolnikov, Zinoviev, Kame-nev and Kalinin, stated that the slogan “enrich your-
selves” was not our slogan. I do not remember Bukharin
making any rejoinder to that protest. When ComradeLarin asked for the floor at the conference, to speak against
Bukharin, I think, it was Zinoviev who then demand-
ed that no speeches be permitted against Bukharin. How-ever, after that, Comrade Krupskaya sent in an article
against Bukharin, demanding that it be published. Bu-
kharin, of course, gave tit for tat, and, in his turn, wrotean article against Comrade Krupskaya. The majority on
the Central Committee decided not to publish any discus-
sion articles, not to open a discussion, and to call onBukharin to state in the press that the slogan “enrich
yourselves” was a mistake; Bukharin agreed to that and
later did so, on his return from holiday, in an articleagainst Ustryalov. Now, Kamenev and Zinoviev think
they can frighten somebody with the “prohibition” bo-
gey, expressing indignation like Liberals at our havingprohibited the publication of Comrade Krupskaya’s ar-
ticle. You will not frighten anybody with that. Firstly,
we refrained from publishing not only Comrade Krup-
skaya’s article, but also Bukharin’s. Secondly, why not
prohibit the publication of Comrade Krupskaya’s articleif the interests of Party unity demand that of us? In what
way is Comrade Krupskaya different from every other re-
sponsible comrade? Perhaps you think that the interests ofindividual comrades should be placed above the inter-
ests of the Party and its unity? Are not the comrades
of the opposition aware that for us, for Bolsheviks, for-mal democracy is an empty shell, but the real interests
of the Party are everything? ( Applause .)
Let the comrades point to a single article in the
Party’s Central Organ, in Pravda , that directly or in-
directly approves of the slogan “enrich yourselves.” They
cannot do so, because no such articles exist. There wasone case, the only one, when Komsomolskaya Pravda  pub-
lished an article by Stetsky, in which he tried to justify
the “enrich yourselves” slogan in a mild and barely per-ceptible way. But what happened? The very next day
the Secretariat of the Central Committee called the edi-
torial board of that newspaper to order in a specialletter signed by Molotov, Andreyev and Stalin. That
was on June 2, 1925. Several days later, the Organising
Bureau of the Central Committee, with the full consentof Bukharin, adopted a resolution to the effect that the
editor of that newspaper be removed. Here is an ex-
cerpt from that letter:
“Moscow, June 2, 1925. To all the members of the editorial
board of Komsomolskaya Pravda .
“We are of the opinion that certain passages in Stetsky’s
articles ‘A New Stage in the New Economic Policy’ evoke doubts.
In those articles, in a mild form it is true, countenance is given to
the slogan ‘enrich yourselves.’ That is not our slogan, it is incor-
rect, it gives rise to a whole series of doubts and misunderstandingsand has no place in a leading article in Komsomolskaya Prav-
da. Our slogan is socialist accumulation. We are removing the
administrative obstacles to an improvement of the welfare of thecountryside. That operation will undoubtedly facilitate all accumu-
lation, both private-capitalist and socialist. But the Party has
never yet said that it makes private accumulation its slogan.” . . .
     Is the opposition aware of all these facts? Of course
it is. In that case, why don’t they stop baiting Bukharin?
How much longer are they going to shout about Bukha-rin’s mistake?
     I know of mistakes made by some comrades, in Octo-
ber 1917, for example, compared with which Bukharin’smistake is not even worth noticing. Those comrades were
not only mistaken then, but they had the “audacity,”
on two occasions, to violate a vital decision of the Cen-tral Committee adopted under the direction and in the
presence of Lenin. Nevertheless, the Party forgot about
those mistakes as soon as those comrades admitted them.But compared with those comrades, Bukharin committed
an insignificant error. And he did not violate a single
Central Committee decision. How is it to be explainedthat, in spite of this, the unrestrained baiting of
Bukharin still continues? What do they really want of
Bukharin?     That is how the matter stands with Bukharin’s mis-
take.
     Next came the question of Zinoviev’s article “ThePhilosophy of the Epoch” and Kamenev’s report at the
meeting of the Moscow Plenum in the autumn of this
year, at the end of the summer—a question which alsostrained our internal Party relations. I spoke about
this in my speech and I shall not repeat myself. The issue
then was “The Philosophy of the Epoch,” the mistakes
in that article, how we rectified those mistakes, Kame-nev’s mistakes in connection with the Central Statistical
Board’s balance of output of grain and fodder, how
Kamenev credulously accepted the C.S.B.’s figure of61 per cent as being the proportion of the market
grain in the hands of the upper groups of the peasantry,
and how, later, under pressure of our comrades, he wasobliged to rectify his mistake in a special statement he
made in the Council of Labour and Defence, and which
was published in the newspapers, to the effect that morethan half of the market grain was in the hands of the
middle peasants. All this undoubtedly strained our
relations.
Then came questions connected with the October
Plenum—new complications, where the opposition de-
manded an open discussion, where the question of Za-lutsky’s so-called “Thermidor” came up, and at the end
of all this the Leningrad Conference, which on the very
first day opened fire on the Central Committee. I havein mind the speeches delivered by Safarov, Sarkis, She-
lavin and others. I have in mind Zinoviev’s speech, one
of his last speeches at the close of the conference, inwhich he called upon the conference to wage war against
the Moscow comrades and proposed that a delegation be
elected consisting of people who were willing to fight theCentral Committee. That is how it was. And that is pre-
cisely why the Bolshevik workers Komarov and Lobov
were not included in the Leningrad delegation (they re-fused to accept the platform of struggle against the Central
Committee). Their places in the delegation were filled by
Gordon and Tarkhanov. Put Gordon and Tarkhanov in
one scale and Komarov and Lobov in the other, and any
unbiassed person will say that the former are not to becompared with the latter. ( Applause .) What were Lo-
bov and Komarov guilty of? All they were guilty of was
that they refused to go against the Central Committee.That was their entire guilt. But only a month before
that, the Leningrad comrades nominated Komarov as
first secretary of their organisation. That is how it was.Was it so or not? ( Voices from the Leningrad delegation : “It
was! It was!”) What could have happened to Komarov in a
month? ( Bukharin : “He degenerated in a month.”) What
could have happened in a month to bring it about that
a member of the Central Committee, Komarov, whom
you yourselves nominated as first secretary of yourorganisation, was kicked out of the Secretariat of the
Leningrad Committee, and that it was not considered
possible to elect him as a delegate to the congress? ( A
voice from the Leningrad benches : “He insulted the con-
ference.” A voice : “That’s a lie, Naumov!” Commotion .)
 
10.  THE  OPPOSITION’S  PLATFORM
Let us now pass to the platform advanced by Zino-
viev and Kamenev, Sokolnikov and Lashevich. It is
time to say something about the opposition’s platform.It is rather an original one. Many speeches of different
kinds have been delivered here by the opposition. Ka-
menev said one thing, he pulled in one direction; Zino-viev said another thing, he pulled in another direction;
Lashevich a third, Sokolnikov a fourth. But in spite
of the diversity, all were agreed on one thing. On what
were they agreed? What indeed is their platform? Their
platform is—reform of the Secretariat of the Central
Committee. The only thing they have in commonand that completely unites them is the question of the
Secretariat. That is strange and ridiculous, but it is
a fact.
This question has a history. In 1923, after the Twelfth
Congress, the people who gathered in the “cave” ( laugh-
ter) drew up a platform for the abolition of the Political
Bureau and for politicising the Secretariat, i.e., for
transforming the Secretariat into a political and organi-
sational directing body to consist of Zinoviev, Trotskyand Stalin. What was the idea behind that platform?
What did it mean? It meant leading the Party without
Kalinin, without Molotov. Nothing came of that plat-form, not only because it was unprincipled at that time,
but also because, without the comrades I have men-
tioned, it is impossible to lead the Party at the presenttime. To a question sent to me in writing from the depths
of Kislovodsk I answered ln the negative, stating that, if
the comrades were to insist, I was willing to clear outwithout a fuss, without a discussion, open or concealed,
and without demanding guarantees for the rights of the
minority. ( Laughter .)
That was, so to speak, the first stage.
And now, it appears, the second stage has been ush-
ered in, opposite to the first. Now they are demanding notthe politicisation, but the technicalisation of the Secre-
tariat; not the abolition of the Political Bureau, but
full powers for it.
Well, if the transformation of the Secretariat into
a simple technical apparatus is really convenient for
Kamenev, perhaps we ought to agree to it. I am afraid,
however, that the Party will not agree to it. ( A voice :
“Quite right!”) Whether a technical Secretariat wouldprepare, whether it would be capable of preparing, the
questions it would have to prepare both for the Organ-
ising Bureau and for the Political Bureau, I have mydoubts.
But when they talk about a Political Bureau with
full powers, such a platform deserves to be made intoa laughing-stock. Hasn’t the Political Bureau full pow-
ers? Are not the Secretariat and the Organising Bureau
subordinate to the Political Bureau? And what aboutthe plenum of the Central Committee? Why does not
our opposition speak about the plenum of the Central
Committee? Is it thinking of giving the Political Bureaufuller powers than those possessed by the Plenum?
No, the opposition is positively unlucky with its
platform, or platforms, concerning the Secretariat.
11.  THEIR  “DESIRE  FOR  PEACE”
What is to be done now, you will ask; what must we
do to extricate ourselves from the situation that has beencreated? This question has engaged our minds all the
time, during the congress as well as before it. We need
unity of the Party ranks—that is the question now. Theopposition is fond of talking about difficulties. But
there is one difficulty that is more dangerous than all
others, and which the opposition has created for us—thedanger of confusion and disorganisation in the Party.
(Applause .) We must above all overcome that difficulty.
We had this in mind when, two days before the congress,
we offered the opposition terms of a compromise agree-
ment aimed at a possible reconciliation. Here is the text
of our offer:
“The undersigned members of the Central Committee believe
that the preparation for the Party congress by a number of leading
comrades of the Leningrad organisation was conducted contrary to
the line of the Central Committee of the Party and in opposi-tion to the supporters of this line in Leningrad. The under-signed members of the Central Committee regard the resolution ofthe Moscow Conference as being absolutely correct both insubstance and in form, and believe that it is the Central Com-
mittee’s duty to rebuff all tendencies that run counter to the
Party line and disorganise the Party.
“However, for the sake of maintaining the unity of the Party,
peace within the Party, of averting the possible danger of alienat-ing the Leningrad organisation, one of the best organisations inthe R.C.P., from the Party’s Central Committee—the undersigned
consider it possible, if the congress endorses the Central Committee’s
distinct and clear political line, to make a number of concessions.With this in view we make the following proposals:
“1. In drafting the resolution on the Central Committee’s
report, to take the resolution of the Moscow Conference as a basisbut to tone down some of its formulations.
“2. The publication in the newspapers, or in bulletins, of the
letter of the Leningrad Conference and of the Moscow Committee’sreply to that letter to be regarded as inexpedient in the interests ofunity.
“3. Members of the Political Bureau . . . are not to speak
against each other at the congress.
“4. In speeches at the congress, to dissociate ourselves from Sar-
kis (on regulating the composition of the Party) and from Safarov(on state capitalism).
“5. The mistake in connection with Komarov, Lobov and
Moskvin to be rectified by organisational measures.
“6. The Central Committee’s decision to include a Leningrad
comrade in the Secretariat of the Central Committee to be put
into effect immediately after the congress.
“7. With the view to strengthening connection with the Cen-
tral Organ, one Party worker from Leningrad to be included in the
editorial board of the Central Organ.
“8. In view of the incompetence of the editor of Leningradskaya
Pravda  (Gladnev), to recognise the need to replace him by a more
competent comrade by agreement with the Central Committee.
“Kalinin , Stalin , Molotov , Dzerzhinsky , and others.
“15. XII. 1925”
That is the compromise we offered, comrades.
But the opposition was unwilling to come to an agree-
ment. Instead of peace, it preferred an open and fierce
struggle at the congress. Such is the opposition’s “desirefor peace.”
12.  THE  PARTY  WILL  ACHIEVE  UNITY
In the main, we still adhere to the viewpoint of that
document. In our draft resolution, as you know, we have
already toned down some of the formulations in the in-
terests of peace in the Party.
We are against amputation. We are against the
policy of amputation. That does not mean that leaders
will be permitted with impunity to give themselves airsand ride roughshod over the Party. No, excuse us from
that. There will be no obeisances to leaders. ( Voices : “Quite
right!” Applause .) We stand for unity, we are against
amputation. The policy of amputation is abhorrent
to us. The Party wants unity, and it will achieve it
with  Kamenev and Zinoviev, if they are willing, without
them  if they are unwilling. ( Voices : “Quite right!” Ap-
plause .)
What is needed for unity? That the minority should
submit to the majority. Without that there is no unity
of the Party, nor can there be.
We are opposed to the publication of a special dis-
cussion sheet. Bolshevik  has a discussion section. That
will be quite enough. We must not allow ourselves tobe carried away by discussions. We are a Party that is
governing a country—do not forget that. Do not forget
that every disaccord at the top finds an echo in thecountry that is harmful to us, not to speak of the effect
it has abroad.
The organs of the Central Committee will probably
remain in their present shape. The Party is hardly likely
to agree to break them up. ( Voices : “Quite right!” Ap-
plause .) The Political Bureau has full powers as it is,
it is superior to all the organs of the Central Committee
except the plenum. But the supreme organ is the ple-
num—that is sometimes forgotten. Our plenum decideseverything, and it calls its leaders to order when they
begin to lose their balance. ( Voices : “Quite right!”
Laughter. Applause .)
There must be unity among us, and there will be if
the Party, if the congress displays firmness of character
and does not allow itself to be scared. ( Voices : “We
won’t. We are seasoned people.”) If any of us go
too far, we shall be called to order—that is essen-
tial, that is necessary. To lead the Party otherwise thancollectively is impossible. Now that Ilyich is not with
us it is silly to dream of such a thing ( applause ), it
is silly to talk about it.
Collective work, collective leadership, unity in the
Party, unity in the organs of the Central Committee,
with the minority submitting to the majority—that is
what we need now.
As regards the Leningrad communist workers, I have
no doubt that they will always be in the front ranks of
our Party. With them we built the Party, with them we
reared it, with them we raised the banner of the uprisingin October 1917, with them we defeated the bourgeoisie,
with them we combated, and will combat, the difficulties
in the path of our work of construction. I am sure thatthe Leningrad communist workers will not lag behind
their friends in the other industrial centres in the struggle
for iron, Leninist unity in the Party. ( Stormy applause.
The “Internationale ” is sung .)
N O T E S
1The All-Union Teachers’ Congress took place in Moscow, Janu-
ary 12-17, 1925. The congress was attended by 1,660 delegates
representing 49 nationalities of the Soviet Union. Three-fourthsof the delegates were village school-teachers. The congress heard
and discussed reports on: the immediate tasks in the sphere of
Soviet affairs; the teachers and the proletarian revolution; thetasks of education in the system of Soviet affairs; the Soviet
school; the national question and the schools; teachers and the
Young Communist League; the international position of theU.S.S.R., etc. The congress adopted a declaration stating that
the teachers did not separate their tasks from those of the Com-
munist Party, from its struggle to build socialism. p. 3
2Krasnaya Molodyozh  (Red Youth )—a monthly students’ maga-
zine published by the Central Bureau and Moscow Bureau ofProletarian Students from May 1924 to November 1925. V . M. Mo-
lotov was the editor-in-chief. In November 1925 the name of
the magazine was changed to Krasnoye Studenchestvo  (Red Stu-
dents ). p. 4
3From January 17 to 20, 1925, a plenum of the Central Commit-
tee of the R.C.P.(B.) took place. On January 17, a joint meet-
ing of the plenums of the Central Committee and of the Central
Control Commission of the R.C.P.(B.) was held. At this jointmeeting, after hearing a statement by J. V . Stalin on the res-
olutions passed by local organisations on Trotsky’s action,
the plenums passed a resolution qualifying Trotsky’s actionas a revision of Bolshevism, as an attempt to substitute Trots-
kyism for Leninism. On January 19, at the plenum of the Cen-
tral Committee of the R.C.P.(B.), J. V. Stalin delivered a speechon M. V . Frunze’s report on “Budget Assignments for the
People’s Commissariat of Military and Naval Affairs of the
U.S.S.R.” (see this volume, pp. 11-14). p. 6
4This refers to the defeat in the autumn of 1924 of the Spanish
army, 150,000 strong, sent by Primo de Rivera, the fascist dic-tator of Spain, to suppress the national-liberation movement
in the Riff, the Spanish zone of Morocco. As a result of the vic-
tory gained by the Moroccans, two-thirds of the territoryoccupied by the Spanish forces was liberated. p. 12
5In the summer of 1924, as a result of the revolutionary-progres-
sive movement in Albania, the reactionary government of Ahmet
Zogu was overthrown. The Government of Fan-Noli, which came
into power, opened negotiations with the Soviet Government forthe establishment of diplomatic and friendly relations between
the U.S.S.R. and Albania. The two countries exchanged diplo-
matic representatives. The Governments of Great Britain,Italy and Yugoslavia demanded that the Albanian Government
should break off diplomatic relations with the U.S.S.R. In De-
cember 1924, armed gangs organised by Ahmet Zogu and sup-ported by the armed forces of the fascist government of Yugo-
slavia invaded Albania and overthrew the Government of Fan-
Noli. The rule of Ahmet Zogu was restored in Albania. p. 13
6Rabochaya Gazeta  (Workers ’ Newspaper ), a daily newspaper
of a mass character, organ of the Central Committee of theC.P.S.U.(B.), published in Moscow from March 1922 to January
1932. It first appeared under the title of Rabochy  (Worker ),
but in July 1922 it was renamed Rabochaya Gazeta .p .  15
7This refers to J. V . Stalin’s article “October and Trotsky’s
Theory of ‘Permanent’ Revolution” published in Pravda , No.
290, December 20, 1924. The article was part of the preface
to the book On the Road to October . The preface was written by
J. V . Stalin in December 1924 and was published in full only
in that book. The greater part of the preface, under the title
of “The October Revolution and the Tactics of the Russian Com-munists,” was published in various collections of articles, inseparate pamphlets and in all the editions of J. V. Stalin’sbook Problems of Leninism , and is included in V ol. 6 of the
Works  of J. V. Stalin, pp. 374-420. p. 16
8See V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 33, pp. 427-35.
p. 17
9The symposium Against the Stream  was published in Petrograd
in 1918. It contained the following articles by V . I. Lenin,
written in the period 1914-17: “The United States of Europe
Slogan,” “On Junius’s Pamphlet,” “The National Pride ofthe Great Russians,” “The Two Lines of the Revolution,”“The Collapse of the Second International,” and others, whichlater were included in V olumes XVIII and XIX of the 3rd edi-tion of the Works  of V . I. Lenin (see V ols. 21 and 22 of the
4th Russ. ed. of the Works ). p. 18
10V. I. Lenin, The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kaut-
sky (see Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 28, pp. 207-302). p. 18
11V . I. Lenin, “ Left-Wing ” Communism , An Infantile Disorder
(see Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 31, pp. 1-97). p. 18
12J. V . Stalin spoke at the meeting of the Organising Bureau of
the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) during the discussionof the events that took place in the village of Dymovka (Niko-layev Okrug, Odessa Gubernia). In Dymovka, on March 28,1924,
a gang of criminals, instigated by the kulaks, killed a village
correspondent named Grigory Malinovsky. The resolution passedby the Central Committee and Central Control Commissionof the R.C.P.(B.) on the events in Dymovka in connectionwith the murder of the village correspondent Malinovsky waspublished in Pravda , No. 30, February 6, 1925. p. 19
13This refers to the kulak revolt in the Tambov Gubernia in
1919-21, and to the counter-revolutionary Kronstadt mutiny
in March 1921, which were organised by whiteguards, Socialist-
Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and agents of foreign states. p. 23
14This refers to the counter-revolutionary revolt in Georgia on
August 28, 1924, organised by the remnants of the defeated
bourgeois-nationalist parties and by the émigré Menshevik
“government” headed by Jordania on the instructions andwith the financial support of the imperialist states and leadersof the Second International. On August 29 the revolt was putan end to with the active support of the Georgian workers andtoiling peasants. p. 23
15The Thirteenth Gubernia Conference of the Moscow Organisa-
tion of the R.C.P.(B.) took place from January 24 to 28, 1925.There were present 1,150 delegates representing 64,078 membersand 30,770 candidate members of the Party. The conference
discussed the report of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.);
the report of the Moscow Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) andthe co-report of the Moscow Committee of the Russian LeninistYoung Communist League; a report on the work of theMoscow Control Commission; the budget and the economicsituation of the Moscow Gubernia; the question of work in the
countryside. It also elected the leading bodies. J. V . Stalin
spoke at the conference on the question of work in thecountryside. p. 25
16The Dawes Plan was the name given to the scheme for the pay-
ment of reparations by Germany drawn up by an international
committee of experts under the chairmanship of the Americanfinancier, General Dawes, and endorsed at the London Confer-ence of Allied States on August 16, 1924 (concerning theDawes Plan see this volume, pp. 277-79). p. 35
17Brandler and Thalheimer—leaders of the Right-opportunist
group, who in 1922-23 stood at the head of the CommunistParty of Germany. The treacherous policy pursued by Brandlerand Thalheimer led to the defeat of the working class of Germany
during the revolutionary events in 1923. In April 1924, at the
Frankfurt Congress of the Communist Party of Germany, Brand-ler and Thalheimer were removed from the Party leadership.
The Fifth Congress of the Comintern (1924) condemned the de-
featist line of the Brandler-Thalheimer group. In 1929, Brandlerand Thalheimer were expelled from the Communist Party
on account of factional, anti-Party activity. p. 42
18This refers to the trial of the “Barmat Brothers Concern” at
the beginning of 1925. During that trial it was revealed that
prominent leaders of the Social-Democratic Party of Ger-many, headed by Weis, had received heavy bribes from this
concern, and also that they had used funds obtained from
this concern and banks connected with it to fight the Com-munist Party of Germany during the Reichstag elections in
December 1924. p. 44
19Kuomintang—the political party in China founded by Sun
Yat-sen in 1912 for the purpose of fighting for a republic and
for the national independence of the country. Sun Yat-sen diedon March 12, 1925. In his testament he enjoined the Kuomin-
tang to maintain the alliance with the Communist Party of
China, to maintain friendship with the Soviet Union and toexpand the national-liberation movement of the workers and
peasants of China. In the period of the development of the revo-
lution in China in 1925-27, the Right wing of the Kuomintang,headed by Chiang Kai-shek, violated the behests of Sun Yat-
sen. In alliance with imperialists of foreign states, it waged a
struggle against the democratic forces of China led by the Com-munist Party. p. 50
20The Amsterdam International Federation of Trade Unions
was formed in July 1919 at an international congress held
in Amsterdam. It consisted of the reformist trade unions of a
number of countries of Western Europe and the U.S.A. In 1919its affiliated membership reached 24,000,000, but by the end of
1923 it had dropped to 16,000,000. In subsequent years the in-
fluence and membership of the Amsterdam Federation steadily
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

declined. During the Second World War it practically ceased
to function. It was dissolved in December 1945 owing to the for-mation of the World Federation of Trade Unions. p. 53
21The Czechoslovak Commission was set up by the Fifth Enlarged
Plenum of the Executive Committee of the Communist Interna-
tional held in Moscow from March 21 to April 6, 1925. The ple-
num discussed the following questions: the international pros-pects and the Bolshevisation of the Communist Parties; the
struggle for world trade-union unity; the peasant question;
the discussion in the R.C.P.(B.); questions concerning individualsections of the Comintern; etc. The plenum set up a number of
commissions: political, Czechoslovak, and Yugoslav, among
others. J. V . Stalin was elected a member of the political andCzechoslovak commissions. On March 30, J. V. Stalin spoke
in the Yugoslav Commission on the national question in Yugo-
slavia (see this volume, pp. 69-76). p. 58
22See J. V . Stalin, Marxism and the National Question  (Works ,
Vol. 2, pp. 300-81). p. 70
23See V . I. Lenin, The Right of Nations to Self-Determination
(Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 20, pp. 365-424). p. 71
24The First All-Union Conference of Proletarian Students was
held in Moscow from April 13 to 17, 1925. There were presentabout 300 delegates representing 250,000 students at higher
educational institutions, technical schools and workers’ facul-
ties. The conference discussed the following questions: theinternational position of the U.S.S.R. and its internal situa-
tion; trade unions and the students; a report on the work of
the Central Bureau of Proletarian Students; a report on thework of the Chief V ocational Education Boards of the R.S.F.S.R.
and the Ukrainian S.S.R.; the connection between higher edu-
cational institutions and industry. On April 13, J. V . Stalin hadan interview with a delegation from the conference, and on
April 15 he sent to the conference the address published in the
present volume. p. 85
25The Fourteenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) took place in
Moscow, April 27-29, 1925. The conference discussed the fol-lowing questions: Party affairs; the co-operatives; the singleagricultural tax; the metal industry; revolutionary law; thetasks of the Comintern and of the R.C.P.(B.) in connection withthe Enlarged Plenum of the E.C.C.I. (For the decisions of the
conference see Resolutions and Decisions of C.P.S.U.(B.)
Congresses , Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part II
1941, pp. 4-31.) p. 90
26V. I. Lenin, Imperialism , the Highest Stage of Capitalism  (see
Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 22, pp. 173-290). p. 95
27Field Marshal Hindenburg, a furious monarchist and an
instrument of German imperialism and militarism, was electedPresident of Germany on April 26, 1925. p. 99
28On April 16, 1925, an explosion occurred at the “Sveta Nedelya”
Cathedral in Sofia when the members of the fascist government
of Bulgaria, headed by Tsankoff, were attending a serviceTsankoff sent to the United States a slanderous statement accus-ing the Soviet Government of instigating the explosion. Thereactionary foreign press launched a campaign against theU.S.S.R., calling upon the governments of their respective coun-
tries to revise their relations with the Soviet Union. The Third
Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R., held in May 1925, issued anappeal to the working people of the whole world concerning thebrutal treatment of the best representatives of the Bulgarianpeople by the Tsankoff Government and in this statement repu-
diated the slanderous attacks upon the Soviet Union. p. 100
29This refers to the theses on the Bolshevisation of the parties
affiliated to the Communist International adopted by the FifthEnlarged Plenum of the Executive Committee of the Comin-tern held in Moscow, March 21-April 6, 1925. p. 102
30This refers to the national-state delimitation of the Soviet re-
publics in Central Asia (the Turkestan, Bukhara and Khoresm
republics) carried through in 1924. As a result of this national
delimitation there were formed: the Turkmenian Soviet Social-ist Republic, the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic, the TajikAutonomous Soviet Socialist Republic as part of the UzbekS.S.R., the Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous Region of the R.S.F.S.R.(subsequently it became the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic),
and the Kara-Kalpak Autonomous Region of the Kirghiz
Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (later of the KazakhSoviet Socialist Republic). The Third Congress of Soviets ofthe U.S.S.R. held in May 1925 accepted the Uzbek and Turk-menian Soviet Socialist Republics into the U.S.S.R. andamended the Constitution of the U.S.S.R. accordingly. The
national-state delimitation of the Soviet republics in Central
Asia was carried through under the immediate direction ofJ. V. Stalin. p. 138
31See V . I. Lenin’s article, “Critical Remarks on the National
Question” ( Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 20, pp. 1-34). p. 110
32This refers to the armed uprising of the workers in Revel (Tal-
linn) on December 1, 1924, provoked by the sentence passed byan Estonian court at the end of November 1924 on 149 politicaloffenders accused of conducting communist propaganda. Themajority of the accused were sentenced to long terms of penal
servitude, thirty-nine were sentenced to penal servitude for
life, and Tomp, the leader of the Estonian workers, was shot.The uprising was cruelly suppressed by the reactionary Esto-nian government. p. 152
33Komsomolskaya Pravda  (Y.C.L. Truth ), a daily newspaper,
organ of the Central Committee and Moscow Committee of the
All-Union Leninist Young Communist League, began publicationin May 1925 in conformity with the decisions of the ThirteenthCongress of the R.C.P.(B.) and the Sixth Congress of theRussian Leninist Young Communist League. p. 155
34Posledniye Novosti  (Latest News ), a daily newspaper of Cadet
white émigrés; began publication in Paris in April 1920; wasedited by the Cadet leader P. N. Milyukov. p. 167
35The Third Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R. was held in Mos-
cow, May 13-20, 1925. The congress discussed the followingquestions: the acceptance of the Turkmenian and Uzbek Soviet
Socialist Republics into the U.S.S.R.; report of the Govern-
ment of the U.S.S.R.; the state of industry in the U.S.S.R.questions concerning Soviet affairs; measures for improving
and strengthening peasant economy; the Red Army etc. The
report on questions concerning Soviet affairs was delivered byM. I. Kalinin. p. 187
36This refers to the Fifth Enlarged Plenum of the Executive
Committee of the Comintern held in Moscow, March 21-April6, 1925 (for the speech delivered by J. V . Stalin on the Com-
munist Party of Czechoslovakia in the Czechoslovak Commis-
sion of the plenum see this volume, pp. 58-68). p. 190
37See V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 32, pp. 308-43.
p. 206
38This refers to the war for national liberation launched by the
Riffs in Morocco against French imperialism in the spring of1925. After the defeat of the Spanish army of occupation in Mo-
rocco in the autumn of 1924, France resolved to seize the Riff,
the Spanish zone of Morocco, and provoked a war. In the springand summer of 1925 the Riffs inflicted a series of heavy defeats
upon the French. The Riffs were defeated in May 1926 only
after the conclusion of a military alliance between France andSpain. p. 209
39This refers to the intervention of Anglo-American and Japanese
imperialism in the internal affairs of China in the second half
of 1924. In South China, British naval forces supported therevolt of the counter-revolutionary Canton merchants against
the revolutionary Canton Government headed by Sun Yat-sen.
In the North, the Anglo-American and Japanese imperialistsinstigated war between their respective protégés, the Chinese
generals Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin, for the partition of
China. This intervention gave a powerful impetus to the struggle
for national liberation in China, which led to the revolutionof 1925-27. p. 209
40Bolshevik , a fortnightly theoretical and political magazine, or-
gan of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.(B.); began publi-
cation in April 1924. p. 220
41The Fifth Congress of the Comintern was held in Moscow,
June 17-July 8, 1924. On June 30, D. Z. Manuilsky delivered
a report on the national question. p. 223
42See V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 22, pp. 306-44.
p. 226
43See Marx-Engels, Gesamtausgabe , Abt. I, B. 6, S. 503-22.
p. 238
44Ruth Fischer and Maslow—leaders of the Trotskyite group in
the Communist Party of Germany. In April 1924, at the Frank-furt Congress of the Communist Party of Germany, after the
removal of the bankrupt Right-opportunist Brandler-Thalhei-
mer group from the Party leadership, the Ruth Fischer-Maslowgroup seized the leadership in the newly-elected Central Com-
mittee of the C.P.G. In the autumn of 1925, Ruth Fischer and
Maslow and their supporters were removed from the leadingposts in the Communist Party of Germany and in 1926 they
were expelled from the Party as agents of the class enemy. After
that the leadership of the Communist Party of Germany washeaded by E. Thälmann. p. 242
45The Sixth Congress of the Russian Leninist Young Communist
League was held in Moscow, July 12-18, 1924. The congress
discussed the following questions: the change of name from the
Russian Young Communist League to the Russian Leninist YoungCommunist League; the political situation and the tasks of the
youth the report of the Russian Leninist Y .C.L. delegation on
the Executive Committee of the Young Communist International;
the report of the Central Committee of the Russian Leninist
Y.C.L.; the prospects of youth labour and the tasks of the eco-nomic activities of the R.L.Y.C.L.; the work of the R.L.Y .C.L.
in the countryside; the work of the R.L.Y.C.L. in the Red Ar-
my and Navy, etc. The Sixth Congress of the R.L.Y .C.L. asso-ciated itself with the decisions of the Thirteenth Congress of
the R.C.P.(B.) and condemned the opportunist theory that the
Y.C.L. should be neutral in the struggle against anti-Party de-viations. (For the decisions adopted by the Sixth Congress of
the R.L.Y .C.L. see Resolutions and Decisions of the Sixth All-
Union Congress of the R.L.Y.C.L. , Moscow, 1924.) p. 253
46V . I. Lenin, “Outline of the Pamphlet The Tax in Kind ” (see
Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 32, p. 302). p. 261
47V . I. Lenin, speech in closing the Eleventh Congress of the
R.C.P.(B.), April 2, 1922 (see Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol 33)
p. 291). p. 261
48The Twenty-Second Gubernia Conference of the Leningrad
organisation of the R.C.P.(B.) was held on December 1-101925, just before the Fourteenth Party Congress. This letter
from J. V. Stalin was read at a private session of the conference
held on December 8, 1925. p. 263
49The Fourteenth Moscow Gubernia Party Conference was held
on December 5-13, 1925, just before the Fourteenth PartyCongress. In its resolution on the report of the Central
Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) the conference approved the polit-
ical and organisational work of the Central Committee ofthe R.C.P.(B.). p. 263
50The Fourteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.) took place in
Moscow, December 18-31, 1925. The congress discussed the
political and organisational reports of the Central Committeethe reports of the Auditing Commission, of the Central Control
Commission and of the representatives of the R.C.P.(B.) on
the Executive Committee of the Comintern; and also reportson: the work of the trade unions; the work of the Young Commu-
nist League; revision of the Party Rules, etc. The congress fully
approved the political and organisational line of the CentralCommittee, indicated the further path of struggle for the vic-
tory of socialism, endorsed the Party’s general line for the
socialist industrialisation of the country, rejected the defeatistplans of the oppositionists and instructed the Central Committee
resolutely to combat all attempts to undermine the unity of
the Party. The Fourteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.) hastaken its place in the history of the Party as the Industrialisa-
tion Congress. The key-note of this congress was the
struggle against the “new opposition,” which denied thepossibility of building socialism in the U.S.S.R. By deci-
sion of the Fourteenth Congress, the Party adopted the
name of Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)—C.P.S.U.(B.). (Concerning the Fourteenth Congress of the
C.P.S.U.(B.) see History of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union (Bolsheviks) , Short Course , Moscow 1952, pp. 423-28.)
p. 265
51This refers to the conference held in Locarno (Switzerland),
October 5-16, 1925, at which Great Britain, France, Italy,
Belgium, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Germany were represent-
ed. (Concerning the Locarno Conference see pp. 279-80 in thisvolume.) p. 277
52In Genoa (Italy), April 10-May 19, 1922, an international eco-
nomic conference was held in which Great Britain, France,
Italy, Belgium Japan and other capitalist states, on the one
hand, and Soviet Russia, on the other, took part. The GenoaConference was called for the purpose of determining the rela-
tions between the capitalist world and Soviet Russia. At the
opening of the conference the Soviet delegation submitted anextensive programme for the rehabilitation of Europe and also
a scheme for universal disarmament. The conference did not
accept the Soviet delegation’s proposals.
On December 2, 1922, the Soviet Government convened
in Moscow a conference of representatives of the neighbouring
Western states (Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Poland and Lithua-nia), at which it submitted for discussion a plan for proportional
reduction of armaments. On December 27, 1922, the Tenth All-
Russian Congress of Soviets, in an appeal “To All the Peoplesof the World,” reaffirmed the Soviet Government’s peace policy
and called upon the working people all over the world to support
this policy. In February 1924, at the Naval Conference heldin Rome, the Soviet representative submitted concrete propos-
als for reducing naval armaments. p. 287
53This refers to the general and commercial treaties between
Great Britain and the U.S.S.R. signed in London on August
8, 1924, by representatives of the Soviet Government and ofthe MacDonald Labour Government. The British Conservative
Government, which came into office in Britain in November
1924, refused to ratify those treaties. p. 297
54The decree of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee
of Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies an-
nulling the state debts of the tsarist government was adopted on
January 21, 1918. p. 297
55This refers to the Conservative Baldwin-Austen Chamberlain
Government that came into power in November 1924 in placeof the MacDonald Labour Government. p. 299
56Ekonomicheskaya Zhizn  (Economic Life ), a daily newspaper
organ of the economic and financial People’s Commissariats
and institutions of the R.S.F.S.R. and U.S.S.R. (Supreme Coun-
cil of National Economy, Council of Labour and Defence, theState Planning Commission, the State Bank, the People’s
Commissariat of Finance, and others); published from November
1918 to November 1937. p. 306
57This refers to V. I. Lenin’s works: “ Left-Wing ” Childishness and
Petty-Bourgeois Mentality  (Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 27, pp.
291-319), Report on the Tax in Kind Delivered at a Meeting
of Secretaries and Responsible Representatives of R.C.P .(B.)
Units of the City of Moscow and of the Moscow Gubernia on April9, 1921 , and The Tax in Kind  (Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 32,
pp. 262-76, 308-43), and Five Years of the Russian Revolution
and the Prospects of the World Revolution  (Report delivered at
the Fourth Congress of the Comintern on November 13, 1922)
(Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 33, pp. 380-94). p. 311
58See Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.) Congresses ,
Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part I, 1941, p. 566.
p. 320
59See V. I. Lenin’s “Preliminary Draft of Theses on the Agrarian
Question (For the Second Congress of the Communist Interna-tional)” ( Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 31, pp. 129-41). p. 332
60See V . I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., V ol. 29, pp. 124-25.
p. 336
61This refers to the resolution adopted by the plenum of the Cen-
tral Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) (October 3-10, 1925) on
V. M. Molotov’s report on “The Party’s Work among theRural Poor” (see Resolutions and Decisions of C.P .S.U.(B.)
Congresses , Conferences and Central Committee Plenums , Part II,
1941, pp. 38-41). p. 338
62See V. I. Lenin, Works , 4th Russ. ed., Vol. 6, pp. 325-92.
p. 339
63Bednota  (The Poor ), a daily newspaper, organ of the Central
Committee of the C.P.S.U.(B.), published from March 1918to January 1931. p. 372
64Leningradskaya Pravda  (Leningrad Truth ), a daily newspaper,
organ of the Leningrad Regional and City Committees of the
C.P.S.U.(B.) and Leningrad Regional and City Soviets of Work-
ing People’s Deputies; started publication in 1918 under the title
of Petrogradskaya Pravda . In 1924 it was renamed Leningradskaya
Pravda.  At the end of 1925, Leningradskaya Pravda , the organ of
the North-Western Regional Bureau of the Central Committeeof the R.C.P.(B.), the Leningrad Gubernia Party Committee,
the Leningrad Gubernia Council of Trade Unions, and the Re-
gional Economic Conference, was utilised by the “new opposi-tion” for its factional anti-Party aims. p. 389
BIOGRAPHICAL CHRONICLE
1 9 2 5
J. V . Stalin has an interview with the members
of the editorial board of Krasnaya Molodyozh
on the tasks of that magazine. A report of theinterview was published in Krasnaya Molodyozh ,
No. 1 (5), January 1925.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with students of
the Stalino (Yuzovka) Party School who hadcome on an excursion to Moscow.
J. V . Stalin writes the appeal “Working Women
and Peasant Women, Remember and Carry Out
Ilyich’s Behests!” The appeal was published
in the magazine Rabotnitsa  (Working Woman ),
No. 1, January 1925.
J. V . Stalin writes a letter to the All-Union
Teachers’ Congress. The letter was published
in Uchitelskaya Gazeta  (Teacher ’s Newspaper ),
No. 2, January 10, 1925.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with a group of
Communists assigned for work in the countryside.
J. V . Stalin writes a letter to the leaders of the
All-Union Association of Proletarian WritersBeginning  of
January
January  5
January  6
January  9
January  10
January  17-20
January  17
January  19
January  21
January  25
January  26
January  27
January  28concerning the convocation of a conference of
proletarian writers.
J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the plenum
of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
At a joint session of the plenums of the Central
Committee and the Central Control Commissionof the R.C.P.(B.), J. V . Stalin reports on theresolutions passed by local organisations onTrotsky’s action.
J. V . Stalin speaks at the plenum of the Central
Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) on M. V. Frunze’sreport on “Budget Assignments for the People’sCommissariat of Military and Naval Affairsof the U.S.S.R.”
. V . Stalin’s letter to Rabochaya Gazeta  on the
first anniversary of the death of V . I. Lenin is
published in Rabochaya Gazeta , No. 17.
J. V . Stalin writes an answer to Comrade D—ov’s
letter concerning the question of the victory ofsocialism in one country.
J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Organ-
ising Bureau of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) on “Dymovka.”
J. V . Stalin delivers a speech at the Thirteenth
Gubernia Conference of the Moscow organisationof the R.C.P.(B.) “Concerning the Question ofthe Proletariat and the Peasantry.”
J. V. Stalin takes part in the meetings of the
Executive Committee of the Communist Inter-national (E.C.C.I.) and of its Presidium.
January  30
January  31
February  2February  3
February  6
February  7
February  9In greetings telegraphed to the first congresses
of the Communist Parties of Uzbekistan andTurkmenistan, J. V . Stalin defines the tasks
of the Communist Parties in those republics
after the national delimitation that had beencarried out in Central Asia. The telegramswere published in the newspapers Pravda Vostoka
(Truth of the East ), No. 29, February 6, 1925,
and Turkmenskaya Iskra  (Turkmenian Spark ),
No. 34, February 14, 1925.
The Twenty-First Gubernia Party Conference
of the Leningrad organisation of the R.C.P.(B.)elects J. V . Stalin a member of the LeningradGubernia Party Committee.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with a delegation
from the All-Union Association of ProletarianWriters on questions concerning proletarianliterature.
J. V. Stalin’s interview with Herzog on “The
Prospects of the Communist Party of Germanyand Bolshevisation” is published in Pravda ,
No. 27.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with leading
functionaries of the Central Committee and
Moscow Committee of the Russian LeninistYoung Communist League on questions con-cerning the work of the League.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with a delegation
from the plenum of the “Proletkult” organi-sation on questions concerning the further workof this organisation.
J. V. Stalin has an interview with leading func-
tionaries of the Central Committee of the
 

/hammersicle⋆
NOT   FOR

February  15
February  18February  20
February  26
February  28
March  6
March  8
March  9
March  10R.L.Y .C.L. on questions concerning the work
of the League.
J. V . Stalin sends greetings to the Seventh
Tsaritsyn Gubernia Congress of Soviets.
J. V . Stalin takes part in a meeting of the
Presidium of the E.C.C.I.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with representa-
tives of Party and Soviet bodies in the
Tula Gubernia on questions concerning the
work of the co-operatives and on housing.
J. V . Stalin takes part in a meeting of the
Presidium of the E.C.C.I.
J. V. Stalin writes a letter to Comrade Me—rt
concerning the situation in the CommunistParty of Germany.
J. V . Stalin sends greetings to the working
people of Tajikistan on the occasion of the for-
mation of the Tajik Autonomous Soviet Social-
ist Republic. The greetings were publishedin Pravda Vostoka , No. 58, March 12, 1925.
J. V . Stalin’s article “International Women’s
Day” is published in Pravda , No. 56.
J. V . Stalin signs the notice “To all organisa-
tions of the R.C.P.(B.)” announcing the con-
vocation of an All-Union Party Conference and
agenda of this conference.
J. V . Stalin writes a letter to the cadets and
to the commanding, political and teachingstaff of the Stalin Infantry School in Nizhni
Novgorod in connection with his election as
an honorary cadet of the school. The letter
March  13
March  14  and  16
March  15
March  17March  21 —
April  6
March  21was published in Nizhegorodskaya Kommuna
(Nizhni-Novgorod Commune ), No. 45, February
23, 1930
J. V. Stalin sends greetings to the Tsaritsyn
Gubernia congress of agricultural co-operative
delegates, wishing them success in drawing
the toiling peasantry into the work of buildingsocialism.
J. V . Stalin writes the message of the Central
Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) sent to the Cen-tral Executive Committee of the Kuomintang
in connection with the death of Sun Yat-sen.
The message was published in Pravda , No. 60,
March 14, 1925.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with a delegation
from the First All-Union Congress of Village
Correspondents.
J. V . Stalin sends greetings to the First Party
Conference of the Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous
Region in which he defines the tasks confront-ing the Communists of Kara-Kirghizia. The
greetings were published in Pravda Vostoka ,
No. 67, March 26, 1925.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with the delega-
tion from the Communist Party of Czechoslo-vakia which had arrived for the Fifth Enlarged
Plenum of the E.C.C.I.
J. V . Stalin takes part in the work of the Fifth
Enlarged Plenum of the E.C.C.I.
J. V . Stalin is elected a member of the political
and Czechoslovak commissions set up by the
Fifth Enlarged Plenum of the E.C.C.I.
March  22
March  25
March  27
March  28
March  30J. V . Stalin’s article “The International Sit-
uation and the Tasks of the Communist Parties”is published in Pravda , No. 66.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with the delega-
tions from the workers at the Vladimir Ilyichand Dynamo factories who had come toinvite him to attend their meetings for theelection of deputies to the Moscow and District
Soviets of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army
Deputies.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with a delegation
from the crew of the torpedo-boat “Stalin” ofthe Red Baltic Fleet.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with leading
members of the staff of the Lenin Institute onquestions concerning the work of the Institute.
J. V. Stalin has an interview with the delegation
from the Communist Party of France which had
arrived for the Fifth Enlarged Plenum of theE.C.C.I.
J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Czecho-
slovak Commission of the Enlarged Plenum
of the E.C.C.I. on “The Communist Party
of Czechoslovakia.”
At a meeting of the workers of Section No. 1 of
the Locomotive Service of the Northern Railway,J. V . Stalin is elected a deputy to the Moscow
Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army
Men’s Deputies.
J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Czecho-
slovak subcommission of the Fifth Enlarged
April  1
April  3
April  6
April  7Plenum of the E.C.C.I. on the situation in the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia.
J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Yugo-
slav Commission of the Enlarged Plenum ofthe E.C.C.I. on “Concerning the NationalQuestion in Yugoslavia.”
J. V . Stalin has an interview with a delegation
from the Kirghiz Republic on the situation in
Kirghizia.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with representa-
tives of the editorial board of the newspaperBednota  on questions concerning the work of
the peasant department of that newspaper.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with a delegation
of workers from Section No. 1 of the LocomotiveService of the Northern Railway who had cometo hand him his credentials as a deputy to the
Moscow Soviet.
In a telegram to S. M. Kirov, Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Partyof Azerbaijan, J. V . Stalin greets the Com-munist Party of Azerbaijan on the occasion
of its fifth anniversary. The telegram was pub-
lished in Bakinsky Rabochy  (Baku Worker ),
No. 75, April 5, 1925.
J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Organ-
ising Bureau of the Central Committee of the
R.C.P.(B.) on “The Active of the Young Com-
munist League in the Countryside.”
J. V . Stalin takes part in a meeting of the
E.C.C.I.
April  13
April  15
April  23-30
April  27-29
May  1
May  2
May  5
May  6
May  7-11, 16
May  9J. V . Stalin has an interview with a delegation
from the First All-Union Conference of Pro-letarian Students.
J. V. Stalin writes an address “To the First
All-Union Conference of Proletarian Students.”The address was published in Pravda , No. 87,
April 16, 1925.
J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the Four-
teenth Conference of the R.C.P.(B.).
J. V . Stalin is present at the May Day military
parade and a demonstration of the workingpeople in the Red Square, Moscow.
J. V. Stalin sends greetings to the editorial
board of Pravda Vostoka  (Tashkent) on the
occasion of Press Day. The greetings were
published in a special issue of Pravda Vostoka ,
May 6, 1925.
J. V. Stalin has an interview with a delega-
tion of workers from the October Railway.
J. V. Stalin writes a message of greetings to the
newspaper Pod Znamenem Ilyicha  (Under Ilyich ’s
Banner ), organ of the Communist University of
the Toilers of the East, in which he definesthe tasks confronting that newspaper.
J. V . Stalin takes part in the proceedings of
the Twelfth All-Russian Congress of Soviets.
J. V . Stalin delivers a report on “The Results
of the Work of the Fourteenth Conference of
May  11
May  13-20
May  18
May  20May  21
May  22
May  23
May  25the R.C.P.(B.)” at a meeting of the active
of the Moscow organisation of the R.C.P.(B.).
The Twelfth All-Russian Congress of Soviets
elects J. V . Stalin a member of the All-RussianCentral Executive Committee.
The first session of the All-Russian C.E.C.,
Twelfth Convocation, elects J. V . Stalin a mem-
ber of the Presidium of the All-Russian C.E.C.
J. V . Stalin takes part in the proceedings of
the Third Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R.
J. V. Stalin speaks at a meeting of students at
the Communist University of the Toilers of
the East on “The Political Tasks of the Uni-versity of the Peoples of the East.”
The Third Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R.
elects J. V. Stalin a member of the Union So-
viet of the Central Executive Committee of
the U.S.S.R.
The first session of the C.E.C. of the U.S.S.R.
elects J. V . Stalin a member of the Presidiumof the C.E.C. of the U.S.S.R.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with delegates
from the Turkmenian and Uzbek republics atthe Third Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with leading work-
ers of Party and Soviet bodies in the South-
Ossetian and North-Ossetian Autonomous Re-gions.
J. V. Stalin has an interview with delegates at
the Third Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R.
May  29
June  1
June  2
June  3
June  5
June  9
June  13
June  27from the Turkmenian S.S.R. and the Tajik
and Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Re-
publics on the situation in these republics.
J. V . Stalin takes part in a meeting of the
Presidium of the C.E.C. of the U.S.S.R.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with leading
officials of the Uzbek S.S.R. and of the
Daghestan and Tajik Autonomous Soviet Social-
ist Republics.
J. V . Stalin, V. M. Molotov and A. A. Andreyev
send a letter to the members of the editorial
board of Komsomolskaya Pravda .
J. V . Stalin has an interview with students of
the courses organised by the Central Commit-tee of the R.C.P.(B.) for uyezd Party workers.
J. V. Stalin takes part in a meeting of the Pre-
sidium of the C.E.C. of the U.S.S.R.
J. V . Stalin speaks at the Sverdlov Communist
University, answering questions put to himby students of the University.
J. V . Stalin’s greetings “To the Sverdlov Uni-
versity (On the Occasion of the Second Grad-
uation of Students of Basic and Trade-UnionCourses)” are published in Pravda , No. 132.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with the chairmen
of the Tambov, Orel, V oronezh and Kursk
Gubernia Executive Committees of Soviets on themeasures to be taken to rehabilitate the nation-
al economy in the black-earth belt.
June  30
July  3
July  4
July  29
August  18
September  12
September  15
September  19J. V . Stalin’s article “The National Question
Once Again (Concerning the Article by Se-
mich)” is published in the magazine Bolshevik ,
No. 11-12.
At a meeting of the Presidium of the E.C.C.I.,
J. V . Stalin is elected to the commission onthe Polish question.
J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Polish
Commission of the E.C.C.I. on the situation
in the Communist Party of Poland.
J. V . Stalin’s interview with Mr. Fuse, Japa-
nese correspondent of the newspaper Nichi-
Nichi , on “The Revolutionary Movement in
the East” is published in Pravda , No. 150.
The Presidium of the E.C.C.I. elects J. V .
Stalin to the commission on the German question.
J. V. Stalin sends a letter to the Cossacks of
Goryachevodskaya Stanitsa acknowledging the
receipt of the certificate of his election as an
Honorary Cossack of that stanitsa on the occa-sion of its centenary. The letter was published
in the newspaper Terek , No. 189, August 22,
1925.
J. V . Stalin writes a letter to V . M. Molotov
concerning the anti-Bolshevik character ofZinoviev’s article “The Philosophy of the
Epoch.”
J. V . Stalin writes an answer to a note by
Comrade Yermakovsky.
J. V . Stalin’s greetings to the patients at the
Uch-Dere Sanatorium are published in the news-paper Sovietsky Yug  (Soviet South ), No. 215.
September  24
September  28
October  3-10
October  10
October  12
October  14
October  15
October  19The Political Bureau of the Central Committee
of the R.C.P.(B.) elects J. V . Stalin to thecommission set up to examine the proposalsof the Central Asian Bureau of the C.C. of theR.C.P.(B.) for land and irrigation reform inCentral Asia.
J. V. Stalin discusses with representatives of
the Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Re-public the national and state structure of thatrepublic.
J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
J. V . Stalin writes a letter to Klara Zetkin
concerning the state of affairs in the Commu-nist Party of Germany.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with members
of the staffs of the Agitation and PropagandaDepartments of the Tiflis and Nizhni-Novgo-rod Party Committees, participants in theconference of heads of Agitation and Propa-
ganda Departments convened by the Central
Committee of the R.C.P.(B.).
J. V . Stalin has an interview with participants
in the conference of Agitation and PropagandaDepartments convened by the Central Commit-
tee of the R.C.P.(B.).
The announcement, signed by J. V. Stalin, of
the convocation of the Fourteenth Congress ofthe R.C.P.(B.) is published in Pravda , No. 236.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with representa-
tives of the South-Ossetian and North-Osse-
October  23
October  29
October  31
November  2tian Autonomous Regions on the question of
uniting the two regions.
J. V . Stalin speaks at a meeting of the Organ-
ising Bureau of the Central Committee of theR.C.P.(B.) on the work of the Tatar Party
organisation.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with the Chairman
of the Kursk Gubernia Executive Committee ofSoviets and the Secretary of the Kursk GuberniaParty Committee on questions concerning work
in the countryside.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with the manager
of the Tula Small Arms Factory on questionsconcerning the work of the factory.
J. V . Stalin sends greetings to the workers at
the Baltic Shipbuilding Yard on the occasionof the launching of the first Soviet-built timber-carrier, the “Comrade Stalin.” The greetingswere published in Izvestia , No. 246, October 27,
1925.
Komsomolskaya Pravda , No. 133, publishes
J. V . Stalin’s answers to questions put to himby the editorial board concerning the tasksof the Young Communist League.
J. V. Stalin visits M. V . Frunze, then lying
ill in the Botkin (Soldatenkov) Hospital.
J. V . Stalin visits the Botkin Hospital where
the body of M. V. Frunze was lying in state.
J. V . Stalin attends the Frunze memorial meet-
ing in the Bolshoi Theatre.
November  3
November  7
November  9
Before  Novem-
ber  15
November  16
November  18
November  29
December  1J. V. Stalin delivers a speech at the funeral
of M. V . Frunze in the Red Square.
J. V . Stalin’s article “October, Lenin, and
the Prospects of Our Development” is pub-
lished in Pravda , No. 255.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with leading
functionaries of the Central Committee and
Moscow Committee of the R.L.Y .C.L. onquestions concerning the work of the League.
A Party meeting of the workers at the Stalin
Workshops of the October Railway elects
J. V . Stalin a delegate to the Fifth Party
Conference of the Sokolniki District of Moscow.
J. V . Stalin has an interview with the leaders
of the Azerbaijan sections of the Metalworkers’and Miners’ Unions on the conditions of the
workers.
J. V . Stalin takes part in a meeting of
the Presidium of the C.E.G. of the U.S.S.R.
J. V . Stalin sends greetings to the Fifth Party
Conference of the Sokolniki District of Moscow.
The greetings were published in the newspaperGudok  (Siren ), No. 265, November 20, 1925.
J. V . Stalin sends a telegram to Comrade Yaro-
slavsky in Leningrad concerning the prepara-
tions for the Twenty-Second Gubernia Confer-
ence of the Leningrad organisation of theR.C.P.(B.).
The Twenty-Second Gubernia Conference of
the Leningrad organisation of the R.C.P.(B.)
elects J. V . Stalin an honorary member of
the presidium of the conference.
December  5
December  8
December  9
December  13
December  15The Fourteenth Gubernia Conference of the
Moscow organisation of the R.C.P.(B.) elects
J. V. Stalin an honorary member of the presid-
ium of the conference.
J. V . Stalin’s letter to the editorial board of Bed-
nota  is published in No. 2,278 of that newspaper.
J. V . Stalin writes a letter to the presidium of
the Twenty-Second Gubernia Conference ofthe Leningrad organisation of the R.C.P.(B.).The letter was published in the magazineKrasnaya Letopis  (Red Annals ), No. 1 (58),
1934.
The Twenty-Second Gubernia Conference of
the Leningrad organisation of the R.C.P.(B.)elects J. V . Stalin a member of the LeningradGubernia Party Committee.
The Fourteenth Gubernia Conference of the
Moscow organisation of the R.C.P.(B.) elects
J. V . Stalin a delegate to the Fourteenth Con-
gress of the R.C.P.(B.).
J. V . Stalin signs the appeal by members
of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.)to the “new opposition” concerning the main-tenance of Party unity.
J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the ple-
num of the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.)and delivers a speech on the subject of chang-ing the name of the R.C.P.(B.) to Commu-nist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)—C.P.S.U.(B.).
December  18-31
December  18
December  20
December  28
December  31J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the
Fourteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.).
J. V . Stalin delivers the political report of the
Central Committee to the Fourteenth Congressof the C.P.S.U.(B.).
J. V . Stalin replies to the discussion of the
Fourteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.) on
the political report of the Central Committee.
J. V . Stalin makes a statement concerning the
draft resolution on the Central Committee’s
report to the Fourteenth Congress of theC.P.S.U.(B.). The statement was published
in Pravda , No. 298, December 31, 1925.
J. V . Stalin directs the proceedings of the
emergency plenum of the Central Committee
of the Party and delivers a speech on the news-paper Leningradskaya Pravda  owing to the
“new opposition” utilising that newspaper
for their factional anti-Party aims.
The Fourteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.)
elects J. V . Stalin a member of the CentralCommittee of the C.P.S.U.(B.).
Printed   in  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics




