GENERAL POLITICAL LINE OF THE
COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU
Central Committee of The Communist Party of Peru
1988
=====第1页=====
Contents
1
3
Fundamental Documents
1.1
On Marxism-Leninism-Maoism
3
1.2
Concerning Gonzalo Thought
14
Historical Context
15
1.2.1
16
1.2.2
Ideological Basis
16
1.2.3
Contents
17
1.2.4
What is Fundamental
Forged in the Two-Lined Struggle
17
1.2.5
17
1.3
Programme and Statues ..
17
1.3.1
Programme....
General Programme of the Democratic Revolution . ...
18
1.3.2
21
2
International Line
21
2.1
Introduction........
22
2.2
TheNewEra .......
24
2.3
The Process of the World Revolution .
27
2.4
Current Situation and Perspective
30
2.5
The International Communist Movement .
30
2.5.1 The Revolutionary Internationalist Movement. . 
36
3
Line of the Democratic Revolution
36
3.1
Introduction......
37
3.2
The Character of Contemporary Peruvian Society
43
3.3
Targets of the Democratic Revolution
44
3.4
Tasks of the Democratic Revolution
44
3.5
Social Classes in the Democratic Revolution .
46
3.6
Fundamental Contradictions in the Democratic Revolution
46
3.7
Stages of the Revolution ....
47
3.8
How the Democratic Revolution is Being Applied Today.....
50
4
Military Line
50
4.1
Introduction.......
51
4.2
People's War......
51
4.2.1
On the People's War in Peru
1
=====第2页=====
4.2.2
The Road of Surrounding the Cities from the Countryside
65
and the Revolutionary Support Bases
99
4.2.3
The ProtractedWar.
67
4.2.4
Construction of the People's Guerrilla Army
68
4.2.5
Strategy and Tactics..
73
5
Line of the Construction of the Three Instruments
73
5.1
Introduction. .
74
5.2
On the Construction of the Party....
78
5.3
On the Construction of the People's Guerrilla Army
80
5.4
On the Construction of the New State...
84
6
Mass Line
84
6.1
Introduction. ...
84
6.2
Reaffirmation of the Principal that "The Masses make History".
6.3
The Principal Aspectof Mass Work is Political Power, but the
87
Struggle for Revindications is Necessary.............
89
6.4
What Masses do we go to?.....................
91
6.5
Persist in the only Marxist-Leninist Tactic . ............
92
6.6
The Organization of the Masses...........
2
=====第3页=====
Chapter 1
Fundamental
Documents
1.1
On Marxism-Leninism-Maoism
Inthefurnaceofclassstruggle,theideologyoftheinternationalproletariat
emergedas Marxism,afterwards developedinto Marxism-Leninism and later
Marxism-eiism-MaoismTheeore,the cietifidologyoftheproletariat,
all-powerful becauseitis true,hasthrestagesorlandmarks inits dialectical
process of development:1) Marxism,2)Leninism,and3) Maoism. These three
stages are partof the same unity whichbegan withthe Communist Manifesto
one hundredandfortyyearsago,withtheheroiepicoftheclass struggle, in
fierceandfruitfultwo-linestruggleswithinthecommunistpartiesthemselves
and inthettanic workofthouhtandactionthatolytheworkinclasscould
generate. Today,three unfading lightsareoutstanding: Marx, Lenin, and Mao
Tse-tung who,through three grand leaps have armedus with the invincible
ideology of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, which today is principally Maoism.
Nevertheless,while Marxism-Leninism has obtained an acknowledgment of
its universal validity, Maoism is not completely acknowledged as the third stage.
Some simply deny its condition as such, while others only accept it as "Mao Tse-
tung Thought."In essence, both positions,with the obvious diferences between
them, deny the general development of Marxism made by Chairman Mao Tse-
tung. The denialof the "ism”characterof Maoism denies its universal validity
and, consequently, its condition as the third, new, and superior stage of the ide-
ology of the international proletariat:Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,principally
Maoism, that we uphold, defend, and apply.
As an INTRODUCTION,in orderto better understand Maoism and the
necessity to struggleforit,letus remember Lenin. He taughtusthat as the
revolutionadvanced tothe East itexpressedspecificconditionsthat,whilethey
did not negate principles or laws, were new situations that Marxism could not
ignore, upon the risk of putting the revolution in danger of a defeat. Notwith-
standing the uproaragainst what is new by pedantic and bookish intellectuals,
who are stuffed withliberalismandfalse Marxism,the only justand correct
3
=====第4页=====
thing to do is to apply Marxism to the concrete conditions and to solve the
new situations and problems that every revolution necessarily faces. In the face
of the horrified and pharisaic "defensesof the ideology, the class, and of the
people”thatrevisionists,opportunists and renegades proclaim,or the furious
attacks against Marxism by brutalized academicians and hacks of the old order
who are debasedbythe rottenbourgeois ideologyandblindly defend theold
society on which they are parasites. Lenin also said clearly that the revolution
inthe East would present new and great surprises to the greater amazement
of the worshipers of following only the well-trodden paths who are incapable of
seeing the new; and, as we all know, he trusted the Eastern comrades to resolve
the problems that Marxism had not yet resolved.
Furthermore,we must keep well in mind that when Comrade Stalin justly
and correctly stated that we had entered the stage of Leninism as the develop-
ment of Marxism, there was also opposition by those who rend their garments in
a supposed defense of Marxism. There were also those who said that Leninism
wasonlyapplicabletothebackwardcountries.But,inthemidstof struggle,
practice has conscrated Leniism as a great developmentof Marxism, and thus
the proletarianideologyshone victoriously inthe faceofthe world as Marxism-
Leninism.
Today,MaoismceilatuioAllwilikeMarim,e
alwaysvdurgdilmillo
be acknowledged.
As for the CONTEXT in which Chairman Mao Tse-tung developed and
Maoism was forged,on an international level it wasonthe basisof imperial-
ism, world war,heaioaltaamovmioaliberation
movement, the struggle between Marxism and revisionism, and the restoration
of capitalism in the USSR. Three big historical landmarks must be emphasized
inthe present century: first,the October Revolutionof1917, which opened
the era of the world proletarian revolution; second,the triumph of the Chinese
Revolution, in1949,which changed the correlationof forces in favor of social-
ism;and third, the great proletarian cultural revolution,which began in1966
as the continuationof the revolution under the proletarian dictatorship in or-
der to maintain the revolutionary course towards Communism. It is enough to
emphasize that Chairman Mao led two of these glorious historical feats.
In China, as the center of world revolution, Maoism was concretely expressed
within the most complex convergenceof contradictions,andthe intense and
ruthless class struggle which was marked by the pretensions of the imperialist
powers of tearing and dividing up Chinaafter the collapseof the Manchurian
Empire (1911), the anti-imperialistmovementof1919, the revoltsof the great
peasant masses, the twenty-two years of armed struggle of the democratic re-
olution,the great contestforthebuildingand developmentof socialism and
the ten years of revolutionary storms for carrying forward the Cultural Revolu-
tion,as wellasthesharpesttwo-linestruggle withinthe Communist Partyof
China,especiallyagainst revisionism. All this wasframed withinthe interna-
tional situation described above.Itisoutof thisaggregateof historical deeds
that we have to extract four events of extraordinary importance: The founding
4
=====第5页=====
of the Communist Party of China (CPC) in 1921; the Autumn Harvest uprising
which initiated the path from the countryside to the city, in 1925; the founding
of the People's Republic, 1949; and the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution
(GPCR), from 1966-1976; in all of which Chairman Mao was a protagonist and
the acknowledged leader of the Chinese Revolution.
We can say from Chairman Mao Tse-tung's biography that he was born on
December 26th 1893, opening his eyes to an agitated world scorched bythe
flames of war; son of peasants, he was seven years old when "Boxer Rebellions"
began; a student at a Teachers'Training College,he was in his eighteenth year
when the empire collapsed and he enlisted himself as a soldier, later to become
a great organizer of peasants and of the youth in Hunan, his native province.
Founder of the Communist Party and of the Red Army of workers and peasants,
he established the path of surrounding the cities from the countryside developing
People's War as the military theory of the proletariat. He was the theoretician of
New Democracy and founder of the People's Republic; a promoter of the Great
Leap Forwardandof the developmentof socialism;the leaderof the struggle
against the contemporary revisionismof Khrushchev and his henchmen, leader
and headofthe GreatProletarianCultural Revolution. Theseare landmarks
of a life devotedthoroughlyand solelytothe revolution. The proletariathas
seen threegigantictiumphsinthiscentury: Twoofthem belongto Chairman
Mao, and if one is glory enough, two are even more.
On the CONTENT of Maoism,ofits substance,we must pointout the
following basic issues:
1. Theory. Marxism hasthree parts: Marxistphilosophy,Marxist political
economy,andscientificsocialism. Thedevelopmentofallthesethree
components gives rise to a great qualitative leap of Marxism as a whole,
as a unity on a superior level, which implies a new stage. Consequently,
the essential thing is to show that Chairman Mao, as can be seen in theory
and practice, has generated such a great qualitative leap. Let us highlight
this with the following points:
In Marxist philosophy he developedthe essenceof dialectics,the lawof
contradiction,establishingitastheonlyfundamentallaw;andbesides
his profound dialectical understanding of the theoryof knowledge, whose
center are thetwo leaps that make upits law from practice to knowledge
and vice versa, but with knowledge to practice being the main one). We
emphasizethathemastrfullappliedthlawofcontradictionin politics;
and moreoverhebrought philosophytothemassesof people,fulfilling the
task that Marx left.
In Marxist politicaleconomy,Chairman Mao applied dialecticsto analyze
the relationshipbtwethebaseandsuprstructure,and,continuingthe
struggleof Marxism-Leninismagainsttherevisionistthesisofthe"pro-
ductive forces",heconcludedthatthe superstructure,consciousnes,can
modify thebase,and thatwith political powerthe productive forces can
be developed.Bydeveloping theLeninistideathatpoliticsisthe con-
centrated expression of economics, he established that politics must be in
5
=====第6页=====
command, (applicable on all levels) and that political work is the life-line
of economic work; which takes us to the true handling of political economy,
not just a simple economic policy.
Despite its importance, an issue which is often sidestepped, especially by
those whoface democratic revolutions, is the Maoist thesis of bureau-
cratic capitalism;that is, the capitalism whichis being developed inthe
oppressed nations by imperialism along with different degrees of underly-
ing feudalism, or even pre-feudal stages. This is a vital problem, mainly
in Asia, Africa and Latin America, since a good revolutionary leadership
derives from its understanding, especially when the confiscation of bureau-
cratic capital forms the economic basis for carrying forward the socialist
revolution as the second stage.
But the main thing is that Chairman Mao Tse-tunghas developedthe
political economy of socialism. Of the utmost importance is his criticism
of socialist construction in the Soviet Union, as well as his theses on how
to develop socialism in China: Taking agriculture as the base and indus-
try as the leading economic force, promoting industrialization guided by
the relationship between heavy industry, light industry and agriculture;
taking heavy industry as the center of economic construction and simulta-
neously paying full attention to light industry and agriculture. The Great
Leap Forward and the conditions for its execution should be highlighted:
One, the political line that gives it a just and correct course; two, small,
medium,and large organizational forms in a greater to lesser quantity,
respectively;three,a great drive, a gigantic efort of the masses of peo-
ple in order to put it in motion and to take it through to success, a leap
forward whose results are valued more for the new process set in mo-
tion and its historical perspective than its immediate achievements, and
its linkage with agricultural collectivization and the people's communes.
Finally, we must bear well in mind his teachings on the objectivity and
the subjectivity in understanding and handling the laws of socialism, that
because the few decades of socialism have not permitted it to see its com-
plete development, and therefore a better understanding of its laws and its
specification, and principally the relationship that exists between revolu-
tion and the economic process, embodied in the slogan "grasp revolution
and promote production". Despite its transcendental importance,this
development of Marxist political economy has received scant attention.
In scientific socialism, Chairman Mao further developed the theory of so-
cial classes analyzing them on economic, political, and ideological planes.
He upheld revolutionary violence as a universal law without any exception
whatsoever;revolutionasaviolentdisplacementofoneclass byanoher,
thusestablishingthegreatthesisthat"politicalpowergrowsoutothe
barrel of a gun".Heresolved the questionof theconquestof political powr
in the oppressed nations through the path of surrounding the cities from
the countrysideestablisinitsgenerallaws.Hedeinedanddevloed
thetheoryoftheclass strugglewithinsocialism in whichhebrilliantly
6
=====第7页=====
demonstrated that the antagonistic struggle between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie,between the socialist roadand the capitalistroad, and
between socialism and capitalism continues. That in socialism it was not
concretely determined who would defeat whom,that it was a problem
whose solution demands time,the unfolding of a process of restoration
and counter-restoration, in order for the proletariat to strongly hold polit-
ical power definitely through the proletarian dictatorship; and, finally and
principally,the grandiose solutionof historical transcendence,the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution as the continuation of the socialist revo-
lution under the proletarian dictatorship.
These basic questions,simply and plainly stated but known and undeni-
able, show the Chairman's development of the integral parts of Marxism,
and the evident raising of Marxism-Leninism to a new, third and superior
stage: Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, principally Maoism.
Continuing with this brief synthesis,letus lookatotherspecific points
which, although deriving from the above, should be considered even if only
enumeratively, to emphasize and pay due attention to them.
2. The New Democratic Revolution. Firstly, it is a development of the Marx-
ist theoryof the State,establishing thre typesof dictatorships:
• Dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, in the old bourgeois democracies like
the United States, a type in which the dictatorships of the oppressed
nations such as the Latin American ones can be assimilated;
Proletarian dictatorships, liketheones in theSovietUnion orin
China before the usurpation of power by the revisionists; and
New Democracy, as a joint dictatorship based on the worker-peasant
alliance, led by the proletariat headed up by the Communist Party,
which was formed in China during its democratic revolution, and
which is concretely expressed in Perú today through the People's
Committees, in the base areas and in the People's Republic of New
Democracy information. It isfundamental to emphasize,within
this developmentof the theoryof the state, thekeydifferentiation
between a state system as a dictatorship ofa class or classesthat
hold political power, which is principal, and a system of government,
which is understood as an organization for the exercise of political
power.
On the other hand, New Democracy, one of the extraordinary devel-
opments made by Chairman Mao, masterfully materializes or us the
bourgeoisrevolutionofanewtype,whichonlytheproletariatcan
lead.In synthsisitisthedemocatic revolutio withinthenewea
of world proletarian revolution in which we evolve. The New Demo-
cratic Revolution impliesanew economy, a new politics,and a ew
culture,bvoultwinladulh ew
one with arms, the only way to transform the world.
7
=====第8页=====
Finally, it is important to emphasize that New Democracy is a demo-
cratic revolution. Although it mainly fulfills the democratic tasks, it
also complementarily advances in some socialist tasks,so thatthe
question of two stages, democratic and socialist, which corresponds
to countries like ours, is thoroughly solved by guaranteeing that once
the democratic stage is concluded, it will be continued as a socialist
revolution, without any intermissions or interruptions.
3. The three instruments. The problem of the construction of the instru-
ments of therevolution presents the Party with the problem of under-
standing the interrelationship between the Party, the army and the united
front;andtounderstandand correctlyhandletheinterconnected con-
struction of the three instruments in the midst of war or in the defense of
the new State based on the power of the armed people, expressing in that
way a just and correct task of leadership. Their construction is guided by
the principle that a just and correct ideological line decides everything,
and it isonthis ideological-political basisthattheorganizational con-
struction is simultaneously developed in the midst of the struggle between
the proletarian line and thebourgeois line and within the storm of the
class struggle, mainly in war, as the principal form of current or potential
struggle.
Regarding the Party, Chairman Mao starts from the necessity of the Com-
munist Party, a new type of party, a party of the proletariat. Today, we
would say a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Party: a party whose aim is to con-
quer political power and to defend it, and therefore it is inextricably bound
to people's war in order to initiate it, develop it or wage it to defend it-
self. A party sustained by the masses of people, be it by way of people's
war which is a war of the masses, or by the united front which, being a
frontof classes, is based on the broad masses. The Party develops and
changes itself according to the stages of the revolution and the periods that
these stages may have. The driving of its development is the contradiction
which materializes in its heart as the two-line struggle, the proletarian line
and the bourgeois or in general non-proletarian line, which is in essence
and mainly a struggle against revisionism. This leads to the decisive im-
portanceof ideology in the lifeof the partyand to the developmentof
rectification campaigns that serve a greater adjustmentof all the systems
of party organizations and the membership to the just and correct ideolog-
ical and political lines, guaranteeing the predominanceof the proletarian
line andkeepingthePartyleadershipinitsirongripThePartyseres
the establishmentof political power orthe proletariat as theleading class
of the New Democracy,and principally fortheestablishment,strengthen-
ing and developmentofthe proletariadictatorship,andthroughculural
revolutions the conquestof the great,final goal: Communism. Because of
this, the Party must lead everything in an all-around way.
The revolutionaryarmyisof a newtype.Itis anarmyforthe fulfill-
mentof the political tasks thatthe Partyestablishes in accordance with
8
=====第9页=====
the interests of the proletariat and the people. This characteristic is con-
cretely expressed in three tasks: To combat, to produce in order to pose
no parasitical burden, and to mobilize the masses. It is an army based
on the political development of the proletariat's ideology, from Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism (today), andfrom the general political line as well as
the military one that the Party may establish. It is an army based on peo-
ple and not on weapons, an army that surged from the masses with whom
it has always been linked, serving them wholeheartedly, which allows it to
move among the people like fish in the water. Without a people's army
the people have nothing, said Chairman Mao, at the same time he taught
us the necessity of the Party's absolute leadership over the army and his
great principle: The Party commands the gun and we will never permit it
to be otherwise. Besides having thoroughly established the principles and
norms for the construction of a new type of army, the Chairman himself
called for preventing the use of the army for the restoration of capitalism
by usurping the leadership through a counterrevolutionary coup d'etat
and, developing Lenin's thesis on the people's militia, he carried out far-
ther than anyone the general policy of arming the people, thus opening a
breach and pointing out the path towards the armed sea of masses that
will lead us to the definite emancipation of the people and the proletariat.
It was Chairman Mao who for the first time developed a complete theory
on the united front and established its laws. A front of social classes based
onthe worker-peasant alliance as a guaranteeof the proletariat's hege-
mony in the revolution, which is led by the proletariat represented by the
Communist Party; in synthesis, a united front under the leadership of the
Communist Party, a united front for the people's war,for the revolution,
for the conquest of power for the proletariat and the people. In synthesis,
the unitedfront is the groupingof the revolutionary forces againstthe
counter-revolutionary forces in order to wage the struggle between rev-
olution and counter-revolution mainly through the armed people's war.
The unitedfront,obviously, is not the same in every stageof the revo-
lution and,furthermore, it has its specifications according to the various
historical periods of each stage;likewise,the unitedfront in a concrete
revolution does not equal the one on a world level, although both follow
the same general laws. Apartfrom this, it is important to emphasize the
relation between the front and the State that Chairman Mao established
when the war of resistance against Japan was evolving, setting forth that
the unitedfrontis a formof joint dictatorship,a questionthat deservs
to be especially studied by those who face democratic revolutions.
4. The People'sWaristhemilitarytheoroftheinternationalproltariat;
in it are summarized,forthefirsttimein a systematicand complete
form,thetheoreticaland practicalexperienceofthestruggles,millitary
actions, and wars waged bythe proletariat,andthe prolonged experience
of thepeople'sarmedstruggleandespeciallyoftheincessantwars in
China. It is with Chairman Mao thatthe proletariatattains its military
9
=====第10页=====
theory;nevertheless,there is much confusion and misunderstanding on
this issue. And much of it springs from how the People's War in China is
seen. Generally, it is considered derisively and contemptuously simply as
a guerrilla war; this alone denotes a lack of understanding. Chairman Mao
pointed out that guerrilla warfare achieves a strategic feature; but due to
its essential uidity, the development of guerrilla warfare is not understood
as it exists, how it develops mobility, a war of movements, of positions,
how it unfoldsgreatplansof thestrategicoffensive andthe seizureof
small, mid-sized, and big cities, with millions of inhabitants, combining the
attack from outside with the insurrection from within. Thus, in conclusion,
the four periods of the Chinese revolution, and mainly from the agrarian
war until the people's war of liberation, considering the anti-Japanese war
of resistance between both,showsthevarious aspectsand complexities
of the revolutionary war waged during more than twenty years amidst
a huge population and an immense mobilization and participation of the
masses. In that war there are examples of every kind; and what is principal
has been extraordinarily studied and its principles, laws, strategy, tactics,
rules, etc. masterfully established. It is, therefore, in this fabulous crucible
and on what was established by Marxism-Leninism that Chairman Mao
developed the military theory of the proletariat: The People's War.
We must fully bear in mindthat subsequently,Chairman Maohimself,
aware of the existence of atomic bombs and missiles and with China al-
ready having them, sustained and developed people's war in order to wage
it under the new conditions of atomic weapons and of war against pow-
ers and super-powers. In synthesis,people's war is the weapon of the
proletariat and of the people, even to confront atomic wars.
A key and decisive question is the understandingof the universal valid-
ity of people's war and its subsequent application taking into account the
different types of revolution and the specific conditions of each revolution.
To clarify this key issue it is important to consider that no insurrection
like thatof Petrograd,theanti-fascist resistance,orthe European guer-
rilla movements in the Second World War have been repeated, as well as
considering the armed struggles that are presently being waged in Euroe.
In the final analysis, the October Revolution was not only an insurection
but a revolutionary war that lasted for several years. Consequently, in the
imperialistcountriestherevolution can only beconceived asa revoltion-
ary war which today is simply people's war.
Finally,today morethanever,we Communists and revolutionaries, the
proletariatandthe people,needtoforgeourselvesin: Yes. We are
adherenttromcofelr wr
it is not badthing; it is good thing.It isMarxist"; which means adhering
to the invincibility of people's war.
is the mosttranscendentaldevelopmentofMarxism-Leninism made 
10
=====第11页=====
Chairman Mao;it is the solution to the great pending problem of the
continuation of the revolution under the proletarian dictatorship: "It rep-
resents a more profound and wider new stage in the development of the
socialist revolution in our country."
What wasthe situation that presented itself? As stated in the Decision
of the Communist Party of China on the Great Proletarian Cultural Rev-
olution states: "Although overthrown, the bourgeoisie still tries to avail
itself of the old ideas,culture, habits and waysof the exploiting classes
in order to corrupt the masses and to conquer the minds of the people in
its endeavors to restore its power. The proletariat must do exactly the
opposite:Itmustdeal merciless,frontalblowstoall the challengesby
the bourgeoisie in the ideological arena and change the spiritual compo-
sition of the whole society using its own new ideas,culture, habits and
ways. Our present aim is to crush,through struggle, those who occupy
leading posts and follow the capitalist road, to criticize and repudiate the
reactionary bourgeois authorities'in the academic fields, to criticize and
repudiate the ideology of the bourgeoisie and other exploiting classes, and
to transform education,literature,and art and the restof areas of the
superstructure that do not correspond to the economic base of socialism,
in order to facilitate the consolidation and the development of the socialist
system."
It was in these conditions thatthe most Earth-shaking political process
and the greatest mass mobilization the world has ever seenbroke out,
and whose objectives were thus outtlined by Chairman Mao:  "The present
GPCR is completely necessary and very timely to consolidate the prole-
tarian dictatorship, to prevent the restoration of capitalism, and to build
socialism."
We also emphase two questions:
• The GPCR implies a landmark in the development of the proletar-
ian dictatorship towards the proletariat's securing political power,
concretely expressed in the Revolutionary Committees; and
The restoration of capitalism in China after the 1976 counter-revolutionary
coup is not a negation of the GPCR but is plainly part of the con-
tention between restoration and counter-restoration, and, on the con-
trary,it shows us the transcendental historical importance of the
GPCR in the inexorable march of mankind towards Communism.
World Revolution. Chairman Mao emphasizes the importance of the
world revolution as a unity, on the basis that revolution is the main
trend while the decompositionof imperialism is greater each da,
and the role played by the masses grows more immense each year,
strengthbelantratetharuthEthlac
Communism or nobody does. Within this specific perspective in the
era of imperialism, the great historical moment of the"next 50 to 100
11
=====第12页=====
years" , and within this context the opening period of struggle against
Yankee imperialism and Soviet social-imperialism, paper tigers that
contend for hegemony and threaten the world with an atomic war,
in theface of which, firstly we must condemn it, and secondly, we
must prepare ourselves beforehand in order to oppose it with peo-
ple's war and make the revolution. On the other hand, starting from
the historical importance of the oppressed nations and, furthermore,
fromtheir perspectiveboth in the economic and political relation-
ships that are evolving on account of the process of decomposition of
imperialism, Chairman Mao stated his thesis that "three worlds de-
lineate themselves". All of which leads to the necessity of developing
the strategy and tactics of world revolution. Regrettably, we know
little oralmost nothing about Chairman Mao's writings and state-
ments on these transcendental questions; nevertheless, the very little
that is known shows the grand perspectives which he watched closely
and the great outlines that we mustfollow in order to understand
and serve the proletarian world revolution
Superstructure,ideology, culture, and education. These and other
related issues have been subtly and deeply studied by Chairman Mao.
For that reason, this is also another basic question that deserves
attention.
In conclusion, the contents seen in these fundamental issues show clearly to
whoever wants to see and understand that we have, therefore, a new, third, and
superior stageof Marxism: Maoism;andthatto bea Marxist in these days
demands to be a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist and mainly Maoist.
All that has been explained in the contents leads us to two questions:
What is fundamental in Maoism? Political Power is fundamental in Maoism.
Political power for the proletariat, power for the dictatorship of the proletariat,
power based on an armed force led by the Communist Party. More explicitly:
1. Political power under the leadership of the proletariat in the democratic
revolution;
2. Political power for the dictatorship of the proletariat in the socialist and
cultural revolutions;
3. Political powerbasedonanarmedforce ledbythe Communist Party,
conquered and defended through people's war.
And, what is Maoism? Maoism is the elevation of Marxism-Leninism to a
new,third,and superiorstage in thestruggle for proletarian leadership of the
democratic revolution, the development of the construction of socialism and the
continuationof the revolution under the proletarian dictatorship as a proletarian
cultural revolution; when imperialism deepens its decomposition and revolution
has become the main tendencyof history, amidstthe most complex and largest
wars seen to date andtheimplacable struggle against contemporary revisionism.
12
=====第13页=====
On the STRUGGLE AROUND MAOISM. Briefy, the struggle in China for
establishing Mao Tse-tung Thought began in 1935 at the Tsunyi Meeting, when
Chairman Mao assumed the leadership of the Communist Party of China. In
1945 the VII Congress agreed that the CPC was guided by Marxism-Leninism
Mao Tse-tung Thought, a specification suppressed by the VIII Congress, since
a rightist line prevailed in it. The IX Congress in 1969 resumed the GPCR and
ratified that the CPC is guided by Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought;
that was as far as it advanced.
On an international level, it acquiredinfuence from the1950sonwards; but
it is with the GPCR that it intensely spread out and its prestige rose powerfully
and Chairman Mao was acknowledged as the leader of the world revolution and
originator of a new stage in Marxism-Leninism; thus, a great number of Com-
munist Parties assumed the denomination of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung
Thought． On the world level, Maoism confronted contemporary revisionism
openly unmaskingitprofoundlyandforcefully,and likewiseit didso inthe
CPC's own ranks,allofwhichraisedthe Chairman's greatred bannerstil
more:The new,third, and superiorstageof the ideologyof the international
proletariat.Atpresent(1988),Maoismconfrontsthetripleattackof Soviet,
Chinese and Albanian revisionism. But today, even among those who acknowl-
edgee o
there are somewhobelivethat warestllinthestageof Marxism-Leninism,
and others whoonly acceptMao Tse-tung Thoughtbut by no means Maoism.
In thiscountry,obviously,therevisionistswhofollowthebatonoftheir
diverse masters,Gorbachev,Teng,Aliaor Castrohave continuously attacked
Maoism; among them one must condemn, unmask, and implacably combat Del
Prado's callous revisionism and his gang,the so called "Peruvian Communist
Party"; the abject deviousness of theself-proclaimed“Communist Party ofPru,
Patria Roja" who, after raising themselves up as“great Maoists" became Teng's
servants,after having condemned him when he was defenestrated in 1976,as
well astheanti-Maoismof theso called"IzquierdaUnida”(United Left),in
whose heart swarmed all the revisionist and even anti-Marxist positions passed
off by false Marxists and opportunists of many kinds. We must raise Maoism as
a revealing mirror for revisionists in order to combat them implacably, working
forthe developmentof the People's War andthe triumph of the democratic
revolution underway, which is an unavoidable and unrenounceable task of a
strategic character.
The Communist Party of Peru, through the fraction led by President Gon-
zalo, who propelled its reconstitution,took up Marxism-Leninism- Mao Tse-
tung Thought in 1966; in 1979 the slogan"Uphold, defend, and apply Marxism-
Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought!";in1981:"Towards Maoism!"; and, in1982,
took Maoism as an integral partand superiordevelopmentof the ideology of
theinternational proletariat: Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.It is with the Peple's
War that we have understood more deeply what Maoism implies and we have
taken up the solemn pledge to"Uphold, defend, and apply Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism,principallyMaoism!"andtowork relentlesslyinhelpingtoplace it as
leaderand guideof the world revolution,thealways redand unfading banner
13
=====第14页=====
that is the guarantee of triumph for the proletariat, the oppressed nations, and
peoples of the world in their inexorable,combative marchof iron legions towards
the golden and always brilliant goal of Communism.
1.2 Concerning Gonzalo Thought
All revolutions,in their process of development,through the struggle of the
proletariat asthe leading classand,aboveall,thestruggleof the Communist
Party thatraises their unrenounceable class interests,giverise to a group of
leaders and principally one who represents and leads it, a leader with acknowl-
edged authority and infuence. In our reality this has taken shape, on account
of historical necessityand causality, in President Gonzalo, leaderof the Party
and of the revolution.
Moreover,and this is the basis upon which all leadership isformed,rev-
olutions giveriseto a thoughtthat guides them,whichis the resultofthe
applicationofhultoftedolgofthnialia
to the concrete conditions of each revolution;a guiding thought indispensable
to reachvictory andto conquer political power and, moreover,to continue
the revolutionand to maintain the coursealways towards theonly,greatgoal:
Communism;a guidingthoughtthatarriving ataqualitative leapof decisive
importanceforthervolutionaryproceswhichitleads,identifieitselfwth
the nameoftheonewhoshapedittheoreticallyand practically.Inoursitu-
t
Gonzalo'sguidinthoughtandlaterasGonzalo Thouht;becauseitis he
President who,creatively applying Marxism-Leninism-Maoism to the concrete
conditionsof Peruvian reality,has generated it;thusendowing the Party and
the revolution with an indispensable weapon which is guarantee of victory.
Gonzalo Thought has been forged through long yearsof intense,tenacious,
and incessant truggleto uphold,defend and apply Marxism-eniism-Maism,
to retakeMariátegui's pathandtodevelopit,to reconstitutethe Partyand,
principally,toinitiate,maintainand develop the People's War in Perúserving
the world revolution, and that Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, mainly Maoism be,
in theory and practice, its sole command and guide.
It is of substantive necessity for the party to study Gonzalo Thought for a
more just and correct understanding of the general political line, and mainly of
the military line, aiming at deepening the understanding of the particularities of
the Peruvian revolution, what is specific and particular that President Gonzalo
has masterfully emphasized. In this way we serve "the great plan to develop base
areas", the development of the People's War and the perspective of conquering
political power countrywide.
We must study Gonzalo Thought,starting from the historical contet that
generated it; examine theideological base which sustains it; explain its content,
more substantiallyexpressed in thegeneral political lineand inthemilitary
line which is its center; aiming at what is fundamental within it, the problem of
political power, of the seizure of power in Perú, which is inextricably linked to
14
=====第15页=====
the conquestof power by the proletariat in the whole world; and we must pay
close attention to its forging in the two-line struggle.
In synthesis,these fundamental issues can be dealt withby applying the
following scheme:
1.2.1 Historical Context
International Context
In relation to the historical events:
1. The development since the Second World War onwards;
2. the powerful national liberation movement and, within it, the process and
triumph of the Chinese Revolution;
3. The Cuban Revolution and its repercussion on Latin America;
4. The great struggle between Marxism and revisionism;
5. The GreatProletarianCulturalRevolution.Butthekeypointiosee
how,inthigreatclassstruggleontheworldlevelGonzalo Thought
considersthatthirstageoftheproletariadeologarises: Firstas
Marxism-Leninism, Mao Tse-tung Thought; then Marxism-Leninism-Mao
Tse-tung Thought;and later,itisdefinedasMaoism,understanding its
universalvalidity;andinthiswayreachingMarxism-Leninism-Maoism,
principally Maoism, as the present expressionof Marxism.
National Context
1. ThepostwarPeruviansocietyandwithinitthepoliticalstrugle,the
so called National DemocraticFront,theactionof APRA, Odras coup
d'etat andthe struggleagainsthis EightYear Rule,thecontestbetween
APRA followers and Communists;and particularly,the developmentof
bureaucraticcapitalism inthe1960sand partofthe1970sandthesharp
class strugglethataccompaniedit;"Velasquism”andits so-calledrvo-
lution,thecontentionandcollusionbetweenthecompradorbourgeoisie
and thebureaucraticbourgeoisie(factionsof thebigbourgeoisie),and
opportunism and mainly revisionism by their suporters;
2. The class struggle in the peasant movement;
3. The process of the working class movement;
4. The intellectual movement;
5. The armed struggle in the country, especially by the MIR [Movement of
the RevolutionaryeandtheELNNatioalLiberationArmy]i16,
as well astheir antecedents in Blanco, Vallejos,and Heraud; and
15
=====第16页=====
6.The problem of the Party: How a Partyfoundedona clear Marxist-
Leninist basis degeneratedinto arevisionist party,the needto retake
Mariátegui's path, develop it, and toreconstitute the Party, the Com-
munist Party of Perú that Mariátegui himself founded in 1928, and how
throughthis reconstitution a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Party wasbuilt.
Here it is fundamental how Gonzalo Thought profoundly understood Pe-
ruvian society, and focused on the crucial problem of bureaucratic capital-
ism, and saw the need to reconstitute the Party and to conquer Political
Power and defend it with the People's War.
1.2.2 Ideological Basis
Without Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,Gonzalo_ Thought cannotbe conceived,
because the latter is the creative application of the former to our reality. The
key question onthis point lies in the understandingof thehistorical process
of the developmentoftheproletarianideology,of itsthreestagesshaped in
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and with Maoism as principal;and, principally, it
is the application of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism as a universal truth to the con-
crete conditionsof the Peruvian revolution;hence Gonzalo Thought is specifi-
cally principalfortheCommunistPartyof Perandthervolutionitleads.
The guiding thought,having reachedaqualitative leapof decisiveimr-
tance for the Partyand therevolution,hasevolvedinto Gonzalo Thought, thus
stamping a milestone in the Party's life
1.2.3Contents
1. Theory. How it understands and applies the three integral parts of Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism, mainly Maoism; it emphasizesthe importancethat
Marxism gives to philosophy, the necessity of forming ourselves in it, and
especially itsapplicationof the lawof contradiction in thestudy of every
problem, always aiming at defining the principal aspect and the process of
things; in political economy,the concern aboutthe relationsof exploita-
tion, andspciallyabouturaucratiapitlism,rintngitltowrds
ripening the revolutionandthe repercussionof the People's War on the
base, as wellaspayingattentiontotheeconomicrelationsofimperialism,
looking forthirpoliticalconsequencesinscientifisocialismitcenters
on the People'sWarandits concreteexpression inthecountry,since it
always hasthe problemof political power in mindand,particularly, its
shaping and development as a New State.
2. On the contents. The mostsubstantiveanddeveloped partof Gonzalo
ThoughtisfoundintheParty'sgeneralpoliticallinethisthoughtdi-
rectly sustainsthrefore,thlineanditsfvelements,withtheinf
departure being how it understandsand maintainsthe Programme firmly
on course.
16
=====第17页=====
3. In Gonzalo Thought we must highlight the remarkablefulfillmentof the
demands stated by Chairman Mao:theoretical solidity, understanding of
history, and a good practical handling of politics.
1.2.4Whatis Fundamental
What is fundamental in Gonzalo Thought is the problem of political power; con-
cretely, the conquest of political power in Peru, wholly and completely through-
out the country, as a consequential application of the universal truth of Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism in our revolution. But, being a Communist thought, it under-
stands the conquest of political power in Perú as a part of the conquest of power
for the proletariat on a world level; and that the conquest of power in the coun-
try, shaping itself today in the People's Committees, base areas, and People's
Republic of New Democracy in formation within the perspective of establishing
the People's Republic of Peru, serves to establish the proletarian dictatorship in
our country, because without it, it is impossible to march towards Communism.
And,all of this isa function of firmly and decisively serving the setting upof
people's republics and mainly the proletarian dictatorship throughout the whole
world, under the leadership of Communist Parties, with revolutionary armies of
a new type, through people's war and the developmentof cultural revolutions,
so that Communism may illuminate all of the Earth.
1.2.5 Forged in the Two-Lined Struggle
Itis througha persistent,firm,and wisetwo-line struggle,defending the pro-
letarian line and defeating the opposing linesthat Gonzalo Thoughthas been
forged. Among the mostoutstanding struggles that deserve to be emphasized
are those waged against contemporary revisionism,represented here by Del
Pradoand his henchmen;those againstthe rightist liquidationism of Paredes
and his gang; those against left liquidationism headed by the one who was called
Sergio andhisself-proclaimed"Bolsheviks";andagainsttherightopportunist
line that opposed the initiationof the armed struggle. Without struggle, Gon-
zalo Thought could nothave been developed;and his remarkable handlingof
the two-line struggle within the Party is a fundamental question whic we must
study and grasp.
To study and principally to apply Gonzalo Thought is decisive in order to
better serve theParty,the developmentof the People's War and theworld
revolution. Likewise,to learn from President Gonzalo is decisive in orderto
wholeheartedly serve the people.h
1.3
 Programme and Statues
1.3.1
Programme
The Communist Party of Perú is based on and guided by Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, principally Maoism and, specifically, by Gonzalo Thought as a creative
17
=====第18页=====
revolution, as made by President Gonzalo, chief of our Party.
The CommunistPartyofPeru,organizedvanguardofthePeruvianle-
following basic principles:
of eternal matter;
2. The masses make history and "it is right to rebel" ;
3. Class strugle,dictatorshipoftheproletariatandproletarianinternation-
alism;
4. The need for a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Communist Party that firmly ap-
plies independence, autonomy and self-reliance;
5. To combat imperialism, revisionism, and reaction unbreakably and impla-
cably;
6. To conquer and to defend power with the People's War;
7. Militarizationofthe Party and concentric constructionof the three instru-
ments of the revolution;
8. Two-line struggle as the driving force of Party development;
9. Constantideologicaltransformationandtoalwaysputpoliticsin com-
mand;
10. To serve to the people and the world proletarian revolution; and,
11. An absolute unselfishness and a just and correct style of work.
12. The Communist Partyof Perú has Communismasits final goal;given
that the current Peruvian society is oppressed and exploited by imperial-
ism, bureaucratic capitalism, and semi-feudalism, the revolution has first
a democratic stage, then a second socialist one that will later develop suc-
cessive cultural revolutions. Presently withthe People's War the Party
develops the democratic revolution, having as its immediate goal to seize
power countrywide. Because of this we raise the following objectives:
1.3.2 General Programme of the Democratic Revolution
1. Demolition of the Peruvian State, the dictatorship of the exploiters led by
the big bourgeoisie, and of the armed forces and forces of repression that
sustain it and of all it's his bureaucratic apparatus.
18
=====第19页=====
2. To sweepawayall imperialistoppression,mainlyYankee,and thatof
Soviet social-imperialism andof any power or imperialist country. In
general to confiscate their monopolies, companies, banks and all forms of
their property including the external debt.
3. Todestroybureaucratic capitalism,private as well as state owned;to
confiscate all their properties,goods and economic rights tobenefitof
new state, as well as those belonging to imperialism.
4. Liquidation of semi-feudal property and everything subsisting on it, in the
countryside as well as in the city.
5. Respectthe property andrightsof the nationalbourgeoisie,or middle
bourgeoisie, in the country as well as in the city.
6. Fight for the setting-up of the People's Republic of Perú, as a united
front of classes based on the worker-peasant alliance led by the proletariat
headed by its Communist Party; as a mold for the new democracy that
carries forward a new economy, a new politics, and a new culture.
7. Develop the People's War that,through a revolutionary armyof a new
type undertheabsolute controlof the Party,destroystheold powera
piece at a time,mainly their armedforces andother repressivefores.
This serves to build the new power for the proletariat and the people.
8. To complete the formation of the Peruvian nation,truly unifying the coun-
try to defend itfrom all reactionary andimperialistaggression,safeguard-
ing the rights of the minorities.
9. To serve the developmentof the Peruvian proletariat as part of the inter-
national working class, and the formation and strengthening of real Com-
munist Parties and their unification in a revived international Communist
movement guided by the Marxism-Leninism-Maoism;all as a function of
the proletariatfulfillingits greathistorical missionasthefinal class.
10. Todefendthreedoms,ights,benefits,andconquestthatthewokig
class and the masses have achieved at the cost of their own blood, recogniz-
ing them and guaranteeing their authentic enforcement in a "Declaration
ofthe Rightsofthe People".Toobserve,particularly,the freedomof re-
ligious conscience,butinitswidestsense,of believing as notto believ.
Also to combatall arrangementsharmful tothepopularinterest,espe-
cially any form of unpaid work or personal burden and theoverwhlming
taxes imposed on the masses.
11. Real equalityforwomen;abetterfuturefortheyouth;protectionr he
mothers and the children; respect and support for the elderly.
12. A new culture asacombatweaponto solidifythenation,thatservsthe
popularmassesandisuidedbythescientificideologyoftheproletariat.
Special importance to education will be given.
19
=====第20页=====
13. To support the struggles of the international proletariat, of the oppressed
nations, and of the peoples of the world; fighting against the superpowers,
the UnitedStatesandSovietUnion,imperialism ingeneral,and intr-
national reaction and revisionism of all types,conceiving the Peruvian
revolution as part of the world proletarian revolution.
14. To struggle tenaciously and heroically for the complete victory and of the
democratic revolution nationwide and after completing this stage, at once,
without pause, to begin the socialist revolution so that, together with the
international proletariat,the oppressed nations andthe peoples ofthe
world, through cultural revolutions, will continue the march of humanity
towards its final goal, Communism.
But consideringthat the democratic revolution inthe country crossesa
period characterized by:
1. Depening of the general crisis of Peruvian society, mainly of bureaucratic
capitalism;
2. Greater reactionarization of the State, today with an Aprista government,
fascist and corporativist, headed by the genocidal García Pérez;
3. Sharpening of the class struggle, with the masses accepting more and more
the need for combating and resisting;
4. The People's War developing vigorously and growing; and,
5. The people's need for a People's Republic built according to the principles
of New Democracy.
20
=====第21页=====
Chapter 2
Line
International
2.1
Introduction
ChairmanGonzalohasestablishedtheinternationallineoftheCommuist
within the zigzags of world politics.
In appraising the world situation,Chairman Gonzalo beginsfrom Lenins
thesis: "Theeconomic relationshipsof imperialism constitute the basis of the
existing international situation. Thehistoryofthe XX Century has been defined
completelybythis new phaseofcapitalism,itslast andhighest phase,"and that
the distinction between oppressor and oppressed countries is a distinctive feature
ofimperialism.Threore,inorder toethecurrent situation wecannot depart
from the fundamental contradictionof capitalism,since we are in its final and
highest phase, imperialism.
Furthermore,upholding what Chairman Mao taughtus,thatimperialism
and all reactionaries are paper tigers, that the people are what is truly power-
ful, and that:"Soviet revisionism and American imperialism, conspiring among
themselves,have perpetrated so many evils and infamies that the revolution-
ary peoplesof the entire world will not letthem go unpunished. The peoples
of all the countriesare rising up. A new historical periodof struggle against
American imperialism andSovietrevisionism has begun.” He expounds that
the destruction of imperialism and world reaction to be carried forward by the
Communist Parties, leading the proletariat and the peoples of the world, will be
an incontrovertible reality. He calls upon us to fight against the two imperialist
superpowers,Yankee imperialism and Soviet social-imperialism, against the im-
perialist powers and world reaction, specifying the conditions of each revolution
to determine the principal enemy and to avert the actions of the rest.
21
=====第22页=====
2.2 The New Era
The victory of the October Revolution in 1917 marked an extraordinary mile-
stone in world history, the end of the bourgeois revolution and the beginning of
the world proletarian revolution. This new era was signaled by an intensifying
violence expressing the decrepitude of the bourgeoisie in leading the revolution
and the maturity of the proletariat to take, lead, and maintain the power of the
dictatorship of the proletariat. Therevolutions of the oppressed nations also
occur within this framework.
In the midstof a complex system of wars of all types, imperialism will be
sunk along with world reaction, from which socialism will emerge; consequently,
revolution and counterrevolution are conscious that only through war are po-
litical changes defined. Since war has a class character,there are imperialist
wars such as the First and Second World Wars that were wars of plunder for a
re-division of the world; imperialist wars of aggression against oppressed nations
such as thoseof England in the Malvinas,Yankee imperialism in Vietnam, and
social-imperialism in Afghanistan;and national liberationwars suchas those
which are waged in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Since the People's War in
Peru is a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist,Gonzalo Thoughtwar,withoutsubmitting
tothe superpowersorimperialistpowers,it isin thevanguard due toits just
character andcorrctladership.Itisralitthat dmonstatestousthatthe
Communistsshouldocuothepincipalaspctofdevlopin peoplesas
the principal form of struggle to serve the world revolution.
Facing thissituationthatonlythrough waris theworldtransformed,we
uphold theomnipotenceofrevolutionarywar(meaning people'swar) as the
highest militarytheory,thatofthe proletariat,which must bespecifiedaccord-
ing to each type of country whether imperialistor oppressed as mapped out
by Chairman Mao. Thus, the world people's war is an adequate response that
serves to preventthe imperialist waror,if this is already happening,to trans-
form it into people's war. But as Communists, we wage war to destroy war
through war in order to establish an "enduring peace."We are the only ones
that fight for peace—not like Reagan and Gorbachev who make war the more
they speak of peace; they are the warmongers.
In appraisingthe world in this era,we see thatfourfundamental contra-
dictions are expressed:1)the contradiction between capitalism and socialism,
referringto the contradictionbetween two radically different systems,which
shall encompass this entire era. This contradiction shall be one of the last to
be resolved, and shall endure after theseizure of power;2) the contradiction
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the contradiction between two op-
posed classesthatshall also persistafterthetaking of powermanifestingitself
in multiple ideological, political andeconomic forms until its resolution with the
arrival of Communism; 3) the inter-imperialist contradictions, the contradiction
betweenthe imperialists themselves for hegemony in the world and itoccurs
between the superpowers themselves, between the superpowers and the imperi-
alist powers and among the imperialist powers themselves. This contradiction
shall besolvedduringtheepochofthenext50to100years;4)contradictions
22
=====第23页=====
between the oppressed nations and imperialism which is the struggle for the lib-
eration of oppressed nations in order to destroy imperialism and reaction, whose
resolution is also framed within the next 50 to 100 years. During this time, this
is the principal contradiction, although any one of the four fundamental contra-
dictions can be principal in accordance with the specific circumstances of the
class struggle, temporarily or in certain countries.
In perspective, in order to arrive at our final goal, Communism, Marxist-
Leninist-Maoists must carry forward three types of revolutions: 1) democratic
revolution, the bourgeois revolution of a new type led by the proletariat in the
oppressed countries,which establishes the joint dictatorship of the proletariat,
the peasantry, the petty bourgeoisie, and in certain conditions the middle bour-
geoisie,underthehegemonyof theproletariat;2) socialist revolution,in the
imperialist and capitalist countries, which establishes the dictatorship ofthe
proletariat; 3) cultural revolutions, which are made to continue the revolution
under the dictatorship of the proletariat. The latter is to subject and eliminate
any regenerationofcapitalism and to wage armed combatagainstattempts at
capitalistrestoration,and whichalso servestostrengthenthe dictatorshipof
the proletariat and the march towards Communism.
Just as no class in the world wasable to seize powerall atonce,but only
throu
takes powanstablihdctatoripthbouoisieaoor
capitalism andtorecovits powerstrengthensandopens upahistorical process
of strugglebytheproletarattomaintainanddefenditsdictatorshiandto
avert cattiondhouewhwihtovw
struggle between restoration andcounter-restorationisanundeniablehistorical
law, untilthedctatorshipoftheproletariatisdefiitivlystablished.In wor
history,whntheudallass advacedin China,ittook2arstoefitiely
crush therestorationofslavery;whenthebourgeoisie in the Weststruggled
against feudalismtocrushthe attemptsatrestorationortheactualrestorations
of feudalism,ittook 300yearsto bedefinitivelyestablished in power. And,
addressinvoltioichepltaiatisdeftivlintldin power,
the struggle between restoration and counter-restoration is singularly acute and
bitter and will last approximately 200 years, starting from the Paris Commune
in 1871. The experiences of capitalist restoration in the USSR and in China
leave us with great lessons, positive as well as negative; especially emphasizing
the gigantic steps forward in the formationof the new State and how the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution is the solution to avert restoration.
We, whoupholdMarxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought,reafirm
ourselves in revolutionary violence as the universal law to seize power, and that
it is crucial in order to substitute one class by another. Democratic revolutions
are carried out with revolutionary violence, socialist revolutions are carried out
with revolutionaryviolence and,in theface of restorations,we shall recover
power through revolutionary violence. We shall maintain the continuationof
the revolution under the dictatorshipof the proletariat with revolutionary vio-
lence through culturalrevolutions and we will only reach Communism through
revolutionary violence.Aslong asthereis aplaceon Earth in which exploitation
23
=====第24页=====
exists, we shall finish it off through revolutionary violence.
This new era arms us richly, and we Communists must strengthen ourselves
ideologically, politically, and organically to assume the corresponding responsi-
bilities.
2.3The Process of the World Revolution
There are two currents that operate in the international Communist movement:
The international proletarian movement and the national liberation movement.
The first leads and the second is the base.
The national liberation movement. It is waged in theoppressed nations
against imperialism and reaction. In the first decade of this century, Lenin paid
close attention to the struggles in India, China, and Iran. He expounded that the
socialist revolution would not be only and exclusivelyof the proletariat against
its bourgeoisie,butalsoof allthecolonies against their oppressors. He saidthere
is a fusion of two forces, the international proletarian movement and the national
liberation movement and, that the weightof the masses in the oppressed nations
constitutes mostof the population in the world and shall be decisive in the world
revolution.Heconcludedthatrevolution wasshiftingtotheoppressed nations,
but this factdoes not negatethe revolution in Europe,rather it demonstrated
how a socialistStatesuchastheUSSRcoulddevelopitselfinthe midstof
imperialistenciclementDevelopinMarx,Leninlaidthefoundationsofthe
strate 
nationalvmwoelotarian
movement,andtodeveloptherevolution.IfthesloganforCommunists is
"ProletariansofallcoutisUnt!,"heputorththesloganthatshouldguide
the struggleofthetwo forces:"Proletariansof all countriesand peoplesofthe
world,Unite!"ChairmanMao Tse-tundevelopedLenin'sstrategycentering
on the transcendentalimportance thenational liberation movement has for the
world revolution sinceimperialism feces moreand morefrom the oppressed
nations,whichin turnrise-upinpowerfulrevolutionarystormsthat should
beledbytheir Communistparties. Thus,the national liberation movement
is groundedontheinternational proletarian movementandthesetwoforces
propel the development of world history. Chairman Gonzalo teaches us that the
strategy that we Communists mustunfoldshould startfrom thefoundations
laid down by Lenin and developed by Chairman Mao.
The international proletarian movement, is the theory and practice of the
international proletariat. The proletariat struggles onthree levels: Theoret-
ical, political,andeconomic.Sincetheproletariatappears inhistoryasthe
final class,it doesso in constantstruggle,highlightedbythefollowingmile-
stones: 1848, where the Communist Manifesto elaborated by Marx and Engels
established the foundations and the program of the proletariat. 1871, the Paris
Commune,wheretheproletariat seized powerforthefirsttime. 1905,the
dress rehearsal of the revolution. 1917,the triumphof the October Revolu-
tion in Russia,wheretheclassestablishedthedictatorshipof theproletariat
24
=====第25页=====
and opened up a new era. 1949, the triumph of the Chinese revolution, where
the joint dictatorship ledby the proletariat is establishedand the passageto
the socialist revolution is resolved, thus changing the correlation forces inthe
world. In the decade of the1960s with the Great Proletarian Cultural Revo-
lution, led by Chairman Mao Tse-tung, the revolution is continued underthe
dictatorshipof theproletariat in theacute strugglebetween restoration and
counter-restoration.
In its revindicative struggle theproletariat generates the union andthe
strike, which are not only instruments for the economic struggle, but that forge
the class "for the great battles still to come." The strike is the principal instru-
ment in the economic struggle and thegeneral strike is a complementto the
insurrection, but what Sorel, the anarchists, and others expound is wrong, that
power can be seized by the general strikealone.We develop the revindicative
struggle as a function of the conquest of Power.
The proletariat generates a political apparatus: The Communist Party which
is totallyopposedtoanddifentromthothrpartishavintheobcti
toseize politicalpower.Thisis howMarx definedit.Leninestablished the
characteristicsofthe Partyofthenew type,combatingtheundermini inf-
encesoftheoldrevisionismthatgeneratedbourgeoisworkerspartiesbadon
thelaboryouymml
to theoldorder.Chairman Mao Tse-tung developed the constructionof the
Party aroundthegunand proposedtheconstructioofthethreeinstrmns.
Chairman GonalotablihdthtsisofthlitaaiooftheCommuit
parties and the concentric constructionofthe three instruments.
The proletariatgeneratesanideology:Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,princi-
pally Maoism othe wldvoluionandMaxism-iism-Maism, Galo
Thought, mainly Gonzalo Thought, for the Peruvian revolution.
Marxism was foundedon the ideasof Marx. Marx and Engels took the
bestthathumanityhadproduced:Germanclassicalphilosophy,Eglish po-
liticaleconomyand Frenchsocialismtofoundtheideologyof the proletariat.
Marxism has nottakena stepinits lifewithout struggling against wrong posi-
tions. Thusithadtoconfront Proudhonandanarchism,right-wing deviations
of the supposedlycreative developmentsof Dühring, and the opportunist posi-
tionsthatmergedinthe GrmanocialDmocraticPartAftesubly,
the old revisionism unfolds with Bernstein and Kautsky after the death of En-
gels; Lenin is goingto defeatthem.In synthesis,inits firststage Marxism
establishesthe Marxist philosophyor dialectical materialism,Marxist political
economy, and scientifi c socialism.
Lenin develops Marxism and brings it to a second stage, Marxism-Leninism.
He didthisthroughhardstrugglesfought againsttheoldrevisionismthat
negated Marxistphilosophy,saying neo-Kantism should bethebasis instead;
that is idealismandnotdialecticalmaterialism. Inpoliticaleconomy,they
negated the growing pauperization among the proletariat, and claimed that the
proletariat's demands werebeing satisfied bycapitalismandimperialism. They
negated surplusvalueand imperialism. Inscientificsocialism,theytook aim
against the class struggle and revolutionary violence and propagated pacifism.
25
=====第26页=====
Revisionism means to revise Marxist principles by invoking new circum-
stances. Lenin said that revisionism is the advance of bourgeoisie into the ranks
oftheproletariat andthattofight effectively against imperialism one must
also fight against revisionism, since they are two sides of the same coin. Lenin
emphasized that revisionism aims to divide the trade unions and the political
movement of the proletariat and that it generates the split in socialism. In this
accurate and relentless struggle against revisionism Lenin further expounded,
during the juncture of the First World War, the need to convert the imperialist
war into a revolutionary war, unmasking the old revisionists as social-patriots.
He pointed out that in revolutionary times one must create new organizations,
since the reactionaries strike at the legal organizations and we should develop
clandestine organizations even for mass work. Afterward, he shaped the October
Revolution with the Communist Party through the insurrection.
Stalin continuedthe work of Lenin and in the processof building social-
ism in the USSR, he struggled against the deviations of Trotsky, Zinoviev, and
Kamenev that concluded in 1937. This was a 13-year struggle and it is untruth-
ful to say thatthings were administratively resolved.We take up the position
of Chairman Mao on the role of comrade Stalin as being 70
In developing Marxism-Leninism, Chairman Mao Tse-tung raises Marxism
toits highest summit,thusthetheoryoftheproletariatbecomes Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism.Hefulfilledthistask withinthemidstofatenaciousand
persistent truggle,cruhintheghtpportuist lie withithe Chinese Com-
munist PartyHere wehighlighttherevisionistlineofLiuShao-chiandTg
Hsiao-ping.Ontheinternationallevelheledthestruggleagainstand thede-
feat of the contemporary revisionism of Khrushchev. He shaped the democratic
revolution in China, the step to the socialist revolution and the Great Proletar-
ian Cultural Revolution. What is fundamental in Maoism is power, power for
the proletariat, power forthe dictatorshipof the proletariat, based on a armed
force led by the Party. Maoism is the application of Marxism-Leninism to the
backwards countries,ofthestrategicofensiveoftheworldrevolution,andof
the continuationof the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Thus, we Communists have three great swords: our founder Marx, the great
Lenin, and Chairman Mao Tse-tung. Our great task is to uphold, defend, and
to apply Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, principally Maoism, and place it as the
command and guide of the world revolution.
Continuing the developmentof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, developing the
Peruvian revolution and supporting the world revolution, Chairman Gonzalo
upholds,dendandapplieundeatdandunadidlgy,onstituting
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought as the basis of Party unity. For
us, Gonzalo Thoughtis the principal thing which we mustembody because it
is the guaranteeofvictorythatleadsustothe democraticrevolution,tothe
socialist revolution, to the cultural revolutions until Communism.
From another perspective, Chairman Gonzalo expounds that in the proces
of the world revolution to sweep away imperialism and reaction from the face of
the earth there arethree moments:1st,the strategic defensive;2nd,the strate-
gic equilibrium;andrd,hestraticofensivofthworlvoluton.Hedoes
26
=====第27页=====
this by applying the law of contradiction to the revolution, since contradiction
reigns in everything and all contradictions have two aspects in struggle, in this
case revolution and counter-revolution. The strategic defensive of the world
revolution opposed to the offensive of the counter-revolution, begins since 1871
with the Paris Commune andends with the SecondWorld War. Thestrate-
gic equilibrium occurs around the victory of the Chinese revolution, the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution and the developmentof the powerful national
liberation movement. Afterwards, the world revolution enters into the strategic
offensive; this moment can be identified in history in connection with the 1980s
in which we see indications such as the Iran-Iraq war, Afghanistan, Nicaragua,
the initiation of the People's War in Peru, an era circumscribed within the "next
50 to 100 years." From there onward the contradiction between capitalism and
socialism will develop whose resolution will carry us to Communism. Our con-
ception is of a long process,not a short one,with the conviction of reaching
Communism even if it means passing through a series of twists and turns and
the setbacks thatwill necessarilyoccur.Furthermore,itisnotstrange that we
should apply the three moments to the world revolution, since Chairman Mao
applied them to the process of the protracted people's war. As Communists, we
should see not only the moment, but the long years to come.
2.4Current Situation and Perspective
In the current situationand in perspective we haveentered thestrategic offn-
sive of the world revolution, within the“50 to 100 years"in which imperialism
and world reaction shall be sunk and we shall enter the stage when the prole-
tariat settles into power and establishes its dictatorship. From there forward
the contradiction shall bebetween socialism and capitalism onthe road to-
wards Communism. That restorations have occurred in the USSR and China
does not negate the thriving process of development of the international prole-
tariat; ratheritshowshowfiercethe struggleisbetween restoration andcounter-
restoration. From this we Communists draw lessons to avert the restoration of
capitalism and to definitively establish the dictatorship of the proletariat.
We reaffirm ourselves on Chairman Mao Tse-tung's thesis that a period of
struggle has begun between American imperialism and Soviet social-imperialism;
thus the two principal enemies are defined at the world level for those who make
democratic revolution or socialist revolution, including those who make nation-
alist movements, and the corresponding task is that each revolution or movement
specify its principal enemyand avertthe dominationof theother superpower
or of the other powers. In Peru,Yankee imperialism dominates us in collusion
with the big bourgeoisie and the landowners. Nevertheless,atthe world level
there is contention between the two superpowers for global hegemony. We fight
against American imperialism,feudalism and bureaucratic capitalism, but we
of anyotherpower.In Afghanistan,thedirectaggressionis by Soviet social-
imperialism thatcontendsforhegemonywithYankeeimperialism,China,as
27
=====第28页=====
well as with other Western powers, andthere a struggle must be unleashed
against social-imperialism as the principal enemy and to not permit either the
domination of American imperialism orof other powers; the problem is that
thestruggle is not correctly unfoldingdue to lack of political leadership, of a
Communist Party. In synthesis, there are two superpowers that are the princi-
pal enemies,with one being principal in each case,and we do not exempt the
actions of the powers.
We consider Chairman Mao Tse-tung's thesis thatthree worlds are delin-
eated just and correct and that it is connected with Lenin's thesis on the distri-
bution of forces in the world based on the analysis of classes and contradictions.
We reject the opportunist and revisionist distortion by Teng Hsiao-ping of the
three worlds thattends toward following atthe tail of the U.S. and selling out
the revolution. From this pointof departure,Chairman Gonzalo analyzes the
current situation in which the three worlds are delineated and demonstrates that
it is a reality. Thefirst world is the two superpowers,the U.S. and the USSR
which contend for global hegemony and which can unleash an imperialist war.
They are superpowers because they are economically, politically, and militarily
more powerful than the other powers. The U.S. has an economy centered on the
monopolyof non-state property;politically,itunfoldsa bourgeois democracy
withrownricoofrgtItiactioarlibismltail
is the most powerfulinthe Westandhasalongerprocessof development. The
USSR is economicallybasedonastatemonopoly, with apolitically fascist dicta-
torshipofbueaucrtibougisieandisih-levllitaryowealthough
its process of development is shorter. The U.S. seeks to maintain its dominions
and also to expandthem. The USSRaims more towards expansion because
it is a new superpower and economically it is interested to capture Europe to
improve its conditions. In synthesis,they are two superpowers which do not
constitute a block but which have contradictions, clear mutual differences, and
they move within the law of collusion and contention for the re-division of the
world. The second world consistsof the imperialist powers which are not su-
perpowers, but have less economic, political, and military power such as Japan,
Germany, France, Italy,etc. which have contradictions with the superpowers
because they sustain, for example, the devaluation of the dollar, military restric-
tions, and political impositions; these imperialist powers want to take advantage
of the contention between the superpowers in order for them to emerge as new
superpowers,and they also unleash wars of aggression againsttheoppressed
nations and furthermore,acute contradictions exist among them. The third
world is composed of the oppressed nations of Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
They are colonies or semi-colonies where feudalism has not been destroyed, and
on thatbasis a bureaucratic capitalism unfolds. They find themselves subject
to one or another superpower or imperialist power. They have contradictions
with imperialism,furthermore theyfightagainsttheir own big bourgeoisie and
landlords,bothof which are at the service of and in collusion with imperialism,
especially with the superpowers.
All this gives us the basis on which the Communists can establish the strat-
egy and tactics of the world revolution. Chairman Mao Tse-tung had achieved
28
=====第29页=====
the establishmentof the strategyand tacticsof the world revolution but the
Chinese revisionists concealedit. Therefore,it falls upon us to extractthis
from his ownideas,most especially if there are new situations,above all in
perspective.
Our Party sustains the view that in the current world there are three fun-
damental contradictions: 1) The contradiction of the oppressed nations, on one
side, against the superpowers and imperialist powers, on the other. Herethe
thesis that three worlds are delineated is contained, and we formulate it this way
because the kernel of that contradiction lies with the superpowers but it is also
a contradiction with the imperialist powers. This is the principal contradiction
and its solution is the development and triumph of new democratic revolutions.
2) The contradiction between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, which has as
its solution the socialist revolution and in perspective, the proletarian cultural
revolution. 3) The inter-imperialist contradictions: Between the superpowers
themselves, between the superpowers and the smaller imperialist powers and,
finally, among the imperialist powers themselves, which tends towards war for
global hegemonyandimperialistwarsof plunderwhichtheproletariat must
oppose with people's war and in perspective,world people's war. We do not list
the contradiction socialism-capitalismbecausetoday itexistsonlyatan ideo-
logicalandpoliticallvsinceocialismdoenotexistanywhreasasae;
todaythereisoialisytmItxistedndtoathatitexiststoay i
is to claim in essence thatthe USSRissocialist,which is revisionism.
The need to see the contradictions serves to analyze the world situation and
todefineitsstategyandtacticandwithinthisitsstratgicandconficting
zones.Today,hemotndarotinotae:outhastAsiwhere
the strugleinVietnam,Laos,andKampucheaareaocalpointitheimmense
strategic regionof Asia,aregion wheregreat masses areconcentrated,for exam-
plein India.IftheysuficientldevlopedCommuistPartiesitwould serve to
powerfullyadvancethevolutionTheMiddleEast,theratilcenter,there
is also an acute contest between the superpowers and powers bound to the issues
of the Near Eastand to nationalistand even reactionary movements. Another
area is South Africa, where there are guerrilla movements thatare usurped by
the superpowers or powers to convert them into occupation forces and dominate
them. In Latin America there are the important struggles of Central America
(Nicaraguaand El Salvador)tothevolatilityofthe Antilles (Haiti,etc.), and
the People's War in Peru, a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist, Gonzalo Thought people's
war that strugglesfoanauthenticdemocraticrevolution without submitio
any superpower or power.In Europe, where persistentanti-imperialists military
actions are developing, itis necessarytostudytheirideologyand the politics
that sustains them, theclass which they serve,their links to theideology of the
proletariat,andtheirrolewithintheworldproletarianrevolution,aswell as
their position on modern revisionism. These movements express the existence
of an uneven revolutionary situation in development in the Old World. Any one
ofthese potsofcofitcouldprovidethesparktoanimpeialistWorld War,
a situationthatwilloccurwhenthestrategicsuperiorityofoneof thesuper-
powersisdfindThereoe,itiincrasiglyugenandperempor
29
=====第30页=====
upon Communist parties based on Marxism-Leninism-Maoism that are forged
for and in people's war through their militarization. Strategically defining the
zones of principal and secondary importance to make the world revolutionis
key to establishing the role that each region and each party should play in the
world revolution.
For the Communist Parties, the problem is not to focus attention on the im-
perialist World War but onto people's war, since only from this shall proletarian-
led power derive. We consider that while there is imperialism,there is a like-
lihoodthatimperialist World Wars will develop. WhatChairman Maosaid
is certain, that either revolution will prevent war or World War will provoke
revolution. In orderfor an imperialist World Warto happen, the strategic
superiority of oneof the superpowers mustbe defined. According to there-
actionary military theoreticians, this situation would unfold at the momentof
the first use of atomic weapons,or an overwhelming atomic bombardment by
both parties, and a second moment in which great contingents of millions will
participate andsubsequenly, (since theobjective is the re-divisionofthe spoils,
especially theoppressed nations)aconventional war tooccupy territories. Then
it will enter into a great and ferocious massacre which will have repercussions
against the imperialists and will provide even greater reasons for the oppressed
nations, the peoples of the world and the class to rise up in people's war. Thus,
if imperialist world war presents itself,first,we are opposed to it;second, we
do not fear it as we center on revolution;third,to focus on revolution means
to wage people's war led by the proletariat through its Communist parties; and
fourth, this people's war must be specified in each type of country according to
the type of revolution. Therefore, the world people's war is the order of the day.
2.5
The International CommunistMovement
2.5.1
 The Revolutionary Internationalist Movement
The history of the International Communist Movement is a glorious process of
struggle through which the Communists in the world have fought, and continue
to fight, to unite in order to attain their unalterable goal: a Communist society.
In this heroic fight, three Internationals were formed.
The International Workers'Association, or First International, was founded
by Marx and Engels in 1864.In hard struggle they opposedand crushed the
anarchist positions of Bakunin and established that there is only one doctrine
of the proletariat: Marxism. Lenin says that the role fulfiled by the First Inter-
national was to lay down the ideological basis of the doctrine of the proletariat.
This International split,and when this wasblamed on Marx and Engels they
answered that if such a division had not occurred, the International would have
died in any case, killed by unity which put aside principles. The Second In-
ternational was founded by Engels in1889.It served to multiplyorganizations
and parties,butwiththedeathof Engels,theold-stylerevisionism emerged
unchecked, which was confronted and crushed by Lenin. This International be-
30
=====第31页=====
came bankrupt in the First World War when its leadership, such as Kautsky and
Bernstein, instead of fighting against the imperialist world war in order to trans-
form it into revolution, supported that war of plunder and their own countries'
bourgeoisie, turning into social-patriots. In 1919 Lenin organized the Third In-
ternational, the Communist International, conceiving of it as a fighting machine
that must assume the responsibility of the world revolution and the construction
of the proletarian dictatorship. Two problems emerged in the Communist Inter-
national during the 1920s which were to have great repercussions: The problem
of Germany (or rather, the revolution in an advanced country), and the prob-
lem of China (or revolution in a backward country). Afterwards, the situation
became more acute with the emergence and triumph of fascism and the ques-
tion on how to conceive the United Front. There were the revisionist criteria of
Thorez and Togliatti who sought to support rather than destroy the old order,
focusing solely on the anti-fascist struggle. It is an urgent task for Communists,
and for our Party, to evaluate the CommunistInternational, especially its VI
Congress linked to the Second World War, and the role of Comrade Stalin. In
1943 the International was dissolved, leaving only an Information Committee.
The struggleof Communists to uniteat an international level is hard and
complex. This was shown in the struggle against modern revisionism after World
War II. Tito was condemned in1948. Theideasof Browder also played asin-
ister role. The Workers'and Communist partiesmet in Moscow in 1957 and
1960 after the TwentiethCongressoftheCommunistPartyoftheSovietUnion
(CPSU)in1956,in whichKhrushchevhadalreadyusurped the dictatorship
oftheproletariatintheUSSRandattackeditunderthepretextofcombat-
ing ComradeStalinHowever,theprestigeoftheUSSR wasstillverygreat
throughout the world, and in such circumstances the meetingsof 1957 and 1960
agreed on ambiguous positions, despiteof the firm,principled positions upheld
by the Communist Partof China (CPC) (especially those of Chairman Mao),
and the Party of Labor of Albania. The positions of Chairman Mao caused the
CPSU to alter some of its positions,but the positionsof modern revisionism
were systematized in 1961, when the CPSU held its twenty-second Congress.
Chairman Mao, leading the CPC, probed the essence of the new revisionism
systematized in the "three peacefuls”and the"two wholes." With"peaceful co-
existence," Khrushchev had twisted Lenin's thesisthatdistinguished between
relationships among states to those within states to propose that the general
lineof theinternational Communist movement is “peaceful coexistence." For
Khrushchev, the problem was to prevent war, because according to him, atomic
weapons did not distinguish between exploiters and exploited and men had to
fraternize in order to prevent the extinction of humanity. "Peaceful transition"
proposes that revolution no longer required revolutionary violence but that one
social system could be transformed into another through the "peaceful route":
through elections or parliamentarism. The concept of"peaceful emulation” ex-
pressed theideathatinorderto destroythe imperialist system,thesocialist
system had to emulateit inorderto demonstrate to the imperialists thatthe
socialist system is superior,and thus encourage the imperialists to become so-
cialists. The "state of the whole people”was the revisionist thesis with which
31
=====第32页=====
Khrushchev intended to negate the class characterof the state. It was specifi-
cally aimed against the dictatorship of the proletariat. The "party of the whole
people” was another monstrosity which negated the class character of the Party
as the party of the proletariat. Thus, Khrushchev maintained that the Twenty-
second Congress of the CPSU was the new program of the Communists, and
the Communist Manifesto was substituted by the bourgeois slogans of "liberty,"
"equality," and"fraternity". The Manifesto is the programof the Communists,
and its negation incited and sharpened the struggle between Marxism and revi-
sionism.
On June14,1963,the “A Proposal Concerningthe GeneralLineofthe
International Communist Movement” (also known as"the Chinese letter") was
published.It wasfollowedby the circulation of the"Nine Commentaries," in
which Chairman Mao and the CPC brilliantly unmasked and crushed modern
revisionism in all aspects.
Weunderstandthat Chairman Maoandthe_CPCfeltthatbecausethe
politicalandideologicalbase—whichhadtobeMarxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-
tung Thought—had not yetbeen defined it was inconvenient to form a new
CommunistInternational in such circumstances. This was mainly due tothe
factthatthePartyofLaborofAlbania,ledby Enver Hoxha,didnotacept
Mao Tse-tung Thoughtand aimedfo an Internationalbased onlyon Marxism-
Leninism, disregardingthenew developments.In essence,Hoxha was opposed
to Mao Tse-tung Thought.
The growingifucofCrmaMaiewrluldd wt  Gat
Proletarian Cultural RevolutionTheCPCcenteredonveryurgentroblems,
suchasrecovering powerithePopl'sRepubliof Chinaom the usurpation
of the revisionists Liu Shaochi and Teng Hsiao-ping, and on how to continue the
revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat. Thus Chairman Mao, in the
class struggle against revisionism at the national and international level, became
the great teacherof the proletariatandthe Great Leader of the world revolution.
His thought developed into the third stageof Marxism.In that era, Commu-
nists referred to this development as"Mao Tse-tung Thought." The Communist
Party of Peru (PCP) adopted Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought as the
basis of party unity at the Sixth National Conference in January 1969. This was
achieved as a result of the struggle by Chairman Gonzalo and the Red Fraction of
the Party that had been adhering to Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought
since 1966. Chairman Gonzalo had already upheld the positions of Chairman
Mao in 1962, and on the basis of that viewpoint went on to forge the Red Frac-
tion of the PCP. We authentic Communists were waiting for the CPC to define
Maoism as the third stageof Marxism, but with the death of Chairman Mao
in September1976,the Chinese revisionists pulledof a counter-revolutionary
coup aimed at Chairman Mao and his thought. Thus, the unity of the Marxists
encountered serious and complex problems, but the Communist Party of Peru
remained firmand unshakable in the defense of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-
tung Thought, immediately unmasking the counter-revolutionary coup and the
revisionistusurpationin ChinaIt wasatthattimethattheEnlaredPolitial
Bureau of the PCP in October 1976 declared,"To be a Marxist is to adhere to
32
=====第33页=====
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought."
With the death of Chairman Mao and the revisionist usurpation in China
by Teng and his gang,the Communistswere leftscattered in the world with-
out a center or base for world revolution; the counter-revolutionaries brandished
their claws to negate Chairman Mao and the validity of Marxism-Leninism-Mao
Tse-tung Thought, unleashing the triple revisionist assaultof Teng Hsiao-ping
(Chinese revisionism), Hoxha (Albanian revisionism), and Brezhnev (Russian
revisionism). Facing this situation atthe PCP's First National Conferencein
November 1979, Chairman Gonzalo called upon the whole party to defend and
apply Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought againstthe revisionist triple
assault. The Party remained firm in these positions and carriedforwardan
unalterable, principled position. In 1980 the PCP launched the People's War
based on Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought; it is in the applying and
developing the People's War that the PCP has advanced further in the compre-
hension of Maoism as the third stage of Marxism. Hence, at the Second National
Conference held in May 1982 the Party agreed that Marxism-Leninism-Maoism
was the third stage of Marxism. Thus, the PCP was the only party in the world
in the vanguardof thedefenseof Maoism,andassumedthetaskof struggling
forthe unityoftheMarxis-eiis-Maoistsof theworldsothatthisideology
be the command and guide of the Peruvian and world revolutions.
The applicatioof Marxism-Leniism-Maoism must bespcified inac -
olution,titotomcallicFtio
Peruvian Revolution has generated Chairman Gonzaloand Gonzalo Thought,
which is the main principle inthebasisof Partyunity. Thus,eachrevolution
mustspecifyitsguidingthouht,withoutwhichtherecanbenoapplicationof
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, nor any development of the revolution.
In the Fall of 1980, 13 Communist parties and organizations signed a state-
ment, "To the Marxist-Leninists, Workers, and the Oppressed of All Countries,"
calling upon Communists to unite around Marxism-Leninismand to uphold
Chairman Mao, but without considering Maoism as a new stage with universal
validity. The Revolutionary CommunistParty,USA(RCP-USA)principally
carriedoutthisefort.In1983the RCP-USA contactedthe PCP and invited
it to signthe1980statement. The PCP didnotagreetosucha statement
since Mao Tse-tung Thought was not considered therein; furthermore, we were
already basingourselveson Marxism-Leninism-Maoism. In March1984, the
Second Conferenceof these organizations was completed and the Revolution-
ary Internationalist Movement (RIM) was founded which approved a joint dec-
laration,whichtalksaboutunitingaroundMarxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung
Thought. Our position on the incorporationof the PCP within RIM is con-
densed in a letter written to the Committee of the Revolutionary International-
ist MovementdatedOctober1986:"We wishto reiteratetwo questions about
this point. Firstfromthebeginningofourtiestheoriginofourdiferences
was the substantive and decisive questionof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism as the
universalvalitywitMaoismathekeyttheueioConqu
disagreement withtheexessionMarxism-niism-MaoTse-tun Thouht.
33
=====第34页=====
Nevertheless, we have thought and still think that the resolution of this matter,
which for us is indispensable as a point of departure, is complex, demands time,
and especially developing revolution."
"Second,insigningthe Declaration derivedfromtheSecondConference
which founded the RIM, we did so with observations and even clear opposition,
which was expressly setforth in brief. We reiteratedthese issues in meetings,
reports, and communications which clearly indicate differenceson the princi-
ple contradiction, the revolutionary situation of unequal development, on world
war, and on some criteria on the role of the Movement, and other more impor-
tant issues, such as the universal validity of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, and in
particular the general validity of people's war (the expression of proletarian mil-
itary theory thatour class has recently developed totally and completely with
Chairman Mao Tse-tung), and our insistence in always raising the great slogan,
'Proletariansof all countries,unite!'Nevertheless,we thoughtand continueto
think thatthe Declaration containsandcontinuesto containa relativebasis
of unity whose developmentand improvement will be demandedby thevery
advance of the Movement, as facts are plainly demonstrating already."
"Today, the Declaration has been repudiated by some as opportunist. Others
assertthatitiinuficintoolvthburngpoblmsthathevolution
demands,andtherefore,weshould moveon to a new declaration. The PCP
believesthatheIace problemsovaious lvls:Othedoloicallevel,
it needs to advance towards the understandingof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
This advance is principal,and even political developmenthinges upon it. On
the politicallevel,itneedstoadvanceindefiningthefundamentalcontradic-
tions,andthe principal global contradiction,the questionof the Third World
War,thatrevolutionisthe principal tendency,and given an imperialist ware
transforming itinto people's war. Inregards to construction,what political
lines we must follow to achieve the formation of the International that we need,
which must be the continuation of the glorious International Communist Move-
ment. Concerning mass work, our points of departure are the slogansThe
masses makehistory,It's righttorebel,'andThecolossal garbageheap'of
revisionism and opportunism that must be swept away—Trans.] and that the
purpose of mass work is to initiate or develop people's war. In regards to lead-
ership, it is key, requiring time for its formation, development, and recognition
of authority. In regards to two-line struggle, it is not being handled as it should
be. These are problems of development, but if they are not addressed justly
and correctly,they can cause phenomenaof disarticulation,and these nega-
tive possibilities necessarily cause us concern. Webelievethatthe Committee
of the RIM aims to impose the denomination of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-
tung Thought,'tryingtoframeuswithinthe Declaration,andthusresolvethe
problemsof leadershipof the Committee,whichgivesreason tobelieveinthe
existence of hegemonic tendencies."
Taking thissituationintoaccount,wereaffirmedourselvesatthe Fourth
National Conference of the PCP in October1986 to unfold ourselves as a frac-
tion within theInternational CommunistMovement inorderto place Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism, principally Maoism, as the command and guide of the world
34
=====第35页=====
revolution. We call to: "Uphold, Defend, and Apply Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
Principally Maoism!" since only through this shall the international proletariat,
through its Communist Parties, be ableto leadthe conquest of power and
emancipate the oppressed so they can emancipate themselves as a class.
We are for the reconstitution of the Communist International, and we regard
the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement as a step in that direction. It will
serve this purpose as long as it bases itself upon and follows a just and correct
ideological and political line.
The struggle to impose Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, principally Maoism, as
thecommandandguideofworldrevolutionwillbe long,complex and diffii-
cult, but in the end, the Marxist-Leninist-Maoistsof the world shall succeed.
Marxism has not taken a step forward in its life without struggle.
GLORY TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROLETARIAT!
LONG LIVE THE WORLD PROLETARIAN REVOLU-
TION!
UPHOLD, DEFEND AND APPLY MARXISM-LENINISM-
MAOISM, GONZALO THOUGHT, PRINCIPALLY GON-
ZALO THOUGHT!
Central Committee, Communist Party of Peru
35
=====第36页=====
Chapter 3
Line of the I
Democratic
Revolution
3.1
Introduction
Upholding, defending and applying Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, principally Mao-
ism, Chairman Gonzalo establishes that the Peruvian revolution in its historical
course mustfirstbeademocratic revolution,thena socialistrevolution which
in turn mustunfold cultural revolutions in order to reach Communism, all in
an uninterrupted process carrying out People's Warand specifying its charac-
ter. To reach this conclusion,his pointof departure was what Marx taught,
that Germany needed to replay the peasant wars of the XVI century,that it
would have to channel the democraticenergyof the peasantry. Later, Lenin
developed thispointfurther,holding that sincethebourgeoisie isa decreit
class and sincethe peasantry have raised the necessityof destroying feudalism,
they could only concretize a democratic revolution under the leadership of the
proletariat. Afterwards, Chairman Mao established On New Democracy which
forms part of the world proletarian revolution; it proposes a joint dictatorship of
the revolutionary classes which must be formed in opposition to the bourgeois
dictatorship, which can only be fulfilled under the leadership of the proletariat.
He takes into account the specific conditions of Peru such as: In Peru's his-
torical process there has not been a bourgeois revolution, since the bourgeoisie
were incapable of leading it; therefore the land question and the national ques-
tion are two pending problems to be solved; that we are in the era of imperialism
and of the world proletarian revolution,therefore,the proletariat is the class
that takes up the destruction of imperialism, bureaucratic capitalism and semi-
feudalism, not for the benefitof the bourgeoisie but rather for the proletariat,
the principally poor peasantry, the petty bourgeoisie and the middle bourgeoisie;
that the Peruvian proletariat has matured with a Communist Party of a new
type capable of leading the revolution; and that the democratic revolution of the
old type is no longer appropriate, but instead a bourgeois revolution of a new
36
=====第37页=====
type is needed; and that this type and all revolutions today can only be fulfilled
through people's war, the principal form of struggle, and by the revolutionary
armed forces, the principal form of organization.
Thus, he establishes the characterof Peruvian society as semi-feudal and
semi-colonial in which bureaucratic capitalism develops. He also sets the targets
of the revolution, the tasks to undertake,and he defines the social classes and
outlines the essence of the democratic revolution, how it shall be realized today
and its perspectives.
3.2
The Character ofContemporary Peruvian
Society
Basing himself onhistorical materialism,heanalyzes the processof Peruvian
history andshowsthatintheoldsocietyanagrarianorderunfolded based
on the ayllu,which wasa communal agrarian order which was beginning to
Later in the XVI Century,the Spanishbroughta decrepitfeudalsystem and
century,thfirstsproutofcapitalismbegitodevelopontheexistingfeudal
base. All this process in Peru is going to mean a change:The passage from
feudalism to semi-feudalism and from colonialism to semi-colonialism.
Later, in characterizing contemporary Peruvian society, Chairman Gonzalo
says: “... contemporary Peru is a semi-feudal and semi-colonial society in
which bureaucratic capitalism develops."Although Mariátegui had defined this
well in PointThreeoftheProgramof theConstitutionof theParty,itis in
the lightof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, principallyof Maoism,that Chairman
Gonzalo hasdemonstratedhowthis semi-feudal and semi-colonial character
maintains itself and develops new modalities, and in particular how bureaucratic
capitalism has developed on thisfoundation throughout the entire process of
contemporary society. This a question of transcendent importance in order to
understand the character of society and of the Peruvian revolution.
Bureaucratic capitalism is a fundamental thesis of Chairman Mao's that it is
not yet understood nor accepted by all the Marxists throughout the world, which
for obvious historical reasons was not known to Mariátegui, and that Chairman
Gonzalo applies to the concrete conditions of our country. He maintains that
in order to analyze the contemporary social process, one must start from three
intimately linked questions: The momentsthat bureaucratic capitalism is going
through;theprocessof theproletariatshaped in itshighestexpression,the
Communist Party;and the roadthat therevolution mustfollow. He teaches us
that since1895threehistoricalmomentscanbdifrentiatedincontemporary
37
=====第38页=====
Peruvian society: lst moment. The developmentof bureaucratic capitalism.
The constitution of the PCP. Definition and outlining of the path of surrounding
the cities from the countryside. 2nd moment. The deepening of bureaucratic
capitalism. Reconstitution of the PCP. Establishment of the road of surrounding
the cities from the countryside. 3rd moment. The general crisis of bureaucratic
capitalism. The leadershipof the PCP in the People's War. Application and
developmentof the road of surrounding the cities from the countryside.
At the same time, he expounds that contemporary Peruvian society is in a
generalizedcrisis,aseriouandincurableillnessthatcanonlybetransfrmed
through thearmed struggle. The Communist Partyof Peru isleading the eole
in carrying this out, as there is no other solution.
Why is Peru semi-feudal? Chairman Gonzalo states:
"The decrepit semi-feudal system continues subsisting and marks the
country from its deepest foundations to its most elaborate ideas. In
essence, it persistently maintains the land question unresolved, which
is the motor of the class struggle of the peasantry, especially of the
poor peasants that are the immense majority." He stresses that the
land question continues subsisting because the semi-feudal relation-
ships of exploitation allow semi-feudalism to evolve, and it is the
basic problem of society that is expressed in land, servitude, and
gamonalismo. We must see these conditions in all their aspects,
economic,politicalandideological,inboth thebaseandsuperstru-
ture. The peasantry constitutes about 60 percent of the population,
which for centuries has worked the land, but it is tied to big prop-
erty and to servitude. He teaches us that a great concentration of
land exists in a few hands, with both associative and non-associative
forms, and that the immense majority of the peasantry are the poor
peasants who do not have land, or if they have it they are very few,
thus giving rise to the minifundio [small landowner—Tr.] submitted
to the voracity of the latifundio. [large landowner—Tr.]
This condition crushes the peasantry in a system of servitude that as Lenin
taught presents itself in a thousand and one forms, but whose essence is per-
sonal subjugation. Thus we see forms centered around servile relationships such
as unpaid work in the SAIS, CAPS, peasant groups, in Cooperación Popular,
PAIT, PROEM, etc. Beyond this, it is known that in the countryside for every
three peasants able to work only one works,and the State tries to channel the
unused labor to benefit itself with unpaid labor. We can also observe, particu-
larly in the Sierra region, an autarchic economy on the margin of the national
economy.
1"The termgamonalismo designates morethan just asocialandeconomiccategory: tat
38
=====第39页=====
Reaffirminghimself in Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,Chairman Gonzaloup-
holds the principle that agrarianreform consists of the destruction of feudal
landlord property; in the individual distribution of land to the peasantry under
the slogan "land to the tiller," which is achieved through the People's War and
the New Power,ledby theCommunist Party. This isequivalent to Lenin's
thesis that there are two roads in agriculture: The landlord's road, which is re-
actionary, evolves feudalism and supports the old state, and the peasant's road
which is advanced, destroys feudalism and tends towards a new state.
Next, he accurately establishes the character and the results of the agrarian
laws passed by the old State, proving the subsistence of semi-feudalism, whose
existence today is often denied. He characterizes the Lawof Basesof Pérez
Godoyof 1962, the Law 15037of 1964 and the Law 17716 of 1969 (essentially
corporative that fomented big associative property) as being three laws of buy-
ing and selling, executed by the bureaucratic apparatus of the State to develop
bureaucratic capitalism. He warns thatthe Law of Promoting Agricultureof
1980 treats the land question as resolved and at the same time advocates as-
sociative propertyandthe returnof the gamonalesto invigorate bureaucratic
capitalism,whichisalso underthe controlof thebigbankersand hasthe di-
rect participationof Yankeeimperialism. This isthe paththatthe fascist and
corporatistApristgovernmenollowsetakinthefascisandcorporie
"agrarianreform”ofVelasco,raisingcriesof“revolutionizingagriculture”to
thusstrengthengamonalismo;thattreatsthelandquestionasresolved and
centers aroundproductivity;thatgivesthe lawof communitiesand the law of
peasant rondsinordetodeepebuaucrticapitalismandtospradito
everyofthcoutyhaclhaoovoing
atthe peasantcommunitiesasthefoundationoftheircorporative zeal,which
equally servestheratioofthmicro-reions,herions,CORDES and other
fascist and corporative creations. All of this signifies nothing except new modal-
ities of concentrationof theoldlatifundista property,still not destroyed, and it
is the old landlord's road followed in contemporary Peru that was promoted in
the 1920s, deepened in the1950s and especially in the1960s,and which is still
pursued today under new conditions.
This landlord'sroadisexpressedpoliticallyintheoldStatethroughga-
monalismo; as Mariátegui says, gamonalismo does notonly designate a social
and economic category but an entire phenomenon represented not only by the
gamonales,but which also encompassesalarge hierarchyofofficials,intermedi-
aries,agents, parasites, etc., and thatthe central factorof this phenomenon is
the hegemonyof big semi-feudal property in politics and in the mechanism of
the State,which should beattacked atits root.Chairman Gonzalo expressly
emphasizes the manifestationsof semi-feudalism in politics and in the mecha-
nism of the State by conceiving that gamonalismo is the political manifestation
of semi-feudalism upon which this regimeof servitude is supported, in which
bosses and lackeys,whochangeoutfitsaccordingtothegovernmentinturn,
representthldStateintheremotestvillagesofthecountry.Thisisefctor
which thespearheadofthe democratic revolutionistargetedat,sincethisisan
agrarian war.
39
=====第40页=====
Whyis it semi-colonial? Chairman Gonzalo teaches usthat the modern
Peruvian economy was born subjugated to imperialism, the final phase of cap-
italism, which was masterfully characterized as monopolistic, parasitical and
moribund. Imperialism, even though it consents to our political independence
as long as it servesits interests,still controls the entire economic processof
Peru: our natural wealth, export products, industry, banking and finances. In
synthesis, it sucks the blood of our people, devours our energies of a nation in
formation, and most strikingly today it exploits us and other oppressed nations
with the external debt.
Chairman Gonzalofirstreaffirmshimself in Lenin'sthesis,laterauraely
developed by Chairman Mao, to define the semi-colonial character of our society.
In synthesis, Lenin established that there are many forms of imperialist domi-
nation,but two are typical: The colony,which is the complete domination by
the imperialist country on the oppressed nation or nations, and an intermediate
form. The semi-colony, in which the oppressed nation is politically indepen-
dent buteconomicallysubjugated.Itis anindependentrepublic,butone that
finds itself subjectedtotheideologicalpoliticaleconomic,and military wbof
imperialism no matter if it hasa governmentofitsown. He rejects the term
"neocolony"usedbyevisionism inthe1960s,whosebasisistheconception tha
imperialismaplioftrrmof ominioandwichdthmtothec-
acterizationof a"dependentcountry."Later,applying Chairman Mao's thesis
that a periodof struggle wasopening against the two superpowers that contend
fortherepatitiootheworldandthatonmusscifwhoisthepncipal
enemyofthmometdfnedthatthprincipalimperialismthatdominates
Peru is Yankee imperialism,but asserted thatone must ward off Russian social-
imperialism that penetrates the country more each day, as well as the actions of
the imperialist powers that are not superpowers. Thus, the proletariat in lead-
ing the democratic revolution shall not be tied to any superpower or imperialist
power and maintainsitsideological,political,andorganizationalindependence.
In conclusion, he demonstrates that Peruvian society continues to be a nation
in formation,andthatitssemi-colonialcharactercontinues,showing itself as
such in all fields and under the new conditions.
Regarding bureaucratic capitalism, Chairman Gonzalo states that compre-
hending it is essentialtothe understandingof Peruviansociety. Takingup
Chairman Mao'sthesis,he teachesusthat it hasfive characteristics:1)that
bureaucratic capitalism is the capitalism that imperialism develops in the back-
ward countries,which is comprised of the capitalof large landowners,the big
bankers, andthe magnatesof thebig bourgeoisie; 2)itexploitsthe proletariat,
the peasantry, and the petty bourgeoisie and constrains the middle bourgeoisie;
3) it is passing through a process in whichbureaucratic capitalism is combined
with the power of the State and becomes State monopoly capitalism, comprador
and feudal,from which can be derived that in a first moment it unfolds as a
non-State big monopoly capitalism and in a second moment, when it is com-
bined with the power of the State, it unfolds as state monopoly capitalism; 4)
it ripens the conditionsforthe democraticrevolution asitreaches the apx
of its development; and, 5) confiscating bureaucratic capital iskey to reaching
40
=====第41页=====
the pinnacle of the democratic revolution and it is decisive to pass over to the
socialist revolution.
In applying the above, he conceives that bureaucratic capitalism is the cap-
italism that imperialism generates in the backward countries,which is tied to
adecrepit feudalism and subjugated to imperialism which is the last phaseof
capitalism. This system does not serve the majority of the people but only
the imperialists, the big bourgeoisie, and the landowners. Mariátegui has estab-
lished that the bourgeoisie, for example upon creating banks, generates a capital
surrendered to imperialism and tied to feudalism. Chairman Gonzalo master-
fully establishes thatthe capitalism that is unfolding in Peru is a bureaucratic
capitalism hindered by the surviving shackles of semi-feudalism that bind it on
the one hand, and on the other hand is subjugated to imperialism which does
not permit the development of the national economy; it is, thus, a bureaucratic
capitalism thatoppresses and exploits the proletariat,the peasantry, and the
petty bourgeoisie,and thatconstrictsthe middlebourgeoisie. Why? Because
thecapitalismthatdevlopisadelayedprcsthatolalowsanconomy to
serveimpialistits.Itiapitalismthapsetsthebibourgeoisie,
the landowners andthe rich peasantsof theoldtype, theclasses thatconstitute
a minoritybutwhichexploitandoppressthelarge majority,the masses.
He analyestheprocessthatbureauraticcapitalismhasollowed inPru
the first historical moment which devlopsrom1895tothe Second World War,
in which,duththompaobouisumot
State,displacinthelandlords butrespecting theiinterests. The second mo-
ment is fromthe econdWorld Warto1980,aperiodofitsdeepenig, duing
which abranchofthebigbourgeoisieevolvesintothebureaucratic bourgeoisie,
which began in 1939 during the first government of Prado when the participation
of the State in the economic process begins. Subsequently, this participation has
grown more and more, and is due to the fact that the big bourgeoisie, because
of a lack of capital, is not capable of deepening bureaucratic capitalism. Thus
a clash between both factions of the big bourgeoisie is generated, between the
bureaucratic andthe comprador bourgeoisie. In 1968,the bureaucratic bour-
geoisie takes the leadership of the State through the armed forces by means of
the military coup of Velasco, which in turn generates a great growth in the State
economy. The number of State-owned companies, for example, increased from
18 to 180;therefore the State passes to become the motor of the economy led
by the bureaucratic bourgeoisie, but it is during this moment that the economy
enters into a grave crisis. The third moment is from 1980 onward,in which
bureaucratic capitalism enters into a general crisis and its final destruction, a
moment whichbegins with the People's War. Since it is a capitalism that is
born in critical condition,sick, rotten,tied to feudalism and subjugated to im-
perialism,at thistime itenters into a general crisis,to its destruction,and no
measure can save it. At best it shall lengthen its agony. On the other hand, like
a beast in mortal agony, itwill defenditselfby seekingto crushtherevolution.
If we see this process from the people's road, in the first moment the PCP
was constituted with Mariátegui in1928,and thehistoryof the country was
divided into two;in the second,the PCP was reconstitutedas a Partyofa
41
=====第42页=====
new type with Chairman Gonzalo and revisionism was purged; and in the third,
the PCP enteredto leadthe People'sWar, a transcendental milestonewhich
radically changedhistoryby takingthequalitatively superior leap of making
the conquest of power a reality by way of armed force and the People's War.
All of thisonly provesthe political aspectofbureaucratic capitalismthatis
rarely emphasized, but which Chairman Gonzalo considers as the key question:
Bureaucratic capitalism ripens the conditions for revolution,and today as it
enters intoitsfinal phase,it ripensthe conditionsforthe development and
victory of the revolution.
It is also very important to see howbureaucratic capitalism is shaped by
non-State monopoly capitalism and by State monopoly capitalism, that is the
reason whyhe differentiatesbetweenthetwofactionsof thebigbourgeoisie,
the bureaucratic and the comprador, in order to avoid tailing behind one or the
other,a problem that ledour Partyto30yearsof wrongtactics.It is important
to understand itthis way,sincethe confiscationof bureaucratic capitalism by
the New Power leads to the completionof the democratic revolution and the
advance intothesocialistrevolution.IfonlytheState monopolycapitalism is
targeted, ththeartwouldemainre,thnon-tate monopolycapital, an
the big compradorbourgeoisiewouldremaineconomicallyabletoliftits head
to snatch awaytheleadershipoftherevolutionandtopreventits passage to
the socialist revolution.
Furthermore,Chairman Gonzalogeneralizesthatbureaucraticcapitalismis
nota process peculiarto Chinaorto Peru,butthatitfollows the elated
conditions in which the various imperialists subjugatetheoppressed nations of
Asia, Africa,and Latin America, at a time when theseoppressed nations have
not yet destroyed the vestiges of feudalism, much less developed capitalism.
In synthesis,the key question to understand the process of contemporary
Peruvian society and the characterof the revolution is this Marxist-Leninist-
Maoist, Gonzalo Though thesis on bureaucratic capitalism, which is a contri-
bution to theworld revolutionthatweMarxist-Leninist-Maoists havefirmly
assumed with Gonzalo Thought.
What type of State is sustained by this semi-feudal and semi-colonial society,
upon which bureaucratic capitalism is unfolding? Having analyzed contempo-
rary Peruvian society and basing himself on the masterful Maoist thesis in "On
New Democracy" which expounds that the many State systems in the world can
be classified according to their class character into three fundamental types: 1)
Republics under the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, which also include the old
democratic States and may include the States under the joint dictatorship of
landowners and the big bourgeoisie;2) republics under the dictatorship of the
proletariat;and3)republicsunderthe jointdictatorshipof therevolutionary
classes. Chairman Gonzaloestablishesthatthecharacteroftheold reactionary
State in Peruisof thefirsttype,a jointdictatorship of landowners and the
big bourgeoisie,thebureaucraticor compradorbourgeoisiethat in collusion
and contention struggle forthe leadershipof the State.Since thehistorical ten-
dencyin uheuutouieimtl,scaily
implies a very acute and long struggle,especially since today the bureaucratic
42
=====第43页=====
bourgeoisie is in command of the old landlord-bureaucratic state.
At the same time he differentiates between the state system and the system
of government. They are parts of a whole; theformer beingthe placethat
classes occupy within the state and the latter is theform in which poweris
organized. Chairman Mao taught thatthe mainthingisto definethe class
character of a state, since the forms of government that are introduced can be
civilian or military, with elections or by decree, liberal-democratic or fascist, but
they always represent the dictatorship of the reactionary classes. To not see the
old State in this way is tofall intothetrapof identifyingadictatorship with
a military regime and tothink thata civilian government is nota dictatorship,
thus tailing behind one of the factions in the big bourgeoisie behind the tale of
"defending democracy”or “avoiding military coups," positions that instead of
destroying the old State support it and defend it. Such is the case in Peru with
the revisionists and opportunists of the United Left.
The old State is subordinated to imperialism, in our case principally Yankee
imperialism, which is propped up by its spinal column, the reactionary armed
forces, and counts on an ever-growing bureaucracy. The armed forces have the
same character as the State that they support and defend.
Chairman Gonzalo tells us clearly:
"It is this social system that the ruling classes and their Yankee
imperialist masters usufructfrom and defend with blood and fire,
through their landlord-bureaucratic State sustained by their reac-
tionary armed forces; constantly exercising their class dictatorship
(of the big bourgeoisie and landlords), either through a de facto mil-
itary government . . . or through governments stemming from
elections and so-called constitutionalones. . .  and, "
this decrepit system of exploitation destroys and halts the powerful
creative forces of the people, the only forces capable of the deepest
revolutionary transformation ...
”'
3.3 Targets of the Democratic Revolution
Chairman Gonzalo teaches us thatthere are three targets of the democratic
revolution: Imperialism, bureaucratic capitalism and semi-feudalism, with one
of them being the principal target according to the moment in which the revo-
lution takes place. Today, in the period of the agrarian war,the principal target
is semi-feudalism.
Imperialism,mainlyYankee,becauseforus it is the principal imperialism
that dominates and that tries to ensure its dominance more and drives home our
situation asa semi-colonialcountry,but we mustalso wardoffpenetration by
various factionsof theold Statetosharpentheircontradictionsand isolatethe
barrierofthedemocraticrevolution;itactsto maintainsemi-feudalismand
43
=====第44页=====
subsists today under new modalities but which still constitutes the basic problem
of the country.
3.4 Tasks of the Democratic Revolution
1. To destroy imperialist domination, principally Yankee imperialism in Peru's
case, while warding off the actions of the other superpower, Russian social-
imperialism, and of the other imperialist powers.
2. Todestroy bureaucratic capitalism,confiscatingboth thebig Stateand
non-State monopoly capital.
3. To destroy the property of the feudal landlords, confiscating both the big
associative and non-associative properties, with individual distribution of
the land under the slogan "Land to the tiller,," primarily and principally
to the poor peasants.
4. To support middle capital, which is allowed to work while imposing con-
ditions on it. All of this implies the collapse of the old State through the
People's War with armedrevolutionaryforce and the leadership of the
Communist Party in building a new State.
3.5 Social Classes in the Democratic Revolution
Chairman Gonzalo defines the social classes which must be united according
to the conditions of the revolution: the proletariat, the peasantry (principally
the poorpeasants),the pettybourgeoisie andthe middle bourgeoisie. The
classes we aim against are: landlords of the old and the new mold, and the big
bureaucratic bourgeoisie or comprador bourgeoisie.
Chairman Gonzalo tells us:
”. . . the peasantry is the principal motive force. .
. with a fundamental revindication of Land to the tiller'
raised many times each century, which despite its coura-
geous struggles has yet to achieve it"; "... the proletariat
. . . the leading class of our revolution . . . that in the
long, arduous struggle has torn only starvation wages and
has conquered only crumbs from their exploiters,only to
lose them through each economic crisis that society en-
dures; a proletariat that debates within a sinister iron cir-
cle . ..“; "a petty bourgeoisie with broad layers, which
corresponds to a backward country, that sees its dreams
shattered in time to the inexorable pauperization that the
prevailing socialorderimposeson them";and, "apetty
bourgeoisie, a national bourgeoisie that is weak and lacks
44
=====第45页=====
capital, which develops swaying and split between revolu-
tion and counterrevolution. ..." "Four classes that his-
torically make up the people and the motive forces of the
revolution, but of them all it is principally the poor peas-
antry who are the main driving force.
“
He gives particular importance to the scientific organization of poverty, a
thesis that comes from Marx and that for us implies organizing the principally
poor peasantry and the poorest masses of the cities into a Communist Party, a
People's Guerrilla Army and a New State that is concretized through People's
Committees. He establishes a relationship that to speak of the peasant question
is to speak of the land question, and to speak of the land question is to speak
of the military question,and to speak of the military question is to speak of
thequestion of Power, of the New State which we shall reach through the
democratic revolution led by the proletariat through its Party, the Communist
Party. He establishes that in the People's War, the peasant question is the base
and the military question is the guide. Furthermore, without the peasantry in
arms there isnohegemonyinthe Front. Itis,then,of great significanceto
understand that the peasant question is basic and it sustains all of the actions
in the democratic revolution. It is important even in the socialist revolution.
The proletariatistheleading class,andheteachesusthatit is the class
that guarantees the Communist course of the revolution,thatunited with the
peasantry it makesupthe worker-peasantalliance,thebasisof the Front. It
is a proletariatthatisconcentrated largely inthe capitaland is proportionally
greaterthanin China,butintermof percentage decrasesday by dayinPru,
a specificsituationthatpresentsitselfas weapplythedemocraticrevolution,
for which we wage the People's War in the cities as a complement. A class that
has arrived today to the formation of a Communist Party, a Marxist-Leninist-
Maoist, Gonzalo Thought party thathas generated a People's Guerrilla Army
which it leadsabsolutelyanda NewState whichitleadsina joint dictatorship,
a Party thatthroughalmost20yearsof reconstitutionand sevenin leadershp
of the People's War has impressed a great historical leap upon the people. It
is vital to understandits leadingrole inthe democraticrevolution,sinceit
guarantees the correct course towards Communism. Without the leadership of
the proletariat the democratic revolution wouldevolve into an armed action
underthe leadershipof thebourgeoisieand wouldfall under the tutelageofa
superpower or imperialist power.
To the above two classes are added the petty bourgeoisie, and taken together
they are the solid trunk ofthe revolutionary Front, which is no more than a Front
for the People's War and a framework of the alliance of classes that makes up the
New State,the People's Committeesin the countrysideand the Revolutionary
Defense Movement of the People in the cities.
Concerning the middlebourgeoisie,todayit does not participate in the re-
olution butitsinterestsarerespected. Itis nota targetof thedemoratic
revolutionitislashatufrsvr-atrriconsfomthacto-
ies butitisof dualcharacterandinthecourseofthedemocraticrevolution
can join thesideofthe revolutionatany moment.Iftheinterestsofthe mid-
45
=====第46页=====
dle bourgeoisie are not taken into account then therevolution would change
character; it would no longer be democratic but socialist.
From all this he derivesthat the New Statethat we areforminginthe
democratic revolution shall be a joint dictatorship,anallianceof four classes
led by the proletariat through its Party, the Communist Party: A dictatorship
of workers,peasants, the petty bourgeoisie and under certain conditions the
national or middle bourgeoisie; a dictatorship that today is of three classes, since
the middle bourgeoisie do not participate in the revolution, but their interest
are respected. These classes make up the dictatorship of New Democracy in the
state system, in a People's Assembly as a system of government.
3.6
FundamentalContradictions in the Demo-
cratic Revolution
In the democratic revolution there exist three fundamental contradictions: The
contradiction between the nation and imperialism,the contradiction between
thepeople andbureaucratic capitalism, andthe contradictionbetweenthe
masses and feudalism. Depending on the periods of the revolution, any one of
these can be the principal contradiction. Today, as we develop an agrarian war,
if we carefully take note of the three, the principal contradiction is between the
masses and feudalism. This has a process of development in the different phases
of the war,thus in our case the principal contradiction of masses/feudalism has
unfolded as masses/government,and latershall be between the new State-old
State, and its perspective is Communist Party/reactionary armed forces.
3.7Stages of the Revolution
Chairman Gonzalo teaches us that the democratic revolution is the indispens-
able first stage in the oppressed nations, which shall pass through various periods
according to how such contradictions are resolved. He conceives of an unbreak-
able relationship and an uninterrupted road between the democratic revolution
and the second stage, which is the socialist revolution, and its perspective is a
series of cultural revolutions to arrive at Communism, serving the world revolu-
tion. As such, we have a maximum program and a minimum one, the minimum
being the program of the democratic revolution that is specified in each period
and which implies a new politics: The joint dictatorship of four classes. A new
economy: Confiscation ofbigimperialist capital,ofbureaucratic capitalism,
and of the big feudal landlord property, with individual land distribution to the
principally poor peasants. A new culture: National, or rather anti-imperialist,
democratic, or rather for the people, and scientific, or based on the ideology of
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought. The maximum program implies
keeping in mind that we, as Communists, must aim to eliminate the three in-
equalities between town and countryside, between intellectual and manual work,
and between workers and peasants. Two programs for which we give our lives
46
=====第47页=====
against every kind of injury, taunt and abjectness. Only the Communists can
fight to maintain the revolution on its course.
Thus, Chairman Gonzalo States:
What in essence is this democratic revolution? It is a peas-
ant war led by the Communist Party, which intends to create
a new State comprised of four classes to crush imperialism,
the big bourgeoisie, and the landlords in order to fulfil its
four tasks. The democratic revolution has a principal form
of struggle: The People's War, and a principal form of or-
ganization: The armed force, which is the solution to the
land question, the national question, and the question of the
destruction of the landlord bureaucratic state and the reac-
tionary armed forces, the spinal column that sustains it, in
order to fulfill the political objective of building a new State, a
State of new democracy, and to make the People's Republic of
New Democracy, advancing immediately to the socialist rev-
olution. In synthesis, the democratic revolution becomes con-
crete through a peasant war led by the Communist Party; any
other modality is only a service to the landlord-bureaucratic
state.
In synthesis,Chairman Gonzalo demonstrates the validityof the two stages
of the revolution in the oppressed nations and establishes that the world prole-
tarian revolution has three types of revolution. As such, by making the demo-
craticrevolution,the Communist Partyof Peru is serving the world revolu-
tion and Chairman Gonzalo is contributing to the world revolution. We, who
uphold Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought,assume the line on the
democratic revolution established by Chairman Gonzalo.
Howthe Democratic Revolution is Being
3.8
Applied Today
In over seven years of people's war in Peru, the justness and correctness of Gon-
zalo Thought is demonstratedand we see that the Communist Party of Peru,
with the Great Leadership of Chairman Gonzalo, is leading the principally poor
peasantry in arms, is forming a joint dictatorship of workers, peasants, and the
petty bourgeoisie under the hegemony of the proletariat, is respecting the inter-
ests of the middle bourgeoisie, and is destroying thirteen centuries of the reac-
tionary State. It is a dictatorship that marches within the People's Committees,
today clandestine, which are expressions of the New State that exercises Power
through People's Assemblies, in which everyone expresses opinions,chooses,
judges, or sanctions by applying true democracy. They do not hesitate in using
the dictatorship, using coercion in order to maintain their power and to defend it
from the exploiting classes or their oppressors, gamonales or their lackeys, thus
specifying a new politics and an advance in the taking of Power from below.
47
=====第48页=====
The very basis of this society, semi-feudalism, is being destroyed and new social
relations of production are being introduced by applying a new economy, taking
into account the agrarian tactic of combating the evolution of semi-feudalism
by aiming at associative property and avoiding non-associative property, neu-
tralizing the rich peasantry, winning over the middle peasantry and basing itself
on the poor peasantry. The agrarian program of "Land to the tiller" by means
of confiscation and individual distribution advances througha process: With
plans of leveling, whose concrete objective is to destroy semi-feudal relations in
order to disarticulate the productive process, directing the spearhead of the rev-
olution at dislocating the power of the gamonales with armed actions; applying
collective planting and crop harvesting, although we do not yet have power or an
EGP that is sufficiently developed; all the peasants collectively work everyone's
land, always favoring the principally poor peasantry. In the event of a surlus, a
form of tax is calculated and produce or seeds are distributed to the poorest and
to the middle peasants. The lands of the rich peasants are not touched unless
such land is needed, but conditions are imposed on them. This political policy
has had highlypositiveresults,ithasbenefittedthepoorest,ithas increased
the qualityofthe products andaboveall itis defended better; the perspective
of this policyistheinvasionoflandsandindividualallotment.Also,particu-
larly in new peasant zones,we haveappliedinvasionsof landsand individual
allotment,lightingthestruggleinthecountrysideanddisturbingthe plansof
the old State, of each government in turn, and organized the armed defense in a
specific opportunity. Today,wehavegeneralizedthelandinvasionthrougout
the country. Furthermore, the organizationof productionof an entire peope is
being achieved, for example with the exchange of produce or seeds, the collection
of firewood or cochinilla [a typeof plantused in making dyes—Tr.], communal
shops, trade, and mule driving. This process serves the actions in cities, the sab-
otages againstdemo-bourgeoisor corporative-fascist stateorganizations, Stat
or private and imperialist banks, centersof the imperialist superpowers or pow-
ers,industrialor"research”sites,businessesof bureaucraticcapitalism,such
as Centromin Peru.Italsoservestheselectiveannihilations,theagitationand
propaganda campaigns and armed propaganda.
And on thebasis of this new politicsand new economy,a new culture is
being erectedthatbeats in theheartsof principallythe poor peasants;basic
educationisaproblem thatdeservesour fundamentalattention and isunfolding
under coeducation,education and work, with a basic program for the children,
adults,and forthe masses in general;it is truly important. The problemsof
health andrecreation of the masses arealsoof vital importance. Thus,the
massesareorganizedformingtheirmobilization,politicization,organzation
and armament,aiming towards thearmed seaof masses,basedon the ideology
of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought,underthe leadershipof the
Party, withtheexperienceof the People's Warand aboveall and principally
with the New Power,exercising it, conquering it,defending itand developing
it, as People's Committees, Support Bases and advancing the People's Republic
of New Democracy.
This is the democratic revolution that the Party is specifying for Peruvian
48
=====第49页=====
society, overthrowing imperialism, bureaucratic capitalism and semi-feudalism
in the countrythrough a unified People's War,principally in the countryside
and with an urban complement, and it is not the"democratic revolution" falsely
proclaimed by the current fascist and corporatist Apra government that negates
the characterof Peruvian society,classes andtheclass struggle,especiallythe
landlord-bureaucratic dictatorial characterof the old state, as well as the need
for violence to topple it. It is a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist,Gonzalo Thought
democratic revolution that constitutes an ardent and growing fame serving the
world proletarian revolution which is guaranteed by the masterful leadership of
Chairman Gonzalo.
DOWN WITH THE LANDLORD-BUREAUCRATIC STATE!
FOR THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF NEW DEMOCRACY!
LONG LIVE THE PERUVIAN REVOLUTION!
Central Committee, Communist Party of Peru
49
=====第50页=====
Chapter 4
Line
Military
4.1
Introduction
the People's War.
bating andcrushnevisioismantheighoprtuistlines.Inapplying
dialectical materialism tothequestionof war,themilitary linealsoexpresses
the philosophicalthoughtof Chairman Gonzaloand summarizes the laws of
war,ofrevolutionarywar ingeneral,andthespecificlawsof thervolutionary
nomic,andtulwknd rmitutodiftitebtethpletarian
military line and the bourgeois military line.
The military line consistsof the lawsthat govern the People's War for the
conquest of Power and its defense.It contains three elements:
1. People's war,specified in our case as unified people's war, with the coun-
tryside as principal and the city complementary.
2. Construction of the revolutionary armed forces, in our case specified as the
People's Guerilla Army, whichhasthe particularityof incorporatingthe
militia in order to advance towards the sea of armed masses, and;
3. Strategy and tactics that are formed through the encirclement and annihila-
tion campaigns and the counter-campaigns of encirclement and annihilation.
In our casethis is specified by applying political and military plans that
have a political and military strategy developed in campaigns with specific
objectives.
50
=====第51页=====
4.2
People's War
4.2.1On the People's War in Peru
Chairman Gonzalo,reaffirminghimself onthe universal lawof revolutionary
violence, takes up the highest military theory of the proletariat established by
Chairman Mao: People's war, which is universally validity and is applicable in
all types of countries, in accordance with the conditions of each revolution. The
world people's war is the principal form of struggle that the proletariat and the
oppressed peoples of the world should launch to oppose imperialist world war.
His point of departure is that people's war is a war of the masses and can only
be accomplished by mobilizing the masses and relying on them. He says: "The
masses give us everything, from the crusts of bread that are taken from their own
mouths to their precious blood which stirs jointly with that of the combatants
and militants, which nourishes the road of the People's War for the New Power."
The masses should be organized with asrms into the People's Guerilla Army.
In the rural Support Bases all the men and women of each People's Committee
are organizedmilitarily.Inthecities,the People's Guerrill Armyalsoats and
accretes more and more of the masses into the various new organizations in and
for the People's War. The Revolutionary Movement in Defense of the People is
the concretizationof the Frontin the cities,and itsobjectiveis to mobilize the
masses in resistance, to serve the war, and to serve the future insurrection.
He holds that in order to carry forward the People's War, we must take into
account four fundamental questions:
1. The ideologyof the proletariat,Marxism-Leninism-Maoism thatmustbe
specified in a guiding thought—therefore we baseourselveson Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought, primarily the latter;
2. The need for the Communist Partyof Peru that leads the People's War;
3. The People's War is specifiedas a peasant warthatfollows the roadof
surrounding the cities from the countryside; and
4. Support Basesorthe New Power,the constructionof the Support Bases,
which is the essence of the path of surrounding the cities from the country-
side.
He analyzes the historical process of our people and demonstrates that they
have always struggled, that it
has been cradled and advanced through revolutionary violence.
It is through this violence, in its diverse forms and degrees,
that our people have conquered their revindications, rights, and
freedoms, since nothing fell from the sky, nor was it handed
out. Damn the words of traitors'; everything was won in fact
through revolutionary violence, in ardent battles against reac-
tionary violence; that is how the eight hour day was won, how
our lands were conquered and defended, how our rights were
won and tyrants were overthrown. Revolutionary violence is,
therefore, the very essence of our historical process... it is
51
=====第52页=====
easy to understand that the development and victory of the Pe-
ruvian revolution, of our democratic revolution, the emancipa-
tion of the people and the class, will be achieved solely through
the greatest revolutionary war of our people, raising the masses
in arms through the People's War.
He draws the historical lesson that these political and military events have
defined the major transformations in the country. He tells us that first comes
the military deed and later political change. Thus he reaffirmsthat war is the
continuation of politics by other means. He teaches us how the masses of our
people have foughtagainstthe exploiters. Since the VII century, in which the
Peruvian state emerged, the masses have combated oppression and exploitation.
The Incan empire established its domination through wars of conquest which
culminated inthebattleof Yahuarpampa againstthe_Chancas1. Later,the
empire further expanded through wars. This is a political and military fact.
The conquest by the Spanish crown was another political and military event
that was imposed,crushing the resistance of the indigenous people and using the
internal strugglesofthe conquered.Nevertheless,weshouldhighlightamong
others the struggleof Manco Inca, who led a rebellion againstthe Spanish.
The impositionofthe Vice-royalty was another political and military event
that was used to crush the conquistadors themselves. To maintain itself it had
to face large peasantuprisings suchastheone ledby Juan Santos Atahualpa,
and in 1780 the powerful movementof Túpac Amaru that raised 100 thousand
men,extending from CuscoandPunointo Bolivia,putingthedominationof
the Vice-royaltyatserious risk,having repercussionsin Argentina,Colombia,
and Mexico and that shook up America. The movement was defeated, but it
had shaken up and undermined the Vice-royalty,thus preparing the conditions
for Emancipation. To see its class character, we should recall that Túpac Amaru
was a cacique2.
The Emancipation was anothermilitaryand political eventand has three
moments: First,in the XVIII Century,peasantuprisings,Túpac Amaru for
example;second,theuprisingsinthecities,suchasthatof Francisco de Zela
in TacnaandthguelahghlihtinthoseofCangaloandYauyosamong
manyothers;third,confrontationsbetweenlargearmiesthatcomplete the lib-
erating exploitsofSan Martnand Bolivarinthebattleof Ayacucho in1824.
Itis importanttounderstandthateventhough the Emancipation was led by
the creoles,ithad the meritofbreaking the dominationofthe Spanish crown;
that San Martin was a great military strategist and Bolivar proved to be both
a politicalandmilitarystrategist.Bothofthemfoughtfortheemancipation
of several American countrieswithoutseeking personalgain,showing that to
serve agreatcausewemustalways putthegeneralinterestfirstand neverthe
personal, and they did so without being Communists.
In the Republicthlanlordemainedin powebutconrontintat
pasantgilooof
1Predominant cultural group in the region of Ayacucho and Apurímac.
52
=====第53页=====
Pedro, or thatof Llaccolla3 in Ocros. Here we have the dark chapter of the war
with Chile where both countries faced each other manipulated by the interests of
the English and the French that were seeking our wealth in guano and nitrates.
This was a war that halted the incipient capitalist development of the country
and revealed the dirty role of the dominant classes, partof which capitulated
to Chile. But we must emphasize the heroic resistanceof the masses against
the invader in defense of the peopleand territorial integrity, a resistancethat
was especially strong in the mountainous Central and Southern regions of the
country where guerrillas were formed; Cáceres4, who was a landowner-soldier,
played an important role in that circumstance.
The war with Chile was waged from 1879 to 1883, and it led to the collapse
of the Peruvian economy. Shortly thereafter, in 1895 it entered thebeginning
of bureaucratic capitalism that initiated the developmentof contemporary Pe-
ruvian society. As the XIX Century passed, Peru went from being a colony to
a semi-colony and from feudal to semi-feudal. Bureaucratic capitalism bound
to Yankee imperialism began to develop,and thus displaced the English. The
modern proletariatemerged which changed the termsof the political struggl.
From this historical process the following lessons are drawn: That the peo-
plehavealwaysstruggled,theyare not peacefulandtheyapplyrevolutionary
violence withthemanhyhaveathand;thatthpaatruglesare those
which havemostshakenthefoundationof societyandthese strugles have
not triumphdautcthaioftplat psented
bythe Communist Party; and that politicalandmilitaryevents determie the
major social changes.
From the standpointofthemilitary line,contemporary Peruhasthree mo-
ments linkedtotheappearanceoftheproletariatthatfoundsitsPartytotake
Power through revolutionary violence, specifying its road, which is synthesized
in the process of the military line of the Party.
The first moment (1895 to 1945). The Communist Partyof Peru is consti-
tutedand itlitar iMaitutablishdcaoa
outlineoftheroad.Theheroicworkersstrugglesforbetterwages,theeight
hour work day,for decent working conditions,the peasant movements of the
southern Sierra for lands and theagricultural proletarian movements,and the
movements to reform the university, leads to a complex sharpening of the class
struggle in whichthe Peruvian proletariat matures and in which Mariátegui
founds the Communist Partyof Peru, on October 7, 1928, under the banner of
Marxism-Leninism.
Mariátegui indicatedandoutlined fundamental ideason revolutionaryvi-
olence. Hesaid:"Thereis norevolutionthatis moderate,balanced, calm,
placid.""Powerisconqueredthroughviolence...itispreservedonlythrough
dictatorship."Heconceived warasbeing protractedinnature:"Arevolution
canonlbeuFqutliatnf
53
=====第54页=====
He established the relationship between politics and war, understanding that the
revolution generates an army of a new type with its own tasks different from
those of the exploiters;healso understoodtheroleof the peasantry and the
vital participation of the working class in a leading role, that the revolution will
come from the Andes, that "with the defeat of the latifundista feudalism, urban
capitalism will lack forces to resist the growing working class"; that in order to
make revolutionrifles, a program and doctrine are needed. He conceived the
revolution as a total war in which there is a conjunction of political, social, mil-
itary, economic and moral elements, and that each faction puts in tension and
mobilizes all the resources that it can. He totally rejected the electoral road.
Withthe deathof Mariátegui in April1930,the Rightledby Ravinesis
going to usurp the leadership of the Party and thequestioning and negation
of Mariátegui's road occurs. They invoke insurrection in words but degenerate
into electoralism. The so-called“Constitutional Congress”of the Party in1942
sanctionsthecapitulationisttacticsofofthe"NationalUnion",bothininter-
nalpoliticsaswellasinternationally.ThePartyisinfuencedbyBrowderite
ideas, a predecessorof modern revisionism, where there isaclear abandonment
ofrevolutionaryviolenceandanelectoraltacticispromotedcenteringonthe
"NationalDemocraticFront".Neverthless,theredlineintheParty struggled
todefedt-l
the internal struggles were resolved through expulsions.
The second moment(1945to1980). The Communist Partyof Peru is recon-
stituted,andwithrespecttothemilitaryline,Chairma Gonzaloestablishes
the"Definitionand Foundationsofthe Road".Thissecond moment hastwo
parts: Thefirst,intheperiodfrom1945to1963,isoneof"Newimpulses for
the developmentofthe Partyandthebeginningsofthestruggleagainst revi-
sionism”andthe second,from1963 to 1980,is oneof"Establishmentof the
general political line and reconstitution of the Party".
In the first partofthe second moment,by the mid-1950s,the struggl begins
for reactivatingthePartythathadbeenleft in disarrayafterOdra'scoupd'a.
Afterwards, the Party commences the opening step in the struggle against re-
visionism. This process occurs in the midst of the repercussions of the Cuban
revolution and principally because the unfolding of the struggle between Marx-
ism and revisionism begins at the world level. The road to revolution begins to
be discussed, the armed struggle is talked about again and in the IV Congress
of the Party in 1962,it is agreed that in Peru the so-called"two roads" are vi-
able:"The peacefulroad and the violentone.”Also,"the revolution can follw
the road of surrounding the cities from the countryside as well as from the city
to the countryside.Butin spiteofthisempty talk,the Party inessence was
hanging on to theoldelectoral strategythentakingtheformoftheso-caled
"National Liberation Front." This was the revisionism of Khrushchev. At this
time the political positionsof Chairman Gonzalo begin to emerge,who laid the
foundations of the red line which adhered to the positions of Chairman Mao in
the struggle between Marxism and revisionism.
In the second partof the second moment,from1963to1980,we have the
"Establishmentoftheral polticallineandreconstitutiootheParty",hs
54
=====第55页=====
task was carried forward by Chairman Gonzalo in constituting the red fraction
of the Party in an intense struggle of more than fi fteen years and through three
political strategies:
From 1963 to 1969 he guided the red fraction under the political strategy of
following the "Road of surrounding the cities from the countryside." From 1969
to 1976 he ledthe Party with the political strategyof "Reconstitutionof the
Party for people's war." From 1976 to 1979 there was the political strategyof
"Complete the Reconstitution and Establish Foundations”for the beginning of
the armed struggle.
During the first strategic period of following the "Road of surrounding the
cities from the countryside,, the Communists of Peru are profoundly stirred by
the struggle between Marxism and revisionism, and Marxist positions soak into
the organization. In the 1960s there is a great peasant movement that mobilized
300to 500 thousand peasants whichfoughtfor land butthat did not convert
into an armed struggle due to revisionist leadership;a great movement of labor
strikesoccursin the workingclass,and theuniversity struggleis developed to
a higher level.All these events had repercussionson the Partyand Chairman
Gonzalo wouldforgetheredfractionin Ayacucho,withclearideasthatthe
Party mustseize power,and thatitmustbebasedon Marxisttheory. He
unleashesafrontalstruggleagainstrevisionism thatwascentered in the Soviet
Union,and adhersrmlytothepoitionoftheCieseCommuist Party an
principally withthoseof Chairman Mao.He expounds that:"The countryside
is in a powerful revolutionaryferment""we must payspecial atentiontothe
countrysideandtothe poor peasants",andthat"ourrevolutionwill be from
thecountryidtothity".ItheIVNationalConceo Januar,
meets withthediferentbasesofthePartytoexpelrevisionismanditscrusty
representatives Jorge del Prado,Acostaand Juan Barrio. Thus our Party is
going to be one of the first in breaking and expelling revisionism from its ranks.
Chairman Gonzalo began to consolidate [aboco a parar] the Party in the Re-
gional Committee of Ayacucho; he put the center of Party work in the country-
side; in the city he organized the poor masses in the Neighborhoods' Federation,
and reorganized the Revolutionary Student Front. But what is of transcendental
importance is that despite the opposition of the new central leadership Chairman
Gonzalo, by applying a Party agreement,launched the"Special Work",which
was the military work of the Regional Committees by giving them three func-
tions: political, military, and logistical. Afterwards, in sharp two-line struggle
against the positions of the central leadership that wanted to control the mili-
tary work, he combated militarism, mercenaryism and foquismo. [This refers to
the foco theory of Che Guerara—Trans.] In these circumstances the guerrillas of
the MIR [Movement of the Revolutionary Left—Trans.] develop, a position that
expressed the struggle of our people from a petit-bourgeois outlook, which fol-
lows a militaristic line and sidestepsthe Party.In spiteof being outof step with
the rise of the peasants,this movement showed the feasibilityof armed struggle
as a perspective,provided that it be ledbya just and correct line under the
leadershipof the Party. Forthatreason,Chairman Gonzalowasopposed o
dissolving the Party in order to tail the MIR and the ELN [National Liberation
55
=====第56页=====
Army—Trans.] in a supposed Front. At the September1967 meetingof the
Expanded Political Bureau, he expounded a Strategic Plan which contained a
setof measuresthatthe Central Committee should take for the construction
of the three instruments, having as its principal task the forming of the armed
forces that was agreed upon at the V National Conference of 1965. This occurs
in the midst of a factional struggle where most notably the fractions of "Patria
Roja” and the Right liquidationismof Paredes contend to corner the leader-
ship of the Party. Paredes intended to replay the tacticof tailing a factionof
the big bourgeoisie, while those of "Patria Roja"went on to plunge into Right
opportunism.
During the second political strategyof"Reconstitute the Party for Peoples
War,"Chairman Gonzalo will expoundontheunderlying revisionism within
the Party and that it is necessary to reconstitute it on the Basis of Party Unity:
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung thought,the thoughtof Mariátegui and the
general politicalline. These positions were foughtagainstby theaforementioned
fractions. The mishandlingof thetwo-linestruggleby Paredes isgoing to lead
to the fragmentationof the Party.Chairman Gonzalounderstood the neces-
sityoftheecontitutionofthePartyandthencessitytoulashaninternal
struggleto makeitarealitybysweepingawayrevisionism,asevidenced by
the editorialshewrote inBandera Rojaof Decembr1967,DevloptheInter-
nalStrugiD,anofApil"DepandIntifteIernal
StruggleinRevolutiorractc"Hewillworktilslothchanelig
ofrevolutro'arrhodofruties
from thecounrysidethuaccomplihinthepincipaltask demandedbythe
Party: The constructionoftherevolutionaryarmedforces.Heexpounds that
the indispensableoundationinthiundertakingisthedevlopmentof revolu-
tionary peasant work,that without good work among the peasant masses,that
is, work guided by Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thoughtand ld bythe
Communist Party, there cannot be a development of the armed forces nor of the
People's War. Afterward,he says that we must notonly retakethe continuing
validityof Mariátegui's thought,butwe must also develop it. He establishes
the Agrarian Program of the Party in May of 1969. In 1972 he establishes the
Strategic Planof the Regional Committeeof Ayacucho. He defeats the Right
liquidationism,and in the Party two fractions remain: The red fraction funda-
mentally in Ayacucho, led by Chairman Gonzalo, and the"Bolshevik”fraction,
acting primarily in Lima. The so-called"bolsheviks”developed a Leftliqui-
dationist line,a formof revisionismthatisolatedthe Partyfrom themasses.
Their conception wasthat it wasimpossibletofightunderfascism,thathaving
acorrect line wasenough.They had amilitary linethat wasopposed to pep's
war. They were crushed in 1975 and their leaders fled.
During the third political strategy to“Complete the Reconstitutionand to
Establish Bases”to initiate thearmed struggle,the problem was to finish, to
consider the Reconstitution of the Party as complete, and to establish founda-
tions to beginthearmed struggle.ThisissuewillbedefinedintheVI Plenum
of April,1977,inwhichallthe Party workedunderthe sloganof“Construction
serving thearmedstruggle"instruggleagainsttheseedsofaghtopportust
56
=====第57页=====
line,which sustainedthat Velasco had carried out the agrarian reform,that
there was a need to organizethe peasants aroundthe Peasant Federationof
Peru and that people's war needed to be waged for the "most deeply felt [mas
sentidas] revindications of the masses",forgetting about the problems of land
and of Power. In the cities, they developed "workerism", focusing the class in
labor leaders [gremialismo] andopposedto the class playingits leading role.
Once these positions were crushed, Chairman Gonzalo launched the "National
Plan of Construction"in June of 1977; dozens of cadre were sent to the coun-
tryside in the interests of the strategic needs of the People's War and to build
Regional Committees taking into account the future Support Bases. In the VIII
Plenum of July of 1978, he establishes the "Outline for the Armed Struggle".
In essence, he expounded that the People's War in Peru must be developed as a
unified whole in both the countryside as well as in the city, with the countryside
being the principal theater of armed actions, following the road of surrounding
the cities from the countryside. Furthermore,it must take into accountthe
historical social processof the country,especially the militaryaspect,theim-
portanceof the Sierraand principallyfrom the Central and Southern part in
our history, the importance of the Capital,and the need to place Peru within
the contextof Latin America, in South America particularly,and withinthe
international contextandtheworld revolution. All the Partyentered into a
general reorganization,placing thecountrysideascentralto develop the prin-
cipal formof struggleandorganization. Thus,thebasisof theconstruction of
the three instruments of the revolution was laid down.
In synthesis,the entire process of Reconstitution left us with a Partyof a
new type preparedtoinitiate thePeople's Warandtoeadituntilthe conquest
of power countrywide.In this process the historic contingent was forged, who
with the ideology of the proletariat under the leadership of Chairman Gonzalo
was ready to assume the conquest of Power through the People's War.
Thethird moment(1980tothepresent). The Party begins to leadthe
People's War.Its military lineis formed withthe“Application and development
of the Road." This third moment has four milestones:
1) Definition. Inessence,the Partytakesthehistoricandtranscendental
agreementof initiating the People's War in Peru, which was defined in the IX
Expanded Plenumof June,1979. Thisagreement was achieved in the midst
of three intense struggles:The first was against the rightopportunist line that
was opposed to initiating thearmed struggle,negating therevolutionarysit-
uation,thattheconditionsdidn'texist,andthattherewas"stability."They
were expelled, and the Party agreed upon a new stage and a new goal. The sec-
ond struggle wasagainsta new Rightistlinethatconsideredthatinitiatingthe
armed struggle was impossible,that it was a "dream", that there was no need
of taking up thatagreementbecause it was a matterof principle. The third
struggle was withthe divergenceswithinthe Left,one in whichthe nuances
were discussed on how to develop the People's War. It was established that the
proletarian position was Chairman Gonzalo's and therefore was the one which
should be enforced;the entire Party made a commitment to be guided by the
leadership of Chairman Gonzalo.
57
=====第58页=====
Concerning the construction of the armed forces, measures were takento
form military cadres, specific groups for action and to undermine the reactionary
forces,aiming at soldiers. In strategy and tactics, the organic system was re-
proposed.
2) Preparation. In this milestone event, the Program of the Party is sanc-
tioned, along with the general political line of the Peruvian revolution and the
Party statues. Problems of political strategy related to revolutionary violence,
the People's War and the Party, the Army and United Frontare resolved. The
following Decision is assumed: "Forgethe First Company in Deeds! Letvio-
lence flourish realized in the initiation and development of the armed struggle;
we open with leadand offer ourblood to write the new chapterof the his-
tory of the Party and of our people forging the First Company in deeds (Peru,
December 3, 1979)."
The Party prepared the armed struggle dealing with two problems: 1) Prob-
lemsof PoliticalStrategythatdefineboththe contentand theobjectivesof
the People's War in perspectiveand inthe shortterm, as well as the guidelines
that the People's War should have,its military plans,the constructionofthe
three instrumentsand their connectionwith the new Power;2) The Initiation
of the armed struggle. This decisiveand paramount question had merited the
most specialatentionfromChairman Gonzalo,whoestablishedthe"Planof
Initiation”guidedbythesloganInitiatethearmedstruggle!”thatwasthe
condensatioofthepinipalpoliticthathadtobedevelopedmltailyIts
contentncludedFthlitcltasktobulfledcati
thearmedstruggle,boycotingthelections,militarilypromotintharmed
struggleforthelandandestablihingthbasefothenewconquestsspe-
ciallythenewPower.Second,ormofstruggle:Guerrillwarareabtae,
propaganda and armedagitation,and selective annihilation. Third, organic and
military forms: Armed detachments, with or without modern weapons. Fourth,
a chronology,dateof the initiationand durationofthe Plan,and simultaneous
actions for specific dates. Fifth,slogans: "Armed Struggle!","A Workers'and
Peasants' Government!", and"Down with the New Reactionary Government!"
The Preparation was carried out in struggle against the Rightist positions
within the Party that were negating conditions, that the Party was not prepared
or that the masses would not lend us support. The leader of these positions
deserted and they were crushed.
3) Initiation. On May 17, 1980,the People's War in Peru began. It "was
a defiant political blowof transcendental significance,deploying rebellious red
fags and hoisting hammers and sickles,that proclaimed:Itis right to rebel'
and 'Power grows from the barrel of a gun.'It summoned the people, especially
the poorpeasantry,to standupin arms,tolight thebonfireandto shake
the Andes,to writethe newhistoryinthefieldsandhiddenfeaturesofour
tumultuous landscape,to tear down the rotten walls of the oppressive order, to
conquer the summits,to storm the heavens with guns to open the new dawn.
The beginnings were modest,almost without modern weapons. Combat was
given,it wasadvancedandit wasbuiltfromthesmalltothelargeandfrom
the weak material and initialfirecame the greatturbulent fire and mighty roar
58
=====第59页=====
that grows, sowing revolution and exploding into ever more impetuous People's
War."
This third milestone lastedfrom Mayto Decemberof1980,resolvingthe
problem of how to initiate the armed struggle,of crossingfrom the timesof
peace to the times of war. The militarization of the Party through actions and
the masterful Planof Initiation were key. This was howthe new was born:
Theprincipalform of struggle,the armed struggle andthe principal formof
organization,the detachments and squads. The mostoutstanding actions in
thefield weretheguerrilla actionsofAyrabamba andAysarca [localitiesin
Ayacucho—Trans.] and, in the city,setting fire to the Municipal Buildingof
San Martín [adistrict in Lima—Trans.]. Theboycottof theelectionsinthe
town of Chuschi was the action that initiated the beginning of the People's War.
This plan wasfulfilled, defeatingthe Rightist positions that were sayingthat
the Plan was "Hoxhite”and that the actions were centered in the city. These
arguments exaggerated appearances with realityand distortedtheir essence,
since reactionary propaganda gave big headlines to the sabotages in the cities
and minimized theactions in the countryside.It isa specificityof the Peple's
War in Peru to make the countryside the principal theaterof action and the
cities a necessary complement.
4)Developmentoftheguerrllawar.Ithasbeenfulfilledthroughthree
military plans: Deployguerrlla warfare, Conquer Bases and Develop Bases.
Regarding the Deploymentof guerrilla warfare. This was completed bya
plan that lasted from May1981to December 1982 and had a pilot period in Jan-
uary 1981. The slogan"Open guerrilla zones in functionof Support Bases” im-
plied an ideological-political leapby putting Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, guid-
ing thoughtof Chairman Gonzaloasthebasisof partyunity.Militarily ur-
rilla warfareopened like afanthroughoutthe country seekingto "Capture
weapons and the means for war, shake up the countryside with armed actions"
and "Strike to advance towards the Support Bases." These plans were partially
completed withthe latter,"Strike",being the link withthe subsequent plan.
The razingof feudal production relations,aiming against gamonalismo as the
spearhead,andfighting againstthejoint policeoperations was advanced. A
multitude of assaultson police posts and selective annihilation against gamonal
power were carried out, generating a great mass mobilization of peasant masses
that incorporated themselves into the militia, giving rise to a power vacuum for
the reactionaries. The People's Committees emerged,which grewand multi-
plied. This is how the Support Bases appeared and were specifid.
We emphasize actions such as the assault on the city jail of Ayacucho where
the First Company acted for the firsttime,harassing the city and freeing tens
of prisonersof war;the assaults on the police posts of Vilcashuamán, of Totos,
of San José de Secce; the sabotages to the power grid and communication lines;
the razings likethoseofPincos,Toxama,Allpachaca,Huayllapampaamong
others.In thecitiesthere were thesabotagestobureaucraticcapitalism and to
imperialism, as well as support for strikes by armed actions.
Here the Rihtist itinsthat wecombated wethoeof proalpower
andfefdomdiav te
59
=====第60页=====
most important conquest: The new Power, the clandestine People's Committees
that are the backbone of the Support Bases.
Facingthe advanceofthePeople's War, thereactionary governmentof
Belaúndefrom theverybeginning launchedthe persecution,repression, tor-
ture, the imprisonment and death of the militants, combatants and the masses.
They have mounted police operations independently and jointly with their po-
liceforces,Civil Guards, Republican Guards,Investigative Police, along with
the counterinsurgency corps known as the "sinchis". They promulgatedthe
D.L. [Legal Decree—Trans.] No. 046, a truly terroristlawthatviolatesthe
most elementary principles of bourgeois criminal law. But the result of all their
plans has been the most all-round failure; the masses rejected and resisted their
aggression. The emergence of the new Power broke the reticence of the Belaúnde
government, which from the beginning minimized the problem to maintain their
bogus democratic facade and strengthened the class necessitiesof the two ex-
ploiters,thebig bourgeoisieandlandlordsundertheprotectionof principally
Yankee imperialism. Belaundethen entrustedthearmedforces(Army, Navy
and AirForce),thebackboneoftheState,to reestablishpublicorderwith
the supportof the police forces, imposing a stateof emergency under political-
military controlintheregionsof Ayacucho, Apurmac and Huancavelica, from
December of 1982 until today.
Chairman Gonzalo, with the development ofthe People's War and the coun-
terrevolutionaryresponsethatimpliedaqualitativeleap,outlinedthe Great
Plan of Conquering Bases in the Expanded Central Committee from January to
March1983 where four political tasks were defned:The general reorganization
oftheParty,thatoofheopl'GuerillArmandhevolutionary
Defense FrontofthePeopleandtheirconcrtizationasPeoplesCommittees in
the countryside and as the Revolutionary Defense Movement of the Peope in the
cities and the Military Plan of Conquering Bases. Politically, the contradiction
new State—old State was making headway under the slogan of "Defend, Develop
and Build”the Support Bases. A sharp armedconfictdeveloped in whichthe
reactionaries struggled to reestablishtheold Powerandthe revolution strug-
gled to counter-reestablish the new Power. This is what we call the struggle
between reestablishment and counter-reestablishment encompassing the years
1983 and 1984. Military plans were specified for the zones applying the tactics
of encircling and striking the enemy's weak point. Two successful campaigns
were completed in which the new Power was tempered passing its first testof
fire; the Party was steeled and the People's Guerrilla Army was developed.
The reactionary armed forces pursued the counterrevolutionary war follow-
ing the concepts of their Yankee imperialist master, the theory of counterrevolu-
tionary war based on their experience in Vietnam and particularly drawn from
the combatagainst the armed struggle in Latin America, especially in Central
America. That is the basic theoretical source combined with the "anti-terrorist"
experience of Israel and its counterpart in Argentina, along with advisors from
the Federal Republic of Germany, Taiwan, Spain, etc. This combined with their
experienceofthefewmonthsofanti-guerrillastruggleof1965andthemore
limited experienceof fighting in La Convención. The operations are under the
60
=====第61页=====
direction of the Joint Command of the Armed Forces that acts according to the
will of the National Defense Council headed by the President, today under Alan
García, who holds direct and inescapable responsibility. This counterrevolution-
ary strategy has been defeated many times. It has been crushed and defeated
completely andthoroughly by people's war,showingto the worldagain and
again the superiority of the strategy of the proletariat over that of imperialism.
Specific policies that were appliedby the genocidal government: masses
against masses; genocide, mass graves; disappearances of entire villages. In syn-
thesis, they unleashed the white terror in the countryside, especially in Ayacu-
cho, Huancavelica and Apurímac. The result of this genocide is eight thousand
seven hundred Peruvians dead. Of these,four thousand seven hundred of the
murdered were the poorest and the mostexploited, mainly peasants, shanty-
town and slumdwellers of the cities, along with four thousand disappeared. This
genocide has not produced the result they wanted; it did not crush the People's
War. On the contrary, "the People's War grows stronger, developing and strik-
ing powerfulblows,"proving whatChairman Maotaught,thatrepression is
what incites the revolution.
Within the Plan of Conquering Bases is the"Planof the Great Leap”that
is subjecttothespecificpoliticalstrategyof“TwoRepublicsareexpressed,
two roads,twopoles"andtheilitartategyoferalthguerllwar-
fare." Four successfulcampaigns werecarriedoutunderthepolitical guidelines
of: "Openourpoliticalspace",Againsthegeneralelectionsof1985,dis-
rupt,destabileandimpeethemwhvesibAinthascension
to powerbythe new Aprista government,”and"Underminethefascistand
corporativeApristaassembly.ThePeople'sWardevelopedintheregionof
Ayacucho, Huancavelica, and Apurímac and was expanded to Pasco, Huánuco
and San Martín,covering anarea from the departmentof Cajamarca, on the
border with Ecuador in the Northwest,to Puno on the border with Bolivia in
the Southeastofthecountry,triking andshaking-upthecities,speciallyinthe
capital.The People's War fundamentallyoccurs in the iera,thehistorical axis
of Peruvian societyand its mostbackwardand poorestpart,by transforming
it into the grand theaterof the revolutionary war. Itadvanced to the edge of
the Jungle and to the headlands of the Coast. Thus, the People's War was not
conceived in a single region but was developed simultaneously in several regions,
although in unequal form, with a principal area that can vary as necessary. All
this is within a strategically centralizedand a tactically decentralized plan.
Among the most salient actions,we can seetheblows againstthe anti-
guerrilla bases in the departmentof Ayacucho;the destructionof the counter-
subversivesettlements nucleamientos];disruptions intheestablishmentofthe
local micro-regions;in Huancavelicathedemolitionoftheelectricalgridand
the destructionof the highway system;the destructionof theagricultural co-
operatives Cinto andVichincha with cattleredistributionand appropriation of
lands; breakthroughs in Apurímac. In the Central region,there were ambushes
suchas in Michivilca,sabotage tothesubstationof Centromin[statemining
corporation—Trans.], sabotage to SAIS [state-run cooperative—Trans.] Túpac
Amaru. In the North, land seizures underthe slogan "Seize the Land!”that
61
=====第62页=====
mobilized 160 thousand peasants and confiscated 320 thousand hectares, mostly
pastures, and 12 thousand headof livestock [reses]; sabotage to theoil pipeline
"Norperuano",andto theheadquartersof APRA in the cityof Trujillo. In
the South, the land question was shaken up by the mobilization of more than
10 thousand peasants; in Huallaga, an assault on the police postof Aucayacu,
destruction of the large [tealera] company, and theambush of the Republican
Guards; in Metropolitan Lima, sabotages against the embassy of Russian social-
imperialists,against dozensof local oficesofthe APRA party, and against banks
and factories,all leading to a state of emergency and [toque de queda] of the
Capital under the responsibility of the Armed Forces in February of 1986.
Alan García Pérez has continued the counterrevolutionary politics ofhis
predecessor and sought to crush the People's War through genocides such as
those of Accomarca, Llocllapampa, Umaru and Bellavista in the countryside.
Inthe capitalofthe Republic, he has unleashed two genocides againstthe
prisoners of war,the firstonthe 4thof October,1985,where 30 militants and
combatants were annihilated in the shining trenchof combatof Lurigancho.
That did not break the heroic resistance of the prisoners of war who, with their
blood,formedthe Dayof the Prisonerof War. The second wason June19
1986, where themostvileand despicable premeditatedcrime was committed
with perfidytocrusthePoplesWaandtoahlatthepionersofwar,
who witherciousstacnflctethmoiouspliticamly
and moraldefeattothegenocidalApristagovernmentThishighlighead
definedthlmovituucicatiooftibos
in order to develop fascism andcorporativism, leaving Garca and the Aprista
partyforevebathedinthebloodofthegenocideThutheDayof Hroism
was formed withthe monumentaltrilogyof250dead inthe shining trenches of
combat of El Fronton, Lurigancho, and Callao.
We condemn and unmask opportunism and revisionism in its various incar-
nations: Thepro-Russian,the pro-Chinese,thefalse Mariateguists,all those
who have acted and continueto actas informers,tailing afterthe counterrevo-
lution, negating and combating the People's War and branding it as terrorism,
repeating what Reagan,the Peruvian and world reactionaries say. Unable to
provetheir charges they simply hurl adjectives and condemn violence "what-
everthe source,"and continue with theiroldelectoral positions with the aim
of pigeonholing the people with parliamentary cretinism,sinking further each
day into thatlifeguardoftheoldorder,theirrotten parliament,theirelectoral
farces,theirconstitutionandtheirlaws, living in quivering fearand reverenial
dread before the reactionary armed forces and the coup d'etat. We condemn
the grovelingattitudeandcapitulationof BarrantesLingánandhisstooge and
cronies.
Since1983,thepoliticaltrategyofthe GreatPlaofConquering Bases was
completed throughtwocampaignsof defending,devloping andbuilding Parts I
andII, and the Plan for the Great Leap with its four campaigns up to December
1986,how utheadacofheopleWa,that wareolil inkedt
masses,crontyaynctceutabl.
The People'sWahaonuedaarthatextedslthrouthera
62
=====第63页=====
the Jungle andthe Coast, marchingvigorously and strong, buildingthe new
and opening what is to be. The Support Bases which are the core of the road
of surrounding the cities from the countryside have already been conquered.
Regarding the Great Plan of Developing Bases. This has a special position
in the People's War since the essence of the People's War is to develop Support
Bases; thereforethe Great Planof Developing Bases has to do with the constru-
tion of the new Power and its development, it has to do with the perspective that
is being opened forthe conquestof Power countrywide. The political strategy
is to develop Support Bases and the military strategy is to develop the People's
War serving the world revolution,a planthatis being fulfilledthrougha pilot
plan.
The triumph of the revolution begets and crushes a powerful counterrevo-
lution. Thus, we are entering decisive years in which APRA continues without
having a strategic plan;they talk of a"new strategy”butthere is no such
thing. The only thing they can do is bestow stronger measures,more political,
economic,andsociallaws,strengtheningthemilitarytofacilitatethearmed
forces'fight againstus,unleashing a new genocide under new conditions,for
us as wellasforthem. Forus,thegenocideunderwaypresentsitself under
new circumstances. We have passedthrough thegenocideof1983 and1984
thatdemonstratedthegreat popular repudiationandthe strengtheninof the
revolution.Reactioncaolyapplyenocide,butthatwillotifythe People's
War.Trehtbitiltorictionutwhalllbr-
sisting iMrxism-insm-Maom,GonloThouiourolics
five delopms,ithnvncitoftolWaanditht
of the people who makeandshall makehistoryalwaysundertheleadership of
the Communist Party.
On the concrete situations and possibilities thatare presented us in the new
Great Plan of Developing Bases we must be aware of:
1. The appearance of armed groups such as the MRTA and the CRP [the short-
lived People'sRevolutionary Commando—Trans.whohavebeen recast,
but who do not have a well-defined Marxist conception. Thus, they march
to serve imperialism, social-imperialism, and the supposed dialogue with the
fascists to whom they have already given unilateral truces
2. APRA has already begun to unfoldfascismandcorporativism. Itfaces
serious andincreasing dificulties,such asits growing and sinuous collusion
and contention with the comprador bourgeoisie, among other even more
important contradictions.
3. The class struggle sharpens and intensifies more, the masses begin to defend
themselves and resist; given social explosions in the urban areas, they could
be used by social-imperialism and the reactionaries in general, through their
representatives.
4. Acoup detat is possible at any moment.Garca Pérezhimself may promote
a self-coup in order to preserve his political future.
63
=====第64页=====
5. In perspective,thereactionariescan also play with an Allende-type overn-
ment, using the Aprista Barrantes or someone similar; within this possibility
one must consider the sinister role of the United Left.
6. The Peruvian State has border problems that can be infamed at any mo-
ment, as is shown by the experience of other Latin American countries. This
problem must be seriously addressed.
7. The sending of Yankee troops is already a real fact and not simplya pos-
sibility. Their presence is linked to a similar presence in other countries,
especially ontheborder and it must be seen in the context of military
measures taken by Brazil.
8. The imperialist wars and their aggressions continue to increase. The World
Warfor hegemonybetween the USAand the USSR continuesbeing pre-
pared through collusion and contention on a global scale. Consequently,
the People's War is a peremptory necessity and the world people's war is
an inevitable perspective.All these possibilities must be taken seriously into
account tohandlethe People's Warwith politics in command,and par-
ticularly with an eye toward the conquestof power countrywide that may
present itself and which must be taken up. For these reasons,we must be
ideologically, politicallyand organizationally prepared.
The First Campaign of the Pilot Plan of the Great Plan of Developing Bases
has meant the largest shake-up with greater national and international repercus-
sions. The old State is fracturing more and more, which had never been shaken
upthis waybyanyone in Peru. Now it is up to us to fulfil the historical and
political necessityof"Finishbybrillianlyestablishingahistorical milestoe!"
in the Second Campaign,understanding thatthe Pilot Plan is like the initial
battle of the Great Plan of Developing Bases.
In conclusion, after close to eight years of People's War we have completed
more than forty fivethousand actions that reveal their high quality;the milita-
rized Party has been tempered; the People's Guerrilla Army has been developed
and has increased its belligerence; and we have hundreds of organizations of the
new Power with the poorest masses increasingly in support of us. The People's
War has raised the class struggle of our people to its highest form and that affects
the struggle of the masses themselves, impelling them to incorporate themselves
by leaps and bounds into the People's War. Thus, the "People's War is turning
the country upside down, theold mole'[el topo viejo] is profoundly rooting up
the entrailsof theold society. No one canstop it,thefuturealready dwells
among us,theoldand rotten society is sinking irrevocably,the revolution wil
prevail. Long Livethe People's War!"Our task is to develop the People's War
serving the world revolution under the banners of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
Gonzalo Thought.
64
=====第65页=====
4.2.2
The Road of Surrounding the Cities from the Coun-
tryside and the Revolutionary Support Bases
Chairman Mao established the road of surrounding the cities from the country-
side, with its heart in the Support Bases. He took into account that the powerful
imperialists and their reactionary Chinese allies were entrenched in the principal
cities, and if the revolution refused to capitulate and wanted to persevere in the
struggle it hadto convert the backwards rural zones into advancedand solid
Support Bases, into great military, political, economic and cultural bulwarks of
the revolutiontofight againstthefierceenemythatwas assaulting the rural
zones usingthe cities,and to carrytherevolutionforward stepby step to a
complete victory through a protracted war.
Based on this Maoist thesis, Chairman Gonzalo has established the carrying
forward of a unified People's War where the countryside is the principal theater
of armed actions: Since in our country we have an immense majority of peasant
masses, that is where we must build the Support Bases.
As Chairman Mao said:
the protracted revolutionary struggle in the revolutionary base areas con-
sists mainly in peasant guerrilla warfare led by the Chinese Communist
Party. Therefore, it is wrong to ignore the necessity of using rural dis-
tricts as revolutionary base areas, to neglect painstaking work among the
peasants, and to neglect guerrilla warfare.5
Furthermore,Chairman Gonzalospecifesthat inthecitiearmed actions should
be carried forward as a complement,since international experience,as well as
our own,demonstratesthatthisisasible.Hedrawslesons,orexample,from
what happened to the guerrillas in the Philippines whichrecastthemselves in
the countrysideandleftthecitiesquiet,especiallythecapital,resultingin the
isolationofthe guerrillas.In Brazil,the revolutionariesalso carriedout armed
actions in the countrysideand city,onlytheyneglectedto specify which was
principal.In Vietnam,importantarmedactions were carriedout in the cities.
Thus, taking into account the peculiarities of the cities in Latin America, where
the percentage of the proletariat and of the poor masses in the cities is high, the
masses are ready to develop actions complementing those in the countryside.
Inthe cities, however,the New Poweror Support Bases are not being built,
rather the Front is solidified through the Revolutionary Defense Movementof
the People (MRDP) with Resistance Centers that carry out the People's War
and prepare thefuture insurrection,which will occur when theforces of the
countryside assault the cities in combination with the insurrection from within.
The Support Basesarethestrategicbaseswhich the guerrilla forcesrely
on to fulfiltheirstrategic tasksand toachieve the objectiveof preserving and
increasingtheirforcesaswellasannihilating andthrowingback theenemy.
Without suchstrategic Bases there wouldbe nothing to base ourselves on to
carry out any oneofour strategic tasks and to reach the war's objective.
5The Chinese Revolutionand theChinese CommunistParty December1939,S.W.Vol.
2—Trans.
65
=====第66页=====
Chairman Mao expounded three reasons for the creation of Support Bases:
To have armed forces, to defeat the enemy and to mobilize the masses. These
were specified in our People's War in 1982, by applying the Plan of Deployment
oftheguerrilla warin the part Strike the enemy',aimingatdestroyingthe
old feudal relations of production. Police posts were assaulted, selective anni-
hilation of feudal landlord power was applied, and the police forces abandoned
the countryside and were regrouped in the provincial capitals. The authorities
of the old Power massively resigned which created a power vacuum, while tens
of thousands were mobilized. It is in these conditions thatthe Support Bases
emerged and were specified in the clandestine People's Committees. Therefore,
it is wrong to take the Chinese experience dogmatically since if the conditions
were given and principles were in effect, we would have had sufficient reason to
build the Support Bases. To agree upon this implied a struggle against Rightism
which argued that we had not defeated large enemy forces,when the problem
was that the enemy forces had abandoned the countryside as a consequence of
the rout of their political and military plans.
Chairman Gonzalo has established a system of Support Bases surrounded
byguerrillaonesoperational onesand pointsofactiontakinginto account
the politicalandsocialconditions,thetraditionofstruggle,thegeographical
characteristicsand the developmentofthe Party,the Army andofthe masses.
It is fundamentalto supportthevalidityoftheroadof surroundingthe
cities fromthcountryideandithartheupportBasescause withonly
wandering guerrillasofinsurrectionthe People's Guerrilla Army wouldnot have
the Support Bases as a rearguard that sustains it,nor would the new Power be
built. We are totally against focoism.
4.2.3 The Protracted War
The People's War is protracted because it derives from the correlation between
the enemy's factors and our factors thatare determined by thefollowing four
fundamental characteristics: The firstis that Peru is a semi-feudal and semi-
colonial society in which a bureaucratic capitalism is unfolding;the second is
that the enemy is strong; the third is that the People's Guerrilla Army is weak;
and the fourth is thatthe Communist Party leads the People's War. From the
first and fourth characteristics we can derive that the People's Guerrilla Army
will not grow too rapidly and will not defeat its enemy soon. These peculiarities
determine the protracted character of the war.
The enemy is strong and we are weak; in thatfactresidesthe dangerof
our defeat. The enemy has a single advantage—the numerous contingents of its
forces and thearmaments they rely upon—but everyother aspect constitutes
their weak points. Theirobjectiveis to defendtheold and rotten Powerof the
landlord-bureaucratic State.Ithasabourgeoismilitaryline;itisamercenary
army.It doesnothaveconsciousdisciplne andits moraleislow.It hasprofound
contradictionsbetweenoficersandsoldiers,anditisdiscreditedbeforethe
masses. Furthermore,theveryfoundationofthereactionaryarmyisof worker
and peasantorigin,which can disintegrate during the courseof an unjust wa.
66
=====第67页=====
Apart from this, the Peruvian armed forces have never won a war and they are
experts in defeat. Furthermore, they have repeatedly counted on and still count
on the support of international reaction, but we count on the supportof the
oppressed nations, of the peoples of the world and the international proletariat,
which are the new forces.
The People's Guerrilla Army has a single weak point, its insuficient devel-
opment but the remaining aspects constitute valuable advantages: It carries
forward a People's War to create a new Power; it has a proletarian military line,
ledabsolutely by the Communist Party; it is based on class valor and revolu-
tionary heroism and on a conscious discipline. Its morale is high and there is
a close union between officers and soldiers and it is an army composed of the
people themselves, mainly poor workers and peasants.
But the objective fact is that there is a large disparity between the forces of
the enemy and our forces and for us to go from weak to strong requires a period
of time, one in which the defects of the enemy are exposed and our advantages
are developed. Therefore, we say that our army appears weak but is strong in
essence and the enemy's army appears strong but is weak in essence. Thus, to go
from weak to strong we must carry forward the protracted war and this has three
stages: Thefirstisthe periodofthestrategicofensiveof theenemyand the
strategic defensiveofourforces.Thesecond willbethe priodof the strategi
consolidationoftheenemy andof our preparation forthecounteroffensive.The
third willbetheperiodofourstrategiccounteroffensivandofthestratei
withdrawal of the enemy.
Chairman Gonzalo thus teaches us that the People's War is protracted, long
and ruthlessbutvictorious andtellsusthatthe lengthofits duration wll be
extended or shortened within its protracted character to the extent that we fight
within the proletarian military line,since Rightism is the principal dangerthat
can cause serious setbacks to the war.
Today, wefindourselves in the periodof the strategicoffensiveof theenemy
and of our own strategic defensive. We must strengthen the People's War by
applyinggeneralizedguerrillawarfarelayinfoundationsforthnexsae,
paying whatever cost is necessary butfighting to minimize it.
4.2.4Construction of the People's Guerrilla Army
To unleash the People's War we must count on the principal form of organiza-
tion, which is the People's Guerrilla Army, since the backbone of the old State is
the reactionary armed forces and to destroy the old State one must first destroy
its reactionary army. The Party must count on a powerful army: "Without a
people's army the people have nothing," as Chairman Mao taught us.
The construction of the Army is seen in the line of construction based on
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought. In synthesis, Chairman Gonzalo
has made a contribution by incorporating the militia into the People's Guerrilla
Army. Its creation is astep toward the seaof armed masses and the solution of
going from disorganized masses to masses who are militarily organized.
67
=====第68页=====
4.2.5 Strategy and Tactics
Chairman Gonzalo emphasizes seven points on strategy and tactics of Chairman
Mao specifying some of them. We must pay close attention to these in order to
lead the People's War.
1. On Strategy and Tactics. He starts from Chairman Mao's thesis that the
task of strategy as a science is to study the laws of leading military operations
that influence the situation of the war as a whole. Thetask of the scienceof
campaigns and tactics is to study the laws of leading military operations of a
partial character. He makes a strategic development of how to wage the war in
the country as a whole and in each zone,taking into accountits links tothe
international situation. He established for us the axes, sub-axes, directions of
movement and linesof movements which permit us to maintain the strategic
course of the war under any circumstances and toface all typesof political
and military operations that the counterrevolution launches. On this basis he
established the National Military Planthatis strategicallycentralized and ta-
ticallydecentralized,startingfromthepremisethatallplansareideological,
that they must reflectboth reality and the rugged paths which this reality will
express. TakingupStalin,helinksstrategywithtacticsandestablishesthe
strategic-operationalPlansthataretheconcrete waythatstrategy is linked to
tacticaloperations.As a result,eachCommittemustelaborateitsstrategic-
operational planswithinthestrategic-operational Plan common to the entire
Party.
The correct disposition emanates from the just decision of the commander;
based on the indispensable recognition and careful studyof the situation of the
enemy, our situation and the interrelationshipof both. That is, we must always
keep in mind"the two hills"; we must be guided by a political strategy and by
a military strategy.
For the elaboration of the Plans always take into account the following gen-
eral features:
1. The international class struggle between revolution and counterrevolution;
ideology;the international communist movement; the Revolutionary Inter-
nationalist Movement
2. The class struggle in the country; the counterrevolution; the political junc-
ture; and the counter-subversive war.
3. The development of the People's War; its balance; laws and lessons.
4. The need for investigation.
5. The People's War and construction.
6. The People's War and the masses
7. The two-lined struggle
8. Programming and Chronology.
68
=====第69页=====
9. Attitudeandslogans."Riseabovethedifficultiesandconquergreatervic-
tories!"
In almost eight years of People's War, we had four plans:
1. Plan of Initiation
2. Plan of of Deploying the People's War
3. Plan of Conquering Bases
4. Plan of Developing Bases
2. The basic principle of war. All the orienting principles of military opera-
tions originate with a single basic principle: Do everything possible to preserve
our own forces and to annihilate the enemy's forces. All war imposes a price,
sometimes it is extremely high. To conserve our own forces, we must annihilate
those of the enemy; but to annihilate the enemy, we must pay a price in order
to preserve the whole. Chairman Gonzalo teaches us that one must be prepared
to paythehighestcostofthe war,butweshouldfightsothatitwillalways
bethesmallestpossiblecost.Itisacontradictionandtheproblem resides in
attitudeandoolaniitisminluestioofadrhpHeredus
in the "challengetodeath",in"revolutionaryheroism”and in"conquer lau-
rels in death."In war wealways seethetwo aspects,thedestructiveand the
constructive and the principal aspect is the second one.
3. Guerrilla tacticsorbasic tactics. "The enemyadvances,we retreat; the
enemy camps,weharass;theenemytires,weattack;theenemyretreats, we
pursue." This basic tactic mustbe embodied and applied, maneuvering around
the enemy and seeking his weak point to smash it.
4. Campaigns of"encirclement and annihilation"and thecounter-campaigns,
the principal formof thePeople'sWar.Itisalaw thatthecounterrevolution,in
order to crush the revolution unleashes campaigns of "encirclement and annihi-
lation"against each unit of the People's Guerrilla Army or against the Support
Bases. The operations of the People's Guerrilla Army adopt the form of counter-
campaigns and Chairman Mao has established nine steps to crush a campaign
of "encirclement and annihilation" :
1. The active defense
2. The preparation of a counter-campaign
3. The strategic withdrawal
4. The strategic counteroffensive
5. The initiation of the counteroffensive
6. The concentration of forces
7. Mobile warfare
69
=====第70页=====
8. The war of quick decision
9. The war of annihilation
Chairman Gonzalo, applying this law to the conditions of our People's War,
has outlined the five parts of the campaign which permit us to defeat the po-
litical and military plans of the reactionaries. Each campaign has a specific
political and military objective,fulfilledby theelementofsurprise,attacking
them when we want, where we want and as we want. He also specified the five
steps that mustfollow each militaryaction always serving the political objec-
tive, opposing the criteria of action for action's sake. He stresses the importance
of differentiating between the essence and the appearance of the enemy's move-
ments. He has also established for us the four forms of struggle of the People's
War:
1. Guerrilla action with its two forms, assaults and ambushes
2. Sabotage
3. Selective annihilation
4. Propaganda and armed agitation, as well as its diverse methods.
5. The strategic roleof guerrilla warfare.Chairman Mao has raised guerrilla
warfaretoa strategiclevel.Priortohim,it wasonlyconsideredasatactical
question thatbyitself did notdecidetheoutcomeofthe war; but even though
the guerrilla war does not decide the war's outcome because this requires con-
ventional warfare,itfulfilsa seriesof strategic tasksthatcarryforward tothe
favorable outcome of the war. We conceive of guerrilla war on a vast scale, a
generalized guerrilla warfare that must support the protracted and bloody war.
From there, we apply the six strategic problems of guerrilla warfare:
1. Initiative,exibilityand planning in the realizationofoffensiveoperations
within the defensive war, battles of rapid decision within the protracted war
and operations in the exterior lines within the war in the interior lines.
2. Coordination with the regular warfare.
3. Creation of Support Bases.
4. Strategic defense and strategic assault in the guerrilla war
5. Transformation of the guerrilla war into mobile warfare.
6. Relationships of command.
6. The ten military principles. In December 1947 Chairman Mao masterfully
synthesizedthe just and correct strategic line followed in more than 20 years of
people's war in 10 military principles. This is seen in his article:"The current
situation andour tasks,"third part. Weapply these principles and it is very
important to broaden their application.
70
=====第71页=====
7. Brilliant summary of strategy and tactics. Chairman Mao has sum-
marized in a brilliantway the strategy and the tacticsof people's war in the
following phrase:"You fightyour wayand we'll fightours:Wefightwhenwe
can win and we retreat when we cannot."
"In other words, you are supported by modern armament and we
by the popular masses with a high level of revolutionary conscience;
you fight to the fullest with your superiority, and we fight with ours.
You have your combat methods and we have ours. When you want
to assault us, you are not permited to do so and cannot even find
us. But when we attack you, we reach the target, we inflict accu-
rate, sure blows and we annihilate it. When we can annihilate it,
we do so with deliberate decision; when we can not annihilate it,
neither do we allow ourselves to be annihilated by you. To not fight
when there is a possibility of winning is opportunism. To persist in
fighting when there is no possibility of winning is adventurism. All
our strategic orientation and tactics are based on our will to fight.
Our recognition of the need for retreating is based first of all on our
recognition of the need for fighting. When we retreat, we always do
so with an eye to future combat so that we may finally and thor-
oughly annihilate the enemy. Only by supporting ourselves in the
broad popular masses can we bring about these strategies and tac-
tics. And in applying them, we can put into full play the superiority
of people's war and constrain the enemy to the passive position of
being beaten, although they are superior in equipment and no matter
what means they employ. We always preserve the initiative in our
hands.
"6
The applicationof this principle allows us to demonstrate the invincibility
of the superior strategy of people's war, because the proletariat as the last class
in history has created its own superior form of war and no other class, including
the bourgeoisie with its greatest political and military strategists,are capable
of defeating it. The reactionaries dream about elaborating"superior strategies"
to people's war,but are condemned to failure sincethey are against history.
Our People's Warafter nearly eight yearsblazes victoriously, demonstrating
the invincibility of people's war.
The militants of the Communist Party of Peru assume completely and thor-
oughlythemilitary lineof the Party,establishedby Chairman Gonzalo, that
based on the highest creation of the international proletariat, Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, has specified our military line with Gonzalo Thought, endowing us with
an invincible weapon,the unified People's War principally inthe countryside
together with the city as a complement. As the principal form of struggle we
carry it forward, it is a bright torch before the world, proclaiming the universal
validity of the forever living Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
6"Long Live the victory of the People's War!", September 1965.
71
=====第72页=====
LONG LIVE THE MILITARY LINE OF THE PARTY!
THE PEOPLE'S WAR IN INVINCIBLE!
Central Committee, Communist Party of Peru
72
=====第73页=====
Chapter 5
Line of the Construction of
the Three Instruments
5.1
Introduction
of therevolution by upholding,defending andapplying Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, principally Maoism.
in its imageandlikeness,thatis,itsownorganizationsIntheXIX century,
own doctrine, our own objective, our common goal—how to take Power and the
means to doit—revolutionary violence. All this wasachieved in a very hard
two-line struggle.Marx establishedthatthe proletariatcannotact as a class
unlessitconstituteitlspolitical partydfentromandopposedtoall
the politicalpartiesatdbytheproptiedclasss.Thatinitsappearance
in a prolonged process, the proletariat has created its own forms of struggle and
its ownformsof organization. As a result,the Party is the highest formof
organization, the army is the principal form of organization and the Front is the
third instrument,and these three instruments are to seize Power by means of
revolutionary violence. He tells us that by the end of the XIX century, Engels
came to the conclusion that the class did not have either the proper organic
forms or the proper military forms to seize Power and hold it, but he never said
we should abandon the revolution, rather we should work for revolution, seeking
a solution to these pending problems. This must be understood well since the
revisionists twist it to peddle their opportunism.
In the XX century Lenin understood that the revolution was ripe and cre-
ated the proletarian Partyof a new type, molding the form of struggle—the
insurrection, and the form of organization—the detachments, which were mo-
bile forms and superior to the barricades of the previous century, which were
fixed forms. Lenin expounded the need to create new, clandestine organizations,
73
=====第74页=====
since the step to revolutionary actions signified the dissolution of the legal orga-
nizations by the police and that step was only possible if it was taken by going
over the old leaders, going over the old Party, destroying it. The Party should
take as example the modern army, with its own discipline and its one will, and
be flexible.
With Chairman Mao Tse-tung, the class understands the need to build the
three instrumentsof the revolution: the Party, ArmyandUnited Frontinan
interrelated way. This resolves the construction of the three instruments in
a backward, semi-feudal and semi-colonial country, through the People's War.
Concretely, it resolves the issue of building the Party around the gun and that
it is the heroic combatant who is leadingits own construction,the Army and
the Front.
Chairman Gonzaloexpoundsthe militarization of the Communist Parties
and the concentric construction of the three instruments. The militarization of
the Communist Parties is the political directive with a strategic content, since
it is "the setof transformations, changes and readjustments it needs to lead
the People's Warasthe principal form of struggle thatwill generate the new
State.”Therefore,themilitarizationof the CommunistPartiesis key forthe
democratic revolution, the socialist revolution and the cultural revolutions.
He defnes the principle of construction:"On theideological-political base, to
simultaneously build the organizational forms in the midstof the class struggle
and the two-line struggle,all of these within and as a functionof thearmed
struggle for the conquest of Power."
In addition,helinks theentire processof constructionwiththe fuidityof
people's war, starting from Chairman Mao's thesis that"the mobilityof military
operations and the variability of our territory provide all works of construction
with ... a variable character."
Hence, to understand the line of construction, we must start from the form
of struggle and theforms of organization;from the principle of construction
and construction linked to the fuidity of people's war which is the main form
of struggle in today's world.
5.2On the Construction of the Party
–Characterof the Party. Webase ourselveson Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
Gonzalo Thought, principally Gonzalo Thought, on the ideology of the prole-
tariat, which is the highest expression of humanity, the only true, scientific and
invincible ideology. We struggle for the Communist Programme whose essence
isto organize and lead the class struggle of the proletariat so it can conquer
political Power,realize the democratic revolution, the socialist revolution and
the cultural revolution on the way to Communism, the unwavering goal toward
which we march. We relyon the general political lineof the revolution, those
are the laws governing the class struggle for the taking of Power, established by
Chairman Gonzalo with its five elements:
1. The international line
74
=====第75页=====
2. The democratic revolution
3. The military line
4. The line of the construction of the three instruments of revolution
5. The mass line
The military lineis the centerof the general political line. Weforge our-
selves in proletarian internationalism as we conceive our revolution to be part
of the world proletarian revolution. And we maintain ideological, political and
organizational independence supported by our own efforts and by the masses.
Itis a Partyofthe newtypewhichgeneratedthe GreatLeaderofthe
Peruvian revolution, Chairman Gonzalo, the greatest living Marxist-Leninist-
Maoist, who leads the Party. He is the guarantee of the triumph of the revolution
who will carry us to Communism.
– The militarization of the Communist Party and concentric construction.
Chairman Gonzalo expoundedthethesis thatthe Communist Partiesof the
world should militarize themselves for three reasons:
First, because we are in the strategicoffensiveof the world revolution, we
live during the sweeping awayof imperialism and reaction from the face of the
Earth within the next 50to100 years,a time marked byviolence in which all
kindsof wars take place.Weseehow reactionis militarizingitself moeand
more,militarizintheoldStates,theireconomiesdevelopin warsofags-
sion,traffickingwiththestruggleofthepeoplesandaiming towardawrld
war, butsincerevolutionistheprincipaltendencyintheworld,thetask of
the CommunistParties is to upholdrevolution shaping theprincipal form of
struggle: People's wartoopposethe world counterrevolutionary war with world
revolutionary war.
Second, because capitalist restoration must be prevented. When the bour-
geoisielosePoweritintroduceitselfinsidetheParty,usesthearmyad
seeks to usurp Poweand destroythedictatorshipof theproletariat torestore
capitalism. Therefore,the CommunistParties must militarize themselves and
exercise the all-round dictatorship of the three instruments, forging themselves
in people's war and empower the armed organization of the masses, the people's
militia,so asto engulf the army. Forthisreason,Chairman Gonzalo tells us
to"forge all militants as Communists,first and foremost, as fighters and as ad-
ministrators";forthat reason every militant is forged in the People's War and
remains alert against any attempt at capitalist restoration.
Third, because we march toward a militarized society. By militarizing the
Party, we complete astep toward the militarization of society which is the strate-
gic perspective to guarantee the dictatorship of the proletariat. The militarized
society is the seaof armed masses which Marx and Engels spokeof, that guards
the conquest of power and defends it once conquered. We take the experience of
the Chinese Revolution,of the anti-Japanese base at Yenan, which was a mili-
tarized societywhereeverything grewoutofthebarrelsofguns: Party,Army,
75
=====第76页=====
State, new politics, new economics, new culture. And in that way we develop
war communism.
In the First National Conference(November 1979), Chairman Gonzalo ex-
poundedthethesisofthe necessity of militarizingtheCommunistPartyof
Peru; afterward, in the first monthsof 1980 when the Party was preparing to
launch the People's War, he proposed to develop the militarization of the Party
through actions, basing himself on what the great Lenin said about reducing
the nonmilitary work in orderto center it onthe military;that thetimesof
peace were ending and we were entering into the times of war, so that all forces
should be militarized. Thus taking the Party as theaxisof everything, build
the Army around it and with these instruments, with the masses in the People's
War, build the new State around both. That the militarization of the Party can
only be carried forward through concrete actions of the class struggle, concrete
military-type actions; this does not mean we will only carry out various types
of military actions exclusively (guerrillaactions,sabotages,selective annihila-
tion, armed propaganda and agitation)but that we must carry out mainly these
forms so as to provideincentiveand development totheclassstruggle, eaching
with deeds,with thesetypesof actionsasthe principal formof strugglein he
People's War.
The militarizationof the Partyhas itsantecedents in Lenin and Charman
Mao,but it is a new problem developed by Chairman Gonzalo taking into a-
count the newcircumstanceof theclass struggleand we mustseethatnew
problems willarisewhich willbeesolvedthroughexperince.These will eces-
sarily implyprocessof strugglebetweentheoldandthenwthat will devlop
it further,with warbeing the highestformof resolving contradictions,of em-
poweringthefacultiespeoplehavetofindsolutions.Itisthemilitariationof
the Party which has enabled us to initiate and develop the People's War. We
consider thatthisexperience hasuniversal validity,and forthatreason itis a
requirementand necessary for the Communist Partiesof the world to militarize
themselves.
The concentric constructionofthethreeinstrumentsistheorganicfulfill-
mentof themilitarizationofthe Partyandinsynthesisitissummarized in
what Chairman Gonzalo teaches: "The Party is the axis of everything, it leads
the three instruments in an all-round way,its own construction,itabsolutely
leads the army and the new State as a joint dictatorshipaiming toward the
dictatorship of the proletariat."
– The six aspectsof the constructionofthe Party. Ideological construction.
The militantsare forgedon the basisof Party unity with Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, Gonzalo Thought, mainly Gonzalo Thought. We say Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism because it is the universal ideologyof the proletariat which is the last
class in history,anideologythatmustbeappliedtothe concrete conditions
of each revolution and generate its guiding thought. In our case,the Peru-
vian revolution has generated Gonzalo Thought because Chairman Gonzalo is
the highestexpressionof the fusionofthe universal ideology with the conrete
practice of the Peruvian revolution.
Political construction. The_ MilitantsareforgedintheProgrammeand
76
=====第77页=====
Statutes;the general political line andthemilitary line as its center,specific
lines; general policy,specific policies andthe Party's military plans. Politics
must always be in command and that is our strong point.
Organic construction. The organic follows the political and taking into ac-
count that linealoneis not enough; theorganic apparatuses must bebuilt
while seeing the organic structure, the organic system and the Party work. In
its organic structure, the Party is based on democratic centralism, principally
centralism. Two armed Party networks are established, the territorial network
which encompasses one jurisdiction and the mobile network whose structure is
deployed. Theorganic system is the distribution of forces in function of the
principal and secondary points wherever the revolution is acting. Party work is
the relationship between secret work, which is principal, and open work; the im-
portance ofthe five necessities: Democratic centralism,clandestinity,disciplie,
vigilance and secrecy, particularly democratic centralism.
Leadership. We are fully conscious that no class in history has ever achieved
the installationof itsruleunless ithaspromoted itspolitical leaders,its van-
guard representatives,capableof organizing the movementand leading it. The
Peruvian proletariat in the midstof the class struggle has generated the lead-
ership of therevolutionand itshighestexpression:The GreatLeadershipof
Chairman Gonzalo who handlesrevolutionary theoryand hasa knowledgeof
history andprofoundunderstaningofthepracticalmovement;whothrough
hard,
therightoportunistlineandghtism.Hehaeconstitutedthe Party,leads it
inthe PeopleWar andhabcomethegrtst livinMarxist-eiist-Maoist,
a great political andmilitarystrategist,aphilosopher,atacherof Communists,
and the centerof Party unity. Reaction has two principles to destroy the revo-
lution: Annihilate its leadershipand isolate the guerrilla from the masses; but
in synthesis its problem is to annihilate the leadership,because that is what
enables us to maintain our course and realize it. Our Party has defined that
leadership iskey and it is the dutyof all militants to constantly work to defend
and preservethe leadershipof the Partyand veryespecially the leadership of
Chairman Gonzalo, our Great Leadership, against any attack inside or outside
the Party and to subjectourselves to his personal leadership and command by
raising the slogans of"Learn From Chairman Gonzalo"and "Embody Gonzalo
Thought."
We base ourselves on the collective leadership and individual leadership and
we are mindfulof the roleof leaders andhow through thePeople's War, through
the renewalofadrship,theadershipothevoltioioalescingandeing
tempered. We maintain the principle that the leadership never dies.
We who follow Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Though,subject our-
selves to Chairman Gonzalo and embody Gonzalo Thought.
Two-linestruggle. The Party is a contradictionwheretheclass struggle
expressesitselfasthetwo-linestrugglebetweentherightandtheleft. Itis
thetwo-linestrugglethatpropelsthedevelopmentoftheParty,its justand
correcthanlinequresthattheefmustimposeitlfWefightconcliation
becauseitnourishestheright;andthe principleofcriticismand selfcriticism
77
=====第78页=====
should be practiced by all the militants, cadres, leaders, combatants, masses too;
assuming the philosophy of the struggle and going against the current, keeping
in mindthatthe Central Committeeis thevortex of the storm,sincethere
the class struggle expresses itself the sharpest. The just and correct handling
that Chairman Gonzalo makes of the two-line struggle has served to maintain
theunityof the Party and the development of the People's War. In general
revisionism is held to be the principal danger, although within the Partyit
continues to unfold against rightist criteria, opinions, attitudes and positions as
a struggle amongst the people. It is necessary to organize the two-line struggle
to impose the Party line, through a plan to develop it in an organized manner.
Mass work. We apply the principle:  "The masses make history." The Party
leadsthe struggle of the masses infunction of Power,which is the principal
revindication; we develop the mass work in and for the People's War basing
ourselves on the basic masses,workers and principally poor peasants, in the
petty bourgeoisie and we neutralize or win over the middle bourgeoisie, accord-
ing to the conditions. We subject ourselves to the law of the incorporation of
the masses and the only Marxist tactic of"going to the deepest and most pro-
found masses,"educating them in revolutionary violence and in the implacable
struggle againstrevisionism. The mass work of the Party is done through the
People's Armyand the masses are mobilized, politicized,organized and armed
as the new PoweithecoutrysideandinthePeople'sDefense Revoltionary
Movement (MRDP) in the cities.
In synthesis,itisthroughthehard struggleandtheleadershipof Charman
Gonzalo that we have a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist, Gonzalo Thought Party of the
new type which leads the People's Warand hasopened up the perspective of
the conquest of Power countrywide serving the world revolution.
5.3On the Construction of the People's Guer-
rillaArmy
– Characterof the army. The People's Guerrilla Army isan armyof a new
type whichfulfillsthe politicaltasksof the revolutionestablished by the Party.
It applies the Maoist principle: "The Party rules the gun and we wil never
allowthegunruletorulethe Party.”Itfulfillsthreetasks: Fighting,which
is the principal task, as it corresponds to the principalform of organization.
Mobilizing, which is very important and by which the mass work of the Party is
fulfilled, politicizing the masses, mobilizing, organizing and arming the masses.
Producing, applying the principle of self-reliance, trying not to be a burden on
the masses. Fundamentally it is a peasant army, absolutely led by the Party.
Chairman Gonzalo teaches us:"The iron legions of the People's Guerrilla Army
sustain themselves on Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, guiding Thought,which is
the basisof itsinvincibility;theyareforged inthehard life,thesacrifice and
the challenging to death, which elevate them to revolutionary heroism."
– The people's guerrila army.Marx setforth thatthe proletariat needed its
78
=====第79页=====
own army and the thesis of the general arming of the people. Lenin created the
Red Army and established the thesis of the people's militia with the functions of
the police, army and administration. Chairman Mao developed the construction
of the revolutionary armed forces with the immense participation of the masses.
The People's War materializes its mass character in three great coordinations.
Basing himself onthese Marxist-Leninist-Maoisttheses and taking into ac-
countthe specificsituationof the People's War, Chairman Gonzalo proposed
the formation of the People's Guerrilla Army. Since the Preparation of the Peo-
ple's War, Chairman Gonzaloconceivedof the necessityof buildingthe principal
form of organization to carry forward the People's War, defeatthe enemy and
build the new State. On December 3, 1979, the formationof the "First Com-
pany of the First Division of the Red Army" was agreed upon. In 1980, with the
Initiation, the squads and detachments were formed and we proposed to cross
over from unorganized masses to militarily organized masses.
In 1983, we needed to take a leap forward in the construction of the revolu-
tionary armed forces, and wefaced alarge growthofthe people'smilitias, which
demonstrated how the masses wanted to fight;furthermore, that year the reac-
tionaryarmedorehadntedthfhagainu.Thu,inthe Expanded
Central Committee (CCA) in Marchof that year, Chairman Gonzalo proposed
the formationofthePeople's GuerrllaArmy. Why an Arm? Becauseit was a
Partaetohimidthtwlitlisheismposed
toincorporatintheilitisintotheArmyWhyurillacaueitapplies
ulararmy,aaurillarmyuttcharactiticsnablei,ieded,to
develop itself as some sortof regulararmy. Why people's?Because it is made
up of the massesof people,bythe peasants,principallythepoorones;it serves
the people,sinceitrepresents the interestsof the people.A very important
situation is how Chairman Gonzalo conceivedof the People's Guerrilla Army
byincorporatingthe people'smilitias,made upof threeforces:Principalones,
local ones and base ones, which act mainly in the countryside and in the city as
complementary; that is a great step toward the sea of armed masses.
– The construction of the People's Guerrilla Army. The formation of the
army is based on men and not on weapons; our army is made up of peasants,
principally the poor, proletarians and petty bourgeoisie; it wrests weapons away
from the enemy and also uses all sortsof elementary weapons. Our slogan is,
"Conquer Weapons!" from the enemy by paying whatever cost is necessary. The
formation of the People's Army must be distinguished from its construction.
The ideological-political construction is primary, based on Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, Gonzalo Thought.Itis based on the political and military lines of the
Party,all its politicaland mass work being underthe Party's leadership. The
Party isorganizedatall levelsof thearmy;thedoublecommandis applied:
Political and military, and the two-line struggle develops betweenthe proletar-
ian military lineand thebourgeoismilitary line.Iadditiotherevolutionary
armed requires the formation of three Departments: Political, Military and Lo-
gistical.
79
=====第80页=====
Military construction is important. Armed with the theory and practiceof
people's war, the military line and the Party's military plans, it is organized into
squads, companies and battalions in the countryside and in special detachments
and people's militias in the cities. This construction is also based on the two-
line struggle. The three forces: principal, local and base which play a specific
role as the support for the new State. "Develop the companies, strengthen the
platoons aiming at battalions!" is still a valid slogan.
Instruction is necessary and indispensable. It aims at increasing bellicosity;
rehearsal cannotbe_sidestepped and leadership qualities [don de mando] are
the key to action. Training specializes; it elevates the formsof struggle. The
organization of courage has a class character and strengthens bellicosity because
it we fight with absolute unselfishness and full conviction of the justness of our
cause.
In synthesis, Chairman Gonzalo has created the People's Guerrilla Army as
an army of the new type, he has established the line of its construction based
on Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thoughtso it canfulfillthe speciffc
tasks of the revolution. It is an example before the world and serves the world
revolution.
5.4On the Construction of the New State
–Characterofthe new State.Power is the central task of the revolution and the
Front is the third instrument. By applying the masterful thesisof Chairman
Mao in"On New Democracy,"Chairman Gonzalo teaches us our conception
of a joint dictatorship whichformsthe People's Republicof New Democracy.
StartingfromthelinkbetweenState/Front,theRevolutionary Frontforthe
Defense of the People is materialized beginning with the People's Committees
in the countryside, and in the cities it is simply the Revolutionary Movement for
the Defenseof the People (MRDP). We build the new State in the countryside
until Power is finallyextended throughoutthe country.
As a state system, it is a joint dictatorship of workers, peasants, principally
poor ones,andthe petty bourgeoisie, and itrespects the interestsof the midde
bourgeoisie,allundertheleadrshipoftheproletariatepresntedbyh Party
which appliesitshegemonythroughthisworker-peasantalliance. As asystem
of government it functions through the People's Assemblies.
– The new State and the fuidity of war. The construction of the new State
follows the fuidityofthe People's War, it can expand or contract,disappear in
one place and appear in another.It is fuid. Chairman Mao teaches us:"Our
democratic Republic of workers and peasants is a State, but currently it is not
so in the fullsenseof the word...our Power is stillveryfarfrom havingthe
complete formof a State... our territory isstill verysmall andtheenemy
constantly dreams of annihilating us."
Always keepin mindthesystemofSupportases,ofguerrillaones,of ones
ofoperationsand pointsof actions,becausethoseconstitutetheenvronmentn
which the new State developsand are keyto maintaining the strategic course;
80
=====第81页=====
within this environment the People's Guerrilla Army,underthe leadershipof
the Party, moves as its spinal column.
–The constructionofthenewState. "Strengthenthe People's_ Commit-
tees, develop the Bases and make advances in the People's Republic of New
Democracy!" That is the slogan which continues to guide its construction.
We strugglefor Powerfor the proletariat and for the people and notfor
personal power. We are against errantry (roving rebel bands) [errantismo] and
the sidestepping of the Support Bases.
The new State is built amidstthe People's War andfollows a processof
specific development,being built in our case in the countryside first,until the
cities are surrounded,and it is formed throughout the entire country. This is
a process in which theold State isbeing destroyed and the contradiction old
State-new State isbeing expressed. This causes all the political and military
plans of reaction to fail and incorporates the masses into the struggle.
At the Expanded National Conference of November 1979, Chairman Gonzalo
established the relationship between Front-New State applying Chairman Mao's
theory.
In the First Military School of April 1980, he told us:
". . . In our minds, in our hearts, in our wills goes embedded [invivito]
the seed [germen] the people's power, we carry it within us ... Com-
rades, let us not forget the people's power, the State of the working
class; the State of workers and peasants marches with us, we carry it
on the muzzles of our rifles, it nests in our minds, it palpitates in our
hands and will always be with us burning in our hearts. Let us never
forget that, it is the first thing we must keep in our minds. Comrades,
it will beborn fragile, weak because it will be new, but its destiny is
to develop itself through change, through variation, through fragility,
like a tender sapling. Let the roots we plant from the initiation be the
future of a healthy and vigorous State. All that, comrades, begins to be
born out of the most modest and simple actions which we shall start
tomorrow.
”'
In 1980, the Committees of Distribution emerge, the seed [germen] of the new
State; in 1982, the first People's Committees emerge, which will multiply toward
the end of that year, forcing reaction to order their armed forces to enter the fight
against the People's War, since the reactionary Power saw itself threatened. In
1983, we agreed upon the Great Plan to Conquer Bases, one of whose tasks was
theformationof the_Organizing Committeeof the People's Republicof New
Democracy. Startingfromthere,wehavefollowedthe_struggle betweenthe
reestablishment of the old Power by the enemy and the counter-reestablishment
of the new Power, applying defense, development and construction.
Thus the new Power passing through the blood bath develops the People's
Committees,whichare being tempered in hard batlesagainsttheenemy, w-
tered bythebloodofthe massesof peasants,of thefightersandof militants.
Atthe ExpandedCentralCommitteeof March1983,Chairman Gonzalo
further develops the lineofconstructionof the Front/New State.He expounds
81
=====第82页=====
the levels in which the new State is being organized: People's_Committees,
Support Bases and People's Republic of New Democracy. The functions of the
Support Basesandof the Organizing Committeeof the People's Republicof
New Democracy are that of leadership, planning and organization; each Base
must elaborate its own specific Plan.
He establishes that the People's Committees are materializations of the new
State. Theyare Committees oftheUnited Front;ledby Commissarswho
assumetheir Statefunctions by commissioning [por encargo], electedby the
Assembliesof Representatives and subject to recall [remoción]. They are, up
to now,clandestine;they marchforward with Commissions [con Comisiones],
ledby the Partyapplyingtheruleof the"three thirds":Onethirdof them
are Communists, one third are peasants and one third are progressives, and
are sustained by the Army. They apply people's dictatorship, enforcement and
security, exercising violence firmly and resolutely so as to defend the new Power
against its enemies and to protect the rights of the people.
The setof People's Committees constitutes a Support Base and the setof
Support Bases is the ring that arms the People's Republic of New Democracy,
today in formation. We have gone from Conquering Bases to Developing Bases,
which is the current political strategy. We have to plant the new Power more
and morefor which we haveto apply thefiveestablishedforms,especially
today when the conditions pointtoward the perspectiveof conquering Power
throughout the country.
In synthesis,Chairman Gonzalo hasestablished the lineof construction of
the new State and two republics, two roads, two axes are counterpoised. We
have advanced in establishing new social relations of production and the Peo-
ple's Republic of New Democracy in formation shines defiantly against the old
State and opens up the perspective of conquering total Power. This example
encouragesthe revolutionariesoftheworld,mostespeciallytheinternational
proletariat.
As followers of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,Gonzalo Thought,we assume
the line of construction of the three instruments of the revolution, of the Com-
munist Partyof Peru,thehighestformof organizationandthefirstpolitical
society;of the People's Guerrilla Army,principal formof organization;and of
the Front/New State, central task of the revolution. These are the Instruments
which are being built in our homeland in the din of the People's War, crossing
the river of blood in which with Communists, combatants and masses heroically
give their lives to materialize the justand correct political line established by
Chairman Gonzalo, and that those who survive will carry the flag of continuing
it in the service of our goal, Communism.
82
=====第83页=====
LONG LIVE THE MILITARIZATION OF THE COMMUNIST
PARTY OF PERU!
LONG LIVE THE PEOPLE'S GUERRILLA ARMY!
LONG LIVE THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF NEW DEMOC-
RACY IN FORMATION!
FOR THE CONCENTRIC CONSTRUCTION OF THE THREE
INSTRUMENTS!
Central Committee, Communist Party of Peru
83
=====第84页=====
Chapter 6
Mass Line
6.1
Introduction
Upholding, defending and applying Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Chairman Gon-
zalohastadlofatHbibrminimself
in the proletarianconception that we musthave inorder to judge the problem
of the masses. He expounds the political role the masses play in the struggle for
power by waofthePopl'sWaandthatthestruggleorevindicationsmust
serve this end. He outlineswhich masses we should go to,principally to the
basic masses, the workers and peasants and the many fronts of struggle acord-
ing to their specific demands and grievances. We must apply the only Marxist
tactic of going to the deepest and most profound masses, educating them in rev-
olutionary violence and in the struggle against opportunism. He specifies that
the mass work of the Party that leads the People's War is carried out through
the people's army, and he indicates the importance of the generated organisms,
as one of the forms of organizing the masses. We must do mass work within
and for the People's War.
6.2
Reaffirmation of the Principal that " The Masses
make History"
Chairman Gonzaloreaffirmshimselfonthe powerfulMarxistprinciple:"The
masses make historyandteachesustoforge our Communist conception in
struggle against the bourgeois conception which is centered around the individ-
ual as the axis of history.
He states:
"The masses are the very lightof the world . .. they are its fiber,
the inexhaustible heartbeat of history ... when they speak everything
trembles, the old order begins to shake, the high summits bow down, the
84
=====第85页=====
stars change their course because the masses make everything possible
and are capable of anything."
This reafirmation is of great importance because it is part of the proletar-
ian conception．Itupholdsthemasslineandisapplicabletoeverything,it
allows judgmentoneverything from international questionsto specific policies,
because it is an ideological problem. No historic event, no movement of change,
no revolution can be made without the participation of the masses. This applies
to the Party because it has a mass character and it cannotbe unlinked from
them,otherwise it would be extinguished or diluted. The masses, in orderto
guaranteethe course of their struggle, mustbe ledby the Party. The Party
has masses: The militants, who as Communists must necessarily embody this
principle and overthrowthat rotten individualism which is not a proletarian
conception through a constant struggle. It can be observed how our process of
the People's War powerfully aids this transformation. Furthermore, one prin-
ciple of leadership is "from the masses to the masses." This also applies to the
People's War because it is a war of the masses; they are the very source of it.
It is with this Marxist conception that we make the People's War.
He particularly highlights the rebellion of the masses as the makers of history,
telling us:
"Since ancient times the masses live subject to oppression and exploita-
tion, but they have always rebelled. This is a long and inexhaustible
history. .. From the beginning,since the masses have fought their
oppressors they have always clamored for organizing their rebellion,
their arming, their uprising, that it be led, that it be conducted. It has
always been this way and it shall continue to be so. Even after there is
another world it shall continue to be this way only in another form."
"The masses clamor to organize the rebellion, and therefore the Party,
its leaders, cadre and militants today have a peremptory obligation, a
destiny: To organize the disorganized power of the masses, and this
can only be done with arms in hand. We must arm the masses it by
bit, part by part, until the general arming of the people. When this goal
is reached, there shall be no exploitation on Earth."
Here he expresses his absolute conviction in the masses, in their historical and
political necessity to rebel, to arm themselves, their demand that they be led and
organized. He summons the Communist Parties to fulfil the demand that comes
from Marx and Engels who taught us that there are two powers on the Earth:
The armed force of the reactionaries and the disorganized masses. Chairman
Gonzalo propounds that if we organize this power, what is only potential shall
become deeds,and what is a possibilityshall become a reality. Everything is a
houseof cardsifitisotbasedothemasses.Concrtl,the problemiso
from the stateof disorganized massesto masses that are militarilyorganized.
We should organize the masses with arms in hand because they clamor to
85
=====第86页=====
world today, with the strategic offensive of the world revolution, and with the
principal tendency in today's world: revolution. Furthermore,the mass line
aims at materializing what Marx indicated,the general arming of the people
with thegoalof guaranteeingthetriumph of therevolutionand preventing
capitalistrestoration. This is athoughtof great perspectivesthatshall carry
us up to Communism: Only by organizing this sea of armed masses shall it be
possible to defend what is conquered and develop the democratic, socialist and
cultural revolutions.
He refutes those who propound that the masses don't want to make revolu-
tion or that the masses will not support the People's War. He teaches us that
the problem is not with the masses because they are ready to rebel, but rather
it is with the Communist Parties who must assume their obligation to lead them
and rise up in arms. He differentiates from those positions that today are based
on"the accumulation of forces,,"which propose parsimoniously accumulating
the masses by wayof the so-called"democratic spaces”or the useof legality.
Such an accumulation of forces doesn't correspond to the current moment of the
international andnational class struggle, itdoesn't fitin the typeof democratic
revolution we are unfolding and which shall have other characteristics within the
socialistrevolution,since we are living in a revolutionary situationof unequal
development inthe world.Heisopposedto andcondemnstheopportnist -
sitionsofakithmassstlthebibousetoanectoral
path or by armed actions under the command of a super power or power.
Thus, he upholds the greatsloganof Chairman Mao:Itis right to rebel,"
and conceivesthattheproblemofthe massestodayisthatthe Communist
Parties mustmobilize,politicize,organizeand arm the massestoseize power,
specifying people's war.
He specifies the necessity of the scientific organization of poverty. Chairman
Gonzalo stresses that those most disposed to rebel, who clamor most to organize
the rebellion are the poorest masses,and we must pay particular attention to
the revolutionary and scientific organization of the masses. This is not against
class criteria because as he shows, poverty has its origin in exploitation, in the
class struggle:"Misery exists next to fabulous wealth; even the Utopians knew
that both are linked: A colossal and challenging wealth next to a revealing and
clamorous poverty. This is because exploitation exists."
This thesis is connected to Marx who discovered the revolutionary potential
of poverty andthe need to scientifically organize itfor therevolution. Marx
taught us thatthe proletariat does nothave property and is the creative class,
the only classthatshall destroy property andthus destroyitself as a class.
This thesis is tied to Lenin, who taught us that social revolution does not arise
from programsbutfrom thefactthat millionsof people say we preferto die
fighting for revolution ratherthan live as victimsof hunger. And it is also tied
to Chairman Mao,who conceived that poverty shall propeltheyearningfor
change,foraction,forrevolution,thatitisablank pieceof paperon whichte
newest and most beautiful words can be written.
Hetakes intoaccountthespecificconditionsofour society,and teachesus
that in Peru, to speak about the masses is to speak of the peasant masses, the
86
=====第87页=====
poor peasants;thatthe1920s,194Os and1960s demonstrate that the peasant
struggles shake thevery foundation of the State, butthatthey lack aguide:
Theideologyof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought. They lack a
motor: The People's War and the just and correct leadership of the Communist
Party. The peasants'struggles were not able to take the correct path to power,
and the blood they shed was used to fetter them and mold them to the old
order. These were unforgettable bloodbaths which left extraordinary lessons.
The 1980s show that the true mobilization of the armed peasant masses orga-
nized in the Communist Party and People's Guerrilla Army has begun, and that
they are giving their precious blood for the new power thatis blossoming and
developing through the People's War.
This is particularity strategicbecauseit permits the understandingthat
revolution in the world is defined on the side of the poorest, who constitute the
majority and who are the most disposed to rebel. In each revolution we must go
to the poorest applying the three requirements that the scientific organization
of poverty demands: Ideology, people's war and a Communist Party.
In this regard, Chairman Gonzalo says:
"Poverty is a driving force of the revolution. The poorest are the most
revolutionary; poverty is the most beautiful song; ... poverty is not
a disgrace, it is an honor, our mountains with their masses are the
source of our revolution, who with their hands led by the Communist
Party shall build a new world. Our guide: Ideology. Our motor: The
armed struggle. Our leadership: The Communist Party."
6.3
The Principal Aspect of Mass Work is Po-
litical Power, but the Strugglefor Revindi-
cations is Necessary
Basing himself on Chairman Mao, who generalized revolutionary violence as the
universal law for the conquest of power and who established that the principal
form of struggle is the armed struggle and the principal form of organization is
the armedforces,and that before the outbreak of a warall the struggles and
organizations should serve to prepare it, Chairman Gonzalo teaches us that in
mass work the struggle for power and the struggle for revindications are two
sides of the same coin, with the struggle for Power being the first and foremost
demand of the masses.
Organize the masses so that they can go beyond what is permitted by the
existing legalorder,sothattheystruggle to destroytheoldorderand notto
maintain it. This is accomplished by use of the three instruments of the revolu-
tion: The Party where the few converge, the Army with more participants, and
new State/Front which is the base which progressively accumulates the masses
through leaps.InthecountrysidethisisachievedthroughPeople's Committees
and in the cities through the People's Revolutionary Defense Movement. In this
87
=====第88页=====
way the tradition of electoral fronts,which the revisionists and opportunists
apply to channel the struggle of the peasantry and to divert the masses in the
cities from not seizing power through war, is destroyed.
To center on political Power also demands the organization of the masses in
diverse new forms of struggle, because war imposes changes on the struggle and
organization of the masses. As Lenin taught us, in revolutionary epochs, new
organizations must be formed and go against the old leaders who seek to sell-
out the revolution in order to accommodate themselves within the reactionary
system. For that reason, theold formsof struggle andorganization of the masses
cannot be used.
The struggle for power as the principal aspect does not mean that from the
beginning we are going to incorporate the masses all at once. Chairman Mao
teaches us that developing Support Bases and armedforces is what generates
the high tide of the revolution. This has to do with the law of incorporation of
the masses into the revolution, which was established by the Party in the Second
Plenum of1980,anincorporation that shall be through progressive leaps; with
more people's war shall come a greater incorporationof the masses. Thus, the
People's War is a political eventthatcontinues to pound ideas into the heads
of men through powerful actions,who shall bitby bitcome to understand their
onlytruepah,thbdvloithpitclousThePeoples
War summonsalltherevolutionarieandopenatrailasitdevelops.
The masses areavid for politicsand it is incumbentupon Communists to
organize andeadthemThe masseshaveconcrete problemsverywhere and we
must worryabouthmndtndtothem.Massworkisdone withintheclass
struggleandotiaIf wdoot omaswok,taioariesand
revisionistsshallutilizeitfortheirownends,whetheritistodevelopfascism
and to corporativizethem orhandovertheirstrugglestoanother imperialist
master. These are two wills that are distinct and opposed.
The masses seek the voice of those who affirm and not those who doubt.
In our Party, in the Initiation, Chairman Gonzalo demanded that no one must
ever doubt the masses,fighting those who are blind and deaf to the voice of the
masses,listening totheirfaintest rumorand attending totheir daily,concrete
problems. The masses must never be fooled,they must never be forced, they
must know the risks which they may face. They must be summoned to the long,
bloody struggle for power, but with this goal they shall understand that it shall
be a necessary and victorious struggle.
Therefore the struggle for power is principal but it cannot be separated from
the struggle for economic and political demands, they are two sides of the same
coin, and the latter struggle is necessary.
How do we conceive the struggle for revindications? We are accused of not
havinga specific linefortheeconomicand politicalstruggleof the masses.
The fact is that we apply it in another way, in otherforms,with different
politics opposed to those appliedby the opportunists and revisionists, a new
and different wayfrom the traditionalforms. Chairman Gonzalo teachesus
that the struggle for economic and political demands is one side of a coin, which
has the struggle for political power onthe other side. Itis completely wrong
88
=====第89页=====
to separate them—to talk only about the strugglefor economic and political
demands is revisionism. In specifying Marx's thesis to our society he tells us:
"The crisis presents us with two problems: First, how to defend what
has been won, since in crises the gains are lost, and more would be
lost if they were not defended. This is the necessity of the struggle
for revindications . . . , an economic and political struggle . . .
,furthermore, it forges the class and the workers in their struggle for
power. Second, how to end the crises? They cannot be ended unless the
predominant social order is ended ... [there is a] necessity for revo-
lutionary struggle which serving the seizure of power by armed struggle
under the leadership of its Party . .. one cannot be separated from
the other. The relationship of both problems materializes in developing
the struggle for demands as a function of political power.
”
To carry forward the struggle for revindications the union is used,along
with the strike which is the principalform of the economic struggle ofthe
proletariat. These are developed into guerrilla warfare which educates the class
in the struggle for power. This elevates the class through concrete armed actions
which strengthens this form of struggle,giving it a higher quality.
In sum, the struggle for revindications must be developed serving the con-
questof power.Thisis apolitical principleof doing mass work.
6.4 What Masses do we go to?
We muststartfrom theclass criteriato resolve to whatmasses do we go. It
is very important to make sure that the masses are organized according to the
common interestsof the classes they belong to. Chairman Gonzalo teachesus
that this approach is essential to combat those who pretend to separate masses
from classes with tales of "unity,"betraying the true interests of the masses by
trafficking with their struggles. Also because it allows us to understand that the
masses are always an arena of struggle where the bourgeoisie and proletariat
clash to lead them. However,only the Communist Party is capable of leading
the masses because it is the only one that can represent them and struggle for
their interests. Those who talk about "mass democracy”or who create open
mass organisms as if they were a form of Power without violence are merely
upholding bourgeois positions that negate the leadershipof the proletariat and
its dictatorship.
Startingfromaclasscriteriahastodowiththecharacterof therevolution,
with the classes that make up the people who should be united under the leader-
shipof theprltaiaIouraseothedmocratievolutio,theproletariat
leads,thepeasantryisprincipa,thepettybourgeoisieisafirmallyandthe
middlebougeosiehasa dualcharacter.Thebasic masse which we mustoo
arethe proltaaandthepasantry,prnciallthepoorpeasantry,the petty
bourgeoisie and also the middle bourgeoisie.
Keeping inmindthespcfievindicationof themasses,wshould difer-
entiate betweenthosesectorsofthemasseswhichsufermoreoppression with
89
=====第90页=====
the goal of organizing them so that they shall struggle to achieve conquests and
resolve their specific contradiction. This refers to the mass fronts in which we
must work. These are: The workers,theproletariat,theleading classofall
revolutions, a class whose principal and decisive political objective is the con-
quest of Power through the People's War to emancipate itself, emancipate the
other classes and finally to destroy itself as a class. Its specific revindications
are the seizing of conquests and rights like increased wages, a shorter work day
and better working conditions. Towards this end,the workers' movement,its
struggles, mobilizations, marches, agitation, and strikes must be developed with
armed actions. "Worry about the fundamental problems of the class and also
of the workers, their general and concrete problems which they fight for daily."
The peasants are the principal force, especially the poor peasants, who strug-
gle for the conquest of land through armed struggle under the leadership of the
Communist Party. Not seeing it this way leads to the "land grabs" [toma de tier-
ras] and conforming to the oldorder. Further develop the peasant movement
applyingthethreewiths":Livewithwork witandtrugle withthem,thus
forging peasants with a proletarian mentality.
Women which make up half the world and develop the women's movement
for the emancipationof women,a task whichis the workof womenthemselves
but undertheaderioftheParty.Wmusombtthebouoisthesisof
women'sliberationWomestrugleagainsttheonstant ncreaseinthecost of
living fhtoflndtil
the working, peasant and intellectual women, etc.
Thentllctuatatalarlec-
tualsservingtheproletariaandpeasantrywithithePeople'sWar.Among
themarethesecondarchooltudents,universittudentandprofessionals,
etc. Seethei specifievindications,thattheyshoulddefnd whatisconquered,
aiming atanewnationalcientificanmassculturemakinthmconscious
that they can only achieve this with the revolution.
Mobilize the poor masses in the cities, in the shantytowns and slums against
hungerandmiroththeyhtothevoluioogramme,summon
them tothePeople'sWarsothattheymayseizetheirconquestsandrights
which are trampled on more each day. Do not allow that they be struck with
impunityandteachthemhowto defendthemselves,sothattheycanresist
the enemysaggressionusingallthavailablemeansattheidisposal.Apply
"Combat and Resist!,"which is the common slogan for the class.
Mobilizetheyouthsothattheydirectlyparticipateinthefront linesof
the combattrenchesof the People's War. Letyoung workers,peasants and
studentsdeveloptheirstruglesfora newworld,theirrighttobeeducated,
against unemployment and other ills that wrack them.
Makethechildrenactive paticipantsinthe People'sWar.Theycan carry
out many taskswhich willhelpthem understandthenecessityoftransforming
the world.Theyare thefutureandintheendtheyshall liveinthe new world.
Change theirideologysothattheyadopttheproletariatsdlo.
06
=====第91页=====
6.5 Persist in the only Marxist-Leninist Tactic
Starting from Engel's thesis:"In a country with such an old political and work-
ers'movement, there is always a colossal heap of garbage inherited by tradition
that must be cleaned step by step." Lenin established: "The only Marxist line
in the world proletarian movement consists in explaining to the masses that the
split with opportunism is inevitable and indispensable, educating them for the
revolution through a merciless struggle against it." Chairman Mao indicated
that a period of struggle against imperialism and revisionism was opening, with
revisionism being one of the principal sources of imperialist wars and a dan-
ger within the Party for Communists in general. Chairman Gonzalo callsfor
persisting in the only Marxist tactic which implies four issues:
1. Sweep away the colossal heap of garbage that is revisionism and opportunism,
principally electoralism. None of these revisionists and opportunists, nor any
of their kin,can represent, much less defend,the masses. Now as before
they only defend theexploiters in turn,yesterday they were merely a caboose
for the fascist and corporative Aprista government, sinisterly dragging along
the union organizations dependantonthem. All these political and union
organizationsandtheirleadersdonotrepresentthepeoplebutthatcrust
of the labor aristocracy. The union bureaucracy and the bourgeois workers'
parties thatalways trytoswervethemassesfromtheirrevolutionarypath
and are no more than partof that colossal heapof garbage which must be
gradually swept away as Engels said.
2. Go to the deepest and most profound masses which constitute the majority,
which in our country are the workers and principally poor peasants, the petty
bourgeoisie and also keep the national bourgeoisie in mind. Of these,the
most important are the workers and principally poor peasantry, and we must
go mainly to them in both the countryside and city. We must propel their
movement, lead it, mobilize them for Power so as to topple and overthrow the
old State. This is the principle tactical question. Thus, among the masses it is
necessary to distinguish the superficial scum which is the crust that serves the
bourgeoisie from the immense majority of deep and profound masses which
shall emerge more and more until the sweeping away of the decrepit Peruvian
state, even more so when a People's War starts to crumble the old Peruvian
state.
3. The masses mustbe educated inthe People's War,inits theoryand practice.
Thus, educating them in the peace of bayonets is to allow them to be slaugh-
tered. The masses should no longershedtheirblood with impunityonly to
bebetrayedbythiralseadrs,ocaptulationrathehipciousblood
should serve the conquest of Power for the class and the people.
4.It is necessarytostruggleimplacablyagainstrevisionismandopportunism,
combating it asa dangerous cancer insideandoutsidethe Partyand among
the very massesthemselves,orelsetheywillnotsolidifytheirrevolutionary
91
=====第92页=====
path. This is a struggle which we have been unleashing since the reconsti-
tution of the Party and which today in open people's war is more urgent
and implacable because of the increasingly treacherous way they act against
us, the people andtherevolution,allthe more so if social-imperialismis
operatingbehind them within their policyof collusionand contention with
Yankee imperialism for global hegemony. This is applicable to revisionism
and opportunism of all sorts no matter who their representatives are.
RegardingthesefourisuesjustlaidoutChairmanGonzalotellsusthe
following:
"Rise above this miasma, this superficial revisionism, opportunism and
electoralism which rides on the back of the masses. The main thing
is that below this the colossal and self-impelled masses agitate, upon
which we operate with the most powerful instrument of the rebellion
which exists on the Earth: Armed action. We are the cry that says:
'It is right to rebel.'"
The Organization of the Masses
Chairman Goalotiomtedloialandlitclbaseandimult
neously wihaoritabitrmoftruggle
andthe formsofogaiithemassHtachustheprocessi whichthe
mass work of the Party developed:
In the Constitution.HetellsusthatMariáteguioutlinedthebases for the
mass workofthePartyanddetrmiedspciiclibyulashinthetwo-line
struggleaacm wppdtofrtd lo
against AprawhichnegatedthMarxis-eninistconceptionandthecapacity
of the class toconstituteitself into a Communist Party,throughits workinthe
Front.
In the 193Os with Mariátegui's death,his line was abandoned. The work
is centered around the masses, putting them at the tail of the big bourgeoisie,
deviating them towards"frontism," elections and revisionism which weighs down
on the efforts of the red line to oppose them. These erroneous tactics last more
than 30 years.
In the Reconstitution. Chairman Gonzalo establishes the mass line of the
Party and the organic forms. This is in a period of over15 years of hard two-
line struggle whichachieves partial leaps.Inthefirst political strategyof the
Reconstruction he develops the initiation of the mass work of the Party, all the
militants in Ayacucho did peasant work and with the civil construction workers,
for example,alsowiththeintellectualsand poormassesintheslumsHesup-
ported the land seizures and carried out peasant events, the most transcendental
being the I Regional Conventionof Peasantsof Ayacucho wherethe agrarian
program wasestablished.He ledthehistoric strugglesof June20,2and22
in 1969 in Ayacuchoand Huanta,mobilizingthe massesof secondaryschool
students,parentsandfamiliesagainstDecree06of General Velasco which was
92
=====第93页=====
defeated. He organized the People's Defense Front of Ayacucho, reorganized the
Revolutionary Student Front (FER), created the Popular Feminine Movement
(MFP), the Center for Mariátegui's Intellectual Work (CETIM), the Revolution-
ary Secondary School Student Front (FRES) and above all the Poor Peasants
Movement (MCP). Thus, he established new politics in mass work, new forms
of struggle and new organic forms.
In the two-line struggle, Chairman Gonzalo fought against revisionism which
led the masses towards electoralism and against revolutionary violence in order
to preserve the old order. He fought against Patria Roja, a form of revisionism
which trafficked, as it does today, with the slogan "power grows from a barrel of
a gun," negating semi-feudalism, centering on the petty-bourgeoisie, especially
students and teachers. He also defeated the right liquidationism that diluted the
Party's leadership among the masses, preaching legalism and saying everything
could be donethrough the Peasant Confederationof Peru(CCP),thatthe
peasants didn't understand confiscation but they did understand expropriation,
and that the fascist and corporative measures of the Velasco government should
be deepened.
In thesecondpolitical strategyofthe Reconstitution,heestablishedthe
Generated Organisms agreed upon in the Third Plenum of 1973: "The move-
mentsthemselvesasorgaizationeneratedbytheproletariatin thediferent
fronts of work havethreecharacteristics:1)adherencetoMaritegui,2)mass
organizationsand3)boundbydemocraticcentralism."Hefounded the char-
acter,contntandroleofthe GeneratedOrganismsapplying enin'sthesison
aclandestine Partyand pointsof Partysupportin the masses,learningfrom
the Chinese experience in open and secretwork. He specified the necessity, in
order to develop the Reconstitutionof the Party,ofopening the Party to the
masses more. In order to reach agreement upon and carry out this policy he
had to defeatthe left liquidationismthatbegan fromthe notion thatfascism
sweeps everything away, aiming atthe Party's extinction by isolating it from
the masses; it deprecated the peasantry and proletariat and preached that "line
is enough."
With the defeatof the leftliquidationistline the tieswith the masses grew
and People's Schools begin to be formed, schools which politicized the masses
with the conception and line of the Party,which playedan importantrole in
the agitation and propaganda by linking the struggle for revindications with the
struggle for political Power. They completed a systematic and planned study
based on outlines, [en base a esquemas] unleashing thetwo-line struggle and
developing the mass work.
The advance of the work of the Generated Organisms led to Chairman Gon-
zalo proposingtheir developmentinto one torrent,underthe political guide
of initiating thearmed struggle. This led to the formingof zonal work. The
Metropolitan Coordination was established for the cities,applying Lenin's the-
sis for open work and Chairman Mao'sthesisforwork in the cities,so that
the struggleof the masses should be developed in a reasonable,advantageous
and precise way. TheirapplicationallowedustokeepthePartyclandestine,
entrenched in the masses,moving in a good number of activists,distribute
93
=====第94页=====
propaganda in a short time and facilitated agitation and mobilization undera
centralized Party plan.
All of this is what we call "the three little feet"for mass work in the cities:
Generated Organisms, People's Schools and the Metropolitan Coordination. For
the countryside the first two forms were applied.
In the third political strategy of the Reconstitution, the Party broadly de-
veloped its mass work in the zones of the Sierra, linking itself with the peasants,
primarily the poor peasants. In the cities it linked itself with the proletariat and
masses in the slums and shantytowns. The generated organisms have played a
good role within the culmination of the reconstitution and laying foundations
for the armed struggle. The specific lines were developed even further,so that
the Classist Movement of Workers and Laborers (MOTC) proposed the 15 basic
theses for the workers'movement;the Poor Peasant Movement (MCP) politi-
cized the peasants with the agrarian program specifiedfor new conditions;in
the Shantytown Classist Movement(MCB)the Listof denunciations and de-
mands of the people was published;the Student Revolutionary Front (FER)
further developedthethesisofthe DefenseoftheUniversityagainst corpo-
rativism; the Revolutionary Secondary School Student Front(FRES) impelled
the struggle of students for people's education; the Popular Feminine Movement
(MFP)raisedthethesisof women's Emancipation,impllingthe mobilization
of working women, peasant women, shantytown dwellers and students. Further-
more,there was participationintheUnitedSyndicateof Peruvian Educatinal
Workers(UTEP)whichledtoitsspecificlasslinebeinadoptedinth7.
The National Federation of Peruvian University Teachers (FENTUP) was also
formed. All of this work entered into a broad ideological-political mobilization
to initiate the People's War.
In synthesis,all the mass work of the Party in the Reconstitution was to
prepare the initiation of the People's War. As Chairman Mao taught us, before
initiating the war,everything is preparation for it,andonceit has begun every-
thing serves to develop it.Chairman Gonzalo has applied and firmly developed
this principle.
In the leadership of the People's War there was a great leap in the mass work
of the Party, a qualitative leap, which shaped the principal form of struggle—the
People's War, and the principal form of organization—The People's Guerrilla
Army. This highest task was carried forward through the militarization of the
Party, and with respect to the mass work this means that all the mass work is
done through the People's Guerrilla Army, which as an army of a new type fulfils
three tasks: Combat, mobilize and produce. We conceive that the second task
of the army implies mobilizing,politicizing, organizing and arming the masses, a
task which is notcounterposed to fighting,whichisthe principal task, because
the principleofconcentratingfor combatanddispersingformobilizationis
applied. Inaddition,the massesareeducated inthe war.Thisis apinciple
which governsthethreeforces:Principalones,localonesand base forces in
which various degrees of actions are specified.
For the mobilizationof masses,the Partythroughthe EGP carries frward
the People's Schools,forms the GeneratedOrganismsand the support gros.
94
=====第95页=====
This is a policy that is applied one way in the countryside, because that is where
the New Power is being formed, and in another way in the cities. In the cities,
the Revolutionary Defense Movement of the People was formed, aiming at the
future insurrection.
In the countryside, where we have power, Support Bases and People's Com-
mittees, we see to it that all the masses engage in armed participation, organized
in the Party, Army and Front/State. If all the masses are not organized the New
Power will not be able to sustain itself for long. Amorphous masses or power
without masses organized under the leadership of the Party is not enough.
In the cities, the mass work is carried out by the Army as well, and the main
thing is the struggle for power through the People's War, with the struggle for
revindications serving political power as a necessary complement． Obviously,
this happens through many armed actions with the goal of materializingthe
new forms oforganization. We formed the Peoples's Revolutionary Defense
Movement (MRDP), which attracts masses from the workers, peasants, shanty
towns and pettybourgeoisie,neutralizing the middle bourgeoisie,aimingto-
ward the democratic forces which support the People's War. The objective is
to lead the massestowards resistanceandto the elevationof their struggles
into People's War, to hinder, undermine and upset the old State and serve the
future insurrection,preparing the citieswith People's Warspecified as com-
plementary. Weusethe double policyof developingourownforms, which is
principal,and penetratingalltypesoforganizations.Weapply Combatand
Resist! Regardingthe GeneratedOrganisms,in the People's Warthey have
expresseda developmentandtheircharactershavebeenvaried. Thy con-
tinuebeingmassorganizationsofthe Partyandtoday:1) Theyare guided by
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought; 2) They are governed by demo-
cratic centralism,and 3) They servethe developmentof the People's War. In
the countryside,the GeneratedOrganismsaremilitarized;in thecitiesmany
degrees of militarization can beapplied. Today, we have the following: MOTC,
MCP, MCB, MFP, MJP proletarian youth movement—Trans.], MIP. [proletar-
ian intellectual movement—Trans.] Peru People's Aid is also important which
has upsurged in the People's War as partof the struggle for prisoners of war
and disappeared. For the Party's overseas work the Peru People's Movement
(MPP) has been formed with its specific tasks.
Today, after nearly eight years of People's War the Party has made a great
leap in its mass work, proving that it is just and correct to develop mass work
within and for the People's War. As a result of its application our people are
learning each daythatthe class struggle necessarily leadsto the struggle for
Power;their growing participation in the People's Waris very expressiveof
this, and even if not everyone reaches an understanding of it, they see in it the
concrete hopeof their emancipation. They are developing their struggles with
new forms of struggle and organization, and the class struggle in Peru has been
elevated to its principal form: The People's War. The masses are organized
in People's War and are thebase and sustenance of it. Theyare organized
ina CommunistParty, in the People's Guerrilla Armyand principally inthe
New Power,the principal conquestof the People's War in whichthe workers,
95
=====第96页=====
peasants and petty-bourgeoisie participate, exercising political power like never
before in history.
These are qualitative leaps which give rise to conditions for a new chapter
in mass work within and for the People's War towards the conquestof power
countrywide.
Those who uphold Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, Gonzalo Thought, assume
the embodimentof the mass line of the Party, giving up our lives so that the
Party seizes Power countrywide and serves the world revolution.
EMBODY THE MASS LINE OF THE PARTY!
ORGANIZE THE CLAMOR OF TH PEOPLE FOR THEIR RE-
BELLION!
MAKE THE GREAT LEAP IN THE INCORPORATION OF
THE MASSES WITHIN AND FOR THE PEOPLE'S WAR!
Central Committee, Communist Party of Peru
96
=====第97页=====