DECEMBER 3RD: CHAIRMAN GONZALO'S BIRTHDAY AND DAY OF THE PEOPLE'S
LIBERATION ARMY
Proletarians of all countries, unite!
SOME BASIC KNOWLEDGE OF MARXISM
Presentation:
These are comments made by Chairman Gonzalo on the two introductory paragraphs of
the document"On Marxism-Leninism-Maoism", the first of the Fundamental Documents
as part of the foundation and taking position in the First Congress of the Communist Party
of Peru(CPP). Necessary_ comments_that_imply_ some_basic_knowledge_of_Marxism,
especially how it is applied to the reality of the Peruvian revolution as part of the world
proletarian revolution. That is why, on the occasion of celebrating a new anniversary of
Chairman Gonzalo's birth and the Day of the People's Liberation Army, we are publishing
them as an article prepared by us on the basis of the records of the First Congress. The fact
is despite such basic and necessary knowledge there is a lotof confusion among the
Maoists as a consequence of the action of revisionism and its repercussion in the ranks as a
partof theideological dynamics. Therefore,this article is a brilliantopportunityof
celebration and as a part of it serving the struggle to eradicate the confusions in this
respect to have more unity for common action.
As for its application to reality, the Chairman himself clarifies: we must bear in mind who
the documents are aimed at, we are not in Europe, we are in Peru, one must bear this in
mind. The circumstances of a Marx when he had to establish was one, that is why "The
Capital" has three volumes plus the two on surplus value, five. Marx said through Engels,
that it should not be more thenfive parts, weshould not be guidedby different
publications but what Marx elaborated. Or Lenin's circumstance, if one thinks about the
Bolshevik Party, one finds that this Party waged a great moment of ideological struggle,
long time carried_out among people with a wide Marxistformation, cosmopolitan
elements, several of them spoke several languages, and it was an intellectuality that as such
debated on that level,that is why we have Lenin's works as they are written. If one
compares the texts of Comrade Stalin, they are already much more concrete and if we take
the works of Chairman Mao Tse-tung, they are extremely deep, very simple and very clear
and do not go into many ins and outs;but if one follows carefully the exposition of the
Chairman in his works, one understands clearly, what he wants to tell us. So one must take
into account the concrete conditions in which one operates, not to have them present is
wrong.
The document ON_ MARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM initsfirst two paragraphs
(introduction) tells us literally:
"Inthefurnaceofclassstruggle,theideologyof theinternationalproletariat emerged
[insurgió] as Marxism, aterwards developed into Marxism-eninism and later Marxism-
Leninism-MaoismThereforethscientifiideologyoftheproletariatall-powerful
bcauset iuehaeanmaiitialciclofdvlopmnt:
=====第1页=====
1) Marxism)einismand )Maoism.hesethe tageaearofthameunit
which began with the Commuist Maestoone hundredand forty yearao,withthe
heroicepicoftheclasstruggleifieceandfruitfultwo-linstruglewte
communist parties themselves and in the titanic work of thought and action that only the
working class could enerae.Today,thee unfadinglihtare outstanding: Marx, Lenin,
and Mao Tse-tung who,through three grand leaps havearmed us with the ivincible
ideology of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, which today is principally Maoism.
Nevertheless, while Marxism-Leninism has obtained an acknowledgment of its universal
validity, Maoism is not completely acknowledged as the third stage. Some simply deny its
condition as such, while others only accept it as "Mao Tse-tung Thought." In essence, both
positions, with the obvious differences between them, deny the general development of
Marxism made by Chairman Mao Tse-tung. The denial of the "ism" character of Maoism
denies its universal validity and, consequently, its condition as the third, new, and superior
stage oftheideology oftheinternational_proletariat: Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
principally Maoism, that we uphold, defend, and apply."
We would like to emphasize some points that deserve a small foundation, but we do not
intend to make big foundations, not because Marxism does not have them, but because we
have to keep in mind who the documents are addressed to.
About the first paragraph:
The ideology of the international proletariat
The quotation begins with the first question, which is the "ideology of the international
proletariat", its definition is understood.
Ideology because there are those who speak of science as opposed to Marxist ideology,
forgetting that our ideology is scientific. When Engels dealt with the problem of ideology in
his famous letters from 9o to 95 of the last century, he told us that all the classes before the
proletariat had an inverted reflection of reality. What does this mean? Like the camera, it
inverts the figure, what is in the head puts it on the feet and vice versa. In this way, every
non-proletarian ideology twists reality, deforms it and therefore cannot understand the
essence of reality, cannot understand the truth as it is, cannot grasp the contradiction as it
is. Therefore, non-proletarian ideologies are deformations, they are not scientific and the
root is one, very concrete: they are based on exploitation. Or, in order to generalise and
encompass them all, it is sustained by the private property of the means of production,
while the proletariat is not sustained by the property of the means of production or by
exploitation, its historical mission is precisely to destroy private property of the means of
production in order to sweep away all existing exploitation and differences.
The ideology of the international proletariat is scientific
We mustclaim the term ideology in the understanding that our ideology is thatof the
internfic,
but it does not take away itscharacterof idoloy.Whenone insist on relacing the term
ideology withscientificor_science,onesumpsinto_bourgeoiscriteria,intobourgeois
plosopheotalI 
=====第2页=====
distorti eofeAlkm,ccording
tohi t n
philosophlly udd nd tat e was gin to ake  itiic ouain.T, h
accused Marx of having created scientific socialism as a new science but of not having
given it itsdoctrinal, philosophicalfoundations,to be precise. That is thebasisofhat
criterion. If one analyses the works of this individual one finds that he is going to propose
that the foundation of Marxism carries a fusionof Spinoza's materialism - Spinoza is a
Jewish phisophe explld rom Spai whose amil ended up in the Nherlands at that
time; Spinoza was a great philosopher in his time and for his time, he was a materialist of
the beginnings of the bourgeoisie. Althusser considered that the foundation of Marxism
had to be made by fusing Spinozaism with Kantism which is another bourgeois philosophy.
There you can see his nefarious position. In essence, what does it imply? A re-edition of the
theses of the old revisionists, such as Kautsky,who maintained that Marxism had no
philosophy and that Marxist philosophy was Kantism;that is to say,it put bourgeois
philosophy as thebasisof our conception,after all an agnosticism or an inabilityto
understand.
The ideology of the international proletariat is the conception of the
proletariat. It is the ideology of the last class in history, whose understanding
of the world is scientific
We need to be clear about the implications of that. See, you take one word and there's a
whole background. That's whythere is equidistant "ideology of theinternational
proletariat"to express the conception of the proletariat,the last class in history, whose
understanding of the world is scientific. That is what we must know in concrete terms.
Why the above? Sit can be en that there is whole oundation in Marx, in Engels, there
is a deep understanding, and so one can see what it means to insist repeatedly on certain
terms, believing thatthey will thus raise Marxism, when at the bottom theyare bastard
concessions to the bourgeoisie, and this must make us think that we cannot simply reeat
all the ideologies that are swarming;first,because it falls into an easy snobbery –it is
called 
go to the coreof things and grasp the substantive things and haveahigh critical sirit to
judge many or all of the things that are written in the world about our conception. One
might ask, what does conception mean? It is the understanding of everything that exists,
that means understanding of the material world, understanding of theclassstrugge, that
is, the social world, and it means understanding of knowledge as a reflection of the mater
in the mind which is another form of matter. That means conception. What have I just
done? Puting Marx's eitionof dialcticsorward,mitingonlytheeerece o laws.
It is more than 2,50o years of knowledge that has been reworked from the
position and interests of the international proletariat
Our ideasoftheinternational proletariat are therefore the productof avery high level of
elaboration, they are more than 2,500 years of knowledge that has been reworked from the
positioitoiiltihur
background: 200 ars! That is why we alwys laugh whomecrtins and smart alecks
say thatam i.'wwt  are
talkin bolddbumh ian
be writen andad,thaigis igh:"Pa doestbluh"andtupiity isimpudent.
This is what ace  wet ouelyof itial ptit: the
elaborIol
=====第3页=====
position and interestsof the workingclass,of the proletariat whatisitsstrictest name;
strictly speaking it iscalled proletariat and itisinternational because it is one class,s w
have only one ideology.
What is insurgency?
The quotation also ays: insurgi.What isinsurgi?Itis linkdtoinsurgency,sn't ? It is
a combatant,revolutionary break,that's what it means. You see,the term is notfor
pleasure. Sometimes when one reads, one reads very quickly or writes very quickly. S, you
have to repair,you have to know how to read and study and think. The brevity of the
documents precisely moves the comrades to think, to develop theinitiative of
understanding in order to be able to transform.
Why is the ideology of the proletariat all-powerful?
In the uotatonitisad:itisall-powerful,ofcourseitiall-powrful bcauseit stu,
Lenin's thesis proved to be true.
There are three stages of a dialectical process of development of the ideology
of the proletariat
The three stages. The document says stages, moments or milestones, but one is the more
precise term and the one we use: stages; then moments or milestones are equivalent but
one is the one that expresses it.In the end, in no language and not in ours either, no term,
no word is identical to another, they will have similar contents but not identical.
We makeabistatementherethatisessential:therearethreestagesfirstMarxism,
second Lem,dMosmat iwit i euiit  tae of 
dialectical processof development,ofcourse,it is a dialectical processof development.
Why is it that way?Becauseit is a processof knowledge,areflection in the mind, a
reflection of matter in the mind and matter in movement, dialectical, knowledge is so and
not by simple method as some say, but by essence, that is another mania. Methodologism
is another concession to bourgeois philosophy. Is it used sometimes? Yes, but never do
Marxists oppose and even less do they reduce our conception to a simple methodology. It
is a crass error to get entangled in the theory of bourgeois knowledge. None of them,
neither Marx, nor Lenin, nor the Chairman did it; if they talk about methods they never
refer to reducing all Marxism to a simple methodological question, it would lose its quality
of conception: being conception has the method as a component, as a derivation; in the
end method is procedure, nothing else. That is why it is important to have a dialectical
process, auiildwtlyadu accau t
is impossibletohaveknowledgewithout practice,itcouldnot be;preciselyseparating
theory from practiceisanotherconcession to thebourgeoisieit is a strictly bourgeois
thought, inour caseofarrowmpiricismof theXVII century.These are thethings that
are at the basis of our criteria as communists.
The Manifesto of the Communist Party of 1848 is the first milestone on which
the whole great Marxism-Leninism-Maoism is built
Before there were attempts,precursors,if any; in Marx'and Engels'own work we have
=====第4页=====
commui 
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism; it is the Manifesto that remains a valid flag to communism,
not as Khrushchev said: that it had finished its mission with the programme of the CPSU in
1961,taking away our class position and introducing a rotten bourgeois conception, a
complete and comprehensive revision of whole Marxism. Therefore, The Manifesto is our
starting point, the first milestone,milestone because it will last thousandsof years and
when there is communism it will still be considered as that great beginning that led to the
new humanity.
Only the class struggle can generate our conception, our ideology
It says that it is a heroic epic of class struggle, of course, only class struggle can generate
our conception, our ideology; only the proletariat with its great and incessant
transformation of the material reality in their productive practice, or in the class struggle
whose centre is politics,as the conquest and defence of the powerfor the class by
overthrowing other powers, only as a practice of research, could the class, generating titans
of thoughtandato,apeitlf astheatologythatwalwaysostnd wil st.
What is behind this titansof thought and action? It is linked to"three unfading lights:
Marx, Lenin and Mao Tse-tung", a chain of mountains not only has big heights, there are
also small summits, medium summits but there are very high peaks. Traditionally, it has
always stood out and we also recognize the work of Engels; Engels is a founder of Marxism.
Moreover,if we go into these things,it was Engels whofirst established a schemeof
understanding the basisof society, the relations of exploitation, that is to say the Political
Economy, it was him, as Marx himself recognized. But it was Marx, with the wonderful
talent and capacityof action that he had, whoshaped the first great height,especially
recognised by Engels; it was Engels who proposed that Marx should base the new ideology.
It is Engels who has developed more the philosophical part or has treated more the
philosophical part of Marxism. Reason: Marx did not have time to do it; he said that he
was working to elaborate a Treatise on Dialectics and unfortunately he did not manae to
complete it, there we would have had a great work; but in short, comrades, there are things
that were more urgent, he did not have time.
We also recognise comrade Stalin. Comrade Stalin has been a great Marxist-Leninist. Did
he err? Yes, but he never sold the revolution, he could have made a mistake, he could not
understand; as the Chairman has taught, his mistake started from an insufficient
understanding of dialectics, from dragging metaphysics, from this derives the problem of
comrade Stalin; but nobody can deny his enormous role nor can anybody take away his
condition of leader of the international proletariat for decades, facing for the first time the
construction of socialism,without precedent, nor the great effort he led in the Second
World War. He has contributions, of course he has them, we cannot deny him, we must
know how to value them.So there are already five of them,the thre added up to five; but
it is a pleiad, aconsiderable groupof great figures, of titansof thought and action. o, this
is enclosed.Why have we not listed them? To make it clear that thereare three great
figures: Marx, Lenin, Chairman Mao Tse-tung, that is the reason.
And how will our ideology develop as a dialectical process?
Ourideologywill develop as adialecticalprocess throughgreat leaps;thereforethe
d
=====第5页=====
this way l s,,d b  uc mn
that only the class can produce,that we have arrived at Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
mainly Maoism. This is how it should be seen. What are we demonstrating once more?
There is a whole background of foundation.
About the second paragraph:
Not recognizing“ism"”, not recognizing“Maoism”
Marxism-Leninism is recognised as having universal validity but that Maoism is not fully
recognised as the third stage.It is clearly said: some simply deny its condition as such, i.e.
third stage; others only come to Mao-Tse-tung-Thought. In essence, what is behind these
two positions that are within the proletariat, that are within Marxism? We are not talking
about reaction, what is there within the Marxists today, even Marxist-Leninists, what is
there? In essence, not recognising "ism", not recognising "Maoism". The "ism" has a clear
meaning;""gtoa,w"im"ictia
interpretsall the matter in its_different ways_of expression, whichare the three above
mentioned: nature, society, knowledge and stop counting, there is nothing else.
It is a doctrine not a system
I said"doctrine".I stress, I did not say"system".If you say"system", you would be making
a big mistake. Engels has already expressly analysed this point, but some people who use
"system" make a grave error, the correct thing to say is"doctrine", understanding it as we
have just specified it. The innovative mania, is it good? No, it goes against the unique
language and there are things that are established in a party way,to have a unique
language, that expresses therefore a party maturity, its own language; the rest, the people
already express themselves according to the social conformation and the development that
each one has, on that we could not enter any more. Do you understand? We cannot enter,
they are already the peculiarities of each person. But we have to serve to establish a unique
language, let's leave aside the superfluous manias of originality, because at the end of the
day originality is not expressed in terms, it is expressed in discovering new realities, small,
medium or large. Is that clear? The originality, that is useless,undermines the unique
language and therefore the consolidation, the unification. What did many foreigners and
even many comrades of the Chinese comrades say? They said, it is enough to listen to one
Chinese person to listen to all Chinese people. What did they want? Each Chinese to have
his or her own line? False originality, that is not originality; originality is the discovery of
new things, not the use of terminology, less snobbery, we must guard against snobbery and
the intelligentsiaisa sourceofsnobbery,ofterminologythatconfusesthe language,
confuses our unified understanding, apart from the fact that they miserably destroy the
language that we speak which is an element in the shaping of the nation. Marxism is not a
problem of fashions; there is no room for these useless fumes.
Later on, when Chairman Gonzalo refers to the content of Maoism, in 1. Theory … The
three integral parts, he will deal with why we should say doctrine and not system, and he
says so:
Marxist hiitiogyofu,ha
is why we cannot neglect it. Lenin drew the great lesson,when he said: "For a time I
thought that phlosophy wauestionof thespecilistsothePaty i this problem, but
=====第6页=====
comrades,this is a big mistake! Although it was Marx who solved the problemof
u,
nothing bue ll alidaiof ct,i,owever ew
it may be.Itis aadicllywand iencation,owhat iwandirent is not
only theapplication to the social world. Why doI saythis:thebourgeoisie in the
eighteenth century through Diderot - that French character - developed mechanistic
materialism to its highest level and came to intuit the contradiction, to sense it, but never
to understand it. Materialism is very old, comrades,as well as dialectics,are parallel,
contemporary in origin, have more than 2550 years in the West, we owe it to the Greeks.
But it has been Marx who took the idea as a derivation of matter, fusing dialectics with
matter, who gave the great transformation generating the new philosophy, the exhaustive
and complete philosophy not in a closed sense, that is why we cannot talk about system,
system implies closed circle and knowledge is spiral, everybody remembers what a spiral
is, it is not a closed circle and neither the circles that form the spiral are closed, it is not
true that, they are not.
So it is the essential point, it is the "ism"
We aretold,for example, what is the differencebetween Mao-Tse-tung-Thought and
Maoism? If the same truths are held or defended, why fight for that term? It is not simply a
problem of theterm; what is at stake is whether it has universal validity or not, and if it is
"ism" then it has it, and if it is not "ism" then it does not. That is the problem, so it is not a
problemofrm,sn'tit?Wll,thigwreikehatitwouldeiential,why don't we
saythen"theinternationalideologyoftheproletariat:Marx-Thought-Lenin-Thought-
Mao-Tse-tung-Thought", why don't we say that if it is identical, it would be logical. Then,
why should we use Marxism-Leninism-Mao-Tse-tung-Thought, if it is the same let's say
Marx-Lenin-Mao-Tse-tung-Thought. Would it be correct, deeply absurd, it would be to
deny its universal character. What is the aim? To deny the universality of Chairman Mao
Tse-tung's development,that's it. That is why we say these two positions are basically
against the same, in essence; with differences, of course they have them because one thing
is only to reach to Marxism-Leninism and another thing the RCP reached to the previous
more Mao-Tse-tung-Thought (to later adopt the term Maoism and pass soon after to deny
everything; note of the editors); but in essence it is the same and here what interests us are
the substantive questions, the essential.
As_for the Introduction. As comrades know well,this document is based on what the
Central Committee aired in 82 and 84 in a general way,complete, the whole problem
means and specifically aired in many occasions in the party. From the beginning we have
used an introduction taking two questions: an accurate thesis of the great Lenin and a
great defence of Leninism made by comrade Stalin. That is why Stalin cannot be denied or
condemned to hell. Because the fact that he said that we were entering Leninism and
defended it as he did and imposed it on the world, is enough merit, or do you think it was
not enough?
We have taken these two issues. Here what deserves explanation is that Lenin said: as the
revolution goes into the East it expressesspecific conditions. These are not strictly the
wordsofthe Grat Leninbut thisishisidea.He was tlling us:the rvolution in Russia
=====第7页=====
was a prison of people because it had reached impeialism,had a wie fudal base that
Lenin masterfullsythiesbyaying"landconcentratedinvery whandand auge
mass with few or no lands", without going into figures that he handles extraordinarily. In
this way he tells us: the revolution in Russia does not deny the truth established by Marx as
the lawof the revolution. He does not deny,whathe is doing is simply seeing the
peculiarities,the specifics; and he says the revolution as it goesinto the East shows that
peculiarity, whether we like it or not, that is so. The incomprehension of the European
social democracy,of the European opportunists, mercenary writers of the Euroean
reactionaries,condemned that revolution,they even called it, being reactionary, not
Marxist. Brave defenders of Marxism! What did they say, then, about that revolution: it is
an eastern despotism,as it has always been seen in the East,and with that,they had
already solved the problem; they said: a mass of ignorant people, how can they make a
socialist revolution? Thus they said, abounding in their“arguments". How did the Great
Lenin respond: "In which text is it that we must first educate before conquering power for
the class, before establishing the dictatorship of the proletariat, in which document is it? Is
it expressly forbidden in Marx or Engels that one should conquer power and then educate?
There is no such prohibition,so what is the cry about?"This is how he puts it. What
happens is that those who are burdened by bourgeois liberalism do not understand what is
new and how it is expressed,because if we are going to talk about it, what proletarian
revolution have they made? The Europeans are clucking a lot, the imperialist countries or
the so-called advanced countries are clucking a lot, and they say that the mistake of the
revolution is that it has taken place in backward peripheral areas such as Russia and China.
Well, where has the proletarian revolution been made in the West, when has it been made,
why has it ot be made, if they are soenlightned, because elightned they are, we have
to admit, they are,but it is not enough to make the revolution. The Great Lenin, going
deeper into this, what he was tlling us: wait,you will see the revolution in the East and
when youseeit,your surprisewillbehuge,immense,you willfall back!-using our turn,
that is: youare going to fall backwards!-Didn't he say that? Moreover,to the comrades
from the East, whom he gathered, what did Lenin put forward: we, he said, including him,
know the revolution in the capitalist countries but not in the backward countries under
imperialist domination;that is your task,it is pending,you have to solve it without
forgetting that you are communists and that you must organise as such, as a Party, linked
to the Communist International. Were not these his words?
Why should this question be highlighted? Because it is obvious that the Chinese revolution
that has been generated by Chairman Mao Tse-tung, through the proletariat itself, is taking
place in the East, or is it not the East? Is what Lenin said fulfilled or not? Of course it is
fulfilled! And from there, then, what is implied? That the same thing that happened to
Lenin is happening to the Chairman: The usual cry of the "deep" connoisseurs of Marxism,
of the intellectuals who are burdened with bourgeoisie and parliamentary cretinism, of the
feathered ones of reaction, that is.
As for comrade Stalin, what was his work that interests us in this point? In Russia itself it
was said: Leninism is true,but for Russia, because the core,the fundamental thing is the
roleof thepeasantry.ComradeStalin,clearlythen,says: Consequently,itis ntthe
dictatorshipofteprtaria.Threo,einly ruli Russiaanditisot uivrsal,
Leninism is spcificlly Russian,andit is aninamyto ay it,bcausenin was prcisly
the one who has emphasized the importance of the dictatorshipof the proletariat, he was.
Youwill au Marada.I Marxism,nmtryitrofithw u
r sipl d; uaco,iae aeons.A
=====第8页=====
icon here in Peru is Mariategui: incense is poured on him, nothing else.It was a hard fight
in Russia, particularly against Zinoviev.
From this, we derive: "Today, Maoism is facing similar situations and as always the new
and Marxism have made their way through struggle, Maoism will also impose itself and be
recognised." As the Chairman said:"Marxism has never taken a step in life but in the
middle of struggle, it will never take a step." And a great qualitative leap, great as he has
given, a new stage, will it be asily accepted? No, it has to be resisted, denied, questioned,
interrogated, but behind all these interrogations there are positions of denial, reduction,
minimization or whatever, but it is, that is what is interesting. Comrades, Marxism gives us
weapons! They have had the sagacity to arm us for the future and to answer questions,
questions that are asked and will be asked in the future; they have armed us. That is the
reason of the introduction, it has a meaning.
=====第9页=====