MARIATEGUI
AND
LATIN
AMERICAN
MARXIST THEORY
MARCBECKER

北
Ohio
University
in
International Studies
Monographs
n America Series,No.20
Latin
=====第1页=====
Ohio University
MONOGRAPHS IN INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
This series of publications on Africa, Latin America, and Southeast
Aiais ccipion
to area specialists and to a wide community of persons interested in
worldaffair.Teokmuciofqulitonan ctn
can generally make a decision regarding publication within two months
of receipt of the original work. Production methods generally permit a
work to appear withinone year of acceptance. The editor works closely
with authors to produce a high quality book. The series appears in a
paperback format and is distributed world-wide. For more information,
contact the editor at the Center for International Studies,Burson House,
Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701.
Editor: James L. Cobban
AREA CONSULTANTS
Africa : Cosmo Pieterse
Latin America: Thomas Walker
Southeast Asia : James L. Cobban
Production Editor: Gillian Berchowitz
Cover Artist: Paul Bradford
The Monographs in International Studies series is published for the
Center for International Studies by the Ohio University Press. The
views expressed in individual monographs are those of the authors and
should not be considered to represent the policies or beliefs of the
Center for International Studies, the Ohio University Press, or Ohio
University.
=====第2页=====
MARIATEGUI AND LATIN AMERICAN
MARXIST THEORY
=====第3页=====
MARIATEGUI AND LATIN AMERICAN
MARXIST THEORY
by
Marc Becker
Ohio University Center for International Studies
Monographs in International Studies
Latin American Series Number 20
Athens, Ohio 1993
=====第4页=====
© Copyright 1993 by the Center for International Studies
Printed in the United States of America
All rights reserved
The books in the Center for Intemational Studies Monograph Series are
printed on acid-free paper
This book is printed on recycled paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Becker, Marc.
Mariategui and Latin American Marxist theory/by
Marc Becker.
p.
cm. - (Monographs in intemational studies. Latin
America series;no.20)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-89680-177-2 (paper)
1. Mariategui, José Carlos, 1894-1930. 2.
Communism-Latin America.
I.Title
II. Series.
HX110.5.A8M372
1993
324.1'75'098–dc20
93-3211
CIP
=====第5页=====
CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
vii
INTRODUCTION
ix
Chapter
page
1.
Marxism and the Communist International
in Latin America.
2.
José Carlos Mariátegui (1894-1930)............... 29
3.
Cuba........
....57
4.
Nicaragua ....
...90
5. The Legacy of Mariátegui
.... 129
NOTES ....
...140
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
...187
V
=====第6页=====
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was five years in the making and went through various
manifestations. It evolved from a seminar paper during my first
semester of graduate studies at the University of Kansas and
pursued me during the course of my sojourn as a graduate student
in Latin American history.
I have incurred unremittable debts to numerous people. My
advisor, Elizabeth Kuznesof, provided especially useful comments
and criticisms of my work. Her brilliantly perceptive and
penetrating analysis dramatically improved my insights into Latin
American history; her encouragement helped me to go forward with
this study. Charles Stansifer read numerous drafts and gave me
invaluable suggestions for revisions. He challenged many of my
assumptions about Latin America and forced me to be more careful
in the arguments which I present. Dwight Kiel and Benjamin Sax,
who sat on my thesis committee, gave me critical insights into this
material from their respective disciplines of political theory and
European intellectual history. Surendra Bhana, Anton Rosenthal,
Kimberly Welch, and Harry Vanden all gave me very helpful sugges-
tions that significantly improved the overall quality of this book.
Other people also gave me helpful suggestions. First I must
thank Tim Block for introducing me to the importance of José
Carlos Mariátegui and his thought. Marcia Quirós, Lyn Bennett,
Sherry Schirmer, and Manuela Knapp de Aguilar accompanied me
through several graduate seminars and assisted me in the framing of
the major questions in this essay. Thanks go to Cheryl Musch, who
read virtually every word I wrote as a graduate student and who is
the best proofreader I know. Shelley Miller did an outstanding job
in her capacity as the Latin American librarian at the University of
Kansas and traced many of my requests for more works on
Mariátegui and Latin American Marxist theory. Interlibrary Loan
Services provided the works that Shelley no longer could buy. The
American Friends Service Committee made possible a trip to Cuba
vii
=====第7页=====
during the summer of 1989. I used that opportunity to uncover many
of the connections between Mariátegui and the Cuban revolution.
An Oppenheimer Fellowship during the summer of 1990 and
Foreign Language and Area Studies (FLAS) Fellowships during the
summers of 1990 and 1992 facilitated travel to Nicaragua, Ecuador,
and Madison, Wisconsin, where I gathered more information on
Mariátegui and his contributions to Latin American Marxist theory.
vii
=====第8页=====
INTRODUCTION
A persistent theme in twentieth-century Latin American history is
the presence of radical political movements for social change.
Scholars often have emphasized the dramatic breaks which a series
of revolutionary upheavals in Mexico, Bolivia, Guatemala, Cuba,
Chile, and Nicaragua made in the continuous development of Latin
American history. Indeed, Fidel Castro's successful 1959 revolution
in Cuba is widely considered to be a singularly significant event
which influenced the course of this history. The European doctrine
of Marxism, which became influential among Latin American intel-
lectuals and others who were looking for a way to bring about
radical social change throughout Latin America, played an important
role in the unfolding of drastic changes. The United States has
tended to depict any hint of Marxist influence in Latin America as
part of the penetration of an alien ideology into the American
hemisphere. Presidential administrations in the United States have
considered leftist revolutionary governments in Cuba and Nicaragua
to be merely pawns of the Soviet Union, part of a Moscow-based
ploy aimed at world communist domination. Rather than recogniz-
ing the indigenous roots of these revolts, the United States searched
for "Bolshevik” or "Soviet”influences in Latin American revolu-
tionary movements, thereby casting them as part of a European-
centered East-West cold war conflict. The response therefore was
a strong (and sometimes paranoid) opposition to any winds of
radical change in Latin America, and a long history of American
interference in the internal affairs of various Latin American coun-
tries which had experienced revolutionary change.
Many scholars and political activists, however, have attacked
as fundamentally misguided the perception that Latin American
revolutionary change was the result of foreign ideological influences.
E. Bradford Burns, professor of Latin American history at the
University of California in Los Angeles, criticizes in his book At War
in Nicaragua: The Reagan Doctrine and the Politics of Nostalgia the
ix
=====第9页=====
"fixated vision" of the United States government which caused it to
concentrate on a "communist threat" in Latin America. Burns
argued that this perception did not take into account the economic
and social conditions (such as underdevelopment, dependency, and
poverty) which pushed people to agitate for radical changes
Years of oligarchical, dictatorial, and military rule in Latin America
led to the concentration of land, wealth, and power in the hands of
an elite few. The masses have been subjected to exploitation,
poverty, malnutrition, and starvation. Revolutionary changes in
countries such as Nicaragua and Cuba, Burns argued, are a response
to the reality of those countries'own historical situations and not
part of an agenda for foreign communist domination.
On the other hand, orthodox Marxists traditionally have
argued that true social revolutions could not occur in Latin America
because these countries had not met the basic objective economic
conditions necessary for a socialist revolution.
These Marxists
believed that history moved through a series of stages,and that
capitalism was a necessary prerequisite for a society to move on to
socialism. A highly developed capitalist economy would alienate the
working class, which would then move to destroy capitalism and thus
push history to the next higher stage of communism. Only the work-
ing class, through its experience with capitalist production, would
develop the consciousness necessary to allow it to see the inherent
contradictions in capitalism and the necessity for a socialist state.
Such orthodox Marxists believed that because peasants were not
involved in the process of capitalist production, they could not
develop the universal class consciousness necessary to overthrow
capitalism.
Although historically Latin America has looked to Europe for
solutions to its problems, the objective Latin American reality (of
large rural peasant populations and mostly unindustrialized societ-
ies) is very different from that of the industrialized European cities
with their working-class proletariat for which Karl Marx wrote.
Cuba and Nicaragua had underdeveloped, rural, peasant-based
economies which lacked the large urban working class which was
deemed necessary to make a socialist revolution possible. While the
peasantry in these countries could revolt, they allegedly lacked the
class consciousness necessary to participate in a communist revolu-
tion. In spite of this lack of the proper economic conditions, both
Cuba and Nicaragua did experience successful socialist revolutions.
X
=====第10页=====
Furthermore, these revolutions had an ideological base and were not
simply reactions to oppressive conditions. Many of the revolutionary
leaders understood Marxist theory and used it to foment changes in
their countries.
Although Latin America had been influenced strongly by
Western philosophical traditions and political institutions, Marxist
theory nonetheless developed in a unique way in Latin America.
Often this theory emphasized that subjective factors and the
political education and organization of the peasantry were more
important than objective economic conditions. A school of Latin
American Marxist theorists arose which believed that peasants could
develop a revolutionary class consciousness.
Thetheoretical
contributions of these theorists must be considered in order to
understand fully revolutionary change in Latin America. While they
have borrowed ideas and learned from the examples of the Euro-
pean and North American traditions, Latin American Marxist
thinkers developed their own unique theoretical orientations which
grew out of their struggles for social justice. Although the United
States sought to place blame for the Nicaraguan revolution on the
Soviet Union, a senior Soviet official has commented that it "had no
contacts with the Sandinistas when they started the revolution and
it was not inspired" by the Soviet Union.² In order to understand
the basis and development of Latin American revolutionary move-
ments, one needs to look someplace other than Moscow. As Burns
indicated, the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions developed from
the context of each country's national reality. The ideological basis
of these social revolutions must be understood within the context of
Latin America's indigenous ideologies and thought.
José Carlos Mariátegui, a Peruvian political theorist from the
1920s, left an unmistakable and lasting legacy on the political, social,
and intellectual landscape of his country. Many Peruvian scholars
have used his thought as the basis for their analyses of Peruvian
culture and identity, and his influence emerges in countless studies
of Peru. In 1991 a Peruvian magazine surveyed Peruvian intel-
lectuals, researchers, and artists and concluded that Mariategui was
the most studied and most read author in the country. His was "the
most important analysis of the principal problems of the Peruvian
reality" and over time "many of his points of view have not lost
their force.Peruvian historian Hugo Neira has argued that
xi
=====第11页=====
Mariátegui's written work and thought meet all of the conditions of
a classic, not only in Peru but throughout Latin America.4
Mariátegui's contributions to Peru did not remain on a purely
theoretical or philosophical level; he also entered politics.
Mariátegui founded the Peruvian Communist Party (he called it a
socialist party) in 1928 just two years before his death. Since then
numerous parties on the fractionalized left, from the centrist
Izquierda Unida (United Left) coalition to the Maoist Sendero
Luminoso (Shining Path) guerrilla group, have invoked his name for
one reason or another. In 1984 three leftist parties formed the
Partido Unificado Mariateguista (Unified Mariateguista Party) with
a statement of intent to build on national traditions in order to form
an open, unified, and creative Marxist socialist force in Peru which
followed the model that Mariátegui presented in the 1920s. The
party believed that Mariátegui's ideology formed the strongest base
for the struggle for peace and against imperialist aggression not only
in Peru but throughout Latin America.
Alfonso Barrantes,the
leader of the Izquierda Unida coalition, also emphasized the
importance of studying Mariátegui's thought in tandem with that of
other classical and modern Marxist theorists. Likewise, Abimael
Guzman, the founder and leader of the Sendero Luminoso guerrilla
group, based his ideological statements on Mariátegui's analysis that
Peruvian society was simultaneously neo-feudal and neo-colonial.
In 1970 Guzman accused the mainline communist party of "intend-
ing to destroy the great party which Mariátegui founded" and
announced his intent to continue forward por el sendero luminoso
de José Carlos Mariátegui" (in the shining path of José Carlos
Mariátegui). He formed a group called Por el Sendero Luminoso
de José Carlos Mariátegui, later changed to Partido Communista del
Perú-Sendero Luminoso, and finally shortened in common parlance
to simply Sendero Luminoso. The group was based in the city of
Ayacucho and at the University of Huamanga and established a
trade union, a student union, and a popular university, all with
Mariategui's name, before actively launching guerrilla warfare
against the Peruvian state in 1980.8
Mariátegui, therefore, made a major contribution to Peruvian
political theory. Political activists from the Peruvian Left have
spoken of a "Marxism-Mariateguism" in their country and argued
that "Mariateguism is the way to be a Marxist-Leninist in Peru."9
Mariátegui interacted dynamically with European thought in order
xii
=====第12页=====
to develop new methods to analyze the problems of non-Western
societies and developed what became known as National Marxism.
He implemented a new theoretical framework which diverged from
the doctrinaire ideology of the communist parties which attempted
to apply a mechanical interpretation of Marxist strategy to a
national reality. He broke from a rigid, orthodox interpretation of
Marxism in order to develop a creative Marxist analysis which was
oriented toward the specific historical reality of Peru of the 1920s.
Mariátegui did not believe that Marxism was a complete philosophy.
He favored a nonsectarian "open" Marxism and believed "that
Marxist thought should be revisable, undogmatic, and adaptable to
new situations.
10
Rather than relying on objective economic
factors to foment a revolutionary situation, Mariátegui examined
subjective elements such as the need for the political education and
organization of the working-class proletariat, a strategy which he
believed could move a society to revolutionary action. He down-
played the passive economic determinism found in orthodox
Marxism and followed a dynamic "voluntaristic conception of
Marxism [which] did not allow him to wait for the economic condi-
tions to force the peasants to act.1 Furthermore, he asserted that
nationalism could be a revolutionary force for positive social change.
Nationalism in Europe was a conservative, imperialist, reactionary,
and antisocialist force, but in Latin America "nationalism is revolu-
tionary and, therefore, it results in socialism.'
12
In addition, unlike
orthodox Marxists who believed that peasants formed a reactionary
class, Mariátegui looked to the peasant and indigenous masses
rather than an industrialized urban working class to lead a national-
istic social revolution which he believed would sweep across Latin
America.
Mariategui's influence has not been limited to Peru. His
interpretation of Peruvian history and its problems had a profound
effect on subsequent social movements and the emergence of an
indigenous revolutionary Marxist theory in Latin America. He is
widely regarded as being the first truly creative and original Latin
American Marxist thinker. Leftists from throughout Latin America
commonly acknowledge that they "did not learn Marxism from
European theories,but from José Carlos Mariáteguii13
Mariateguis name continues to be invoked in political struggles
across Latin America. In 1985 Peruvian writer and journalist
Ricardo Luna Vegas wrote that he was sure "that if Mariáteui was
xiii
=====第13页=====
still living today he would be on the side of the Cuban revolution
and not on that of its bad-intentioned critics.14
The implications
of Mariátegui's thought have resulted in an ongoing revolutionary
praxis that is far removed from Marxism's nineteenth-century
European roots and the mechanical Marxism of the Communist
International of the 1920s and 1930s. In order to understand fully
subsequent revolutionary changes in Latin America, it is necessary
to examine Mariátegui's contributions to this revolutionary ideology.
Even though Mariátegui's thought has retained central impor-
tance to ideological struggles in Latin America, in the United States
few people are aware of his contributions. When Mariátegui died
in 1930, his funeral turned into one of the largest processions of
workers ever seen in the streets of Lima, but in the United States
his death was hardly noticed. Waldo Frank, a United States writer
and a close friend of Mariátegui, wrote in the leftist United States
weekly The Nation that Mariátegui's death plunged "the intelli-
gentsia of all of Hispano-America into sorrow; and nothing could be
more eloquent of the cultural separation between the two halves of
the new world than the fact that to most of us these words convey
no meaning.
n15
It is this continued ignorance of Latin American
political and ideological traditions which has led to a misplaced
concern over an alien "communist threat" in the Western hemi-
sphere. In order to understand the direction, nature, and signifi-
cance of recent revolutionary changes in Latin America, it is
important to begin with an analysis of Mariátegui's contributions to
revolutionary Marxist theory in the region.
This study begins with an overview of the intellectual milieu
out of which Mariategui's thought emerged. It reviews the essential
elements of Mariátegui's thought and the important influences on
his intellectual development. This forms a framework for under-
standing the ways in which Mariátegui's thought influenced the
indigenous nature of revolutionary movements in Latin America.
Subsequent chapters survey the contacts which Mariátegui main-
tained with revolutionaries throughout Latin America. In particular,
the third and fourth chapters demonstrate the relationships which
Mariátegui developed with his contemporaries in Cuba and
Nicaragua in the 1920s, and his influence on the indigenous nature
of subsequent revolutionary changes in those countries. Numerous
letters and articles from the 192Os demonstrate that Mariátegui
maintained contact with Julio Antonio Mella, the founder of the
xiv
=====第14页=====
Cuban Communist Party, and Augusto César Sandino, a nationalist
leader who fought to free Nicaragua from a United States Marine
occupation. The content of these writings reveals the extent to
which Mariátegui influenced revolutionaries throughout Latin
America including his contemporaries and their successors in Cuba
and Nicaragua.
The influence of Mariátegui's leadership in the University
Reform Movement on Mella's thoughts and actions in Cuba is one
example of the Peruvian's inspiration emanating throughout Latin
America. Mariátegui's contact with Sandino in Nicaragua is another
example of the extent of this influence. Mariátegui's emphasis on
the role of the peasantry in the Latin American revolution influ-
enced Sandino's strategy of mobilizing peasant support to his cause
in the Nicaraguan mountains. Both Mella's and Sandino's actions,
in turn, influenced Fidel Castro's 26th of July Movement which
overthrew the Fulgencio Batista dictatorship in Cuba in 1959.
Castro and Ernesto "Che" Guevara studied the model of political
organization which Sandino had used in Nicaragua. From Sandino,
they learned that peasants could develop a revolutionary conscious-
ness. They employed this method in Cuba to develop a peasant
base for their revolutionary movement. In addition, they were
influenced by the Mariateguian tradition which had been growing in
Cuba since Mella's contact with Mariátegui in the 192Os. The
victory of this guerrilla force vindicated Mariátegui's and Sandino's
break from the doctrinaire position of the Stalinized Communist
International.
Not only has the Cuban revolution indirectly inherited the
intellectual influence of Mariátegui through Mella and Sandino, but
its leading Marxist theorists also have acknowledged their direct
debt to Mariátegui's approach to revolutionary theory. The Cuban
revolution employed subjective aspects of Mariátegui's Marxism to
raise the political consciousness of the Cuban people, and Guevara
expanded on these ideas through his discussion of the new socialist
person. Cuban political theorists have contributed to the develop-
ment of a Marxist theory which is specifically applicable to the
concrete social, economic, and political reality of Latin America.
The Cuban revolution led leftists in other Latin American countries
to reconsider the value of Marxism and to reevaluate the
importance of Mariátegui in constructing an indigenous Latin
American revolutionary theory.
XV
=====第15页=====
The Cuban revolution also influenced a new generation of
Sandinista revolutionaries in the 1960s and 1970s, thereby helping
to pass a Mariateguian-inspired tradition on to Nicaragua. A sense
of historical identity deeply influenced the Sandinista revolu-
tionaries. They drew on the lessons of the Cuban revolution and on
the example of Sandino's struggle against the United States Marines.
Although the Sandinistas began their organizational efforts as a
nationalistic movement, their ideology had broad, international
implications.
They drew on the tradition of a unique Latin
American revolutionary theory which Mariátegui and others had
previously articulated. Victor Tirado López, one of the nine
commandants of the Frente Sandinista para la Liberación Nacional
(FSLN), wrote, "we began with Sandino's thought, but we have
never forgotten the thought of Marx, Lenin, Che Guevara, Zapata,
or any other revolutionary who had something to offer.6 In a
pattern reminiscent of Mariátegui's strategy,"the genius of FSLN
ideology has been its consistent practical application of Sandino's
thought and Marxist concepts and methodology to the Nicaraguan
reality.17It is this blend of nationalism with Marxist theory hat
gave the Sandinista movement its intellectual vigor and practical
applicability. The success of the Sandinista revolution in 1979
demonstrated the strength of applying Mariátegui's open and non-
dogmatic Marxist theory to a specific national situation.
As in Cuba, orthodox Marxist theory indicated that the
objective conditions for a social revolution in Nicaragua did not
exist. However, the Nicaraguan experience proved to expand in the
Latin American mind the possibilities for a nationalistic-based
insurrection. In both Cuba and Nicaragua elements of Mariátegui's
subjective Marxist theory have been combined with the reality of a
revolutionary situation in order to create new revolutionary
understandings which challenge the assumptions of a rigid,
deterministic Marxism. Donald C. Hodges, professor of Latin
American philosophy at Florida State University, wrote in his
analysis of the Nicaraguan revolution that, "the unique contribution
of the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions was not only to adapt
Marxism to the peculiar conditions of each country, but also to
remold it as part of an indigenous movement independent of the
localCommunist parties.
In both Nicaragua and Cuba, a
flexible, voluntarist Marxism willing to adapt its strategy to present
historic conditions triumphed where the rigid, deterministic Marxism
xvi
=====第16页=====
of communist parties allied with the Communist International could
not. Mariátegui set a historical precedent and gave an ideological
framework which legitimizes this approach to revolutionary theory.
Both the Cuban and Sandinista revolutions, therefore, joined a
historical tradition in Latin America of social revolution which
Mariátegui strongly influenced. The actions of these revolutions
continue to influence the development of indigenous forms of
revolutionary theory in Latin America. Mariátegui was a
predecessor of these Latin Americans who sought to define their
own identity and determine their own future. This study traces his
intellectual contribution to these revolutionary movements which
developed in a unique manner in Latin America.
Three links demonstrate Mariátegui's influence on subsequent
social movements. First is the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolution-
aries'direct and acknowledged use of Mariateguian ideas. Cuban
revolutionary leaders have been especially aware of Mariátegui's
contributions to Marxist thought and have incorporated his analysis
into their political theories and actions, particularly in regard to
their anti-imperialism and active internationalism. In addition to
this direct influence, however, are two indirect and sometimes more
significant links which demonstrate Mariátegui's importance for later
revolutionary developments. One of these links is the inherited
tradition which has been passed down through the contacts
Mariátegui maintained with Mella, Sandino, and others. As these
revolutionaries incorporated elements of Mariátegui's thought into
their own ideological orientations they passed Mariátegui's ideas on,
perhaps inadvertently, to following generations of revolutionaries.
Lastly, common influences on both Mariategui and later revolution-
aries help explain Mariátegui's presence in expressions of
revolutionary theory throughout Latin America. A good example of
the nature of this influence is the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci,
who also influenced the _Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions.
Mariátegui met Gramsci in Italy, read his writings, and was familiar
with his thought forty years before Gramsci's writings became widely
available outside Italy and before many Latin American leftists knew
of his existence Indeed,Mariategui may be largely responsible
for the introduction of Gramsci's ideas into Latin America.
Likewise, Mexico represented an important commonality and
point of contact between Mariategui and Sandino in Nicaragua and
Mella in Cuba, and its revolution exercised a common influence on
xvii
=====第17页=====
all three leaders. Mariátegui lectured on the Mexican revolution at
the González Prada Popular University in Lima and during the
1920s he wrote numerous articles on various aspects of Mexican
politics and culture for the Peruvian periodicals Variedades and
Mundial. His writings reflect the significance that indigenismo had
for the Mexican revolution, and a large part of the non-Peruvian
scholarship on Mariátegui has come out of Mexico. An example of
this interest is the edited collection of ten of Mariátegui's essays on
Mexico in La Revolución Mexicana ante el pensamiento de José Carlos
Mariátegui, which the Mexican state of Tabasco published in 1980 as
a tribute to Mariátegui on the fiftieth anniversary of his death.
Sandino was radicalized in the oil fields of Tampico,and later
turned to the Mexican government for help with his struggle in
Nicaragua. Mella fled to Mexico when he was expelled from Cuba,
and it was there that he was assassinated in 1929. More recently,
Mexico,although its revolutionary ardor has substantially faded
internally, still identified with and supported the independent
courses of the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions. Mexico formed
an important link in the early emergence of revolutionary theory in
Latin America, and it continues to be a significant contributor to the
development of contemporary expressions of Marxist theory in the
region. From these interconnections emerges a picture of a parallel
development of revolutionary ideas and concepts not only in Peru,
Cuba, and Nicaragua, but throughout Latin America. These
parallels can be attributed partially to a common historical and
cultural tradition in Latin America which causes ideas to resonate
similarly in different countries, but Mariátegui's early articulation of
these ideas is also a critical influence which cannot be ignored.20
Mariátegui published only two books during his lifetime (La
escena contemporánea and 7 ensayos de interpretación de la realidad
peruana). Most of his writings took the form of articles for popular
Peruvian periodicals such as Mundial, Variedades, El Tiempo, and his
own vanguard journal Amauta. During the 1950s and 1960s,
Mariátegui's widow and his four children collected most of his
written work into a twenty-volume Popular Edition of the Complete
Works of José Carlos Mariátegui. This collection, which includes not
only Mariátegui's original works but also four volumes of biogra-
phies and essays about Mariategui's life, ideas, and influence in
Latin America, is printed in an inexpensive paperback format
intended for mass distribution. Biblioteca Amauta, an editorial
xviii
=====第18页=====
house in Lima which Mariátegui founded in the 1920s, released the
first ten volumes in this series in 1959, significantly coinciding with
the triumph of the Cuban revolution. The second ten volumes were
gradually released over the next ten years.
Essential to gaining a full understanding of Mariátegui's
political thought is the thirteenth volume in this series, Ideologia y
politica. This volume provides ready access to Mariátegui's more
doctrinaire editorials, theses, manifestos, and documents from the
founding of the Peruvian Socialist Party and the Marxist-oriented
trade union federation Confederacion General de Trabajadores del
Perú (CGTP). Unfortunately, only one of the twenty volumes
(Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality, his most popular work)
has been translated into English. In 1984 Editorial Amauta released
a two-volume compilation of Mariátegui's correspondence edited by
the Italian Mariateguian scholar Antonio Melis. For the first time,
scholars have ready access to the letters which demonstrate the
many contacts that Mariátegui maintained with leftists throughout
Latin America including those in Cuba and Nicaragua.
21
Scholars throughout Latin America and around the world have
produeed a surprisingly broad array of works on various aspects of
Mariátegui's thought. In 1963 Peruvian historian Guillermo
Rouillon compiled an extensive bibliography of 3,462 items which
either Mariátegui had written or others had written about his
work.²² Others have noted the omissions and errors in Rouillon's
important work, and in 1978 Harry E. Vanden, professor of political
science at the University of South Florida, wrote a very helpful
bibliographical essay which surveyed significant developments in
Mariateguian scholarship since 1963. The appearance in 1989 of
the Anuario Mariateguiano, a journal dedicated to examining the life
and thought of the Peruvian Marxist, testifies to an ongoing and
unabated interest in Mariátegui. The first volume of this journal
included a list of 271 editions of Mariátegui's books and writings
(including translations into ten languages), and stated the intent to
publish in future volumes an exhaustive bibliography of works on
Mariategui2{In addition,the editors noted plans to create an
institute to further the study of Mariátegui's thought.25
There is a very limited pool of North American scholarship on
Mariátegui, but it has grown along with the virtual explosion in the
past ten years of interest in Mariateguian studies. In the 1960s,
intellectual historians William Rex Crawford and Harold Eugene
xix
=====第19页=====
Davis began to consider the implications of Mariátegui's thought for
Latin American history. Although their treatments are brief and not
always accurate (both refer to Mariátegui's European exile as a
reward for his journalistic efforts in favor of the Augusto Leguía
dictatorship, which definitely was not the case), they introduced the
significance of Mariátegui for Latin America to other North
American scholars. John Baines's Revolution in Peru: Mariátegui and
the Myth was the first book published in English on Mariátegui. Its
release in 1972 provoked much criticism from other Mariateguian
scholars for its inaccuracies and shortcomings. Fortunately, English
language scholarship since then has far surpassed this early attempt.
In 1979 Jesús Chavarría published his doctoral dissertation, José
Carlos Mariátegui and the Rise of Modern Peru, 1890-1930, which
correctly places Mariátegui's political thought in its Peruvian
context. Harry Vanden presents an extensive analysis of Mariátegui's
ideology and written works in his book National Marxism in Latin
America: José Carlos Mariátegui's Thought and Politics, published in
1986. Thomas Angotti offers a good quick introduction to subjective
forms of Mariátegui's Marxist theory in his article "The Contribu-
tions of José Carlos Mariátegui to Revolutionary Theory," published
the same year in Latin American Perspectives. Ramon Antonio
Romero Cantarero forwards an analysis of Mariátegui's new Marxist
thought similar to that of Vanden and Angotti in his 1990 disserta-
tion "The New Marxism of José Carlos Mariátegui."
Scholars have demonstrated both the Peruvian and European
influences on Mariategui. Two collections of essays which are
particularly revealing in this regard are Robert Paris, et al., El
marxismo latinoamericano de Mariátegui, and José Aricó, ed.,
Mariátegui y los origenes del marxismo latinoamericano. Both books
include essays from the Mariateguian scholars Robert Paris, Antonio
Melis, and Jorge del Prado, and analyze Mariátegui's relations with
the Aprista movement, populism, the Peruvian Communist Party,
and the influence which European intellectuals such as Georges
Sorel had on his thought. Argentine Marxist José Aricó has done
an outstanding job in charting the successive evolution of the
various interpretations of Mariategui's thought from Aprismo to
SheldonLiss's Marxist
populism and finally Marxist-Leninism.26
Thought in Latin America placed the significance of Mariátegui's
intellectual contributions in its broader Latin American context.
Manuel Caballero's Latin America and the Comintern, 1919-1943, and
XX
=====第20页=====
Rodolfo Cerdas Cruz's La hoz y el machete: La Internacional
Comunista, América Latina y la revolución en Centro América both
help explain the difficulties facing leftists who wished to break out
of the stringent grasp which the Communist International placed on
Latin America in the 1920s, and the role Mariátegui played in this
process.
In spite of the growing attention to Mariátegui's influence on
Latin American Marxist theory, there have been few studies on his
influence on the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions. The Peruvian
poet Winston Orrillo published several useful interviews in which
Cuban governmental officials reflected on Mariátegui's importance
for the Cuban revolution. These interviews were preliminary
research for his forthcoming book Mariátegui y la revolución
cubana²and hlped form the basis for MartiMaritegui: litertura
inteligencia y revolución en América Latina, a book which compares
Mariátegui's intellectual contributions with those of the Cuban
independence hero José Martí. Cuban scholar Erasmo Dumpierre
surveys Mariátegui's influence in Cuba in his paper "Mariátegui,
Cuba y la lucha contra el imperialismo which he presented at a
1984 conference on Mariátegui which the Peruvian Communist Party
sponsored in Lima. Sheldon Liss's Roots of Revolution: Radical
Thought in Cuba and C. Fred Judson's Cuba and the Revolutionary
Myth briefly allude to Mariategui's influence in Cuba. More useful
are Mercedes Santos Moray's direct comparisons of Mariátegui to
Cuban communist leaders Julio Antonio Mella and Juan Marinello
in Mella et al., Marxistas de América.
Even fewer studies have been done on Mariátegui's influence
on the Sandinista revolution. Narciso Bassols Batalla dedicated the
last several pages of his Marx y Mariátegui to the connections
between Mariátegui and Sandino, the forerunner of the present
Sandinista movement.28
Donald Hodges in his significant work
Intellectual Foundations of the Nicaraguan Revolution outlined the
influence of Mariategui (together with Georges Sorel and Antonio
Gramsci) on the development of a flexible, open, and voluntarist
29
Sheldon Liss refers briefly to
Marxism in Sandinista ideology.
Mariategui in his Radical Thought in Central America, and Hary
Vanden, in his various articles and books, and Thomas Angotti in
his article The Contributions of José Carlos Mariategui to Revo-
lutionary Theory" also provide several important insights into
Mariategui's influence on the Sandinistas. Elements of Mariateuis
xxi
=====第21页=====
thought have entered the ideology of the Sandinista revolution via
liberation theology. Fundamental to an understanding of this
influence are Gustavo Gutiérrez's writings, especially A Theology of
Liberation and The Power of the Poor in History. For an interesting
article along these lines, see Michael Candelaria's "José Carlos
Mariátegui: Forgotten Forerunner of Liberation Theology." A fuller
analysis of Mariátegui's role in the development of Sandinista
ideology in Nicaragua would give a deeper and more complete
understanding of present developments in Latin American revolu-
tionary theory.
The success of the Sandinista revolution was a very significant
development for Latin American revolutionary theory in the 1980s.
The Sandinista's strategy of developing a nationalist movement,
along with their ability to mobilize the peasant masses and their
attitude toward religious forces, had an impact on other leftist forces
fighting throughout Latin America. The United States government
and policymakers sought to frame this in largely military terms, but
in doing so they missed the Sandinistas' most fundamental influence.
The Sandinistas exported their revolution, not through military
armaments but through the powerful and influential ideological
example of the independent course of their experiment in socialism.
In contributing to the development of revolutionary theory,the
Sandinistas focused attention on the role which Mariátegui played
in the formation of an indigenous Latin American Marxist theory.
The Sandinista movement confirmed the strength of Mariátegui's
approach to revolutionary theory. In both Nicaragua and Cuba,
revolutionaries who forwarded a flexible, voluntarist Marxism and
were willing to adapt their strategy to their present historic
conditions triumphed where proponents of the rigid, deterministic
Marxism of communist parties allied with the Communist Interna-
tional could not.  In many ways, Mariátegui set a historical
precedent and gave an ideological framework which legitimized this
approach to revolutionary theory. In the 1980s sandinismo caused
revolutionaries throughout Latin America to reflect on the historical
"With the victory of
significance of Mariátegui's writings.
Sandinismo in Nicaragua," one scholar has noted, "Mariateguismo
now promises to be the symbol of the largest and most unified
30
revolutionary Left in South America during the 1980s.
Recent changes in the world political order have presented a
challenge to Marxist theorists everywhere. But even with the
xxii
=====第22页=====
electoral defeat of the Sandinista government in Nicaragua and the
end of socialist governments elsewhere, the relevance of
Mariátegui's thought to Latin American revolutionary Marxist theory
remains as strong as ever. While the United States revels in the
victory of capitalism over socialism in Eastern Europe and the
Soviet Union, underdevelopment, dependency, and poverty continue
to demonstrate that capitalism has been an objective and absolute
failure in Latin America in the twentieth century. More than sixty
years after his death, Latin American countries still face many of the
same problems which Mariátegui discussed in the 1920s. His analysis
of the Latin American reality (its indigenous background, its large
peasant masses, the role of the Catholic church, the struggle against
imperialism and foreign domination) still resonates true in many
Latin American countries. A thorough study of his influence on the
development of Marxist theory not only demonstrates the indigenous
roots of movements for social change in Latin America, it also illus-
trates the continued relevance of his .thought as leftists struggle to
come to terms with the problems of the 1990s.
NOTES
1.
Burns, At War in Nicaragua, 7.
2.
Quoted in Blasier, Giant's Rival, 227.
3.
Cuánto 3/32 (September 1991), cited in Anuario Mariateguiano
3 (1991): 155.
4.
Neira, "El pensamiento de José Carlos Mariátegui," 59.
5.
Rojas Samanez, Partidos politicos en el Perú, 286.
6.
Ibid., 252.
7.
Ibid., 347, 349.
8.
For a good, brief critique of the relationship between
Mariategui and Sendero's ideology, see Poole and Renique,
"New Chroniclers of Peru," 170-71, 177.
xxiii
=====第23页=====
9.
Roncagliolo, "Gramsci, marxista y nacional," 119.
10.
Liss, Marxist Thoughs, 129-30.
11.
Vanden, National Marxism, 68.
12
Mariategui, "Indigenismo y socialismo" in Ideologia y politica,
221.
13.
Manuel Gonzalez Caizada quoting Enrique Ramirez y
Ramírez in his essay "México en el pensamiento de José
Carlos Mariátegui," in Mariategui, La Revolución Mexicana,
21.
14.
Luna Vegas, Historia y trascendéncia, 51.
15.
Frank, "Great American, 704. The depth of Mariategui's
influence on Frank is evident in that Frank dedicated his book
America Hispana to Mariategui, and used Mariategui as an
example of the "New American" which he saw emerging out
of Latin America (166-TT). Mariátegui wrote similarly on
Frank. See his essay "Waldo Frank in El alma matinal, 181-
95.
16.
Tirado Lopez, El pensamiento pollitico, 6.
17.
Vanden, "Ideology of the Insurrection, 58-59.
18.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundaions, 193.
19.
Vanden, National Marxism, 3.
20.
In his book Ten Keys to Lain America, Frank Tannenbaum
points to a "similar character structure" (5) in terms of land,
people, race, religion, education, etc, which could be used to
explain Mariategui's universal appeal in Latin America.
21.
For a critique of the errors and omissions which could have
been avoided in this work that Mariategui's widow and chil-
dren had been planning to publish since 1959, see Luna
xxiv
=====第24页=====
Vegas, Historia y trascendéncia, 18. The editors (which include
Melis) of the newly founded Anuario Mariateguiano are
publishing more of Mariátegui's correspondence as it is
uncovered. This will not only correct some of the deficiencies
in Melis's edited volume, but it will also shed more light on
Mariátegui's connections with intellectuals and revolutionaries
around the globe.
22.
Rouillón, Bio-bibliografia de José Carlos Mariátegui.
23.
Vanden, "Mariátegui: Marxismo, Comunismo."
24.
Anuario Mariateguiano 1 (1989): 193. Due to the immense size
of this undertaking, it was not possible for the editors to
publish this exhaustive bibliography in the subsequent two
volumes of the Anuario Mariateguiano. In each issue, however,
they have published a rather complete listing of recent works
related to Mariátegui. These bibliographies, in addition to
essays, articles, primary documents, notes, and book reviews,
make the Anuario Mariateguiano a critical resource for the
continued study of the Peruvian's thought.
25.
"Nota editorial," Anuario Mariateguiano 3 (1991): 7.
26.
Arico, Mariategui y los origenes del marxismo latinoamericano.
Also see Neira's article "El pensamiento de José Carlos
Mariátegui" for an examination of various interpretations of
Mariátegui's thought.
27.
Orrillo mentions his intent to write such a book in his 1977
article "Primeras huellas," 178, and in his 1989 book Marti,
Mariátegui, 226. Considering that his book on Martí and
Mariategui took twelve years to publish, Mariategui y la
revolución cubana may still see the light of day.
28.
Pp. 268-71.
29.
Pp. 179-84.
30.
Angotti, "Contributions of José Carlos Mariátegui," 33.
XXV
=====第25页=====
1
MARXISM AND THE COMMUNIST
INTERNATIONAL IN LaTIN AMERICA
Karl Marx, writing in eighteenth-century Europe, envisioned that a
social revolution would first develop among the working classes in
the highly industrialized economies of Germany or England. Ironi-
cally, his thought gained a much larger following in countries which
are peripheral to the capitalist mode of production. Socialist revolu-
tions triumphed in countries with underdeveloped, precapitalist, or
peasant-based economies,first in Russia and later in China, Cuba,
and other Third World countries. Even though Marx wrote about
colonialism and the Asiatic mode of production, Latin America
remained on the periphery of his world view, a region which simply
was removed from his central interests. When Marx or Friedrich
Engels did mention Latin America, their remarks often appeared
less than favorable toward the region. Commenting on the United
States 1846 invasion of Mexico, Engels said that "we have witnessed
the conquest of Mexico, and we are happy about it." In what would
seem to be an apologetic position for an emerging United States
imperialism, Engels maintained that "It is in the interests of its own
development that henceforth Mexico should be placed under the
tutelage of the United States. Similarly, in an article on Simon
Bolívar, Marx stated that "like most of his countrymen, he [Bolivar]
was averse to any prolonged exertion."3
Hence, there emerges an
apparent irony: Marx, retaining a fundamentally Euro-centric
perspective,remained largely ignorant of the distinctive reality in an
area of the world where his thought would become very popular.
How can this attraction to his thought in the Third World be
explained?
Traditionally, Marx's comments on Bolivar have been taken to
symbolize his atitudes of racist disdain for,and cultural superiority
over, the people of Latin America. Furthermore, it would seem
1
=====第26页=====
incongruous that Latin Americans would be drawn toward the
thought of a person who had made such despairingly negative
remarks about a person of the stature of Bolivar, who is almost
universally regarded in that culture as El Libertador and an embodi-
ment of the Latin American identity. In his work Marx y América
Latina, José Aricó, author of numerous studies on Latin American
socialist movements and former editor for the Mexican publishing
house Pasado y Presente, which is dedicated to the study of Marxist
thought, asserted that although Marx had access to a variety of
sources that contained positive comments about Bolivar, Marx
assumed an anti-Bolivarian position as a political statement against
authoritarian, dictatorial, and antidemocratic forms of government.
"By no means," Aricó argued, "could Marx accept the legitimacy of
a political system based on an omnipresent dictator."4
Arico's
observation that Marx's thought had to be reinterpreted and
modified in order to be applied successfully to the Latin American
situation is an important factor in gaining an understanding of how
Marxism has developed in Latin America.³ Far from having a nega-
tive view of Latin America,Aricó presents a powerful view of a
Marx calling for a humanistic and democratic form of socialism far
removed from the Stalinistic-style of government which later
characterized communist regimes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union.
Marxism, as historian Luis Aguilar observed, "reached Latin
America late and sporadically."
It came "not as a mature and
practical doctrine," Sheldon Liss added, "but in piecemeal fashion
as an ideology absorbed slowly by young workers and intellec-
tuals. It is ironic that from these humble beginnings Marxism
became a powerful and influential ideology in Latin America.  This
development did not occur in an intellectual,social,or political
vacuum. There were many forces at work which helped define the
character of this Marxist ideology.
Communist International
Many people have looked only to Moscow to understand the
presence of Marxist revolutionaries in Latin America. This was
particularly evident in studies from the 1950s written at the height
of the Cold War. Robert Alexander, in his 1957 study Communism
in Latin America, points to the blind loyalty of communist parties to
2
=====第27页=====
the Soviet Union as the basis for revolutionary sentiments in Latin
America. He argues that "there could be no greater mistake than
to believe that the Communists of Latin America are somehow
'different,' that because they are Latin American, they do not share
the characteristics of Communists in other parts of the world." He
concluded that "the Latin American Communists have never been
without direction from the Communist International.*⁸ Rollie
Poppino pursued this line of thought further in his 1964 study
International Communism in Latin America. He echoed Alexander
with the statement that "the Latin American Communist parties
have never been free agents. From the beginning they have served
willingly as regional branches of the international Communist move-
ment directed from the Soviet Union." He denied that there were
any indigenous roots for Marxist action in Latin America. The
Soviet state dictated "inspiration, ideology,and guidance" to the
Latin American communist parties, and they never "sought to draw
upon Latin America's heritage of indigenous communistic' societies
or seriously to identify [themselves] with the surviving communal
practices of Aztecs, Mayas, or Incas."10
Furthermore,citing the
example of the recently victorious Cuban revolution, it was only the
moral, material, and military assistance of the Soviet Union that lent
communists the confidence to act.
11
Even in the 1980s scholars such as Cole Blasier, although they
have done much work to shed light on the complexity of inter-
national relations in Latin America, have continued to lend
legitimacy to the view that revolutionary movements in Latin
America were a product of Soviet penetration into the hemisphere.
Even though Blasier recognized that throughout the twentieth
century pro-Soviet communist parties in Latin America have
remained marginal to both mainstream politics and other revolution-
ary movements, he still stressed their presence as an alleged Soviet
influence in the region. Although Blasier was forced to acknowledge
the "independent origins, national causes, and particular objectives"
of certain revolutionary movements and that the Soviet Union did
not play a significant role in the successful1979 Nicaraguan insur-
rection, he still condemned what he saw as the spreading Soviet
economic and military presence in Latin America in the 1980s.12
To be sure, there was a Soviet influence on Latin American
communist parties. Often times hard-line orthodox communist
parties aligned with the Communist International did become pawns
3
=====第28页=====
of the Soviet Union. The importance of this influence, however, has
been exaggerated greatly and has been used to cover up more
significant indigenous expressions of revolutionary Marxist theory.
In order to understand correctly Soviet influence on these
developments, it must be placed in a proper historical setting.
Blasier and many others who have dealt with these issues have
framed the issues in largely military and geopolitical terms. In doing
so, Blasier missed entirely ideological influences, a factor which is
central to understanding whether socialist countries such as Cuba
and Nicaragua were pawns of the Soviet Union or independent
actors pursuing their own historical destiny. Other works such as
Nicola Miller's Soviet Relations with Latin America, however, have
hesitated to see Soviet actions in Latin America in these purely
military and geopolitical terms. Miller argues that due to long
distances and more pressing political and military issues closer to
home,Soviet interest in Latin America was at best marginal.
Accordingly, she gives much more emphasis to the role of Latin
Americans in fomenting social revolutions in the region. Common
among revolutionary groups in Latin America was the belief that the
Soviet Union and national pro-Moscow communist parties "lacked
either the will or the capacity to engage in armed struggle.13
Miller directly attacked Blasier's argument that the Soviet Union
attempted to infiltrate and subvert Latin American governments in
order to foment Soviet-style revolutions in the region as leading "to
a seriously distorted picture of Soviet-Latin American relations."14
Soviet interest in Latin America was less a political or military
concern than it was a function of their attempts to establish trade
relations with Latin American and penetrate the region
economically.
Furthermore, Miller points to the irrelevance of a Soviet-style
Marxism in Latin America. Often it was writers, artists, and poets
such as Diego Rivera, Pablo Neruda, and Rubén Martínez Villena
who were responsible for the dissemination of Marxist ideas
throughout Latin America. This form of Marxism was interested in
the cultural and subjective aspects of revolutionary theory rather
than the dogmatism which came to characterize Soviet communism.
Hence, Miller found the emergence of a unique form of Marxist
thought in Latin America which was quite different from its Soviet
counterparts. Any Soviet influence, furthermore, often was detri-
mental to the establishment of a revolutionary movement. History
4
=====第29页=====
ultimately has shown that the most successful movements in Latin
America retained their ideological independence from the Soviet
Union. It is not such outside factors which explain the presence and
persistent appeal of Marxist theory in Latin America, but develop-
ments within Latin America itself. The nature and evolution of this
indigenous ideology,therefore, must be understood within the
historical context which would engender such a unique theoretical
response.
The first Latin American Marxists were not particularly
profound or creative in their understanding and application of
Marxist thought, but they did help introduce socialism into Latin
America. Marxism made its initial and strongest impact in Latin
America in Argentina, a country where southern European immi-
grants and exiles from the Paris Commune formed a section of the
First International in 1872. These radicals helped introduce
doctrines such as anarchism, trade unionism,and socialism into
Latin America. The Argentine Juan Bautista Justo (1865-1928) was
one of the first Latin American socialists to emerge from this
tradition. In 1895 he translated Marx's Das Kapital into its first
Spanish edition and was one of the first people to introduce
elements of Marxist thought into Latin America. Justo had moved
from an adherence to Herbert Spencer's Positivism closer to a
Marxist position, but his socialism remained more that of a reformist
European parliamentary social democrat than that of a revolutionary
Marxist. As a reformer, he helped establish the non-Marxist Partido
Socialist Argentino in 1895.15
Socialists in other Latin American countries shared Justo's
philosophy. In neighboring Chile, socialists formed a political party
in 1887. Labor leader Luis Emilio Recabarren (1876-1924) worked
tirelessly to develop a viable Marxist party in that country. Like
Justo, Recabarren worked within the confines of the parliamentary
system and served as a socialist in the Chilean national congress.
Likewise,Cuban independence hero José Marti's (1853-1895)
philosophy is indicative of the attitude of many Latin American
revolutionaries toward Marxist thought in the late nineteenth
century. Although the present Cuban government views Martí as a
forerunner of their socialist revolution, he was not a Marxist. Martí
organized the Cuban Revolutionary Party in 1892 to free Cuba from
Spain, end racial inequality, and implement economic and agrarian
reforms. Martí did favor social reforms, but he did not subscribe to
5
=====第30页=====
scientific socialism or a Marxist view of history. Martí worked with
Carlos Baliño (1848-1926), the first notable Cuban Marxist, but, like
most Latin American Marxists of his time, Baliño did not present a
particularly profound or creative Marxism.
16
At the time of the Russian Revolution in October of 1917,
most Latin American Marxists remained distant and isolated from
the political turmoil in Europe. The success of the Russian Revolu-
tion, however, was a catalyst which triggered an increased level of
revolutionary organization throughout Latin America and soon
ended its isolation from Europe. Many Marxists from around the
world became enamored with the Russian Revolution and looked to
the Bolsheviks in Moscow for leadership. These revolutionaries first
established Marxist-oriented communist parties in Argentina (1918)
and Mexico (1919), quickly followed by Chile, Brazil, Bolivia, and
Uruguay. Similar parties Iater emerged in Cuba (1925) and Peru
(1928) and in virtually every other Latin American country.
17
After the triumph of the Russian Revolution, the Bolshevik
leaders formed the Third or Communist International in the hopes
of organizing the various communist parties into a worldwide
communist revolution. Unlike the First and Second Internationals,
which were federations of different national groups and political
parties, the Third International was designed to be a single, centrally
organized party radiating out from its base in Moscow with the aim
of world revolution.1 From its founding in Moscow in March 1919
to its demise in 1943 during World War II, the Communist Interna-
tional (or Comintern) focused its efforts on political developments
in Europe and Asia. Latin America and Africa remained on the
periphery of the organization's activities. Examining the history and
function of the Communist International, however, is useful in giving
a historical framework and understanding the development of
revolutionary theory in Latin America.
The Communist International met annually for the first four
years of its existence, but with Vladimir Lenin's death in 1923 and
Josef Stalin's ascension to power in the Soviet Union, the Commu-
nist International met only three times over a twenty-year period
and took on a more authoritarian flavor. The changing role of Latin
America in the international communist arena is evident through the
changing position of Latin America and its delegates in the Commu-
nist International congresses. No Latin Americans attended the
First Congress of the Communist International, and only three
6
=====第31页=====
delegates from the Mexican Communist Party made it to the Second
Congress in 1920. Argentina sent a single delegate the following
year for the Third Congress, and Brazil and Uruguay joined Mexico
and Argentina for the Fourth Congress. Initially, Moscow and the
Communist International's preoccupation with events in Europe
allowed the new communist parties in Latin America to evolve in
autonomous and unfettered directions. This disregard for Latin
America had its beneficial aspects, as it allowed revolutionaries
there to develop their own indigenous paths to communism. When
the Communist International began to discuss Third World issues,
it was in the context of anticolonialism in Asia, but even these issues
were subsumed by the Soviet Union's strategic interests. It was not
until the Sixth Congress in 1928 that the Communist International
"discovered" Latin America and began to express an active interest
in the region. During the same year the Soviet Union also
reestablished trade relations with several Latin American countries
(especially Argentina) in an effort to strengthen the Soviet
19
economy.
This was the high point of Latin American activity for
the Communist International. Delegates representing nine countries
(Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay,
Uruguay, and Venezuela) attended the Sixth Congress; the commu-
20
nist parties of Cuba and Peru were invited but could not come.
When in 1928 Latin America became a serious topic of debate
for the Communist International, it was not because they saw Latin
America as a place where a Leninist or Socialist revolution would
triumph. Rather, it was because anti-imperialistic sentiment in the
region could be exploited effectively as a means to curtail expanding
United States power which would become a threat against the Soviet
Union.
21
This is perhaps best illustrated by the unsuccessful
attempts to co-opt General Augusto César Sandino's nationalistic
crusade against the United States military occupation of Nicaragua
in 1927. This heightened interest in Latin America led the Commu-
nist International to establish a South American Secretariat in
Buenos Aires in 1928.
In June of 1929 the Communist International held its first and
only significant meeting of its Latin American sections in Buenos
Aires,rigintogteriry-se legae romfifn ifferent
countries. This was the only time the Communist International held
a broad and open discussion of Latin American issues, most specifi-
cally concentrating on issues of race,the anti-imperialist struggle,
7
=====第32页=====
and the position of Latin America in the international arena.²² In
his book Latin America and the Cominterm, 1919-1943, Manuel
Caballero argues that this was one of few times that there was direct
contact among the various Latin American parties. The Communist
International attempted to limit "horizontal" connections among the
various Latin American sections in favor of a vertical relationship
with Moscow with the result of limited communication among the
sections.
23
Although he accurately describes the organizational
structure of the Communist International, in reality there were many
more contacts between revolutionary leaders than what Caballero
indicates and what might be expected in an era with a technologi-
cally limited communications infrastructure. Letters which Antonio
Melis included in his edited volume José Carlos Mariátegui:
Correspondencia testify to a flourishing international network of
contacts which Mariátegui maintained throughout Latin America.
This demonstrates not only Mariátegui's internationalism, but also
the existence of a thriving internationalism which was not dependent
upon the Communist International.
Along with the Communist International's increased interest
in Latin America came a Bolshevik attempt to bring independent
communist parties in Latin America under the political and
organizational control of one central communist party in Moscow.
The shift in the focus of the Communist International to that of
"socialism in one country" not only drained socialism of its inter-
national character, but it also had a detrimental effect on the
independent and creative nature of many Third World revolutionary
struggles. The efforts of Mariategui in Peru, Luis Emilio Reca-
barren in Chile, and Julio Antonio Mella in Cuba to build an
independent Marxist movement in Latin America became displaced
after their deaths in the 1920s and 1930s by the Stalinistic tactics of
Victorio Codovilla in Argentina, Luis Carlos Prestes in Brazil, and
Vicente Lombardo Toledano of Mexico. These efforts to subjugate
the various national communist parties to the foreign and domestic
interests of Moscow increased with the onset of Stalinization in the
Soviet Union.
Stalinism was characterized chiefly by bureaucratic authoritar-
ianism; it also entailed the centralizing of power in the upper
echelons of the administrative apparatus, the emergence of a cult of
personality, and the lack of economic democracy. Moscow's tight
control resulted in a rigid and centralized leadership and the
8
=====第33页=====
development of communist parties which were both radicalized and
marginalized from mainstream society, errors that the Seventh
Congress sought to correct with the emergence of the Popular Front
strategy in 1935. As Ronaldo Munck has observed, this Stalinist
leadership "developed economic and political interests distinct from
those of the proletariat" and were primarily characterized by "their
unswerving devotion to the powerful Soviet bureaucracy, to which
24
they were linked by innumerable material and political ties.
This increased interest on the part of the Soviet Union in Latin
America and the subjugation of national parties to central bureau-
cratic control destroyed an incipient independent communist move-
ment. "Given ten or twenty years of relative freedom," Victor Alba,
a Latin American labor historian wrote, "a school of truly Latin
American revolutionary thinkers might have developed. Manuel
Caballero has observed that "perhaps nowhere better than in Latin
America did the Comintern show all the contradictions and finally,
the lack of viability and efficiency of a world organization with a
structure too rigid, too centralized and too vertical.6
Similarly,
Nicola Miller echoed her sentiment that "the Communist Interna-
tional failed to turn any political situation to its advantae ...
largely because of the rigidity of its model and its lack of interest in
the actual conditions of Latin America.
n27
The first attempted communist-inspired insurrection in Latin
America came not from a country such as Mexico or Argentina,
which had a large Communist International presence, but from the
small and seemingly insignificant Central American country of El
Salvador. In 1932, the Salvadoran communist leader Agustn
Farabundo Martí set up local soviets and developed a socialist
program that quickly evolved into a large peasant uprising which the
Salvadoran military rapidlyand brutally suppressed, killing thirty
thousand people. Although the Salvadoran communists were well
aware of the international dimensions of their struggle, they operat-
ed with no apparent support of the Communist International. In
fact, the pro-Moscow communist parties in Argentina and Mexico
were very critical of the Salvadoran efforts, and international
support which Sandino enjoyed in Nicaragua and which the
TheSalvadoran
Salvadorans expected never materialized28
uprising was further indication that the roots of revolt in Latin
America do not lie in the Soviet Union.Under Stalin's leadership
the Communist International's strict and heavy-handed policies had
9
=====第34页=====
the unfortunate effect of destroying any creative or innovative
efforts to develop an original and flexible Marxism in Latin America.
Several factors characterized the nature of the Communist
International's influence in Latin America. Especially revealing was
the Communist International's organizational conceptualization and
administration of its Latin American interests. Not only did the
Latin American communist parties play a marginal role in the
organization, the Soviet leaders also appeared to have a very limited
understanding of the current crucial issues and political dynamics in
Latin America. Until the establishment of the South American
Secretariat in Buenos Aires in 1928, the Communist International
placed Latin America under the care of the Latin Secretariat which
dealt with France, Italy, Spain, and Portugal. Language, not social
or political realities, formed the rationale for this administrative
structuring.
29
Later, apparently for geographic reasons, many Latin
American communist parties came under the tutelage of Earl
Browder and the Communist Party of the USA. This inability on
the part of the Communist International to understand that the
emerging Marxist tradition in Latin American differed funda-
mentally from its counterparts in Europe and the United States
characterized not only their appraisal of the Latin American reality
but also the attitudes of many other observers.
Foreigners dominated many of the early Communist Interna-
tional efforts in Latin America, including holding positions of
leadership in the South American Secretariat and in many of the
early Latin American communist parties. Although the Mexican
Communist Party attracted influential intellectuals and artists
including Diego Rivera and David Siqueiros, many of its initial
leaders were foreigners. In fact, none of the three Mexican
Communist Party delegates to the Second Congress of the
Communist International were Mexican. As late as the Fifth
Congress in 1924 the only delegate who was a native Latin American
was a Brazilian.
30
This pattern was even stronger in Argentina
where Italian immigrant Victorio Codovilla led the South American
Secretariat and later emerged as the secretary general of the
Argentine Communist Party. Overall, Latin America never had a
large representation in the Communist International, and often is
few representatives were actually Europeans or other non-Latin
Americans.
10
=====第35页=====
The Communist International, therefore, played an active role
in the formation of communist party politics in Latin America. But
to assign to Moscow or the Communist International the responsi-
bility for revolutionary movements in Latin America requires a large
and unjustifiable jump in logic. With its theoretical assumptions
which grew out of a European situation, and because of its conser-
vative impulse to defend the interests of the Soviet state, the
Communist International was hardly in a position to foment revolu-
tionary change on the continent. Ironically, the most radical
changes came from places which broke with the dogmatic assump-
tions which emanated out of Moscow. There has been a natural
tendency not only in the Communist International but also among
scholars to focus attention on the communist parties in the large
Latin American countries. The Argentine and Mexican communist
parties retained their central importance to the Communist Inter-
national's organizational structure, but other parties, such as those
in Chile and Cuba, grew out of leftist traditions in those countries,
had a more solid mass base of support, and therefore were organiza-
tionally more effective and successful. The Chilean Left has a
longer and deeper history than most of its counterparts in Latin
America, and the rise of its leftist-oriented labor movement early in
the twentieth century was an unusual development. An in-depth
examination of the factors which led to the growth and evolution of
a working-class consciousness in this country helps frame the issues
which led to developments in Marxist revolutionary theory in other
parts of Latin America.
The Chilean Road to Socialism
Historically, Latin America has been held on the periphery of
an international capitalist economic system. As in most other Latin
American countries, Chile developed an export-oriented economy
which, by the latter part of the nineteenth century, had become
highly dependent on the export of a single product, nitrate, to
European markets. Chile became a classic example of an economy
highly dependent on foreign capital and the export of one product
which funded the development of the Chilean state and filed the
pockets of the wealthy elite,but left the vast majorityof Chileans
economically impoverished,politically powerless,and subject to
exploitation and repression.The nitrate industry dramatically
11
=====第36页=====
enlarged the size of the working class in Chile and along with its
larger size came a proliferation of militant actions to improve their
working, living, and social conditions. Increasingly, these workers
identified themselves as having class interests distinct from those
who owned the mines, controlled the infrastructure, and benefitted
financially from foreign trade. The workers became actors in a class
struggle that eventually moved beyond issues of pay and working
conditions, to ones that dealt with ownership and modes of produc-
tion. This was the setting for the emergence and growth of a
working-class consciousness in Chile, especially among the workers
in the northern nitrate fields and on the docks at Valparaiso.
During the first several decades of the twentieth century there
was an increase in the level of leftist political and labor
organizational activity in Chile. Chilean journalist Luis Emilio
Recabarren, traditionally seen as the founder and chief ideologist of
the Socialist and Communist parties, was a major influence in
organizing both the Communist Party and labor unions,ad in
fomenting a class consciousness among the nitrate miners. He
founded and edited numerous working-class newspapers in the
nitrate fields, undoubtedly his greatest impact on the developing
working-class consciousness. With working-class support, he was
first elected to Congress in 1906 as a delegate for the Democratic
Party. The Conservative Party which controlled Congress, however,
refused to seat him because of his revolutionary views. "It is not
tolerable," one deputy remarked, "that the ideas of social disso-
lution sustained by Mr. Recabarren be represented in the
Chamber.'
31
In 1912 Recabarrenformed the Socialist Workers
Party (POS), a left-wing break-off from the Democratic Party. The
POS party platform included planks which detailed its opposition to
World War I, its favor for the nationalization of private property
and the confiscation of church wealth, and its attempts to construct
a labor movement. Recabarren ran for president in 1920, but the
government persecuted him and imprisoned him, thereby preventing
him from extending his appeal beyond the northern nitrate regions.
He was, however, elected to Congress in 1921 as a delegate of the
Socialist Labor and Communist parties.
Class struggle was a central issue in Recabarren's thought. He
sought to unite the working class into a revolutionary force to
overthrow the bourgeoisie, and much of his writing had the intent
of helping "orient the thought of the proletariat which must struggle
12
=====第37页=====
for its emancipation. He argued that socialism was much more
than the redistribution of wealth from the rich to the poor, but also
included changes in mentality that would "abolish the imaginary
rights of private property." This would result in justice and moral
perfection.
33
The nature of this class consciousness which
developed in Chile is rather unique in Latin American history. It
was largely an indigenous development; Chile did not experience the
large influx of European immigrants who brought radical syndicalist
ideas to Argentina. In 1914, 60 percent of Argentina's urban
working class was foreign-born, whereas in Chile the figure was less
than4 percent.34
InChile, Latin American actors such as
Recabarren took a leading role in fomenting a working-class
consciousness. In a speech presented to the Chilean Congress in
1921 to counter attacks that blamed working-class agitation on
foreign agents, Recabarren argued that the Chilean working class
was itself capable of fomenting revolutionary action, and that such
action had its roots in Chilean history. He proceeded to demon-
strate that such actions predated the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia
by fifteen or twenty years. He concluded that it was rather"the
capitalist regime itself which had developed revolutionary thoughts
Historian Brian Loveman has remarked that
"Although the Communist party dated only from 1922 and the
Socialist party from the early 193Os, an indigenous Marxist
movement linked to international Marxism had struggled for at least
half a century" in Chile.
36
The working-class movement in Chile not only grew out of
indigenous roots, but it also had a strong internationalistic flavor.
In an attempt to divide the working class and keep wages low,
employers (along with the government) imported foreign workers to
the northern nitrate fields. In 1885, 40 percent of the workers were
37
The
of foreign extraction-largely from Bolivia and Peru.
employers played on the workers'cultural differences and political
animosities from the War of the Pacific to keep them from uniting
into a significant labor force. Recabarren and other socialists,
however, pointed to the international scope of the workers' struggle
and tried to get workers to attack the capitalists rather than each
other. The foreign workers tended to be the most exploited and
The
appear to have participated freely in labor strikes.
"Argentineans, Bolivians, and Peruvians, a Chilean worker later
stated in his autobiography,"were exactly like compatriots for us,
13
=====第38页=====
with equal rights and duties.In the end, the capitalists'attempt
to depress wages through the introduction of foreign workers back-
fired—these workers only joined the ranks of the exploited Chilean
workers in agitating for social changes.
Through Recabarren's urging, the POS joined the Communist
International in 1922 and transformeditself into the Chilean
Communist Party (PCC). Although the Chilean Communist Party
commanded one of the largest and most powerful left-wing move-
ments in Latin America, the Communist International never
acknowledged its significance. Instead, the Communist International
gave more attention to the much smaller and marginalized parties
in Argentina and Mexico, thereby revealing its strategic economic
interests which were not necessarily in line with the Latin American
political reality. In 1923, Recabarren travelled to the Soviet Union
for the Fourth Congress of the Communist International. He was
impressed by the successes of the Russian Revolution, but
concluded that "the Chilean proletariat only needs more discipline
and a little more political and economic organization in order to
find the capacity to realize the social revolution that will expropriate
the entire exploitative capitalist system.
39
Recabarren's life came to a tragic end in 1924. Faced with a
military coup and frustrated with the infighting in the Communist
Party and with its impotence in the face of the military dictatorship,
he committed suicide. He remained, however, a critical figure in the
evolution of working-class organizations and consciousness in Latin
America. He inspired a rising class consciousness that led workers
first to agitate for better working and living conditions, and then to
see themselves as a class with interests that differed from those of
their employers. Workers organized themselves into labor move-
ments and political parties that developed into a significant leftist
force in Chilean society. Whereas Mariátegui left a permanent
imprint on revolutionary Marxist theory, Recabarren "excelled at
turning theory into practice" and his legacy lives on in the Chilean
working-class consciousness.4 These two historical figures played
parallel roles in the development of a working-class consciousness
in their respective countries, and together have formed a basis for
the creation of indigenous forms of socialism that has influenced
subsequent revolutionaries throughout Latin America.
Throughout the 192Os the Communist Party remained the
dominant leftist force in Chilean politics,but its leaders brought it
14
=====第39页=====
increasingly in line with the strict dictates of the Communist
International. This led to a left-wing Socialist Party break-off in
1932, a move which was inspired by the independent direction that
Mariátegui had taken the Socialist Party in Peru
41
During the
1950s and 1960s, the Chilean Left developed one of the most non-
doctrinaire ideological positions in Latin America. Not only did it
emerge out of a mass party tradition which predated the 1917
Russian Revolution, but it also applied lessons it learned from the
Cuban revolution and other world events in a unique and innovative
manner. In what became known as the "Chilean Road to Socialism,"
leftist groups formed the Unidad Popular (Popular Unity) coalition,
which gained political power in 1970 through the democratic
election of a Marxist, Salvador Allende Gossens, to the presidency
of Chile. The Unidad Popular's economic program advocated
replacing Chile's capitalistic and export-oriented economy with one
which was centralized and democratically controlled. In office,
Allende implemented far-reaching reforms in order to benefit the
working and lower classes. Central to his plans was the national-
ization of natural resources, especially the copper mines, which had
become the focal point of the Chilean export economy after the
decline of nitrate production.
42
Although the Chilean revolution
collapsed in a violent coup in 1973, it opened up the theoretical
possibility for a peaceful and democratic path to power. Based on
its deeply seated democratic traditions, the culmination of Chilean
socialism was a political and social expression which was truly
indigenous to Chile's national reality.
Afro-Marxism
The development of an indigenous road to socialism has not
been an undertaking unique to Latin America. In Africa in the
1960s and 1970s,"Afro-Marxist" governments gained power in
countries such as Angola, Mozambique, and Ethiopia. Afro-
Marxism is simply the attempt "to adapt the principles of scientific
socialism to African conditions." Not only has such a modification
of Marxist principles for a specific context become common around
the world, it also left open the "possibility that Afro-Marxists could
make an original contribution to political thought, if not to
politics.
43
Afro-Marxism increased the viability of applying
Marxism to Third World situations, and demonstrated a break from
15
=====第40页=====
ideological guidance emanating from the Soviet Union. As in the
Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions, the ideology of Afro-Marxist
governments "was not imported from abroad, but it is insteada
product of internal processes that are unique to certain African
states.* Because "the objective conditions found in Africa are
different from those that characterized Russia in 1917 Marxist
theory had "to be adapted to the specific conditions of specific
Third World countries.'
44
In South Africa, the South African Communist Party (SACP)
also developed a form of Marxist theory that was appropriate for
and indigenous to the South African national context. The SACP
grew out of a historical situation similar to that which socialists
faced in Latin America in the 1920s. Socialists founded the
Communist Party of South Africa in 1921 and allied themselves with
the Communist International in the belief that the Bolshevik revolu-
tion represented the purest expression of the aspirations of the
working class.4As in other parts of the world,the Communist
International imposed their views on South Africa with little
consideration for the specifics of South African history. Under the
"scientifically correct and therefore more or less infallible" dictates
of the Communist International, the SACP became one of the most
rigid and Stalinistic communist parties in the world.46 Under the
dictate of the Sixth Congress of the Communist International, the
SACP began to pursue the Black Republic Thesis in 1929 which
argued for "an independent native South African republic as a stage
towards a workers' and peasants' republic, with full, equal rights for
all races, black, coloured and white." This position was "a strategic
orientation adapted to the concrete conditions of the South African
class struggle," but at the same time the Communist International
continued "to impose its line in an increasingly Stalinist manner"
with the result of mass expulsions and the eventual decline of the
SACP.47 This hard-line position characterized the nature of the
SACP for the next fifty years of its existence.
With the breakup of the Eastern Bloc and the Soviet Union,
the SACP began to demonstrate an incredible adaptability to the
newly emerging and possibly post-Marxist world political and
ideological environment. The SACP surfaced in 1990 after operat-
ing illegally for thirty years in the underground as a banned entity
to a South Africa where diplomacy and political debate had become
more important than armed struggle. Confronted with a changing
16
=====第41页=====
national reality, the SACP repudiated its Stalinist past and admitted
"that socialism in the Soviet Union was deformed from the 1920s by
the stifling of democracy, setting a thoroughly tyrannical precedent
for communists everywhere.
m48
TheSACPrefusedtodefinea
model which it would emulate in its drive to create socialism in that
country, but instead strove for a national democratic revolution
which was constructed within its own cultural context. As a result
the SACP pursued a social program which was increasingly "in a
conceptual and theoretical contradiction to the model of revolution
generated by classical marxism," as members of the party called for
a laying to rest of the "revered classics.4In place of orthodox
Marxism, party leaders began to construct new theoretical
approaches. "Marxism, like any science, is not a monolithic and
closed dogma simply waiting application," revisionist party
theoretician and SACP Central Committee member Jeremy Cronin
wrote in 1991. "It is a body of theory,yes, but one which needs
constantly to be tried out in practice, developed and revised."50
As the SACP entered the 199Os it moved away fromthe
concept of a "dictatorship of the proletariat" and began to criticize
revolutionary ideologies which relied exclusively on a small revolu-
tionary vanguard to act at a time dictated by objective political and
economic conditions. In Cronin's words, that ideological perspective
embodies "a narrow, statist and bureaucratic conception of working
class power." Cronin envisioned a much broader struggle for popu-
lar hegemony and empowerment that would lead to a transformation
of society. In South Africa, Cronin argued, the socialist revolution
would be a process (as opposed to a singular spontaneous event) of
raising the level of people's political consciousness, which would
lead to the gaining of popular power. It would not be enough to
gain power simply through either electoral means or by violently
seizing the governmental apparatus. Rather than pursuing a
dogmatic fundamentalism or passively waiting for the "revolutionary
moment," the SACP emphasized the importance of popular mass
struggles, popular power, and popular hegemony in creating the
conditions in which a socialist revolution (in whatever national form
it takes) could triumph.51
Former SACP secretary-general Joe Slovo presented similar
concerns in a pamphlet "Has Socialism Failed?" which triggered
extensive discussions on the emerging nature of Marxist theory in
South Africa. The failure of the rigid application of communism in
17
=====第42页=====
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union had discredited socialist
theory, but Marxism itself was not at fault. Slovo argued that the
crisis in socialism was a result of "a mechanical and out-of-context
invocation of Marxist dogma" rather than any inherent weaknesses
in Marxist theory.
52
Because socialism strives for an egalitarian
society, it is an inherently democratic philosophy, Slovo continued,
and this democratic philosophy is violated fundamentally when a
dictatorship of the proletariat becomes a repressive state apparatus
(as it did under Stalin) rather than a transitional phase to
communism. "The way forward,” Slovo concluded, "is through
thorough-going democratic socialism” grounded in democratic
persuasion rather than authoritarian power.
53
At its eighth party congress in December of 1991, the SACP
reaffirmed its commitment to Marxist-Leninism, described its party
as "the political vanguard of the working class," triumphed its belief
in socialism, and declared "that socialism is inherently demo-
cratic.
54
This was not a reactionary move of a party defiantly
holding on to a dated and dying philosophy, but rather an indication
of its position of strength and ability to adapt its Marxism in a way
which was applicable to the current state of the South African strug-
gle. The rationale for this position echoes that of the Peruvian
Socialist Party some sixty years earlier when Mariátegui also argued
for the necessity of a vanguard party which would form a "political
force that assumes the task of orienting and directing the proletariat
in the struggle for the _fulfillment of their class ideals."55
Mariátegui, as did the SACP, distinguished between a dictatorship
of the proletariat which could become repressive, and a vanguard
party which was charged with raising the political consciousness of
the masses.
The congress expressed its internationalistic character through
a resolution in support of the revolutionary process underway in
Cuba and pointed to the Cuban revolution as a positive model to
study and possibly emulate as they struggle to develop a South
African road to socialism. The SACP pledged to mount an educa-
tional campaign to raise political and material consciousness about
Cuba and issued a call to urge other countries to trade with Cuba.
Cuba had long supported the ANC and similar mass-based, anti-
colonial revolutionary movements in Angola and other African
countries, and through these pronouncements the SACP wished to
18
=====第43页=====
expressed its continued intent to work at raising the political
consciousness of the South African people for socialism.
Organizing against the backdrop of the institutionalized inequality
of a capitalistic apartheid South Africa, the SACP presented a vision
of a socialistic South Africa blessed with material and social
equality. Unlike East European communist parties which were
experiencing a period of severe decline, the SACP appeared to
enjoy a period of unprecedented growth which further indicated that
the roots of Marxist thought in South Africa do not lie in Moscow
or some other equally foreign and external place but rather within
their national reality.
Eurocommunism
These Third World communist movements which retained
their independence from Moscow and the Communist International
had their counterparts in Europe in the form of Eurocommunism.
Eurocommunism, or "European Communism," presented "the idea
that communism can be adapted to a European pattern, rather than
that it has to follow the Soviet model.7 Eurocommunism was "an
autonomous strategic conception, in the process of formation, born
of the experience of those concerned and of concrete reality.'
58
Eurocommunism as an independent national road to socialism
emerged as a dominant ideology among European communist parties
in the 1970s. Eurocommunist parties were strongest in France, Italy,
and Spain; Santiago Carrillo and Enrico Berlinguer, the leaders of
the Spanish and Italian Communist parties, were the two dominant
leaders of the movement. The Italian Communist Party gained a
strong electoral following and in the mid-1970s it appeared that they
would gain power in that country, but the first Eurocommunist party
to join a government was in 1981 when the French Communist Party
joined the left-wing Mitterrand government. Sometimes Euro-
communism has been referred to as a third road independent from
either Western-type capitalism or Soviet-style communism, but in an
important work outlining the role of the state in a Eurocommunist
critique of society, Spanish communist leader Carrillo argued that
"if we were to set out to enumerate the different roads being
followed in the world revolutionary process, there would be many
more than three.'
59
19
=====第44页=====
Each individual party would have to develop and pursue its
own indigenous road to socialism. Rather than attempting to
emulate or recreate the Russian Revolution in Western Europe,
Eurocommunist leaders looked to their own histories and cultural
traditions as the foundation on which to construct a socialist
revolution. Carrillo was not afraid to attack the basic tenets of
Leninism in working out a Spanish-style communism; he argued that
Lenin openly revised Marx's theses and Lenin's Soviet successors
have also done the same thing. The Eurocommunist parties were
attracted more to the democratic experiments in "communism with
a human face in Hungary and Czechoslovakia than Stalin's rigid
Marxist ideology. They rejected the idea of the dictatorship of the
proletariat and argued for a deeper and more sophisticated under-
standing of the innate relationship between socialism and a working
people's democracy. Instead of an authoritarian leadership style,
the Eurocommunist parties affirmed the democratic process and
"democratic political liberties and human rights which are historic
achievements of human progress that cannot be surrendered.60
Ultimately,the goal of Eurocommunism was to break out of a
dogmatic, sectarian, and dated form of Marxism in order to create
a new, original, and living revolutionary process.
One of the strongest European communist parties was the
Partito Comunista Italiano, the Italian Communist Party (PCI). The
PCI originated as a left-wing break-off of the Italian Socialist Party
in 1921. The following year it was outlawed along with all other
political parties with Benito Mussolini's rise to power. For the next
two decades it remained underground, a secret and illegal party,
until it resurfaced during World War II in the fight against fascism.
After the war it emerged as one of Italy's largest and strongest
parties. The party's leaders believed that each country's communist
party should find the best "road to socialism" for its own particular
situation. This road would vary from country to country, but the
PCI saw no need to have a violent revolution in Italy and were
satisfied to come to power peacefully and gradually. Like lefist
parties in Chile,the PCI worked within the existing political system,
supporting aconstitutional democracy and political pluralism which
respected individual rights. The fail of Allende's government in
1973 confirmed for the PCI that a small vanguard party could not
hold power in Italy, and that the way toward a socialist revolution
20
=====第45页=====
was through building popular support and a political consciousness
among the Italian people.
In the context of the Cold War and high anticommunist
sentiment in Western Europe, the PCI strove to maintain ts
distance and independence from the Soviet Union. Instead of
submitting to dictates from Moscow, the PCI insisted on pursuing a
path to communism which was suited to Italian culture. The PCI
denounced Stalin for his human rights abuses and refused to join
the Soviets in their denunciation of Joseph Tito's independent
course of action in Yugoslavia. With the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia in 1968, the PCI became convinced that an autono-
mous form of communism could flourish only outside of the Soviet
Union's sphere of influence. The PCI further distanced itself from
Moscow by condemning the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
supporting Poland's independent Solidarity Union, and attemting
to restore normal relations with China. The PCI persisted in its own
independent road to communism in Italy, regardless of what actions
other communist parties or governments might take.
Antonio Gramsci
Antonio Gramsci, the brilliant intellectual founder of the PCI
and one of Italy's most original Marxist thinkers, gave an intellectual
underpinning to many of the PCI's innovative doctrines and formed
a basis for the later emergence of Eurocommunism. Gramsci joined
the Italian Socialist Party in 1913 and helped found the socialist
weekly newspaper L'Ordine Nuovo in 1919 and the PCI in 1921.
Influenced by the role of workers' soviets in the Russian Revolution,
Gramsci helped organize the Turin Factory Councils Movement
which agitated for democratic control of the factories as the first
step toward the revolutionary transformation of Italy. Gramsci
worked with the Communist International in Moscow and Vienna
from 1922 to 1924. In 1924 he became head of the Communist
Party in Italy and was elected to the Italian Parliament. As a result
of his opposition to the rise of a fascist dictatorship in Italy, Musso-
lini imprisoned Gramsci in 1926 where he remained until shortly
before his death in 1937. Ironically, as one scholar has observed,
Gramsci "escaped the perils of Stalinization because he spent those
While inprison and under
years in one of Mussolini's jails."
rather adverse and difficult conditions,Gramsci wrote extensively on
21
=====第46页=====
Marxist theory and its application in Italy. It was not until the
1960s, however, that Gramsci's significant writings were available
outside of Italy. With the appearance of The Prison Notebooks (first
published in English in 1971) Gramsci finally gained international
renown as a leading and significant Marxist intellectual.
Gramsci's ideological positions grew out of his Italian cultural
context; he was particularly influenced by the idealism of Italian
philosopher Benedetto Croce. Gramsci rejected a strict mechanical
materialist determinism in favor of a view of Marxism that empha-
sized its historical and cultural aspects. This led Gramsci to a
dynamic and dialectical view of a "philosophy of praxis" which grew
out of a Hegelian idealism and sought to unify theory and practice,
thought and action. This philosophy of praxis was a critical theory
that challenged the mechanical aspects of nineteenth-century Marx-
ism.
He was interested in the'contradictions inherent in "the
relationship between human will (superstructure) and economic
structure.
62
Gramsci warned against an ideology that becomes a
"dogmatic system of eternal and absolute truth."³
He rejected a
mechanical determinism which argued that the breakdown of
capitalist society and the transition to socialism was an inevitable
process subject to identifiable natural laws. Rather, he believed that
it would only be through human action that historical changes
occurred. He was one of the first Marxists to emphasize the role of
human consciousness in shaping revolutionary change. Gramsci was,
Carl Boggs noted, "a creative Marxist who never failed to seize upon
the active, political, or 'voluntarist'side of theory in contrast to the
fatalistic reliance upon objective forces and scientific laws’of
capitalist development that had been central to the Marxist tradi-
tion.
He stressed the importance of maintaining a dynamic and
flexible system of thought that could be adapted to new situations.
In a milieu that had not yet come under the domination of a rigid
Stalinism emanating from Moscow, the Italian concentrated on
cultural and spiritual aspects of Marxist theory. The result was an
open, nondoctrinaire Marxism that, as David McLellan observed,
"rehabilitated the subjective, creative side of Marxist thought" and
emphasized "the importance of ideological struggle in the process
65
of socialist transformation.
Not only on a theoretical level, but also on a political and
practical level, Gramsci believed in the importance of adapting
Marxist revolutionary theory to the concrete Italian cultural and
22
=====第47页=====
political context. Gramsci pursued an active internationalism and
studied other countries' revolutionary experiences, but he rejected
any attempt (as with the Stalinized Communist International) to
export or impose a revolutionary model from one country or situa-
tion on to another. Gramsci strove to develop an Italian Marxism
with a truly national character "that spoke to the customs, needs,
and aspirations of the Italian people. Revolutionary strategies
that worked in Eastern Europe would not necessarily work in
Western Europe,because the nature of the state was different.
Gramsci was drawn to the Bolsheviks for their bold actions in
making history in 1917, but he rejected their use of a highly central-
ized revolutionary vanguard. Instead, he favored the development
of a mass-based party rooted in popular and democratic structures.
Gramsci proposed that in Italy first the people and their culture
should be won over to communism, and then the government could
be taken over. This method of coming to power is the reverse of
what Vladimir Lenin, who first seized the government and then used
it to change the state, propagated with the Russian Revolution.
Gramsci developed the idea of cultural hegemony to explain
why a socialist revolution had not triumphed in the industrialized
Western European societies as Marx had predicted. The absence
of a proletarian revolutionary consciousness was not due, Gramsci
argued, to the lack of proper objective or economic conditions.
Rather, the dominant culture, according to Gramsci, had retained
its control over people's lives not through coercive state apparatuses
but through the manipulation of cultural and ideological institutions.
A revolutionary movement, therefore, could not succeed simply by
seizing political control; it must also design a new proletarian
cultural "counterhegemonic" structure to replace the existing one.
The party must work at raising the political consciousness of the
masses and transforming them from passive subjects to actors who
take a proactive role in the process of social transformation. This
was a process of politicization which would take time. When the
party had thereby created a proper historical situation for social
transformation,it must then be unified and ready to act boldly, as
the Bolsheviks did in Russia in 1917. This formed the basis of
Gramsci's conception of the state, which influenced his strategy for
transforming it. Gramsci believed that in Italy the PCI would need
to unite the urban and rural poor into a mass-based revolutionary
party which would then gain victory.67
23
=====第48页=====
Gramsci believed that intellectuals played a crucial role in
constructing the proper conditions in which a revolutionary
movement would flourish. These intellectuals would not come from
the traditional elite classes, but would emerge out of the working
classes and use that experience as a basis for developing a mass
political consciousness. Part of his philosophy of praxis was the
importance of maintaining contact between the intellectuals and the
masses. Party leadership should not remain removed and distant
from the masses, but should emerge organically and democratically
out of them. "Intellectual élites separated from the masses" could
never make profound and lasting social changes, Gramsci wrote, but
"intellectuals who are conscious of being linked organically to a
national-popular struggle" would elucidate the nature of the
dominant culture's hegemonic control and help raise the political
consciousness of the masses.
68
This forms the basis for Gramsci's
emphasis on subjective factors (consciousness) rather than objective
factors (economic relations) in leading toward a socialist revolution.
Gramsci believed that this cultural transformation could not
be accomplished through a dictatorship of the proletariat with no
system of accountability. Rather, Gramsci favored a structure of a
nonbureaucratic democratic centralism built on popular participation
that protected individual freedoms of thought, press, and associa-
tion. Furthermore, these subjective ideas must be molded to fit
particular historical and cuItural conditions. Without a voluntary
acceptance and organic adaptation, the social revolution would be
bound to fail. The result is National Marxism, a strategic critique
that has characterized the development of the PCI and has won
considerable acceptance among leftist leaders in Latin America.
Whereas the Communist International presented the antithesis of
what the Third World needed in order to win a social revolution,
the central tenets of Gramsci's thought have been critical to the
success of social revolutions throughout the region.
69
Gramsci represented a nonauthoritarian, democratic form of
Marxist thought that has become very influential in many parts of
the world. In the United States in the 1960s many New Left or neo-
Marxist intellectuals and political activists were also drawn toward
this style of thought. Michael Harrington,former leader of the
Democratic Socialists of America, emerged from this Gramscian
tradition to present one of the most creative and innovative critiques
of North American society. In his book The Twilight of Capitalism,
24
=====第49页=====
Harrington analyzed the crisis of western capitalism from a Marxist
perspective far removed from the mechanistic interpretations
associated with Stalinism. Harrington's thought was characterized
by a lack of rigid dogmatism and the advancement of a humane and
democratic form of Marxism. He emphasized the spiritual and
cultural aspects of Marxist theory as he uncovered what he called
"the new Karl Marx," who presented theories which were "infinitely
more supple" and "more open and vital" than what Moscow had
propagated.70
Harrington pushed for an egalitarian, democratic,
and nonelitist political system with a social transformation rooted
not in economic determinism but in the voluntarism of human
action. He followed the lead of Gramsci, whose "writings were
never vulgar and mechanistic," in rejecting a positivistic or
deterministic Marx in favor of a subjective, creative, and revolu-
tionary form of democratic socialism.This replacement of a stale
Marxism with a living and dynamic Marx, Harrington believed,
would carry societal critiques forward into the twenty-first century.
As in Europe and North America, Gramsci left a lasting legacy
for leftists in Latin America. In the 1960s and 1970s,his ideas
Latin America during the 1960s Gramsci's works were for the first
time translated from the Italian into other languages.7 In his book
La cola del diablo: Itinerario de Gramsci en América Latina, José
Aricó examines the diffusion of Gramsci's influence in Latin
America from the 1950s through the 1980s. Aricó writes largely
from his experiences in Argentina and Mexico, but Gramsci's
importance can also be seen in other countries such as Cuba and
Peru. This influence is particularly evident in the Nicaraguan revo-
lution which brought the Sandinistas to power in 1979. In his work
on the intellectual roots of the Sandinista revolution, Donald
Hodges points specifically to Gramsci as acritical inspiration for the
creation of the Sandinistas' innovative Marxist theories. Because of
his emphasis on voluntarist and subjective factors such as the impor-
tance of ideology in moving the masses to revolutionary action, the
Sandinistas saw Gramsci "as the single most important Marxist
Sandinista intellectual Ricardo
theoretician since Lenin.
Morales Avilés was particularly responsible for bringing Gramsci's
concept of political hegemony to Nicaragua. Because of Gramsci's
influence, the Sandinistas went beyond a political or social
revolution to attempt a cultural revolution which would engender
25
=====第50页=====
the creation of a socialist "new man.7 In Nicaragua, the creation
of a revolutionary myth influenced by Gramsci and others took the
form of a close alliance between the Sandinistas and liberation
theology proponents in struggling for a revolutionary transformation
of society.
For the most part, Peruvians were isolated from the radical
European philosophical currents which influenced Argentina, Cuba,
and other Latin American countries in the nineteenth century.
Manuel González Prada (1848-1918), an early Peruvian intellectual,
was an important exception to this patern of isolation. González
Prada sought to fuse nationalism with indigenismo (a movement
which championed the value of indigenous society) as he argued
that Peru's indigenous heritage and population must be incorporated
into the national culture. Although González Prada rejected
historical materialism and Marxist socialism in favor of anarchism,
Marx's writings from the 187Os nevertheless influenced his thought.
His radical nationalism and indigenismo created a milieu which
allowed for the later emergence of a fully developed Peruvian
Marxism.
76
Mariátegui was one of the premier and most well-renowned
Latin American Marxists to emerge out of this historical situation.
He was the first Peruvian to develop a serious and systematic
Marxist analysis of the problems of Latin American society and to
bring a revolutionary understanding of Marxism to Latin America.
Mariátegui directly challenged many of the dogmatic assumptions of
the Communist International which emanated from Moscow. He
wanted to develop an "Indo-American" socialism rooted in Latin
America's own historical reality. Before Mariátegui, Robert Paris
has noted, Latin Americans viewed socialism and Marxism as purely
European  doctrines.77
But Mariátegui argued that "although
socialism, like capitalism, was born in Europe, it is not specifically
or particularly a European doctrine. It is a world movement.78
He'is known, therefore, for his "Latin Americanization" and
"spiritualization" of Marxism in which he forwarded a voluntaristic
interpretation of Marxist theory that "exalted passion as a revolu-
tionary force. His ability to incorporate and adapt European
Marxist doctrines into a critique of Latin American society
influenced a generation of Marxists struggling to change those
societies, and his thoughts still continue to have relevance today.
26
=====第51页=====
Mariátegui's influence can be felt throughout Latin America.
In addition to countless books, four volumes in Mariátegui's Com-
plete Works series contain articles not only from his fellow Peruvians
but also from Latin American, North American, and European
writers. Collections of essays such as these demonstrate the scope
of Mariátegui's international appeal. They confirm that people not
only throughout Latin America but also in Europe and elsewhere
were conversant with his thought and influenced by it. An example
of his influence can be found in the neighboring Andean country of
Ecuador where Marxist scholar Oswaldo Albornoz has recently
commented that Mariátegui was "of utmost importance for the
political and intellectual development of socialist thought in
Ecuador." His works were "an important vehicle for the propaga-
tion of Marxist doctrine. More than anything, they are invaluable
lessons that teach us how to apply Marxism to the Ecuadorian
reality. Mariategui's literary works arrived early in Ecuador.In
1916, ten years before he matured as a leading Marxist intellectual,
Ecuadorians were reading his poetry and articles. Later an
elaborate network was set up in Ecuador to distribute his vanguard
journal Amauta in addition to his working-class newspaper Labor
and various other books he published. Many of Mariátegui's
insights into his Peruvian reality also proved to be relevant in
Ecuador. This was especially true for his indigenist ideology since
Ecuador, like Peru, had a large indigenous population. Although
Mariátegui only spent a week in Guayaquil during his return from
Europe in 1923, Albornoz stated that Mariátegui was no stranger in
Ecuador and furthermore that his thought was indispensable for un-
81
derstanding the Ecuadorian reality.
In addition to this strong appeal of his thought in Ecuador,
Mariátegui's writings have been similarly well-received throughout
Latin American. Although he did not travel extensively in Latin
America, he developed a widespread intellectual presence on the
This happened not only in countries with large
continent.
indigenous populations, but also in other countries which have a
historical and cultural reality somewhat different than what is found
in Peru. In order to understand this broad appeal of Mariategui's
thought,itisitructivetoconidethehistoiesoftheintroduction
ofhis thought intotwo LatinAmrican countries which have expr-
enced successful socialist revolutions: Cuba and Nicaragua. These
histories help underline the commonality of experience throughout
27
=====第52页=====
Latin America that informed Mariategui's Marxist theory. But
before proceeding to examine those specific national histories, one
must first understand the uniqueness of Mariategui's Latin
American Marxist thought.
28
=====第53页=====
2
JOSE CARLOS MARIATEGUI
(1894-1930)
Mariátegui was born in the small southern Peruvian coastal town of
Moquegua on 14 July 1894, and grew up on the outskirts of Lima.
He was the sixth child of a poor mestiza woman, Maria Amalia
LaChira, who had lost her first three children shortly after child-
birth. This experience led her to be deeply religious, and her
earnest Catholicism strongly influenced the young Mariátegui.
Mariátegui's father was Francisco Javier Mariátegui, a grandson of
the liberal Independence Era hero of the same name. This hero,
who was heavily influenced by the ideals of the French Revolution,
was excommunicated from the Catholic church for his active
anticlericalism and his involvement with the Freemasons.
Mariátegui's father, in an apparent attempt to avoid the hardship of
identification with a liberal family in the conservative Peruvian
milieu, hid his true identity from his wife.3
Shortly after
Mariátegui's birth, however, she discovered that her husband "was
the contaminated grandson of a man condemned by the Church for
apostasy and masonry."4
LaChira separated herself from her
husband and sought to shelter her children from his liberal
influence.
Mariátegui's upbringing was not like that of many of the
intellectuals of his period. He did not enjoy the stimulation of an
upper-class education; rather, Mariategui was a weak and sickly
child who struggled against many disadvantages. From an early age
he had developed a tubercular condition, and when he was eight
years old he hurt his left leg, which crippled him for life.³ Because
of a lack of financial resources and the need to support his family,
he acquired only an eighth grade education. At the age of fifteen
Mariátegui began work at La Prensa, a Peruvian newspaper, which
introduced him to the field of journalism. He demonstrated a good
29
=====第54页=====
deal of talent for journalism,and he quickly moved from the
position of copyboy to writing and editing positions. Throughout his
life, Mariátegui used his journalism skills as both a financial
livelihood and a vehicle for expressing his political views. By the
age of sixteen Mariategui's writings began to show a socialist
orientation. Together with his friend César Falcón,Mariátegui
launched two short-lived papers, Nuestra Epoca and La Razón.
Although these papers took a prolabor stance, they did not espouse
the revolutionary Marxism found in Mariátegui's later writings.
Mariátegui's vocal support for the revolutionary demands of workers
and students, however,ran him afoul of the Peruvian dictator
Augusto B. Leguía,who in October 1919 exiled Mariátegui and
Falcón to Europe as Peruvian "information agents." Mariátegui's
time in Europe strongly affected the development and maturation
of his thought, and solidified his socialist tendencies. Mariategui
later looked back on his early life as a journalist as his "Stone Age"
in contrast to the time of his later writings in the 1920s when he had
matured as a Marxist-Leninist revolutionary thinker.
Before his exile to Europe in 1919, Mariátegui had become
politically aware of the need for socialism and had begun to study
Marxism, but it was not until he was in Europe that he clearly
entered the Marxist tradition. He studied in France and Italy,
where he found opportunities to meet with many European
socialists. In France he met Romain Rolland, Henri Barbusse, and
other members of the revolutionary Clarté group, from whom he felt
the "intense social revolutionary emotion of the new multitudes.9
Mariátegui spent three years in Italy, where he met important
figures of Italian thought, such as Benedetto Croce, Giovanni
Papini, Marinetti, Gobetti, Prezzolini.1
Although Mariátegui
matured as a Marxist-Leninist thinker later in his life, much of his
thought originated from his experiences in Italy. This was a period
of much diversity in the international communist movement;
"Marxist thinking had not yet come to be dominated by a strict,
historical materialist interpretation which was defined through the
Soviet Union.
11
The founding of the Italian Communist Party in
1921 left a deep impression on Mariátegui. Later he acknowledged
that "until then Marxism had been for me a rather confused, boring,
cold theory," but the leadership of the Communist Party in Ialy
impressed upon him the revolutionary potential of a voluntarist
approach  to Marxism.12
Italy was Mariátegui's "major political
30
=====第55页=====
apprenticeship; it was there where he began to identify with the
"extreme Marxist left" and the Third International
13
Upon his return to Peru in 1923, Mariátegui stated that he
was "a convinced and declared Marxist.1⁴  Drawing on the experi-
ences and insights which he had gained in Europe, he gave a series
of lectures calIed "History of the World Crisis" at the newly formed
González Prada Popular University in Lima. Although he touched
on parts of Latin America, Mariátegui emphasized a working-class
critique of recent events in Europe in these lectures and demon-
strated his broad comprehension of major political themes in post-
war Europe. These lectures were later compiled as volume eight of
his Complete Works.1³ He was a popular lecturer, but despite
student requests the public University of San Marcos refused to give
him a professorship because he lacked a formal academic education.
Ironically, he was an intellectual at odds with the intellectual world.
Later in his life he referred to his "extra-university, if not anti-
university,character, and admitted that he was "far removed
from the academic techniques of the university."7
Althoughhe
lacked a formal education, he had a creative and brilliant mind. He
loved to read and was,for the most part, self-educated.8 In keep-
ing with his national Marxist framework, Mariátegui believed that
economic and social imbalances were fundamental to understanding
the problems of the educational system in Peru. "To teach a man
to read and write is not to educate him," Mariátegui wrote.1 He
criticized the Spanish, French, and North American domination of
Peru's educational system and noted that as in the United States
and Europe, the public education system in Latin America served
and defended the interests of a social and economic elite class.20
Therefore, the educational system must come under popular control
so that it would respond to the needs of the people. Only socialism,
Mariategui wrote, could create a democratic and egalitarian
educational system that would give to all members of society the
instruction which they deserved and would lead to the development
of the country.
21
He looked to the emerging trade schools and the
González Prada Popular University as models to develop a class
consciousness among the masses. As the elite classes used the
educational system to serve their interests, Mariategui believed that
it was important to develop a democratic and socialistic educational
system that would serve the broader interests of society.
31
=====第56页=====
In 1924 Mariátegui lost his right leg and spent the rest of his
life confined to a wheelchair. In spite of his failing health,
Mariátegui increased the intensity of his efforts to organize a social
revolution in Peru. In 1926 he founded Amauta, a journal which he
intended to be a vanguard voice for an intellectual and spiritual
movement to create a new Peru. It would examine developments
not only in the realm of politics but also philosophy, art, literature,
and science with a clear political agenda. Mariátegui announced
that Amauta would analyze "Peru's problems from a doctrinaire and
Amauta (which
means "wise teacher" in the Quechua language) reached a wide
audience not only in Peru but throughout Latin America. The
selection of this name, which the Peruvian indigenous painter José
Sabogal suggested, was indicative of Mariátegui's nationalistic spirit,
his indigenous roots, and his ideas of a vanguard leadership.24
Because of its cost and "essentially highbrow nature," Amauta did
not find an audience among the Peruvian working class. As a result,
in 1928 Mariátegui launched a less doctrinaire and more informative
biweekly periodical called Labor as an extension of Amauta.25
Labor, which sought to inform, educate, and politicize the working
class, survived less than a year before the Leguía dictatorship shut
it down. Although an official explanation was never released for its
closure, it was seen as a threat to Leguía's "increasingly unpopular
and insecure regime. Amauta continued publishing until shortly
after Mariátegui's death in 1930.
Mariátegui also presented his political views in the form of
articles which he wrote for various Peruvian periodicals. In addition,
he published two books during his lifetime, La escena contemporánea
in 1925 and 7 ensayos de interpretación de la realidad peruana in 1928.
The first book, The Contemporary Scene, is a compilation of various
articles which he originally penned for the popular Peruvian
magazines Variedades and Mundial. In these essays he explores the
current world political scene, including the rise of fascism,
democracy, socialism, and antisemitism. His second book, translated
into English in 1971 as Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality
and now widely available around the world in eight languages, was
a critically acclaimed success for its original and creative insights
into the Latin American reality. In this book he presents a brilliant
analysis of Peruvian, and by extension Latin American, problems
from a Marxist point of view. The book includes seven essays on
32
=====第57页=====
topics such as economic development, the indigenous population,
land distribution, the education system, religion, and literature.
Today many Marxist intellectuals throughout Latin America still
consider it to be the fundamental work on Latin American Marxism.
Mariátegui intended both works to be a socialist criticism of the
problems and history of Peru and to assist in the creation of
Peruvian socialism.
27
Neither of the two books which Mariátegui published,
however, dealt specifically with political theory, nor were they
intended to be doctrinaire treatises. In the introduction to his Seven
Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality, Mariátegui noted plans for
28
another book on the political and ideological evolution of Peru.
This book, which was to be entitled Defensa del marxismo, polémica
revolucionaria, was apparently lost during shipment to Spain where
Mariátegui's longtime friend and comrade César Falcón had planned
to publish it.² An incomplete edition of this work was released in
Chile in 1934, and in 1959 Biblioteca Amauta published a closer
approximation of the original essays as part of Mariátegui's Complete
Works series. Of all of his work, Mariátegui presents the most
doctrinaire interpretation of Marxism in Defensa del marxismo.
Together with Ideologia y politica, the thirteenth volume in the
Complete Works series which contains Mariategui's editorials, theses,
manifestos, and various other political documents, these are the best
sources for understanding his political thought and activity, along
with his interpretation of the political and ideological evolution of
Peru. During his lifetime, Mariátegui had assembled and intended
to publish several other books (including El alma matinal y otras
estaciones del hombre de hoy and La novela y la vida), but none of
them appeared until the 1950s.3 These books, like the rest of his
writings, deal with not only political themes but also literary and
cultural aspects of the realities of Peruvian life and the world
around him. Gathered together in the twenty-volume Complete
Works series, Mariategui's writings demonstrate his intellectual
stature,vigorand sigificace in formulating innovative and revolu-
tionary Marxist positions for Latin America.
Mariátegui's revolutionary activities did not remain only on a
theoretical level. In addition to discussing educational reform,
Mariátegui made numerous other demands which indicated the
nature of the socialism he wished to construct in Peru. He
proposed labor and social reforms which would establish a social
33
=====第58页=====
security system,end the hated enganche (debt peonage) system,
implement an eight-hour work day, increase salaries, and impose a
minimum wage.
3\
Mariategui had a broad view of the unified class
struggle he wished to organize in Peru. The working-class periodical
Labor represented "the interests and the aspirations of the entire
productive class: workers in industry and transportation, agricultural
workers, miners, indigenous communities, teachers, employees."
There was even a role for intellectuals and students in the
struggle.
32
In order to agitate for these changes, he founded the Peruvian
Socialist Party (PSP) in 1928 and served as its first secretary-general.
This party, which was affiliated with the Third International and was
to be directed by a "secret cell of seven," was formed as the
vanguard of the proletariat, the political force which would assume
the task of its orientation and direction in the struggle for the
realization of its classist ideas.3
In1929thePeruvianSocialist
Party launched the Confederación General de Trabajadores del
Perú (CGTP), a Marxist-oriented trade union federation, as an
effort of the party to organize the working class34 Both the CGTP
and the PSP were involved in an active internationalism, and partici-
pated in Communist International-sponsored meetings. In addition,
Mariátegui organized communist cells all over Peru.
35
The exact extent and complete nature of Mariátegui's organi-
zational activities are not entirely clear, but his activities were
enough of a threat to the security of the Peruvian state that twice
the Leguía dictatorship arrested and imprisoned Mariategui,
although he was never convicted of any crime. The first arrest came
in 1924 for his alleged subversive activity at the González Prada
Popular University. There was an immediate and strong interna-
tional reaction against his arrest, and he was soon released. The
Leguía dictatorship arrested Mariátegui for a second time in 1927
and charged him with involvement in a communist plot. He was
detained for only six days at a military hospital, but he continued to
be a victim of police harassment and surveillance. In September of
1929, Mariátegui's working-class periodical Labor was shut down,
and in November of the same year the police raided his house and
"kidnapped" him and his family for three days. Mariátegui rejected
the validity of the charges and claimed that they were politically
motivated. "Naturally, they speak of a communist conspiracy"
Mariátegui wrote to a friend. Mariátegui had published articles in
34
=====第59页=====
both Amauta and Labor which were critical of the exploitative labor
practices and the lack of safety measures at Cerro de Pasco,a
United States-owned copper mine, and the Peruvian government
feared that Mariátegui was "defending and inciting the workers to
resistance." His support for the miners' organizational struggles and
ensuing strike action alarmed the North American corporation and
the Peruvian government, which did not want to alienate powerful
foreign economic interests.
36
Mariátegui's National Marxist Theory
Mariátegui did not elaborate on his conception of an ideal
state structure, nor did he expound on the tactics necessary to
establish such a state. Although he sought to organize a legal
political party, he was critical of European socialists who engaged
in parliamentary politics. He cautioned against attempts to grab
power militarily, but he was willing also to use violence to achieve
his aims should the need arise. In polemical arguments with
Peruvian Aprista leader Victor Raúl Haya de la Torre, Mariátegui
contended that the orthodox Marxist assumption that a bourgeois
democratic revolution had to precede a socialist revolution was
invalid in Latin America. Rather than building an alliance between
workers and the national bourgeoisie, Mariátegui believed that a
revolutionary vanguard would lead a unified working class, peasant,
and indigenous proletariat toward a socialist revolution. To this
end, he formed the Peruvian Socialist Party as a Leninist vanguard
party, but he did not expect these organizational efforts to bear
immediate results. It would take time for the peasant and working
classes to gain power. The Peruvian emphasized that the revolution
must emerge from the efforts of the masses as a democratic (though
not necessarily electoral) process. A vanguard leadership which was
distant and alooffrom the proletariat would inevitably fail.
Mariategui saw the inherent danger in dogmatically applying
strategiestoational itution,and heblivedthatspecifictactics
would have to be adapted to a changing cultural context. This fluid
application of political strategies to the reality of the Peruvian
politicaltuitoialwkrlenl
with his Marxist ideas.
Mariategui freely employed a Marxist materialism, which
depicted history as moving through a series of stages: from a
35
=====第60页=====
communal or tribal society through feudalism and capitalism on the
way to a communist society. Mariátegui understood that Peruvian
society had its roots in the ancient communism of the Inca empire.
The Spanish conquest of the sixteenth century introduced a feudal
order into Peru. After independence from Spain in the nineteenth
century, northern European economic inroads along the coast
introduced capitalism into the country. Mariátegui did not believe,
however, that Peru had been completely integrated into a capitallistic
system. Rather, Mariátegui concluded, Peru had evolved into a very
backward situation with the simultaneous existence of three
different economies. Remnants of the Inca communal economy still
existed in the Andes, while feudalistic remains from the colonial era
persisted in the land-holding patterns, and a bourgeois economy was
growing along the coast. Peru's economy continued to be under-
developed and export oriented with an unhealthy dependency on the
international capitalist market. Mariátegui looked for a solution to
move Peruvian society to Marx's fourth, and final, stage of
communism. To do this, Mariátegui believed that Peru needed to
break its dependency on foreign capital, orient production toward
the internal development of the country, and incorporate the
isolated indigenous population into Peru's national culture.
While Mariátegui began with a Marxist class analysis of
Peruvian society, his genius can be found in his ability to work out
the implications of this for his own reality. He emphasized a
nationalist, anti-imperialist, agrarian-based revolution. Mariategui
insisted that a revolutionary movement's actions be rooted in "the
concrete circumstances of a country."37
Marxism was not "a body
of principles which can be rigidly applied the same way in all
historical climates and all social latitudes.” Rather,Mariategui
argued, "Marxism, in each country, for each people, works and acts
on the situation,on the milieu, without overlooking any of its
realities.38
Mariátegui blended his European experiences and his
knowledge of European philosophers such as Antonio Gramsci and
Georges Sorel with his Peruvian reality in order to create what has
become known as a national Marxism. He drew on European
Marxist voluntarists who emphasized the role of human actors in
moving society and combined their views with elements of Peruvian
indigenismo thought in order to create a new and flexible Marxist
methodology for Latin America. His Marxism was not nationalistic
in the sense of a narrow, patriotic, parochial, or isolated world view.
36
=====第61页=====
Indeed, Mariátegui was an active internationalist who expressed soli-
darity with revolutionaries throughout Latin America. He developed
theoretical methods that were directly suitable and applicable to the
specific Peruvian situation in which he lived and, by extension, to
Latin America in general. Thus, he began a new strand of political
thought which has had implications for subsequent social movements
throughout Latin America.
A central issue in Mariátegui's thought is the interplay
between objective and subjective factors. Marx's early writings,
which reflected the need for a blend of these two elements,were
unknown until the 1930s, and Marx's immediate successors tended
These
orthodox Marxists believed that specific objective conditions (an
advanced, industrialized capitalist state with a large, proletarianized
working class) needed to be achieved before a socialist revolution
could occur.
Mariátegui rejected the deterministic historical
materialist view that these objective conditions alone could create
a revolutionary class consciousness which would lead to socialism.
He considered these deterministic interpretations of Marx's thought
to be a product of the mechanistic mentality of the nineteenth
century which was incompatible with the modern world. "Marxism,"
Mariátegui wrote in an essay on Marxist determinism, "where it has
shown itself to be revolutionary—that is to say wherever it has been
Marxist-has never observed a passive, rigid determinism.
¥40
Mariátegui understood that the objective conditions of the
Peruvian peasant and indigenous masses, which made up the bulk
of the Peruvian population,were not the same as those of the
nineteenth-century European industrialized working class. He
recognized that the Peruvian peasants' impoverished and exploited
situation was not enough for them to develop a class consciousness.
Mariátegui sought to blend his understanding of their objective
economic condition with subjective factors which would heighten
their class and racial awareness. Rather than simply relying on
(nonexistent) economic factors to move the masses to revolutionary
action, Mariátegui emphasized the power of Marxist education and
political organizaion to"spark the revolutionary consciousness that
would accelerate the socialist revolution,and thus help tocompen-
sate for the underdeveloped nature of the nation."41
Mariátegui
believed that Marx understood that the spiritual and intellectual
preparation of the proletariat was a necessary precondition for a
37
=====第62页=====
social revolution.^{2
The result was a "dialectic interrelation
between objective and subjective conditions" which stressed "the
importance of voluntaristic human action.
43
The most well-known proponent of this nationalistic approach
to Marxism was Lenin, who adapted Marxist teaching to what he
understood to be the historical reality in Russia. Lenin provided
Mariátegui with a historical precedent for a creative and flexible
adaptation of Marxism to a specific national reality which relied on
subjective rather than objective conditions to foment a social
revolution.
"Wedo not regard Marx's theory as something
completed and inviolable," Lenin wrote. "On the contrary, we are
convinced that it has only laid the foundation stone of the science
which socialists must develop in all directions if they wish to keep
pace with life.44 It was not enough to wait for the proper
objective economic conditions to move a society into revolution;
rather, he warned of the dangers of reliance on such a mechanistic
approach. In the organization of a revolutionary vanguard for the
Bolshevik revolution, Lenin stressed the importance of the
consciousness and initiative on the part of the revolutionary
leaders.
45
Like Lenin in Russia, Mariátegui recognized that Peru in the
1920s had little in common with the situation in nineteenth-century
industrialized Europe which Marx addressed. Mariátegui admired
Lenin's methods and he claimed that Lenin was "unquestionably the
most energetic and profound restorer of Marxist thought" of his era.
Furthermore, he considered the Russian Revolution to be the
dominant occurrence of contemporary socialism.
46
Mariátegui's
Leninist orientation is seen most clearly in the founding principles
of the Peruvian Socialist Party which he drafted in October of 1928.
"The praxis of Marxist socialism in this period," Mariategui wrote,
"is that of Marxist-Leninism. Marxist-Leninism is the revolutionary
method for the age of imperialism," and he adopted it as his
"methodof struggle."
47
In one of Mariátegui's more doctrinaire
statements, he claimed that the Socialist Party would adapt its praxis
to the concrete circumstances of the country, but it still would be
subordinate to the rhythm of world history.
48
For Mariátegui,
Marxist-Leninism provided the framework for analysis and revolu-
tionary action, but it had to be adapted to the specific conditions of
particular countries.49
38
=====第63页=====
The Italian Marxist Gramsci was also an important influence
on Mariátegui's understanding of a creative, nondeterministic
Marxism. Although they were born on different continents, there is
a certain parallel between the lives of Gramsci and Mariategui.
Gramsci was three years older than Mariátegui, but both died at a
relatively young age. Both grew up in single-parent households,
both had to begin working at a young age, both suffered from
tuberculosis and lived sickly lives, both married foreigners (Gramsci
married a Russian and Mariátegui an Italian), and both were
journalists who became deeply involved in politics and made signifi-
cant contributions to Marxist thought.50 Mariátegui died long
before Gramsci's collection of writings were widely published or
before his thought became popular outside of Italy, but Mariategui,
along with his comrade Falcon, heard and probably met Gramsci at
the 1921 Congress of Livorno at which leftists formed the Italian
Communist Party.51
Mariategui read Gramsci's communist paper
L'Ordine Nuovo and later patterned his journal Amauta after
Gramsci's ideas. Mariátegui considered Gramsci to be one of the
most notable intellectuals of the Italian Communist Party and would
refer to him in articles on contemporary Italian politics.
52
More important than the parallels between Gramsci's and
Mariategui's lives, however, are the similarities between their
thought and philosophy. Both wrote on similar topics, such as the
Both
thinkers were intellectuals who were not completely comfortable
with the intellectual world. Gramsci, as was true of Mariátegui,
believed that his "entire intellectual formation was of a polemical
nature," and it was impossible for him to think "disinterestedly" or
to study for the sake of studying.54
Mariátegui believed that
Gramsci and the group Ordine Nuovo presented ideas which were
a significant contribution to an understanding of the myth of the
S5
"A knowledge of Gramsci," Rafael Roncagliolo
new generation.
wrote in an article on the Italian,"will always provide a more
Mariategui.
56
In
particular,
complete understanding of
Roncagliolo emphasized the parallels in the Italian's and Peruvian's
thought on the role of nationalism and the bourgeoisie in their
particular national setings. Robert Paris has pursued these
commonalities between the two thinkers further than any other
scholar. He demonstrated that Mariategui's rejection of a pessi-
mistic determinism in favor of a voluntary activism had its roots in
39
=====第64页=====
Gramsci's philosophy. In addition, he showed how both of their
nondogmatic political philosophies had common intellectual roots in
the thought of Sorel, Croce, and Piero Gobetti.7 César Lévano
has also argued that these parallels in thought were not a strange
coincidence, but the natural result of two brilliant and creative
thinkers attempting to apply class doctrines to fundamentally arari-
an cultures.
58
The various scholars who have commented on these parallels
between Gramsci and Mariátegui have both accredited Mariátegui
with introducing the Italian's thought into Latin America and have
considered Mariátegui to be Latin America's first Gramscist.
Although Mariátegui was an important conduit in introducing
Gramsci's thought into Latin America and many of Gramsci's ideas
strongly influenced Mariátegui's own understanding of indigenous
forms of Marxism in Latin America, the influences between the two
men's thought is more complex than that. José Aricó, while
acknowledging Gramsci's influence on Mariátegui, argued that more
significantly the widespread distribution of Gramsci's works in the
1960s, especially the Prison Notebooks, created conditions which led
to the rediscovery of Mariategui's thought in Latin America.5
Long after both thinkers were dead, their writings continued to
influence interpretations of each other's thought.
Both Gramsci and Mariátegui followed a dynamic, voluntarist
line of Marxist thought which stressed the role of human actors in
history. Changing the economic base was not enough to move a
society toward a social revolution; it was necessary to engage in the
political education of the proletariat which would lead to a class
struggle.
Gramsci rejected the strong current of dialectical
materialism in orthodox Marxism in favor of concentrating on the
importance of cultural factors in contributing to historical change.60
He developed a nonmechanical, voluntaristic philosophy which
"rehabilitated the subjective, creative side of Marxist thought.61
Rather than economic factors, Gramsci looked to ideology as a driv-
ing force in history. He saw Marxism as a philosophy of praxis (a
combination of theory and practice) that concentrated on philosophy
and political theory but yet was concerned with spiritual and cultural
problems.
Gramsci's "emphasis on intellectual and cultural
influences rather than on purely economic ones" influenced
Mariategui's attitude on the relationships among art, literature,
culture, and revolutionary political action.62
For both Gramsci and
40
=====第65页=====
Mariátegui, the study of culture interested them more than a dry
economic analysis of the world.³ Marx, Mariátegui later wrote,
had "initiated this type of man of action and thought” which
employed a cultural analysis. Mariategui believed that Gramsci's
philosophy of praxis was solidly within the revolutionary tradition
Marx originated. Gramsci sought to develop a historical analysis
that unified objective and subjective factors with the goal of
understanding "the political means necessary to overthrow ... the
socio-economic relations of capitalist society.65
Thisformulation
influenced Mariategui's view "that good revolutionary praxis be
based on the careful application of Marxism to the concrete reality
of different nations rather than general directives of the Commuist
International] thatmight have lttle to do with local conditions."
Robert Paris has noted that one of the main questions Marxists in
Latin America and elsewhere had to face was "what is the
'proletariat'in a country without a proletariat?*67
InItaly,
Gramsci responded by including Italian peasants as part of a
revolutionary movement, a consideration which may have led
Mariátegui to do likewise in his native Peru.
68
In addition,
Gramsci's emphasis on worker consciousness and the Ordine Nuovo
and Turin Factory Council movement in Italy had a certain effect on
the organizational structure of Mariátegui's trade union federation
CGTP. Both Gramsci and Mariategui struggled to construct an
independent Marxism rooted in their own historical realities.
The Peruvian Marxist writer Alberto Flores Galindo has
observed that Mariátegui shared a common intellectual environment
with Gramsci, and that Georges Sorel was one of the most impor-
tant common influences on their thought.
Sorel was an early
twentieth-century French philosopher whose 1906 book Reflections
on Violence rejected reform movements and triumphed the potential
of revolutionary syndicalism. Sorel wrote of a mythical general
strike which would empower and mobilize the working-class prole-
tariat to engage in class warfare that would destroy capitalism.
Sorel was less interested in constructing a coherent and consistent
ideological structure than in working at the political mobilization of
the masses, and the result was therefore one of the most serious and
original critiques of Marxism.
Gramsci used Sorel's idea of a revolutionary myth as the basis
for his examination of a Machiavellian "Modern Prince" which
could break society out of the hegemonic control of the elite
41
=====第66页=====
capitalist classes. He called Sorel an "inventor" in the field of
historical research who "does not place at the service of his aspiring
disciples a method that can be applied mechanically, always and by
everyone, and result in intelligent discoveries.'
70
True revolution-
aries would analyze their own historical realities and develop
strategies appropriate to their own situations. Together with Croce,
the Italian idealist philosopher, Sorel rejected economic and
historical deterministic interpretations of Marxism. Both Sorel and
Croce disagreed with socialists who saw science as a "mill into
which problems are poured and from which solutions come out.7
Both were hesitant to accept the view that social science could solve
societal problems. Sorel, however, went beyond Croce's voluntarism
to consider the sentimental and nonrational aspects of Marxist
thought. Intellectual historian Henry Stuart Hughes has observed
that in the Europe of his time, Sorel "alone saw a positive value for
human understanding in an entanglement of objective'and emo-
tionalelements.'
72
For Mariátegui, Sorel represented a return to
the dynamic and revolutionary conception of Marx.³ Mariateguian
scholar José Aricó has argued that Mariátegui's time in Italy was
crucial to the formation of his antieconomic and antidogmatic Marx-
ism.
"Mariátegui read Marx through the filter of Italian
historicism," Aricó argued, and the result is the strong influence of
Croce's, Sorel's, and Gramsci's idealism in his thought.
74
Sorel criticized rationalism and positivism but was fascinated
by the energy, faith, and moral strength that had been provided by
religious conviction for movements in history.
Helookedat
Catholics who "have never been discouraged even in the hardest
trials,” because these trials "must finally end in the victory of
Catholicism.
75
Sorel quoted church historian Ernest Renan who
said, "people died for opinions, not for certitudes, because they
believe and not because they know.
76
People, Sorel observed,
"who are participating in a great social movement always picture
their coming action as a battle in which their cause is certain to
triumph."77
Similarly, Sorel pointed to the necessity of a
revolutionary myth to fight the effects of cynicism and rationalism.
"As long as there are no myths accepted by the masses," Sorel
wrote, "one may go on talking of revolts indefinitely, without ever
78
provoking any revolutionary movement.
A
revolutionary
consciousness has both rational and nonrational components. The
rational component arises from a careful, concrete analysis of a
42
=====第67页=====
particular historical situation which demonstrates the need for a
social revolution. But the nonrational can provide a much more
powerful motivation for revolutionary actions and can be more
crucial to the success of a social revolution. The nonrational
involves faith that a social revolution is not only possible, but also
desirable, necessary, and imminent. According to C. Fred Judson,
a Cuban scholar, it involves "emotional identification with the cause
of social revolution, and a belief that social regeneration will be
made possible by insurrection and revolution.
Sorel influenced Mariátegui's view of the role of the
unconscious and the nonrational in human behavior.8 In his effort
to move society toward a social revolution, Mariátegui focused "on
the role of human consciousness as a reflection of history and as a
crucial force in shaping history.
81
He emphasized subjective
factors, the intellectual and emotional forces which have a leading
role in the making of revolutions.
82
Mariategui believed that a
cold, conceptual analysis was not enough to bring about a revolu-
tion.
"More than an idea, the revolution is a sentiment,"
Mariátegui wrote in La escena contemporánea. "More than a
concept, it is a passion."83
Like Sorel, Mariátegui believed that a
social revolution could not be left to the forces of history; there was
a need for the spiritual and intellectual preparation of the
proletariat.8 He criticized his contemporary bourgeois civilization
for its skepticism and for its lack of a myth, of a faith, of a hope.
The bourgeoisie were trapped by a rationalism which "has had the
effective paradox of leading humanity to the disconsolate conviction
that Reason can show it no path. Rationalism has served only to
discredit Reason." Furthermore, Mariátegui stated, "Reason has
eradicated from the soul of bourgeois civilization any residue of its
ancient myths." As a result, the bourgeoisie relied on reason and
science, neither of which could satisfy people's deepest needs.
"Reason and Science,," Mariategui wrote, "have corroded and
dissolved the prestige of the ancient religions.
85
Unlike the bourgeoisie, The proletariat has a myth: the social
86
Mariátegui argued that people are metaphysical
revolution.
animals who are moved to action by the spiritual and ethical
dimensions of a myth. "Without a myth," Mariátegui argued, "the
existence of man does not have any historical meaning." Mariátegui
concluded that only the myth possesses the precious virtue of filling
the profound "I Therefore,Mariategui began to turn away
43
=====第68页=====
from a scientific socialism in favor of a more subjective cultural
interpretation of Marxism. "The strength of revolutionaries is not
in their science," Mariátegui wrote, "it is in their faith, in their
passion, in their will. It is a religious, mystical, spiritual force. It is
the force of the Myth. The revolutionary emotion is a religious
emotion.
88
The result, one scholar observed, was that "the
revolutionary Marxists were united in the pursuit of the common
goal—socialism-and they now possessed the messianic fervor of the
early Christian Church.8 Mariátegui's socialism must be under-
stood in the context of Andean utopianism and millenarian move-
ments which have driven many revolts in the region, but he was not
interested in an abstract or unreal messianic millennium which will
never arrive.
90
The emotions which Tupac Amaru and other
struggles invoked appealed to him, but these emotions must lead to
concrete action. Like Sorel, Mariátegui was concerned not only with
the utopian dream but also with the redeeming quality of a class
struggle. They believed in the power of an illusionary final struggle
to transform humanity. This gave the Marxist class struggle a
dimension and a faith normally not found in Marxism.
For
Mariátegui, the irony was that "the same [Marxist] philosophy that
teaches us the need for a myth and faith, is generally incapable of
understanding the faith and the myth of the new times.
91
This subjective approach to Marxist theory has significant
importance for the organizational efforts for a social revolution. For
Sorel, "the real question was to understand what actually moved
men to become actors in the great events of history.
92
Proceeding
from a classical Marxist approach, Sorel used class conflict to
foment a general strike which would engender "in the proletariat
the noblest, deepest, and most moving sentiments that they
93
possess.'
Sorel stressed action; the myths are not descriptions of
things, but expressions of a determination to act.94
Likewise,
Mariátegui did not believe that the proletariat should wait passively
for the proper objective conditions under which to act. Rather, he
analyzed his historical situation in order to develop an appropriate
plan to educate and organize the masses into a revolutionary
movement and to create a revolutionary situation. "The proletariat
is not a spectator," Mariategui declared, "but an actor.
95
Both
Sorel and Mariátegui broke away from a Marxist determinism in
order to restore myth to Marxism.
96
44
=====第69页=====
Mariátegui thus joined European Marxist revisionists of his
era in a shift of the central emphasis of Marxism from economics to
the moral and cultural aspects of life in society. He repudiated
"the stale,economistic interpretations of Marx that reduced the
struggle for socialism to a series of economic struggles for higher
wages and better working conditions.
98
Mariátegui concurred
with French socialist Henri Barbusse's criticism of those Marxists
who "tend to transform economic or historical materialism into pure
and simple materialism, and who consider dogmatic objectivism' as
a machine whose wheels move outside of all personal influence.99
Mariátegui emphasized the role of human actors in moving society
toward revolutionary changes. He argued that although this volun-
tary character of Marxism is not always understood by its critics, it
is not less evident than its deterministic aspects. "Every word, every
act of Marxism," Mariategui concluded, "has an accent of faith, of
voluntarism, of heroic and creative conviction; it would be absurd to
look for its drive in a mediocre and passive deterministic
sentiment."100
As noted earlier, Mariátegui was never content to leave his
beliefs solely on the level of abstractions. He was personally and
immediately involved in many of the pressing issues of his day.
Many of these issues were not unique to Peru in the 1920s, and his
thoughts on indigenismo, the peasantry, religion, and inter-
nationalism continue to have relevance and importance throughout
Latin America. Through an examination of his thoughts on these
subjects, it becomes evident that Mariátegui has performed a crucial
role in the development of revolutionary theory in Latin America in
the twentieth century.
Indigenismo and the Peasantry
Mariátegui was part of the Peruvian indigenismo movement of
the 1920s and 1930s which extolled the virtues of the ancient Inca
civilization and sought to integrate its descendants into Peruvian
life. He idealized the socialist attributes of the Inca empire and
stressed that the Incas, who lived in material comfort with abundant
101
Their material
food, were happy and content with their lives.
gains had been destroyed by the Spanish conquest, and the feudal
legacy of Spanish colonialism meant the ongoing exploitation of the
indigenous masses. Mariátegui analyzed their alienation from a
45
=====第70页=====
Marxist economic point of view. "The problem of the Indian is
rooted in the land tenure system of our economy," he argued, and
this feudalistic system wouid have to be changed to result in any
lasting change.
102
He pointed to the highly developed and harmo-
nious communistic system of the Incas as a model for a new societal
order. The result would not be a simple dogmatic copy of European
socialism, but an "indo-american socialism" which would grow out
of the Peruvian culture and language.
103
The significance of the
indigenismo movement spread far beyond Mariátegui's native Peru
as it became a vital part of the Bolivian, Guatemalan, and Mexican
revolutions, as well as an integral part of Peru's national ethos.
104
Peru did not have a large working class, but Mariategui
believed in the revolutionary potential of the indigenous and
peasant masses. The rural communities could complement and even
replace the historic role which Marxism traditionally gave to the
urban working class. Mariátegui stressed the importance of a
unified worker-peasant alliance and he addressed declarations of the
General Confederation of Peruvian Workers (the CGTP) "to the
workers and peasants of the nation so that they would respond to
their historic class calling.
105
Agrarian concerns were a common
topic of Mariátegui's writings,and he dedicated a section in both
Amauta and in the working-class periodical Labor to the issues
facing agricultural workers in Peru. Significantly, he entitled the
section in Labor "El Ayllu" after the rural communities which had
formed the base for Andean social structure for thousands of years
and as a homage to Peru's native agrarianism.
106
Mariátegui
believed that the fate of the peasantry and indigenous masses was
intertwined and often emphasized the common concerns of both
groups. The themes he advanced in these columns were an elabora-
tion on the agrarian themes he had introduced in the book Seven
Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality. Mariátegui believed that the
issues which he raised in the column were relevant not only for poor
and exploited peasants and sharecroppers, but also for the indige-
nous communities and others victimized by Peru's landholding
system. Ultimately the peasant and indigenous masses, which
comprised 80 percent of the Peruvian population, had a major role
to play in any solution to Peru's problems.
Mariátegui presented a paper to the first Latin American
Communist Conference held in Buenos Aires in 1929 which contra-
dicted the Communist International's position of calling for the
46
=====第71页=====
formation of an independent indigenous republic in South America.
The Communist International's leadership envisioned carving a
separate state of the Quechua and Aymara people out of the
Andean Highlands. Their underestimation of the level of state
formation which had already taken place in Latin America, together
with the misapplication of the "National Question" as formulated
in Europe and the Soviet Union to the region led to this policy
which Mariátegui rejected as irrelevant and unworkable in Latin
America. Although the establishment of such autonomous republics
might work elsewhere, he believed that in Peru such a policy was
the result of not understanding the socioeconomic situation of the
indigenous masses. Not only would European solutions not work in
Latin America, but even the question of race was not the same in
all Latin American countries and therefore new solutions would
have to be worked out for different places within Latin
America.
107
Fundamental to this polemic with the Communist Interna-
tional is whether class or race determined the impoverished
condition of the indigenous population. Mariátegui definitely saw
the problem as one of class. The establishment of an autonomous
state would not lead "to a dictatorship of the Indian proletariat,
much less to the formation of an Indian state without classes as
some have argued, but rather to the establishment of an bourgeois
Indian state with all of the internal and external contradictions of
any bourgeois state."108
Such a move would not solve anything.
It was not because of their race but because of their feudal
economic situation that the indigenous people were oppressed.
"The problem of the indigenous," Mariátegui wrote, placing the
problem in very concrete material terms, "is a problem of land."10
Only a class-based revolutionary movement could lead to their
liberation and the end of exploitation. Mariátegui believed that
once the indigenous population was introduced to a revolutionary
consciousness, it would be unequalled in its struggle for
socialism.
110
Mariategui pursued these issues further in his essay "The
Problem of the Indian" published in his best-known book, Seven
Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality. He wrote that"socialism has
taught us how to present the problem of the Indian in new terms.
We have ceased to consider it abstractly as an ethnic or moral
problem and we now recognize it concretely as a social,economic,
47
=====第72页=====
and political problem.11 Mariátegui criticized various strategies
that others had employed to improve the status of the indigenous
people, including humanitarian campaigns, administrative policies,
legal reforms, ethnic crossing with whites, moral appeals to
Heconcluded
that the solution to indigenous impoverishment could not be found
in individual actions nor in the actions of outsiders who intervened
on their behalf looking for way to redeem a "backwards" race.
Rather, their problems were rooted in the nature of the land tenure
system, and only through fundamental economic change and land
reform would social change take place.
Mariátegui envisioned the establishment of an "Indo-
American" socialism in Peru which would be based on the ancient
communal values of the Inca empire. He believed that if the ayllus,
the ancient communal social structure which formed the base of the
Inca empire and which still existed in the Andes, were to be
integrated into the national economy, they would form a natural
base for a modern Peruvian socialism.
113
Furthermore, Mariátegui
believed that the basis for Peruvian socialism needed to be an
agrarian policy which emphasized a nationalization of the land
oriented toward the concrete needs and conditions of the country's
economy.
114
Heconsidered Article 27 of the 1917 Mexican
Constitution (which subjected land usage to national needs) to be
a model for the agrarian reform he wished to see implemented in
Peru. The Peruvian believed that in order to break out of the
monocultural export economy which had turned Peru into a
neocolony for a world capitalist market, socialism needed to break
up the large neofeudal estates which still existed in Peru. He
looked to the existing ayllus as a solution to this problem. Through
a combination of socialism and indigenous communal land values,
land (and power) could be given to the masses.
Marxism has traditionally viewed the peasants as a conserva-
tive and reactionary class which was incapable of leading a social
revolution. In "The Communist Manifesto, Marx maintained that
the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The peasants
are "not revolutionary, but conservative. Nay more, they are reac-
tionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history.
115
Under
Stalin, the Communist International urged Latin American
communist parties to organize an urban proletariat and to downplay
the role of the peasantry. In Buenos Aires, the Communist Interna-
48
=====第73页=====
tional censored Mariátegui for several of his "unorthodox" tenets,
including his belief in the revolutionary potential of the indigenous
and peasant masses of Peru. Peru in the 192Os (and much of
present-day Latin America, for that matter) did not have a large
industrialized working class, and Peru's economy was not a
thoroughly capitalistic one. It would appear that Peru did not meet
the basic objective economic conditions as laid out by Marx in order
to progress on to the socialist stage of history. Mariátegui, however,
believed that the Peruvian peasants, much like Marx's European
industrialized working class, had experienced alienation from the
ruling classes and were ready to throw off their oppressors.
Mariátegui claimed that the hope of the Indian was absolutely
revolutionary, and that the idea of the socialist revolution would
move them to action.
116
He called on the Indian and peasant
masses to respond to their important class role in history and to
help organize a social revolution in Peru.117
Mariátegui believed
that in Latin America the peasants could move history directly from
a peasant-based feudal economy to a socialist one.
Mariategui was not alone in this belief, and history has
demonstrated the revolutionary capabilities of peasants. Eric Wolf
in his book Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century has examined how
peasants have led societies to revolutionary change in Mexico,
Russia, China, North Vietnam,Algeria, and Cuba.
118
In Latin
America, successful revolutionary movements in both Nicaragua and
Cuba have relied on the support of the peasants. Mariátegui's
contribution to these movements was an interpretation of Marxism
which incorporated peasants into the revolutionary struggle. He was
part of a tradition that adapted the thoughts of Marx to the
historical reality of a particular national situation. History has
shown this flexible approach to be more likely to result in a
revolutionary situation than one which rigidly adheres to the
writings of Marx. Other revolutionaries also have engaged in such
nondogmatic critiques of Marxist theory. In China, Mao Tse-Tung
criticized a mechanistic materialism and other dogmatic approaches
to Marxist theory, arguing instead that the revolutionary potential
of Marxism grew out of a concrete analysis of specific historical
conditions. Likewise, the African Marxist leader Amilcar Cabral
once said that "we base our struggle on the concrete realities of our
country ...the liberation struggle has to be developed according to
119
the specific conditions of each country.
49
=====第74页=====
Religion
Mariategui's fresh application of Gramsci's and Sorel's
voluntaristic and subjective ideas to Latin America also resulted in
a new understanding of the role of religion in the revolutionary
struggle. Unlike Marx, Mariátegui lived in a milieu in which the
Catholic church still retained much of its economic and social
power. This perhaps led him to write that "the revolutionary critic
no longer disputes with religion and the church the services that
120
they have rendered to humanity or their place in history.
Mariátegui saw religion as an inherent component of human society,
and he "never considered a rejection of religion a necessary
121
He acknowl-
prerequisite for engaging in the social struggle.
edged the positive contributions that religion could make to a social
revolution and he applauded the positive efforts of the Jesuits to
122
improve the lot of the indigenous population.
Mariátegui did
criticize priests who used religion to oppress the indigenous popu-
lation,
123
but for the most part he considered the anticlericalism
which had been prevalent among liberal reformers throughout Latin
America during the nineteenth century to be "a liberal bourgeois
pastime.*124
Mariátegui criticized these reformers, especially the
great nineteenth-century Peruvian philosopher Manuel González
Prada, for their antireligious attitudes and attempts to uproot
125
religion without offering men a new ideal in its place.
"Gonzalez Prada preached the passing of all religious' beliefs
without realizing that he himself was the bearer of a faith,"
Mariátegui wrote in his book Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian
Reality. Mariategui argued for a new and broader definition of
religion,for a revolution was always religious and communism is
This new religious expression was part of
a revolutionary myth, and Mariátegui quoted Sorel, who wrote of an
analogy "between religion and the revolutionary Socialism which
aims at the apprenticeship, preparation, and even reconstruction of
127
the individual.
Both Sorel and Mariategui looked forward to
a social revolution which would occupy people's conscience just as
fully as theoldreligious myths.12In Marxism,Mariategui found
a faith which was not that of an other-worldly Catholicism, but one
that was directly applicable to the present needs of the people.129
Like Catholics who had found a source of strength in their religious
50
=====第75页=====
beliefs, the proletariat would be empowered by the myth of the
revolution.
130
Unlike many other Marxists, who rejected religion as the
opiate of the people, Mariátegui never saw the need to distance
himself from the religious beliefs that he had received from his
mother. Scholars have presented several interpretations to explain
this. Some see it as an action of respect for his devoutly Catholic
mother, or as an attempt to remain at peace with his own
conscience.
131
John Baines, in his political biography of
Mariategui, contended that Mariategui's religious outlook was
influenced by Miguel Unamuno's existential concept of an "agonic
soul." Baines maintained that "Mariátegui's Marxism was not a
formula for political action. It was a personal, religious-like code of
ethics that enabled him to endure physical pain and psychological
anguish.
132
Mariategui's extensive political activities, however,
clearly repudiate Baines's depiction of Mariátegui's Marxism as a
form of escapist religion. His political theories did acquire a
religious flavor, but in the sense of present-day liberation theology
in which religion becomes a vehicle for political change. Indeed,
one author has concluded that such a "synthesis of Marxism and
Christianity ... comes closer to reflecting the sentiments of many
Latin Americans than the orthodox doctrines of either group.
#133
Ultimately, Mariátegui's views on religion influenced the direction
of the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, which freely welcomed
Catholic priests and other religious actors into its struggle.
Internationalism
Although Mariátegui stressed the importance of rooting a
revolutionary struggle in national conditions, he did not ignore the
significance of the international dimensions of the struggle. His
writings and the journals which he published are a testimony to the
constant contact which he had with international movements. Not
only did he take an active interest in such varied issues as the
direction of the Mexican revolution, the cause of workers in
Bolivia's tin mines, and Sandino's guerrilla struggle against the
United States Marines in Nicaragua, he also maintained contacts
with revolutionaries and intellectuals in China, France, and the
United StatesIn1929 he was elected,together with Sandino
and the Mexican muralist Diego Rivera, to the General Council of
51
=====第76页=====
the International Anti-imperialist League. He was charged with
organizing a section of this league in Peru, but he died before
completing this task.135
Mariategui further expressed his anti-
imperialist sentiments and concern with the semicolonial status of
the Latin American republics in his thesis "Punto de vista anti-
imperialista," which he wrote for the 1929 Latin American
Communist Conference in Buenos Aires. He ended the thesis with
the stirring statement that "we are anti-imperialists because we are
Marxists, because we are revolutionaries . …. because in the struggle
against foreign imperialism we fulfill our duty with the revolutionary
masses of Europe.*136
A lengthy catalog of progressive and vanguardist journals and
newspapers in Labor further testifies to Mariátegui's contact with
and firsthand knowledge of other leftists from around the world.
This list includes Henri Barbusse's Monde from Paris, The Nation
and The New Republic from New York, Joaquín García Monge's
Repertorio Américano from Costa Rica, Social and Revista de Avance
from Cuba, the American Anti-Imperialist League's El Libertador
from Mexico, among many others.
137
An advertisement in the
final issue of Amauta indicates that not only was his journal
distributed in Peru and throughout Latin America (including Chile,
Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, Ecuador, Costa Rica, ElSalvador,
Guatemala, Mexico, and Cuba) but also in New York, Paris, Spain,
and Melbourne.
138
On the second anniversary of the execution of
the two famed anarchists Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti in
Boston, Mariátegui ran a special issue of Labor with sketches of
their faces gracing the top of the first page. Ricardo Martinez de
la Torre introduced this issue to the readers of Labor with the state-
ment that the Peruvian proletariat was willing to intensify its
international relations with the proletariat of the other American
countries.
139
Mariátegui was clearly cognizant of the international
dimensions of the class struggle which he sought to organize in Peru
in the 1920s.
Mariategui's relations with the international communist
movement provide a good example of the application of his
nonmechanical, nondeterministic approach to revolutionary theory.
Mariátegui supported the Third International's call for support for
the Bolshevik revolution in Russia and the fomentation of an inter-
national revolutionary working-class movement. Mariátegui's
intellectual independence, however, did create a break with the
52
=====第77页=====
Communist International at the 1929 Latin American Communist
Conference. The Communist International had ordered Mariátegui
to form a communist party in Peru, but instead he had formed a
socialist party. This was not a repudiation of the ideology of the
Communist International but a decision in line with the Peruvian
Socialist Party's statement that it would adapt its praxis to the
concrete circumstances of the country.
140
Labor historian Victor
Alba has used Mariátegui's original and creative approach to Latin
American problems as an example of the direction that Marxist
theory could have taken in Latin America had the Commuist
International not come to dominate it.141 "Whether our party was
called socialist or communist, Eudocio Ravines reported in his
book The Yenan Way, it "would not alter in any way the chaacter
of the movement, nor change its doctrine or its program." Rather,
the decision was made on the pragmatic basis that a party which
carried the socialist label could be a legal one and would experience
Julio
Portocarrero, Mariátegui's spokesperson at the Buenos Aires
conference, clearly stated that the Peruvian Socialist Party was
entirely committed to the ideology of the Communist International,
and that it desired that the workers'movement in Peru carry the
imprint of the Communist International.
143
The conference
censured Mariátegui for his positions, but nevertheless the leaders
of the Communist International admired Mariátegui. Gregory
Zinoviev, the president of the Communist International, reportedly
said, "Mariátegui has a brilliant mind; he is a true creator ...he
doesn't copy, he doesn't parrot what the Europeans say. What he
creates is his own.
144
Although the political party and labor confederation which he
had helped to launch flourished, Mariátegui's health floundered.
He had plans to move to Argentina in search of a better climate,
both for his health and his political work, when he died on April 16,
1930. Ravines was named the secretary-general of the Peruvian
Socialist Party shortly before Mariátegui's death. He had come to
Peru from Moscow as an agent of the Communist International to
help form a communist party in Peru and to bring it in line with
145
After Mariátegui's death,
Stalinist thought in the Soviet Union.
Ravines changed both the name and the direction of the Peruvian
Socialist Party. He sought to eliminate Mariátegui's thought from
the party and to terminate the Peruvians'independent direction
53
=====第78页=====
from the Third International.146 Under Ravines's guidance, the
newly formed Peruvian Communist Party (PCP) argued that a
revolutionary situation existed in Peru,and it pushed for an
insurrection. The result was disastrous, as Mariategui's carefully
constructed movement was quickly destroyed by official state
repression. The military government banned the trade union federa-
tion CGTP and the PCP. While the PCP continued to exist under-
ground as a clandestine organization, the CGTP was effectively
destroyed.47 After his death, the movement which Mariategui
had founded lost its vitality and its revolutionary potential. The
destruction of this movement demonstrates both the failure of
Stalinism to adapt its praxis to the Latin American political situation
and the strength of Mariátegui's independent approach to Marxist
theory in Latin America. Significantly, Ricardo Martinez de la
Torre, a close associate and protégé of Mariátegui, left the Peruvian
Communist Party because of philosophical differences with the
direction that Moscow wanted to take the party.
Elements of Mariátegui's thought and his influence can be
seen throughout Latin America. He is widely considered to be the
first and most creative Latin American Marxist thinker, and activists
from numerous countries'communist parties have noted the influ-
ence of Amauta and Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality on
their intellectual development. Waldo Frank reported that from
Cuba to Argentina the intellectual community revered Mariátegui
as a "maestro," and that they read him, loved him, and followed
him.
148
Mariategui has had a significant impact on indigenismo,
and this influence can be seen in the direction taken by the Mexican
revolution, the MNR (Movimiento Nacional Revolucionario) govern-
ment in Bolivia, and the revolutionary Jacobo Arbenz government
inGuatemala.
149
Furthermore, his subjective approach to
Marxism had an impact on guerrilla fighters such as Camilo Torres
in Colombia and the FMLN (Frente Farabundo Martí para la
Liberación Nacional) in El Salvador.
Two historical turning points in the study and interpretation
of mariateguismo stand out. The first came in 1959 when Fidel
Castro led a revolution which overthrew the dictatorship of
Fulgencio Batista in Cuba. In the 195Os, communist parties in Latin
America had lost much of their vitality and revolutionary potential.
The success of the Cuban revolution sparked a renewed interest in
Marxism and the possibility of a socialist revolution throughout
54
=====第79页=====
Latin America. Part of this movement included a turning away from
the stale, old communist vanguard and a search for new and creative
interpretations of Marxism. A result was a new level of interest and
research into the more subjective writings and ideas of thinkers such
as Gramsci and Mariátegui. For example, Sheldon Liss in his work
Marxist Thought in Latin America noted that after the Cuban
revolution a generation of Venezuelan scholars showed an increased
interest in Marxist thought and considered Mariátegui to be the
father of Marxist thought in Latin America.
150
The second significant historical occurrence for the study of
mariateguismo came twenty years later in Nicaragua with the
triumph of the Sandinista revolution. The Sandinistas not only used
the heroic example of General Sandino standing up to the United
States Marines who were militarily occupying his country in the
1920s, they also drew their intellectual strength from the history of
an indigenous Latin American revolutionary theory. The roots of
this tradition go back through the Cuban revolution and Sandino's
struggle, to revolutionary thinkers from the 1920s such as
Mariategui. The Sandinistas found inspiration for their voluntarist,
non-Stalinist interpretation and application of socialist theory in
Mariategui's thought. This tradition was not a transplant from
Europe or the Soviet Union, but developed uniquely in Latin
America to address issues and concerns that were purely Latin
American. Thus, Marxist theory in Latin America developed in a
way which broke radically with orthodox interpretations of Marx.
Sandinismo, the fusion of nationalism and Marxist class analysis in
Nicaragua, had an impact on this trend, most notably in the use of
religion and the understanding of subjective factors in fomenting a
revolutionary consciousness. Many of these themes found their first
expression in Latin America in the writings of Mariátegui and were
initially put into practice by Sandino in Nicaragua.
Mariátegui believed that the Latin American revolution would
be a step toward a world socialist revolution. He used the adjectives
"anti-imperialist,""agrarian,"and"nationalist”to describethe
Significantly,
nature of the revolutionary change he envisioned.151
these are the central tenets of revolutionary changes which have
occurred in Latin America. Maritegui stressed an activist approach
to revolutionary theory; he foreshadowed Fidel Castro's claim that
"the duty of every revolutionary is to make the revolution ...it is
not for revolutionaries to sit in the doorways of their houses waiting
55
=====第80页=====
for the corpse of imperialism to pass by.152 Mariátegui's legacy
of a creative, flexible approach to Marxism has been handed down
to subsequent revolutionary movements in Latin America.
Mariátegui articulated a theoretical framework which gives meaning
to the ideological issues that have driven two Sandinista uprisings in
Nicaragua and the Cuban revolution. The success of these popular
movements has demonstrated the strength of Mariátegui's approach
to revolutionary struggle and the need to develop theoretical
frameworks appropriate to local conditions. The struggles in Cuba
and Nicaragua have added new dimensions to this understanding of
an indigenous Latin American revolutionary Marxist theory.
56
=====第81页=====
3
CUBA
In 1959 Castro led a small band of guerrillas to power in Cuba.
These Cuban revolutionaries drew on a deep tradition of political
radicalism in their country. Through an examination of this history,
together with a study of political philosophers such as Mariátegui,
the Cubans began to understand the potential for revolutionary
change in their country even though the objective economic condi-
tions as outlined by orthodox Marxism for a socialist revolution did
not exist. Initially, the Cuban Communist Party denounced Castro's
guerrilla army as "adventuresome" and encouraged Castro to wait
for the proper economic conditions before acting. The success of
the Cuban revolution, however, clearly demonstrated the strength of
a developing indigenous Latin American revolutionary theory.
In the 1960s, Mariátegui's writings found fertile ground in
Cuba. In an article originally published in 1967, Melis stated that
in recent years Mariátegui's thought had been met with a renewed
interest. Especially in Cuba where his thought had become particu-
larly relevant to their political struggle, there was an increasingly
intense discussion of Mariátegui's intellectual contributions to
revolutionary theory in Latin America. His influence in Cuba,
however, originated in the 1920s. Mariátegui was a true internation-
alist who not only discussed themes with international significance,
he also published articles in vanguardist journals such as Repertorio
Américano in Costa Rica and Social and Revista de Avance in Cuba.
Through his written works, "Mariátegui spread an intense political
and ideological activity, not only within the geographic limits of his
native Peru but . .. throughout the entire continent. [He] enriched
the revolutionary experience of our Latin American and Caribbean
people." Mariátegui's Marxist journal Amauta "circulated in Cuba
... and exerted a positive influence on the thought of [Cuban
revolutionary leaders] Rubén Martínez Villena, Juan Marinello,
57
=====第82页=====
Emilio Roig de Leuchsenring, Raúl Roa, and others" with whom he
maintained contact. Historically, therefore, Mariátegui played an
important role in the Cuban understanding of a flexible approach to
Marxist theory, and numerous Cuban writers have stressed
Mariátegui's influence on the development of revolutionary thought
in their country. The fruit of his influence was the first social
revolution in America, the Cuban revolution.
Julio Antonio Mella
The first traces of Mariátegui's influence in Cuba are evident
in the thought and action of Julio Antonio Mella, the founder of the
Cuban Communist Party. Mella was a student leader at the
University of Havana in the 1920s and first came into contact with
Mariátegui through reading his writings on the University Reform
Movement, a student movement organized to gain a greater voice in
university affairs. Mariátegui wrote that the student movement
signaled the birth of a new generation of Latin Americans and that
the desire for reform has identical characteristics in all Latin
American universities.² This movement was triggered initially in
1918 in Córdoba,Argentina, by the success of the Mexican and
Russian revolutions. It demanded autonomy for the university, the
use of experimental and scientific methods of instruction, and an
end to the practice of granting professors lifetime tenure. From its
base in Argentina, the movement quickly spread throughout Latin
America and became especially strong in Peru and Cuba. Both
Mariátegui and Mella understood that the University Reform
Movement was inseparably linked to national independence and
movements for radical social and political change in their countries,
and both rose to positions of leadership in the movement. They
worked with student movements to create alliances with the working
class and encourage new ideas rather than to inculcate those of the
prevailing system.³ In Peru, the University Reform Movement led
to the establishment of the González Prada Popular University in
1921. This popular university was intended to link the student and
working-class movements and to provide educational programs and
social services to workers. When Mariátegui returned to Peru from
Europe in 1923, he gave a series of lectures at this university,
assumed the editorship of the university's journal Claridad, and
wrote articles in defense of university reform.⁴ In 1923 in Cuba,
58
=====第83页=====
Mella was instrumental in the formation of the José Martí Popular
University, an effort which was patterned after the González Prada
Popular University in Lima.
The first documented contact between Mella and Mariategui
came in 1924 when Mariátegui was imprisoned for his alleged sub-
versive activities at the González Prada Popular University in Lima.
Mella, in the name of the José Martí Popular University in Havana,
sent an open letter to the Peruvian government to protest the unjust
treatment of Mariátegui, an influential Peruvian intellectual who
was sent to prison for committing only the crime of thinking freely.
This was the first expression of international Latin American
solidarity to come from this newly formed popular university.
Mariátegui's and Mella's common concerns went far beyond educa-
tional issues and the University Reform Movement. As Erasmo
Dumpierre has demonstrated, both also were involved actively in
anti-imperialist struggles and in actions of international solidarity.
In addition, both were interested in the role of nationalist
In 1925, together with the Cuban communist Carlos Balliño,
Mella founded the Cuban Communist Party and established the
Cuban section of the Anti-Imperialist League of the Americas, an
organization with which both Mariategui and Sandino were affii-
ated. Mella advocated an active Pan-Americanist internationalism,
and his activities with the Anti-Imperialist League included his
opposition to the Peruvian dictator Augusto B. Leguia In his
letter denouncing Leguia's imprisonment of Mariátegui, Mella
contended that it was irrelevant that this matter appeared to be an
issue of internal order in Peru. "In spite of the ridiculous borders,"
Mella wrote,"the transformed men of the continent will form a
great nation. For this reason, an assault on one in Peru is an
#10
assault on all of Humanity.
In 1927 the dictatorship of Gerardo Machado closed down the
José Martí Popular University because of its anti-imperialist stance
and attacks on the United States. Mella was forced to flee to
Mexico where he became deeply involved in the Mexican Commu-
nist Party. He worked as the secretary-general of the Anti-
Imperialist League in Mexico, and together with Diego Rivera he
edited the League's newspaper El Libertador. From his position in
the Anti-Imperialist League, Mella called on people throughout
Latin America to oppose United States imperialism in Nicaragua
59
=====第84页=====
and to support Sandino's struggle against the United States
Marines.
11
Mella also worked with Rivera on the anti-
interventionist Hands-Off Nicaragua Committee which collected
medical aid for Sandino and agitated for Nicaraguan independence
and respect for Latin American sovereignty.
12
At one of these
meetings in June of 1928, Mella stated that Sandino's guerrilla army
was the "precursor of the revolutionary movement in all of Latin
America against yanqui imperialism" as he called on workers
everywhere to support the Nicaraguans in their struggle.
13
On 10 January 1929, agents of the Cuban dictator Machado
killed Mella. In Peru revolutionaries felt as if they had lost one of
their own comrades. Mariátegui lamented Mella's assassination with
emotional notes in both Amauta and Labor. In an obituary in
Amauta, Mariátegui saluted with emotion the memory of the valiant
comrade who was one of the true revolutionaries to come out of the
ranks of the University Reform Movement.⁴ In Labor, Mariátegui
wrote that "the Latin American proletariat will always remember his
name as one of its greatest combatants, the university youth [will
remember him] as one of its most heroic leaders."15
In a special
May Day issue of Labor, Mella's portrait graced the front page
along with a caption that said his life was a valiant tribute to the
socialist revolution.
16
After the Cuban revolution, the new government would stress
the parallels between Mariátegui and Mella. Mella and Mariátegui
helped found two of the first communist parties in Latin America,
and both used their journalistic talents to fight for socialism and to
educate workers on the nature of the class struggle. There was a
great similarity of revolutionary thought and action between the two
great pioneers of the struggle for the unity of the workers and
people who defend common ideas and interests, the revolutionary
government wrote in an essay on Mariátegui's influence on the
Cuban revolution.17 In her edited collection of Latin American
Marxist writings, the Cuban journalist Mercedes Santos Moray
emphasized similar parallels. "In this volume," Santos Moray wrote
in the introduction, "we want to integrate the texts of Mella and
Mariátegui." Both Mella and Mariategui led their generation in
Marxist-Leninist theory in Latin America and understood the
imperative necessity for a substantive social transformation in
18
education and cultural identity.
Santos Moray commended
Mariategui for his acute observations, his profound concepts, and
60
=====第85页=====
the quality of his expression, and called Mariátegui the master of his
generation of Marxist-Leninist theorists noting that his writings
influenced people across the entire continent of Latin America.
Santos Moray also used the writings of Mariátegui and Mella to
demonstrate the parallels between their thoughts on Pan-
Americanism as a tool of United States imperialism versus its use as
an expression of indigenous Latin American culture.19
Mella
stressed the need for Cubans to develop their own cultural identity
in order to be free from exploitation. Liss has pointed out that
because Cuba's indigenous population had been completely wiped
out by the Spanish conquest, it was more difficult for Cubans to
appeal to their indigenous past for revolutionary inspiration as
Mariategui had done in Peru. Mella was part of a movement that
instead drew on Cuba's Spanish, African, and Chinese roots in order
to develop its own sense of cultural identity.
20
Mella employed
José Marti's anti-imperialist thought to bridge the gap between
Cuban nationalism and internationalism.
21
Like Mariategui, Mella opposed Haya de la Torre's Aprista
movement. In 1928, Mella wrote an article entitled"iQué es el
ARPA?" in which he criticized APRA for being a populist and
reformist movement which opposed class struggle and the con-
struction of a socialist society. This article was reprinted in 1930 in
Although this publication date
followed the deaths of both Mella and Mariátegui, Mariategui
probably received the article from Mella, and Ricardo Martínez de
ia Torre (the new editor of Amauta) was most likely following
through with Mariátegui's plans to publish it.³ In "iQué es el
ARPA?" Mella analyzed the 1928 presidential election in Nicaragua
in much the same way as Mariátegui had done. Both the Liberal
candidate Moncada and the Conservative Díaz were traitors, Mella
argued, and only Sandino represented the interests of Nicaraguan
sovereignty.
"Those who do not support Sandino,” Mella con-
cluded, "are traitors to the interests of the oppressed classes in the
continent.'
24
Grupo Minorista
Mella, however, was not the only Cuban who Mariátegui influ-
enced. Mella represents only the beginning of an extensive literary
and intellectual relationship between Mariategui and the Cuban
61
=====第86页=====
revolutionaries. Especially after Mella's exile from Cuba, the most
important contacts which Mariátegui maintained in Cuba were with
the Grupo Minorista, or Minority Group. This group, which
flourished during the decade of the 192Os,was a collection of
writers, artists and journalists who believed that an intellectual
minority could create a revolutionary climate for social and political
change in Cuba.2³ The Grupo Minorista emerged in 1923 as a
vanguard movement with a political-social program and aspirations
to renovate the arts in Cuba. Its actions ratified Mariategui's
analysis for the Cuban context.26
Juan Marinello and Rubén
Martínez Villena were two early socialist leaders in Cuba who were
important founding members of  the Grupo Minorista. Both
Marinello and Martinez Villena,classmates at the University of
Havana, worked with Mella on a variety of political projects
including the University Reform Movement, the founding of the
Cuban Communist Party, and the Anti-Imperialist League of the
Americas. Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista assassinated Martnez
Villena in 1934, but the latter's poetic vision of a socialist and anti-
imperialist Cuba inspired later generations of revolutionaries, and
he is seen as an important precursor of the Cuban revolution.
It was Mariategui's contacts with Marinello, however, that left
the most important and lasting legacy of the Peruvian's influence in
Cuba. While MelIa's major contribution to Cuban revolutionary
theory was his introduction of a Marxist class analysis into Cuba,
Marinello approached Marxism in a much more creative and innova-
tive fashion. Like Mariátegui, Marinello had learned from Lenin
the importance of flexibility and the ability to fit ideas to new
situations.
27
Although Mariátegui and Marinello never had an
opportunity to meet personally, through their exchange of letters
they identified "their mutual concerns for the destiny of our
America.28
This correspondence gave Marinello an impression of
Mariátegui's intense personality. Marinello became an avid reader
of Mariátegui's works. "Mariátegui was without doubt," Marinello
later claimed, "the most complete Marxist thinker to come out of
Latin America." Mariátegui's creativity and the depth of his
comprehensive and penetrating thoughts impressed Marinello,
especially given his short life and the epoch in which he lived.
"Mariátegui should be read," Marinello concluded, "by the youth
throughout America.
29
After Mariátegui's death in 1930,
Marinello continued to discuss the significance of Mariátegui's life
62
=====第87页=====
and writings. Marinello paid tribute to Mariátegui's memory in
homages at the University of Santiago in Chile in 1939 and to the
Peruvian Communist Party in 1946.3 Marinello's writings attest to
Mariátegui's ongoing influence in Cuba and throughout Latin
America. At the Chilean conference, Marinello said that he was a
student of Mariátegui's works and that he was loyal to Mariátegui's
vision.
31
The Cuban socialists regarded Mariátegui's ideas highly and
incorporated numerous elements of his ideology into their own revo-
lutionary struggles. Like Mariátegui, Marinello understood that the
continued exploitation of Latin America's indigenous population was
not due to their race. The problem was fundamentally one of
imperialism and cheap labor; at the base it was a socioeconomic
problem rooted in skewed land distribution patterns. To improve
the lot of the indigenous population there would need to be an
32
agrarian reform program.
This contention that Latin America's
problems were rooted in economic and not racial relations became
very influential in Cuba.
33
Mariátegui's greatest influence on the
Grupo Minorista, however, was in the realm of literature and art.
In her book on the Grupo Minorista, author Ana Cairo makes
repeated references to Mariategui's writings collected in El artista y
la época and the influence that these writings had on the views and
political beliefs of the Cuban vanguardistas.
34
These exchanges between Mariátegui and the Cuban
vanguardist movement can be seen especially in the relations
between Amauta and periodicals such as Social and Revista de
Avance which emerged out of the Grupo Minorista. Mariátegui's
first contact with the group came in 1924 when Oliverio Girondo, an
Argentine poet, wrote to Mariategui from Mexico to introduce him
to its principal actors. Girondo made special mention of Emilio
Roig de Leuchsenring, a historian, Martiano scholar, and literary
director of the avant-garde journal Social. According to Girondo,
Social was the only journal in Cuba at the time which published any
35
C. W. Massaguer founded this journal in
interesting material.
1916, and its articles emphasized developments in literary move-
ments, art,ideas,styles, and sports.Although its content was not
overtly politicait did provide aimportantliterary outletorthe
Grupo Minorista.
The arrival in Cuba in 1925 of Mariategui's first book, La
escena contemporanea,represented the beginning of a long and
63
=====第88页=====
important exchange of written ideas between Mariátegui and the
revolutionary leaders in Cuba. This book had an immediate impact
on the intellectual landscape of the youth at the University of
Havana, and the Grupo Minorista passed it among themselves in
order to study Mariáategui's ideas.36 According to Marinello, it was
a new stage in the development of Latin American thought, and the
Cubans sensed the lasting significance of Mariátegui's writings.
37
Roig de Leuchsenring was one of the first Cubans to receive a copy
of this book, and he reprinted Mariátegui's article on the French
writer Anatole France in Social. In his editorial introduction to this
article, Roig de Leuchsenring noted that Mariátegui's book
presented a clear and important analysis of the problems of their
38
era.
The following year when Mariátegui began to publish
Amauta, he sent Roig de Leuchsenring a sample issue and asked for
an exchange between the Cuban and Peruvian vanguardist writers.
To facilitate this exchange, Mariátegui sent along a manuscript to be
published in Social.3 Mariategui's writings especially influenced
Martinez Villena. Martinez Villena received a copy of La escena
contemporánea from Roig de Leuchsenring and it "gave him a vivid
and coherent view of the ensnarled world situation.'
#40 When the
first issue of Amauta arrived in Cuba in 1926,Martínez Villena
"leafed through it with feverish joy"; it was a journal which
"challenged the leftist intellectual and political movements of our
America." Its message was heard all over Latin America.4
Martínez Villena used Mariátegui's Seven Interpretive Essays on
Peruvian Reality to support and to validate his own work and as a
base for a specific analysis of the problems of his own country.
42
Marinello, along with Grupo Minorista members Alejo
Carpentier, Martí Casanovas, Francisco Ichaso, and Jorge Maach,
founded the journal Revista de Avance in 1927. This journal, which
was more overtly political than Social, was both an avant-garde
literary journal and a leftist vanguard journal. It was modeled after
Amauta and called for political "movement, change, advance ... and
an absolute independence" for Cuba. Revista de Avance provided
a forum for the introduction of new ideas into Cuba, including
historical and dialectical materialism, scientific socialism, and a
sense of national identity4 Revista de Avance was actively involved
in literary exchanges with Mariategui. Shortly before he died,
Mariátegui sent Marinello two essays and promised soon to send
64
=====第89页=====
Amauta in Cuba and gave Cubans access to works by Peruvian
authors. A bookstore named Minerva (the same name as
Mariátegui's press, which published his books) ran advertisements
in the journal for Mariategui's Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian
Reality in addition to Luis E. Valcarcel's Tempestad en los Andes and
Martinez de la Torre's El movimiento obrero en 1919, among other
works.46 One revolutionary leader from the 1920s later remem-
bered that Mariátegui had sent fifteen copies of Seven Interpretive
Essays on Peruvian Reality to be sold through Revista de Avance in
Cuba.47 Mariátegui's books and Amauta were readily available in
Cuba, and political radicals in that country were well versed in his
thought.
In 1927 the Leguía dictatorship closed the journal Amauta,
once again imprisoned Mariátegui for his supposed involvement in
a "communist plot," and deported two of his coworkers to Cuba.
The Grupo Minorista quickly responded with a cablegram to Leguía
calling for the release of Mariátegui. Both Social and Revista de
Avance printed statements which denounced Leguía's action. In a
note entitled "Mariátegui, Amauta," Marinello sent his emphatic
protest against those acts of the Peruvian dictator and a message of
sympathy to the Lima journal and its valorous inspirer.
48
In
reaction to this act of solidarity with the Peruvians, the Cuban
government imprisoned several members of the Grupo Minorista,
also on charges of a supposed involvement in a communist plot.
49
Governmental repression, however, could not destroy the organiza-
tional efforts of the Cubans and Peruvians. In a letter dated
October of 1927 to Roig de Leuchsenring, Mariátegui thanked the
Grupo Minorista for their efforts on his behalf to help gain his
freedom. He announced his determination to proceed with the
publication of Amauta and asked Roig de Leuchsenring to handle
the distribution of this journal in Havana0 In December of1927,
Amauta resumed publication, and Mariategui noted in the editorial
"Segundo acto" that the journal had been "defended by the best
spirits of Hispano-America" and thanked the Grupo Minorista for
its supportMariategui continued to send articles to Social on
both literary topics and political questions. In August of 1927,
Social printed Mariategui's review of Henri Barbusse's book Les
Enchainements Barbusse was an early influence on Mariateuis
understanding of a nondeterministic Marxism which stressed the
subjective elements of a revolutionary faith and individual free will.
65
=====第90页=====
The Cubans looked to Mariátegui as an interpreter of European
socialist thought for Latin American reality. Roig de Leuchsenring
reviewed Mariátegui's Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality in
Social and printed an excerpt from one of Mariátegui's essays on
indigenismo in Peruvian literature. Mariátegui thanked Roig de
Leuchsenring "for the kind words with which you have greeted in
Social the appearance of my 7 Essays, and sent him an article on
Charlie Chaplin which Mariátegui planned to publish in El alma
matinal.
53
In 1928 Mariátegui entered into a brief polemic with Revista
de Avance over the meaning of revolution and decadence in Spanish
vanguard literature. Mariátegui had printed the poem "Oda al
Bidet" by E. Giménez Caballero in Amauta and followed it with
editorial comments which denounced the poem as "decadent
frivolity" and as an example of the "dehumanization of art.54
Apparently Mariátegui had reprinted this poem from the February
1928 issue of Revista de Avance, and the editors of this journal took
Mariategui's comments as an attack on their political views.5
Mariátegui responded that no such attack was intended, and that he
owed Revista de Avance the most cordial gratitude for its protest
against the suspension of Amauta in 1927. "It is a journal definitely
written into our affections," Mariátegui wrote.
9S
Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, one of the leading Marxist theorists
in Cuba, also has attributed the beginning of his intellectual and
political development to Mariátegui. Rodriguez first came in
contact with Mariátegui's thought through Marinello's article "El
Amauta José Carlos Mariátegui" in Revista de Avance. This led him
to read Mariátegui's Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality and
the 1934 Chilean edition of Defensa del Marxismo. Rodriguez said
that the later was "a very badly presented edition, but it gave us the
opportunity to become acquainted with other of Mariategui's
essays." Rodriguez was especially attracted to Mariátegui's open
Marxism.
"We tried to apply some of the forms of thought
Mariátegui used to analyze his Peruvian reality to our country,"
Rodriguez said.57 From Mariategui he learned the necessity of
combining theory and action into a revolutionary praxis which was
directly applicable to his own historical situation. Rodriguez's
thoughts helped bridge the gap between the generation of Castro
and Guevara with earlier radical movements and introduced the
value of Mariátegui's earlier teachings to the later Cuban revolu-
66
=====第91页=====
tionaries. He stressed the need for Cuba to follow a flexible,
nondogmatic road to socialism. Like Mariátegui, his pursuit of an
independent Marxism occasionally led him into conflict with the
"There is nodoubt
that Mariategui influenced our entire generation,” Rodriguez
concluded.
59
Raúl Roa was another Cuban who pointed to Mariátegui's
writings as an important influence on the development of his revolu-
tionary consciousness. Roa worked with the Cuban Communist
Party with Mella and Marinello, and after the triumph of the
revolution he worked in the foreign ministry of the new government.
Roa shared Mariátegui's anti-imperialist politics and concern for
Latin America's indigenous population. In addition, Roa learned
from Mariátegui the role of the intellectual in the revolutionary
process.60
Roa, like Rodriguez, was an independent Marxist
thinker in the tradition of Mariátegui who believed that
revolutionary theory must take into account Cuba's historical
situation. Like Mariátegui in the face of the Communist Interna-
tional in the 1920s, Roa sought to implement an ideology in Cuba
independent of the Soviet Union. He criticized Soviet bureaucracy,
its invasion of Hungary in 1956, and its rigid interpretations of
Marxism. The Cuban revolutionary process would have to be
adapted creatively to its own historic situation and not simply be a
copy of the French, Mexican, or Russian revolutions.
61
Roa
attested to the impact which Mariátegui's ideas had on Cuba.
Amauta inspired "fruitful discussions within the Popular University
andtheAnti-Imperialist League, Roa said.6{
He reportedthat
revolutionaries in the 1920s would take Mariátegui's works with
them to prison where they would study his thought. In particular,
Mariátegui's Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality showed
them the way which they wanted to go in Cuba: that is, to apply the
dialectic materialism with the concrete study of the reality of the
There was no other Marxist writer, Roa emphasized,
people.6{3
who had such a vast influence in Latin America. According to Roa,
Mariategui was the first Latin American Marxist ideologue whose
thought had broad, international implications. The death of this
"brilliant Marxist ideologue and exceptional writer was] a hard
64
Mariátegui helped
blow for the Latin American revolution.
Cuba discover its historic destiny."The action,thought and writing
of Mariategui," Roa wrote, "left a deep impression on the Cuban
67
=====第92页=====
revolutionary intellectuals, artists and progressives of the era."He
compared Mariátegui's impact on Cuban revolutionary thought to
that of Mella and Martinez.
S9
Marinello added that these leaders
gave a new Marxist interpretation to the anti-imperialist struggle
which led to the overthrow of imperialism in Cuba and the opening
of a popular and national liberation movement. "The Cuban
Revolution is the beginning of the Latin American revolution,"
Marinello wrote, and these early Marxist writers formed the basis of
this struggle. Mariátegui, together with Mella, Anibal Ponce, and
Martínez Villena, presented a new and profound interpretation of
the reality which they sought to transform.
66
Although José Antonio Foncueva is not as well known as
several of his contemporaries, he is a good example of the influence
Mariátegui had on the youth of Cuba. Already at the age of fifteen,
Foncueva was working with Mella in the Anti-Imperialist League of
the Americas and the Cuban Communist Party. The next year he
founded and edited the student revolutionary journal El Estudiante.
Foncueva attempted to set up an exchange of ideas with Mariátegui,
whom he considered to be his ideological mentor. "In Cuba,
Foncueva wrote, "we love Amauta as if it were our own." He asked
for an exchange between his journal El Estudiante and Amauta, and
offered to help distribute Amauta in Cuba. Referring to
Mariátegui's arrest and the closure of Amauta in 1927, Foncueva
proudly pointed out that "El Estudiante was the first journal in Cuba
to protest the arbitrary actions of the civilismo against the group of
Amauta."6 In his writings, Foncueva borrowed Mariátegui's ideas
on art, indigenismo, and the Mexican revolution.6 In addition,
Foncueva applauded Mariátegui's original and intelligent ideas on
the political, economic, and social problems of Peru in the historical
state in which they lived.6 In 1928 Foncueva sent Mariátegui an
essay for publication in Amauta in which he analyzed José Martí's
social thought and the significance of this ideology for his era.7
Unfortunately, many of their letters were apparently intercepted by
either the Peruvian or the Cuban police. The copies of Amauta sent
to Foncueva were returned to Peru because of a circular from the
Cuban secretary of communications ordering that the circulation of
all revolutionary publications be prevented. To avoid such compli-
cations, Foncueva requested that the journal be sent to a different
address without any markings of Amauta on the wrapper.
71
Foncueva died of tuberculosis at the age of twenty, ironically just a
68
=====第93页=====
few days after his mentor Mariátegui had died. In Cuba, the two
deaths were linked in left-wing and literary journals. Both were
seen as fighters for the oppressed and for a free and emancipated
Roig de
Leuchsenring's journal Social called Foncueva's article in Amauta
the most beautiful essay written on Martí.
73
Although Revista de Avance was the most significant and long-
lived Cuban vanguardist publication (it was published for four years
from 1927 to 1930), Mariátegui also maintained contact with various
other vanguardist journals and writers who emerged from the Grupo
Minorista. One such contact was with the Cuban writer and
journalist José Antonio Fernández de Castro. Fernández de Castro
edited the Sunday literary supplement of the Cuban daily newspaper
Diario de la Marina, and he used this outlet as an avenue to advance
the ideas and literary views of the Grupo Minorista. In 928,
Mariátegui published one of Fernández de Castro's articles on the
Mexican revolution in Amauta.⁴ Tristan Marof, who had sent this
article to Amauta, wrote an essay on Mariátegui for Fernández de
Castro to publish in the literary supplement of Diario de la
Marina.7
Mariategui's intellectual presence in Cuba is also
evidenced in the articles which appeared in América Libre, an anti-
imperialist journal which emerged out of the José Martí Popular
University, and in Atuei, an Aprista journal modeled after the first
incarnation of Amauta before Mariátegui broke with Haya de la
Torre's multiclassist political views.
76
Further evidenceof
Mariategui's close contact with Minorista developments in Cuba is
the timely note in Amauta of the appearance in 1930 of the short-
lived vanguardist journal Revista de la Habana. When Mariátegui
died shortly thereafter, Fernández de Castro wrote a short article on
his life for this journal. Fernandez de Castro called Mariátegui one
of the most prestigious writers in all of Latin America and noted
78
that his death was a loss for all of America.
In addition to Fernández de Castro's note in Revista de la
Habana, editorials in both Social and Revista de Avance give
evidence that the Cubans mourned Mariátegui's death as if he were
one of their own. Social declared that Mariategui was "a teacher
and a guide who showed to the intellectuals the vanguard stance
which tey,as menand citiensareobliated to take.Revista
de Avance dedicated its June 1930 isue to Mariategui's memory; in
it the editors reflected on the importance of Mariátegui for Cuba
69
=====第94页=====
and Latin America. In an article entitled "El Amauta José Carlos
Mariátegui," Marinello praised Mariátegui's profound understanding
of the world, of art, and of politics.
Marinello stated that
Mariátegui's book Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality had
a continent-wide significance for its analysis of economics and the
indigenous population.  Mariátegui defended the historic destiny of
Cuba as much as he did for Peru; Mariátegui was an "Amauta" for
allof America.
80
Others commented on the significance of
Mariátegui's political example and the literary style of his two
published books.
In addition to these thinkers, Mariátegui's writings also
influenced other Cuban literary figures during the first half of the
twentieth century.
Mariategui also carried on other literary
exchanges with Cubans. The Cuban author Carlos Montenegro's
collection of stories El renuevo y otros cuentos was reviewed twice in
Amauta.81
The Peruvian writer Luis Alberto Sánchez discussed
Mariátegui's written works in an article on Peruvian literature in the
Cuban journal Revista de Avance.
82
These and other encounters
between Peruvian and Cuban intellectuals are evidence of the high
level of interest which Cubans took in Mariátegui's thought. This
interest was sustained even after his death. In 1936 Osvaldo
Dorticós Torrado, who served as the president of Cuba from 1959
to 1975, wrote an essay for the Cuban journal Polémica on the rising
significance of Mariátegui's thought in Cuba. "We must continue
to live following his example," Dorticós Torrado wrote. "We will
announce the dawning of a new America with his message83
In
the 1940s the Cuban journal Dialéctica carried on a polemic between
the Russian author V.M. Miroshevski and Mariátegui's comrades
in the Peruvian Communist Party Jorge del Prado and Moisés
Arroyo Posadas over whether Mariátegui was a populist or a true
Marxist-Leninist. Miroshevski denounced Mariátegui as a populist
similar to "erroneous" thinkers in Russia before the revolution,
whereas the Peruvians defended him as a path-breaking Marxist-
Leninist thinker whose ideas had significant implications for Latin
American Marxist theory.
84
More important than the specifics of
this debate, however, was the continued presence which the Peru-
vian thinker held in the Cuban intellectual landscape. Although in
the 1920s Mariátegui had held a more visible role in the political
debates in Cuba, and later in the 1960s there was once again a
70
=====第95页=====
resurgence in interest in his intellectual contributions, his thought
never entirely disappeared from the Cuban political consciousness.
Cuban Revolution
Juan Marinello is considered to be one of the major figures of
Latin American Marxist thought, comparable to Mariátegui, Mella,
and the Argentine Anibal Ponce.
85
Unlike these thinkers and
other revolutionaries in Latin America such as General Sandino in
Nicaragua, Marinello had the good fortune to live to see the
realization of his dreams in the triumph of the Cuban revolution.
Following the United Front strategy of the Communist International
of the 1930s and 194Os, the Cuban Communist Party had openly
collaborated with the Batista regime. It maintained that the
objective economic conditions were not right for an armed struggle,
denounced Castro's guerrilla army as "adventuresome," and
criticized its lack of ideological underpinnings. Likewise, Castro's
26th of July Movement distrusted the Communist Party, and it was
not until several years after the triumph of the revolution that the
new Cuban government began to assume the structure of the
communist party. In Cuba, the Marxist practice of theory leading to
action was reversed; it was not until 1961 that Castro declared
himself to be a Marxist-Leninist and began to analyze the island's
historical situation from that point of view. Invigorated by Lenin's
approach in Russia and Mariategui's in Peru, Fidel Castro revital-
ized Marxist theory for Cuba.
More than anyone else Marinello helped reconcile the differ-
ences between the communist old guard and the New Left in Cuba
and helped bridge the gap between the generation of Mella and
Mariátegui and that of Castro and Guevara. "The Cuban revolution
is the beginning of the Latin American Revolution,” Marinello
wrote in 1971. He declared that the Cuban revolution was the
realization of the aspirations of José Martí, Mariategui, Ponce,
Martinez Villena, and Mella. These revolutionaries had believed
that the overthrow of imperialism would open the way for a popular
86
Marinello took an active part in this
and national liberation.
societal transformation. In 1962 he was appointed rector of the
University of Havana and sought to implement the university
reforms for which he and Mella had so diligently worked in the
1920s. Until his death in 1977,he held a variety of political posts
71
=====第96页=====
in the new Cuban socialist government including ambassador to
UNESCO and member of the Central Committee of the Cuban
Communist Party.
87
The Cuban revolution which Marinelloforeshadowed and
supported was truly a Latin American product. It was not an export
from Moscow, evidenced by the fact that the pro-Moscow Commu-
nist Party did not join the revolution until several years after the
1959 guerrilla insurrection.88
This has ledSpanish philosopher
Adolfo Sánchez Vázquez to question what kind of Marxism it was
that emerged as the theoretical driving force behind the Cuban
revolution. The Marxism, he wrote, "that the Cuban Revolution
encountered was a different Marxism that is difficult to fit into
existing molds.*89
The Marxism that emerged in Cuba must be
understood in the context of Cuban history,in the revolutionary
nationalism of Cuban independence hero José Martí, and in the
unique Latin American trends in Marxist theory. Sánchez Vázquez
insisted, as have many others, that Mariátegui's thought, especially
his views on a subjective and voluntarist Marxism, is critical for
understanding these developments. As Mariátegui's intellectual
contributions had a strong influence on Marinello and an earlier
generation of Cuban revolutionaries, his thought was also important
to the development and evolution of the Cuban revolution in the
1960s and on later revolutionary movements in Latin America.
Fidel Castro
Castro, the leader of the guerrilla 26th of July Movement
which toppled the pro-United States Batista dictatorship in Cuba in
1959,is better known for his organizing skills and charismatic
leadership than his political theory or his strength as a Marxist-
Leninist thinker. Castro had studied and learned the military
strategy which he carried out in his guerrilla warfare in the Sierra
Maestra Mountains from Sandino's fight in Nicaragua. Like
Sandino, Castro relied on a strategy of flexible organization which
could adapt to changing conditions. Both guerrilla leaders relied on
a sympathetic peasant base to support their fight.90
At the
University of Havana in the 1940s, the writings of Marx and Mella
influenced Castro's thinking, but his political activities in the 1950s
91
were those of a revolutionary nationalist and not a Marxist.
Castro's justification for his assault on the Moncada army barracks
72
=====第97页=====
on 26 July 1953 shows the native roots of the Cuban revolution. In
his courtroom defense History Will Absolve Me, Castro refrred
frequently to Cuban independence hero Martí. Although Martí's
social and political program of national reform is evident in this
speech, Castro's ideology also shows the infl uence of other thinkers.
Castro had read Mariátegui, among others, while in prison from
approached Cuba's problems in a nondoctrinaire manner with a
flexible attitude on how to foment a revolutionary consciousness in
that country. Not only was Castro an anti-imperialist revolutionary
nationalist in the tradition of Martí, but like Mariátegui he stressed
the revolutionary potential of the peasantry and affirmed the value
of African and other indigenous cuitural expressions. When the new
Cuban Communist Party was formed in 1965, Castro emphasized
that it would be built on Cuban ideas and methods. The result was
a conglomeration of native, European, and Latin American socialist
and anti-imperialist thought This is reflected in the fact that
although Cuba developed close economic ties with the Soviet Union,
it refused to resubmit political control of its communist party to
foreign ideology. In spite of parallel interests with Moscow, Cuba
maintained an independent foreign policy as demonstrated by its
Operation Carlota in Angola. According to French Marxist K. S.
Karol, it is this model of "making revolutions regardless of-indeed
often in direct opposition to-the theories and organizational
panaceas of Moscow" that led to a great deal of interest in the
Cuban revolution.
94
The success of Castro's 26th of July Movement challenged the
assumptions of orthodox Marxism and gave hope and inspiration to
a new generation of revolutionaries. Régis Debray, a French
Marxist philosopher who was imprisoned in Bolivia for his support
of Ernesto "Che" Guevara's guerrilla force, was very critical of the
revolutionary potential of the Communist International. In his book
Revolution in the Revolution?, Debray criticized "those who want
S6
mechanically to apply formulas to the Latin American reality.
The Soviet and Chinese models for revolutionary change would not
work in Latin America; rather,"the Latin American revolutionary
war possesses highly special and profoundly distinct conditions of
development, which can only be discovered through a particular
#96
Unlike Mariátegui, most Marxist leaders and
experience.'
theoreticians imported prefabricated strategies and concepts from
73
=====第98页=====
Europe. The lesson of the Cuban revolution which Debray
believed needed to be learned by all of Latin America is that a
revolutionary movement must first reflect on its own national history
and reality. Such a movement must draw on "its own tradition of
national independence struggles," Debray said. "Fidel read Martí
before reading Lenin" and likewise a Peruvian will have read
Mariategui before other Marxist works.98
Ernesto "Che" Guevara
Ernesto "Che" Guevara, an Argentine doctor who fought with
Castro in the Sierra Maestra mountains of Cuba, formed much of
the ideology and strategy of the Cuban revolution. In the early
1950s Guevara left his native Argentina to travel throughout Latin
America, an experience which enlightened him to the poverty and
exploitation of the majority of the Latin American people. These
travels led him to Peru where he came into contact with
Mariátegui's ideas and political associates. In Peru Guevara stayed
in the house of Hugo Pesce,who had been a close associate,
personal friend, and ideological companion of Mariátegui. Both
Pesce and Guevara were medical doctors and political activists.
Guevara worked with Pesce in a leprosarium, and the two doctors
spent many hours discussing the social and political reality of Latin
America. Pesce had been a member of the secret communist cell
that directed the Peruvian Socialist Party which Mariátegui had
organized in 1928. In June of 1929 Pesce headed the Peruvian
delegation which Mariátegui sent to the First Latin American
Communist Conference in Buenos Aires. Together with Mariátegui,
Pesce coauthored the essay "El problema de las razas en la América
Latina,” which Pesce presented at this conference. Undoubtedly
Mariátegui and his writings were a topic of conversation for the two
men. Later Guevara noted the great influence that these talks with
Pesce had on his political thoughts and social views of Latin
100
American reality.
In 1953 Guevara left Peru for Guatemala, where he lived until
the overthrow of the revolutionary government of Jacobo Arbenz in
1954. On his way to Guatemala, Guevara passed through Costa
Rica where he met veterans of Sandino's struggle against the United
States Marines. Guevara was impressed by their stories of Sandino,
and the inspirational quality of Sandino's leadership and his
74
=====第99页=====
guerrillatactics.10In Guatemala Guevarafellunderthe political
tutelage of Hilda Gadea, who was in political exile from her native
Peru for her militant activities with the Aprista Party. Although
Mariátegui and the Aprista leader Víctor Haya de la Torre had had
a falling out in 1928 over the issue of a multiclass party, Gadea had
worked with the left wing of this party because she believed that it
102
Gadea
was the only avenue for revolutionary change in Peru1
had studied Mariategui's works, and she discussed them with
Guevara in the course of their many political and intellectual discus-
sions.
Gadea later wrote that they not only talked about
Mariategui's Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality, but also his
El alma matinal, which had just been released in Peru in 1950.
Apparently both Gadea and Guevara had read these works, which
indicates Guevara's familiarity with Mariátegui's thought.
103
It was in Guatemala where many of Guevara's political
philosophies were formulated. The clearest lesson which Guevara
drew from the overthrow of the Guatemala revolution was the need
to integrate the peasant and indigenous masses (in addition to the
workers) into an armed revolutionary struggle. The United States-
backed coup in 1954 also turned Guevara into a dedicated fighter
against United States imperialism in Latin America. Obviously,
these are not new themes or discoveries for Latin American revo-
lutionary movements. Twenty-five years earlier in Peru Mariátegui
had advanced the idea of an indigenous, anti-imperialist struggle,
and Sandino had carried out such a struggle in Nicaragua.
104
Perhaps Mariátegui's greatest contribution to the Guatemalan
revolution was his affirmation of the indigenous people's culture and
values. Like Peru with its highland Incas, about 65 percent of
Guatemala's population were direct descendants of the ancient
Maya civilization and since the Spanish conquest had been alienated
from the mainstream of that country's life. Mariátegui's writings on
indigenismo influenced the leaders of the Guatemalan revolution,
who strove to end years of economic exploitation of the indigenous
and peasant masses by large landholders such as the United Fruit
Company. Guevara also came under the influence of Mariateguis
indigenismo. In Peru he had visited the Inca ruins at Machu Picchu
and he understood the misery and exploitation of the Inca
descendants.
105
In Guatemala,Guevara saw the beauty and
strength of the ancient Maya culture and he sought (without
75
=====第100页=====
success) a job as a medical doctor in the Petén region where the
Maya civilization had established several population centers.
The writings of Mariátegui helped provide Guevara with the
intellectual setting which allowed him to break from orthodox
Marxism's Eurocentric assumptions. Guevara probably had read, in
addition to the Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality and El
alma matinal, the 1934 Chilean edition of Mariátegui's Defensa del
marxismo.
106
In this book more than in any other, Mariátegui
presented his views on an open, voluntaristic, nondeterministic
Marxism. He defended Lenin's dynamic application of a flexible
Marxism against the revisionist attacks of Henri de Man and empha-
sized the possibilities of the creative potential of a Gramscist volun-
tary Marxism.107
Guevara's thought also shows the influence of
Mariátegui's writings on ethics and humanism. In 1967,while
Guevara was fighting in Bolivia, Mariátegui's essay "Etica y
socialismo" in Defensa del marxismo was reprinted in Tricontinental
in Cuba.
108
Guevara, like Mariátegui, embraced an open, voluntarist
Marxism based on a rural, peasant-based movement rather than the
urban, working-class movement found in orthodox Marxism.
Guevara built on the implications of Mariátegui's creative efforts to
apply Marxism to an analysis of Latin American conditions and
echoed Mariátegui's contention that the proletariat is not a
spectator, but an actor.
109
Guevara was open to new adaptations
of Marxist thought to specific historical circumstances; like Lenin
with the 1917 Russian Revolution, Guevara sought to creatively
apply Marxism to the Cuban situation. Following the lead of
Sandino, Guevara based his revolutionary struggle in the peasant
masses of the Cuban countryside rather than with the urban
proletariat which Marx had argued would lead the socialist
revolution. Guevara criticized orthodox Marxists "who maintain
dogmatically that the struggle of the masses is centered in city
movements, entirely forgetting the immense participation of the
country people in the _life of all the underdeveloped parts of
America.
110
He argued that the revolutionary insurrection would
start in the countryside and spread to the cities.
Guevara's most significant contribution to revolutionary theory
in Latin America is his foco theory of guerrilla warfare. This theory
challenged the traditional Marxist-Leninist doctrine of waiting for
the proper objective conditions for a revolutionary struggle. The
76
=====第101页=====
peasants understood the objective conditions of hunger, poverty, and
oppression which led to a social revolution, and Guevara argued
that it was through fighting that the peasants (and others) would
gain a theoretical knowledge of the class struggle. This was a daring
challenge to the assumptions of Marx, who believed that action
without the proper theoretical framework would risk the develop-
ment of a crude communism. Guevara believed that the triumph of
the Cuban revolution demonstrated that it was not necessary to wait
for proper objective conditions under which to act. Rather, a small
insurrectionary guerrilla force could create the conditions for a
revolution. He criticized those "who sit down to wait until in some
mechanical way all necessary objective and subjective conditions are
given without working to accelerate them.*i
Régis Debray was
a strong proponent of Guevara's foco strategy. The Cuban revolu-
tion, Debray argued, reversed the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of a
vanguard party creating an insurrectionary foco. Rather, the
guerrilla force created the political party.
Indeed,the Cuban
guerrillas succeeded because they received their primary inspirations
from Marti, and only later considered the writings of Marx, Lenin,
Mao, and Giap.
112
This ended, according to Debray, a divorce of
several decades' duration between Marxist theory and revolutionary
113
practice.
Guevara's foco theory had been discredited in Latin America;
where it has been implemented it has failed miserably. In Peru in
1965 Hector Bejar's insurrectionary foco met defeat and two years
later Guevara himself was killed while attempting to follow this
strategy in Bolivia. Many people have criticized Guevara for
overemphasizing the role of armed struggle in a revolutionay move-
ment and have pointed out that while a relatively small guerrilla
force overthrew Batista in Cuba, this came only after years of leftist
114
political agitations and rising worker expectations.
As a ques-
tion of military strategy, Mariátegui would have concurred with this
analysis. Mariátegui was ready to accept violence as part of the
revolutionary struggle,1but he cautioned against the possible
negative reactions to the use of violence without first constructing
was not a military strategist,however, and does not address the
question of Guevara's emphasis of subjective over objective
conditions.
77
=====第102页=====
One of Mariátegui's most significant contributions to Latin
American revolutionary theory is his introduction of Gramsci's and
Sorel's subjective voluntarism to the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolu-
tions of the 1960s and 1970s. In the 1960s Gramsci's writings were
studied in Cuba alongside those of Marx, Engels, and Lenin. In the
1970s Gramsci's explanation and legitimization of revolutionary
action through ideological or nonrational appeals, sentiments, and
beliefs provided a similar influence to revolutionaries in Nicara-
gua.117 Mariategui was familiar with Gramsci's thought long before
it had become popular in leftist circles in Latin America, and he
helped transmit his ideas to the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions.
It is this emphasis on subjective factors in fomenting revolutionary
action which has made Mariátegui's thought so popular among
Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutionaries, who consider him to be the
most original Marxist thinker in Latin America.
118
His thoughts
on "the redemptive power of the myth of social revolution ...
foreshadowed Fidel Castro's call in the 1950s for the youth of Cuba
to lead the revolt against Batista and redeem the heritage of Cuba's
past heroes and struggles.
Castro challenged the role of
objective economic conditions in moving a society toward a social
revolution. A dogmatic Marxism had not been capable of inspiring
revolutionary action; Castro's success in Cuba vindicated a
subjective Marxist approach. "The duty of every revolutionary is to
make the revolution," Castro said. "It is known that the revolution
will triumph in America and throughout the world, but it is not for
revolutionaries to sit in the doorways of their houses waiting for the
corpse of imperialism to pass by.
At a press conference in
1988,Castro noted that in the Cuban revolution the subjective
factors had a larger influence on its outcome than the objective
ones.
121
Castro reversed the traditional Marxist concept of theory
leading to action. Although he said it was impossible for anyone
traveling the road of revolution not to arrive at Marxism, Castro
contended that "many times practice comes first and then
theory.
122
In doing this, he shifted the emphasis from principles
of scientific socialism to revolutionary feeling and attitude3
Castro moved away from a petrified, decayed, and stagnant version
of Marxism to a nonrational force which could move a society to a
124
social revolution.
Guevara further expanded on Mariategui's ideas of the subjec-
tive factor in mobilizing a social revolution. "Let me say, with the
78
=====第103页=====
risk of appearing ridiculous,* Guevara said in an often-repeated
quote, "that the true revolutionary is guided by strong feelings of
love. It is impossible to think of an authentic revolutionary without
this quality." Furthermore, revolutionaries must struggle every day
so that their love of living humanity is transformed into concrete
deeds,into acts that will serve as an example,as a mobilizing
factor.
125
Mariategui anticipated Guevara's views on the role of
emotion in the revolutionary struggle and the ability of art and
creative endeavors to move the masses to social and political action.
Mariátegui also influenced Guevara's ideas on the use of moral,
rather than material, incentives, and his ideas on the new Socialist
Man. He foreshadowed Guevara's attempt to create people with a
new role in the new society. This line of thought can be seen in the
journal Amauta, which Mariátegui founded to unite the "new men"
of Peru into a movement which would create a new Peruvian society
andculture.
126
In addition, Mariátegui dedicated La escena
contemporánea to the moral development of "the new men ... of
indo-Iberian America,'
127
and in El alma matinal Mariátegui wrote
of a "new man," a "morning man," who would emerge from the
dying bourgeois civilization.
128
According to Donald Hodges,
Mariátegui's book El alma matinal was the principal intellectual
source and progenitor of Guevara's new Marxism.
129
Like many Latin American leftists, Guevara had an anticlerical
bias which viewed the Catholic church as impeding economic
development and political change in Latin America. Hilda Gadea,
reflecting Mariátegui's view that in Latin America religion could not
so easily be dismissed because of the large influence of Catholicism
on society, influenced Guevara's ideas on religion. While the
hierarchy of the Church may be reactionary, this did not necessarily
mean that the Catholic masses lacked revolutionary potential.
Rather, the radical example of Christ could be used to organize for
political change.
These views foreshadowed those of the
liberation theology movement which rose in Latin America after the
triumph of the Cuban revolution. The spiritual element in
Guevara's subjective Marxism together with his views on the new
socialist person were a strong influence on the political development
of people such as the revolutionary priest Camilo Torres whooined
leftist guerrillas in Colombia in 1966.
A subjective or nonrational approach to Marxism also affected
Castro's attitude toward religion. "In general, he has claimed,
79
=====第104页=====
"you can say that the relations with the Church in our country are
normal, because our revolution had never been inspired in an
antireligious spirit."131
In his interview on religion with the
Brazilian liberation theologian Frei Betto, Castro said that there
were ten thousand times more coincidences between Christianity
and communism than between Christianity and capitalism, and he
found the fairer, more human, more moral values of early
Christianity appealing.
132
In addition he noted the participation
of priests and religious students in the triumph of the Cuban
revolution.
133
(This influence is also seen in the fact that Frank
País, a Baptist seminarian from Santiago de Cuba who was killed in
1957 while working with Castro's 26th of July Movement, is a great
hero and martyr for both the revolutionary government and the
Protestant churches.)
In 1975 the Central Committee of the Cuban Communist Party
published a pamphlet on Mariátegui which noted that one of his
great merits was his creative application of Marxist-Leninism to the
Peruvian reality. The Cubans admired his ability to unify the
indigenous peasant masses and urban working class into a popular
struggle that wouid carry forward the democratic, antifeudal, anti-
oligarchical and anti-imperialist revolution.
134
They noted the
parallels between Mariátegui and Guevara. These "two great men
of the American continent" not only shared the same birthday (June
14), but they both also "dedicated their thoughts, their actions, and
even their lives to the most intransigent revolutionary cause against
colonialism, imperialism, and international neocolonialism. Both
constitute the most elegant expression of the tradition of struggle for
the complete independence of our continent."135
Mariategui's works published in Cuba
After the Cuban revolution,Guevara was instrumental in
having Mariátegui's works republished in Cuba. In 1960, the year
of the First Festival of Political Thought, the Editora Popular de
Cuba y del Caribe in Havana published a selection of the most
notable essays of Mariátegui under the title El problema de la tierra
y otros ensayos. The editors described Mariategui as one of the
highest and noblest precursors of revolutionary thought in Peru and
LatinAmerica.
Through his written work, Mariátegui had
contributed "to the political formation of men who, in the future,
80
=====第105页=====
would carry out an historic role in America.136
The thirteen
essays which comprise this volume are indicative not only of the
ideology of Guevara and the direction that he and others wanted to
take the Cuban revolution, but also of their awareness of the
thought and importance of Mariátegui for their revolution.  Ten of
the essays are taken from the first stage of ten volumes of
Mariátegui's Complete Works which were published in 1959. An
additional essay was taken from volume twelve, Temas de nuestra
América, which had just been published in 1960. Biblioteca Amauta
in Lima did not publish the two remaining essays in book form until
1969 when volume thirteen of Mariátegui's Complete Works series,
Ideologia y politica, appeared. Apparently the editors of the Cuban
volume pulled these essays from their original publication in
Mariátegui's journal Amauta. Therefore, this selection of articles
demonstrates that not only were the volumes of Mariátegui's
Complete Works arriving in Cuba as they were released in Lima, but
also that the Cuban editors had access to the original journal
Amauta. Their familiarity with the journal and Mariátegui's Marxist
ideology is further evidenced by their use of two of Mariátegui's
more doctrinaire pieces from Amauta ("Mensaje al congreso
obrero" and "Aniversario y balance") almost ten years before they
were given wider exposure in Ideologia y politica.
For this first Cuban volume of Mariategui's writings, the
editors chose themes which were significant both to Mariátegui and
to the Cuban revolution. In the essay "El problema de Ia tierra,"
which was originally published in Mariátegui's Seven Interpretive
Essays on Peruvian Reality, Mariátegui interprets the pattern of con-
centration of large land holdings in the hands of a small elite as a
socioeconomic and political problem and not a technical-agricultural
137
problem for agronomists.
Mariátegui criticized the liberal,
individualistic approach of breaking up large land holdings into
small properties. This strategy "is neither utopian, nor heretical,
nor revolutionary, nor Bolshevik, nor avantgarde, Mariategui
claimed,"but orthodox,constitutional,democratic,capitalistic, and
bourgeois. For Mariategui, the moment for attempting the liberal
138
individualist method in Peru had already passed.
This system
of land ownership resulted in a dependent export economy which
inhibited internal development and resulted in an impoverished
Mariátegui's writings on agrarian reform must have
populace.139
appeared especiallylevantandinitflinthearly196stothe
81
=====第106页=====
Cubans, who were trying to break their continued dependence on
the sugar economy and to raise the standard of living of their
workers. The continued relevance in Cuba of Mariátegui's ideas on
land-holding patterns is further demonstrated by the publication in
Cuba in 1983 of an essay by the Peruvian writer Jaime Concha on
Mariátegui and the latifundia.
140
The other essays in El problema de la tierra y otros ensayos deal
largely with Mariátegui's views on Pan-Latin Americanism and
North American imperialism. The essays demonstrate both
Mariátegui's and the Cuban revolution's concern with defining their
own cultural identities free from outside interference. In the essay
"iExiste un pensamiento Hispano-Américano?" Mariátegui wrote,
"Europe has lost the right and capacity to influence spiritually and
intellectually our Young America.
141
He envisioned a new
America which would break free from the decaying European
capitalistic civilization and construct a new social and political order.
Mariátegui emphasized the necessity to draw on Latin America's
own indigenous culture to form a new Latin American identity.
Neither Mariátegui nor the leaders of the Cuban revolution wanted
to break free of Spanish and British domination only to be resub-
mitted to the economic control of the United States. Mariátegui's
essays "El destino de norteamérica" and "Yanquilandia y el
socialismo" reflect Cuba's growing concern with the threat of United
States imperialism in Latin America.
142
Various other editions of Mariátegui's writings have also
appeared in Cuba since the 1959 revolution. The cultural publishing
house Casa de las Américas in Havana has taken the lead in this
endeavor, publishing three separate editions of Seven Interpretive
Essays on Peruvian Reality. The first edition was released in 1963,
three years after the release of the first collection of Mariátegui's
writings and two years after Castro declared the Marxist-Leninist
nature of the Cuban revolution. In the prologue to this edition,
Francisco Baeza summarized Mariátegui's life and commented on
the historic significance of this work. Not only did it interpret
Peruvian reality, but it gave a Marxist analysis of the reality of
America. This prologue gives an indication of the inspiration the
Cubans drew from Mariátegui in their attempt to apply a creative
and dynamic form of Marxist theory to their specific revolutionary
situation. "This is not the work of a cold and indifferent
researcher," Baeza wrote. "It is of a man that lives,feels, and
82
=====第107页=====
suffers intensively for the problems of America and looks with fervor
for solutions to them.14
The thirty-five years since the initial
publication of Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality had not
diminished its significance, but rather clearly demonstrated the
continued value of his work. Baeza considered Mariátegui to be,
together with Mella and the Argentine Anibal Ponce, a noble
teacher of Cuban youth.
144
The prologue to the next two Cuban editions of Seven Inter-
pretive Essays on Peruvian Reality, which were published in 1969 and
1973, indicate the changing direction of the Cuban revolution. The
1969 edition reflects the strong internationalism of Guevara, who
had been killed two years earlier while trying to spark a revolution
in Bolivia. In his prologue to this edition, Baeza found support in
Mariátegui's writings for Cuba's condemnation of yanqui imperial-
ism, and he saw this book as playing an active role in the ongoing
process of revolutionary change in Latin America. "Mariategui's
essays have not lost their validity with the passing of the years,"
Baeza wrote. "For the entire length and width of our continent his
writings are used to wrest rights from the oppressors by means of
the armed struggle. The vanguard of this struggle, the guerrillas in
Peru and throughout Latin America, all of these revolutionaries, see
in Mariátegui a noble precursor.'
145
The tone of Baeza's prologue in the third (and final) edition
of Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality (published in 1973)
is changed significantly from that of 1969. Following a turn away
from Cuban support for revolutionary armed struggle throughout
Latin America, Baeza softened the revolutionary fervor of his pro-
logue. Instead, Baeza presented a more distant and scholarly
analysis of the essays and omitted the reference to the armed
struggle of Latin American guerrillas. Perhaps it was because of the
influence of the strong friendship between Cuba and Salvador
Allende, the Marxist president of Chile who had come to power
through democratic means in 1970, that now the vanguard would
fight the oppressor "in all spheres with all available weapons," and
146
not with only military ones.
The Cuban editorial house Casa de las Américas followed
(and in many cases led) the worldwide explosion of interest in the
1970s in the politicalimplicationsof Maritegui's thought Alread
in 1968 the journal Casa de las Américas printed a translation of the
Italian Marxist Antonio Melis's popular and widely read aticle
83
=====第108页=====
"Mariátegui: primer marxista de América." In the same year, this
editorial house released Colombian Francisco Posada's Los origenes
del pensamiento marxista en latinoamérica, an analysis of the ideology
and political thought of Mariátegui. Both of these works emphasize
Mariátegui's leading role in the formation of Marxist theory in Latin
America, with a particular emphasis on the European origins of his
thought.
Whereas Melis gives a sympathetic view toward
Mariátegui's innovative attitudes toward Marxist theory, Posada
presents a much more critical analysis of Mariátegui's subjective and
spontaneous Marxism. While portraying Mariátegui as an important
precursor of Marxist thought in Latin America, Posada considers
Mariátegui to have an undue affinity for the idealism of Sorel and
Croce, influences which prevented Mariátegui from formulating a
fully developed and mature form of Marxist thought. The result,
according to Posada, was a voluntarist interpretation of Marxist
theory which led Mariátegui to an erroneous critique of the alleged
mediocre and passive  deterministic aspects of Marxism.
147
Although these two works represent two divergent and opposing
views on Mariátegui's Marxism, they do demonstrate the intensity of
scholarly debate over the nature of the Peruvian's thought and the
depth of Cuba's involvement in this discussion. Since 1968, Casa de
las Américas has published no fewer than eleven articles and three
books dealing directly with some aspect of Mariátegui's life and
thought.
148
Of significant interest among Casa de las Américas' publica-
tions is the massive two-volume José Carlos Mariátegui: Obras,
published in 1982, which contains significant sections of the sixteen
volumes of Mariategui's Complete Works series. Apparently this is
the largest collection of Mariátegui's written works published out-
side of his native Peru and attests to the level of scholarly interest
in Mariátegui's thought in Cuba. Enrique de la Osa contributed a
sixty-five page preface to this collection in which he surveyed
Mariategui's life and work. De la Osa emphasized the parallels and
connections between Mariátegui and Cuba. Mariátegui, like Cuban
independence hero José Martí, who also died at a young age, lived
De la Osa also noted that many
"riding on a lightning bolt."14
of Mariategui's Peruvian comrades had spent time in Cuba. Exiles
such as Peruvian Aprista militant Esteban Pavletich, who had
collaborated with Mariátegui on Amauta, and the Peruvian poet
Magda Portal, who Mariátegui had called one of the best poets of
84
=====第109页=====
the continent, both contributed to literary developments in Cuba
and cemented political relationships between the two countries. In
1928 the Cuban dictator Machado imprisoned many of the Peruvian
exiles whom he had accused of being communists. De Ia Osa also
noted that the Cuban authors José Antonio Fernández de Castro
and José A. Foncueva had their writings published in Amauta. The
Cubans were conscious not only of the ongoing significance of
Mariátegui's writings for their country but also of Mariátegui's
historical connections to Cuba and his ideological contributions to
the development of Marxist theory in that country.
150
Two other important collections of Mariátegui's works
published in Cuba are Ensayos literarios and Marxistas de América (by
Mella et al.), both of which the Cuban journalist Mercedes Santos
Moray edited and the Editorial Arte y Literatura published. The
first collection was published in 1980 as a commemoration of the
fiftieth anniversary of Mariátegui's death. It sought to present a
Marxist-Leninist analysis of Mariátegui's views on aesthetics, theory,
and literary criticism in order to show the influence he had on the
formation of Cuban culture. The twenty-two essays in this collection
are reprinted from Mariategui's Complete Works series and had
never before been published in Cuba. Santos Moray intentionally
selected these essays to give Cuban readers a flavor of the literary
stature "of this exemplary communist intellectual" who had
penetrated Cuban culture with a compelling Marxist-Leninist
analysis of the Latin American people.
151
"Thefantasy, the
creative imagination, the recreation of the same reality, as our Alejo
Carpentier would say many years later," Santos Moray wrote in the
prologue, "are emphasized by José Carlos Mariátegui as aesthetic
values.
152
Furthermore, Santos Moray compared Mariategui's
and Martí's efforts to respond to the problems of their realities and
their attempts to construct a new world. Like Martí, Mariátegui
hoped for a new humanity and new world.
Mariátegui united
with Mella, Marinello, and Villena to form a "plan of ideological
battle that permitted the formation of new revolutionary
generations" that led to the victory of the Cuban revolution.
154
This political theme is further expanded in the second book
organized by Santos Moray, Marxistas de América, published in 1985.
This book collects written work by four early Latin American
Marxists (Mella, Mariategui, Ponce, and Marinello) and analyzes
their influence which produced important successes which would
85
=====第110页=====
radically transform the sense and objectives of the political,
economic, and social struggle in Latin America.5
A main
objective of this volume was "to integrate the texts of Mella and
Mariátegui, two of the founders of the first communist parties of our
America, two political directors of continental stature who saw the
urgent need to use words to create political action.
156
Fourof
the twenty-four essays by Mariátegui chosen for this volume had
been published twenty-five years earlier in Cuba in El problema de
la tierra y otros ensayos. Overall this collection shows a broader
perception and a more scholarly analysis of Mariátegui's work than
earlier Cuban publications, but more significantly it portrays the
continued significance of Mariategui's thought for Cuba today.
In order to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of
Mariátegui's death in 1980, Casa de las Américas announced a
"Special Prize José Carlos Mariátegui" for a work that addressed
the theme of Marxism, national culture, and popular movements in
Latin America.
15
In a special ceremony dedicated to Mariategui's
significance for Latin America, Casa de las Américas awarded this
prize to the Hungarian historian Adam Anderle for his research on
Peruvian political movements between the two world wars.
158
In
1985 Casa de las Américas published Anderle's book, which gives
special attention to the role of Mariátegui in the labor movement in
Peru. Further evidence of Casa de las Américas' continued interest
in Mariateguian thought is a note which appeared in 1990 announc-
ing the launching of Anuario Mariateguiano. This new journal was
the continuation of a living classic which had never been distant
from Latin America's contemporary scene and it would contribute
not only to the enriching of Peru's national culture but also Marxist
and revolutionary thought in general.
159
Casa de las Américas also has published various other books
and articles on the literary aspects of Mariátegui's work. In 1967
Yerco Moretic won an award from Casa de las Américas for his
work on Mariátegui's conceptions of realism. In 1972 the journal
Casa de las Américas published both an excerpt from his book José
Carlos Mariátegui. Su vida e ideario. Su concepción del realismo and
a critique of his approach.160 In 1971 Casa de las Américas
published a special issue of its journal on the theme of the
relationship between culture and revolution in Latin America. As
a point of departure, the journal printed Marti's essay "Nuestra
América," Mariategui's "El artista y la época” and "Arte,
86
=====第111页=====
revolucion y decadencia," and an essay on Mella.161
These essays
were followed by a series of articles which considered the role of
literature and culture in the development of a revolutionary
consciousness. The inclusion of Mariátegui on par with the leader
of Cuban independence and the founder of the Cuban Communist
Party is indicative of the importance which the Cubans place on
Mariátegui for the intellectual development of their revolutionary
identity. In 1987 Mariátegui's family donated thirty-eight of
Mariategui's works to the Biblioteca Nacional José Martí, the Cuban
national library in Havana. Upon receiving this gift, Julio Le
Riverend, the director of the national library, stated that
"Mariátegui is not for the past. His thought lives on.
162
The
Cuban revolution was a synthesis of Martí's revolutionary nationalist
thought and a scientific Marxism. Mariátegui's intellectual contribu-
tions are critical in understanding this unique Latin American
development. Mariátegui has, continues, and will continue, to
influence the development of Marxist ideology in the Cuban context.
Winston Orrillo has pursued extensively these parallels
between Martí and Mariátegui. In his book Marti, Mariátegui:
literatura, inteligencia y revolución en América Latina, Orrillo draws
comprehensive comparisons between the thought and literary output
of the Cuban Apóstal and Peruvian Amauta. He calls the two
national heros true brothers, and states that "Martí, without being
a Marxist, saw ... the connections between literature, economics,
politics, history, and sociology" which Mariátegui later deve-
oped.
163
Indeed, throughout the book Orrillo examines the
common themes of education, idealism, Pan-Americanist interna-
tionalism, indigenism, and socialism which these two leaders con-
structed as a base for later intellectual and political developments.
For both it is impossible to separate their artistic and creative
expressions from their political views, but rather their political
action (praxis) aimed at social transformation emerged out of their
literary and intellectual activities.Marti's statement that the only
way to be apoet in an oppressed nation is to beasoldier isequally
indicative of Marti's views as it is of Mariategui's as well as those of
"Literature and
later Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutionaries.
revolution, Orrllo argued, "are concepts that Martí and
164
Mariategui linked and correlated in a dialectical manner.
Mariátegui never met Martí (Mariátegui was less than a year
old when Martí was killed in the Cuban War of Independence at
87
=====第112页=====
Dos Ríos) and had limited contact with Marti's writings. Orrillo,
therefore, did not analyze any direct intellectual influences between
the two. Rather, Orrillo looked for commonalities in the Latin
American experience which formed a basis for both intellectuals'
thought. The result, Orrillo concluded, was that the Peruvian
articulated an amazing continuity with the revolutionary thought of
Martí. Although Orrillo understood that Martí was not a Marxist,
he argued that there was a direct path from Marti's revolutionary
nationalism to Mariátegui's Marxism-Leninism. Mariátegui was the
dialectic continuation of the revolutionary thought and action of
Martí.
165
Orrillo noted that in Cuba there were many political
leaders, writers, and others including Mella, Rodriguez, Martinez
Villena, Roa, and Marinello who were both Martianos and
Mariateguistas. It was through people such as these that "the route
which Martí opened and Mariátegui subscribed to was fertilized and
brilliantly magnified in the Cuban Revolution, which summarized
and synthesized the legacy of the Apostle and the doctrine of the
Amauta.'
166
The Cuban revolution was solidly in the tradition
which the Apostle and Amauta had laid out years earlier.
In addition to the publications from Casa de las Américas,
seven articles were published on Mariátegui in the popular Cuban
magazine Bohemia during the 1970s and 1980s.167 "One has to
speak about José Carlos Mariátegui," one of the articles began, "as
if he were a companion who is presently with us." Mariátegui, this
article continued, had perhaps the most brilliant Marxist-Leninist
mind of his time in Latin America. The force of his revolutionary
thought and action could only be compared to that of Mella
In 1980 Bohemia printed two of Mariátegui's essays in which he
worked out the subjective aspects of his Marxist theory. In the first
essay, "La unidad de la América Indo-Espaola, Maritegui
asserted that spiritual and emotional forces, not intellectual forces,
would unify a Latin American revolutionary movement.
169
Likewise, in the second essay, "Henri Barbusse," Mariátegui
contended that the revolutionary struggle was not only for material
gain but also for beauty, art, thought, and spirit.
170
In addition to the articles in Casa de las Américas and
Bohemia, innumerable articles have been published on the Peruvian
Marxist in Verde Olivo, Granma, and other Cuban magazines and
newspapers. Although most of these articles do little more than give
a basic biographic sketch of Mariátegui's life, together they point
88
=====第113页=====
out Mariátegui's contribution to Latin American Marxist theory and
his connections with political developments in Cuba. "The example
and work of Mariátegui has constituted, Erasmo Dumpierre
observed, "a permanent source of inspiration and revolutionary
stimulation in Cuba, the first country in América that has realized
his grand dreams.171
Mariátegui's thought is so significant that
intellectuals and editors find him to be an important enough topic
to keep him continually in front of the Cuban public eye fifty years
after his death.
The success of the 26th of July Movement in Cuba became a
model for revolutionary guerrilla movements throughout Latin
America. Many of these revolutionaries were moving away from the
rigid, doctrinaire positions of the Communist International to a
more open, dynamic, and revolutionary Marxism. The Cuban
revolution became a conduit which transferred, refined, and legiti-
mized the revolutionary ideals, examples, and theories of Mart,
Sandino, Mariátegui, and other early revolutionary heros to the
realities of Latin America in the 1960s. Nicaraguans, as did many
people in other Latin American countries, felt the influence of the
Cuban revolution. As a result of the revolution, a new generation
of Sandinistas arose who began to reinterpret Sandino's original
struggle in light of historic and ideological developments following
his death. As in Cuba,where revolutionaries drew their inspia-
tion from both their national history as well as international
ideological trends, the Sandinista struggle was also not only rooted
in Nicaraguan conditions, it was the product of events across Latin
America.
89
=====第114页=====
4
NICARAGUA
On 19 July 1979, a group of guerrillas entered Managua, Nicaragua,
after having overthrown the Somoza family dynasty which had held
power in that country for nearly half a century. Anastasio Somoza
Debayle, who had risen to power in 1967 after the deaths of his
father and brother, had become so greedy and brutal in his quest for
more power and wealth that even some of his own supporters
turned against him and joined in the popular movement which
ousted him from power. Although there were calls for somocismo
sin Somoza (the continuance of a conservative, elitist government
but without the extreme excesses of the Somoza dictatorship), the
guerrillas who entered the National Palace envisioned a program of
broad social reform. Thus, the Frente Sandinista para la Liberacion
Nacional (FSLN) came to power and marked the triumph of the
second successful socialist revolution in Latin America.
From an orthodox Marxist perspective, Nicaragua was a highly
unlikely candidate to experience such a social revolution. Nicaragua
was a poor, backward country without a strong working-class base
on which to build a proletarian revolution. It had not developed the
objective economic conditions necessary to foment a revolutionary
situation. Other countries seemed to be more likely candidates for
a social revolution. Chile (which had elected a Marxist president in
1970) had a long history of working-class militancy. Mexico also had
a strong tradition of leftist labor unions. Although Cuba was a
largely rural society, it too had a long tradition of communist and
labor party organization which contributed to the success of its
revolution. In addition, the nature of the work in the sugar cane
fields had a proletarianizing effect on the workers.
Nevertheless, for eighteen years the Sandinistas (as the
members of the FSLN were known) carried on their efforts at
political organization among the peasant and urban masses of
90
=====第115页=====
Nicaragua. The Sandinistas broke from the orthodox Marxist
emphasis on the urban proletariat as the leader of the revolutionary
struggle and rejected the notion that the peasants were a reac-
tionary class which could not be relied on for the development of a
revolutionary movement. As with Castro and the Cuban revolution-
aries in the 1950s,political practice and strategy were more
advanced than theory in Nicaragua.² The historically unusual and
unique nature of the Nicaraguan revolution which spurned the
economistic view that social and political consciousness is ultimately
determined or revealed by one's relations to the means of produc-
tion sparked the interest of both scholars and political activists
alike.
3
In order to understand how the Sandinistas fomented a
revolutionary consciousness in an economically underdeveloped
society, it is necessary to understand the unique development of
Marxist theory in Latin America. The success of the Cuban
revolution strongly influenced the Sandinistas. They learned from
Ernesto "Che" Guevara that a revolutionary consciousness could be
created in Nicaragua's peasant population. The Sandinistas also
looked back to the heroic struggle of General Sandino against the
United States Marines as an example and inspiration for their
revolutionary struggle. Mariátegui also played a role in the success
of the Sandinista revolution. Like the FSLN, Harry Vanden has
observed, Mariátegui also emphasized the importance of ideologi-
cally prepared organizers going into the highland villages to
accelerate the process of the politicization and enlightenment of the
peasantry. Under Nicaraguan conditions, as well as in most coun-
tries of Latin America, a leading Sandinista ideologist wrote, the
center of action of the revolutionary war has to be the countryside.
Mariátegui helped define the theoretical possibilities for a Marxist
revolution where the traditional objective conditions for such a
revolution did not exist.
Augusto César Sandino
Sandino was born in 1895 out of wedlock to a poor Indian
agricultural day laborer and a moderately wealthy landholder in the
small town of Niquinohomo, Nicaragua. He spent his childhood
working as a field hand with his mother. When he was older he
gained employment as a mechanic at various plantations and haci-
endas.  In 1920 Sandino fled Nicaragua in order to avoid
91
=====第116页=====
prosecution for charges stemming from a fight with another man.
He worked in Honduras and Guatemala for several years and in
1923 he began working in the oil fields of Tampico, Mexico, where
he was caught up in the revolutionary fervor of the Mexican
revolution. Radicalized by the worker struggles in the oil fields and
dismayed at United States intervention in Nicaragua, Sandino
returned to his homeland in 1926 to fight with the liberal cause
against foreign domination. Initially he joined the Liberal army
which was fighting to overthrow the Conservative government, but
after the Liberals surrendered in 1927 Sandino kept on fighting a
guerrilla-style warfare in the Nicaraguan mountains against the
United States occupation troops. In 1933, after the United States
troops left Nicaragua, Sandino entered into peace talks with the
newly elected government. Despite the fact that he laid down his
arms, the National Guard (which the United States had created)
ambushed and killed General Sandino in February 1934.
Sandino began his guerrilla campaign as a patriotic and
nationalistic struggle to free his country from United Staes
occupation and to defend his nation's dignity. Before he would give
up his struggle, more than a battalion of marines would have died.6
Even today many consider Sandino's commitment solely to be the
removal of the marines, but his fight was not devoid of ideology. He
declared that his Army for the Defense of Nicaraguan National
Sovereignty also fought for freedom and justice for those who were
weak and oppressed. Although Sandino never identified himself as
a Marxist revolutionary, he was clearly influenced by the militant
worker struggles in the oil fields of Tampico. Sandino sought to
maintain a broad front which united many different political
elements in his struggle in Nicaragua, but he was drawn toward the
social analysis articulated by the leftists in his group who proposed
a socialist policy of agrarian reform and a redistribution of wealth.
In 1929 Sandino wrote to a supporter in Guatemala that he must
have complete confidence that this is the direction Sandino would
take.
Aithough he had a clear agenda for a social revolution,
Sandino had learned through his experiences in Nicaragua and from
the Liberal Party in Mexico that to launch a successful revolution,
one must avoid anarchist and communist labels and be careful to
keep one's deepest political convictions to oneself and to stress the
patriotic motives of a struggle.8
92
=====第117页=====
Influenced by the Mexican revolution, Sandino rooted his
struggle for a social revolution in the peasant population of
Nicaragua. He organized peasant land cooperatives in the Seovia
region of Nicaragua and used these as a model for the changes he
envisioned in Nicaragua. Sandino defined Nicaragua's national
consciousness in terms of the indigenous and mestizo masses, and
their struggle against Spanish colonization. This effort to look
toward their distant indigenous past to rediscover their nation's
historic identity led to the ability to transcend the narow
Hispanicism that had continually constrained national politics,
thought, and literature.
9
Sandino identified himself with this
indigenous struggle; he proclaimed that he was proud to be of
Indian parentage.
10
Although Sandino rooted his anti-imperialist struggle in the
rural, lower class of northern Nicaragua, he expressed an interna-
tionalist vision of a revolutionary nationalism that was linked to
other revolutionary movements throughout the world.1 In a letter
to the Spanish socialist author Luís Araquistáin which Mariátegui
published in Amauta, Sandino wrote that although at the present
time his struggle was nationalistic it would develop into an interna-
tional struggle against colonial and neocolonial imperialism.
In
1931 Sandino declared that he took great pleasure in declaring that
the army was waiting for the coming world conflagration to begin so
that it might develop its humanitarian plan in favor of the world
movement extended not only to Peru and Mariátegui, but through-
out Latin America and Europe.
Sandino's struggle was an embodiment of Sorel's idea of a
revolutionary myth. Sandino combined the thoughts of Mexican
anarchist Ricardo Flores Magón and Argentine spiritist Joaquín
Trincado into an "anarcho-Spiritism,"14
and became convinced that
his struggle had a cosmic significance and that he stood on the
threshold of a new era in which the world would be transformed by
love and good works Sandino set forth his struggle in the apoca-
lyptic terms of a clash between justice and injustice in a final
struggle for the moral andspiitualredemptionofNicaraguaas part
in his Army for the Defense of National Sovereignty with a religious
drive to achieve their aims of a social revolution in Nicaragua. In
his "Light and Truth Manifesto," which was read to his soldiers,
93
=====第118页=====
Sandino spoke of a final judgment which would eradicate injustice
from the earth, break the chains of the oppressed, and usher in a
reign of perfection, love, and divine justice.
17
There are clear parallels between the lives and the nature of
the struggles of Mariátegui and Sandino. Both were from the lower
classes of society, and neither enjoyed the advantages of a formal
academic education. Their hopes and aspirations for a social
revolution were rooted in the indigenous and mestizo rural peasant
populations of their respective countries. Although for different
reasons, both Mariátegui and Sandino spent time in exile from their
native lands. This time in exile helped form their political beliefs
and actions and determined the directions their lives would take.
The Mexican revolution was an important influence on intel-
lectuals and leftists in Latin America; it especially influenced
prevailing ideas in regard to agrarian reform and the revolutionary
potential of peasants. The influence of the radical tradition of the
revolution can be seen in the thought of both Sandino and
Mariátegui. Sandino was swayed by the material published by the
Ministry of Public Education under José Vasconcelos.18 Sandino's
approach to the mobilization of the peasant and indigenous masses
of Nicaragua reflects Vasconcelos's thoughts on indigenismo and the
affirmation of their culture and values. Mariátegui's writings show
a similar influence. In his essay on land distribution in Seven
Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality, Mariátegui quoted
Vasconcelos's concerns for the rights of the indigenous population
The example of the
participation of peasants in the Mexican revolution convinced
Mariátegui that the peasantry could develop a revolutionary
consciousness. In adapting Marxism to the Latin America context,
Mariátegui assigned to the peasantry the historic role of leading a
society in a social revolution, a role which Marx had originally given
to the industrialized working class in Europe. Mariátegui wrote
several articles on the Mexican revolution; it was a recurrent theme
in Amauta and Labor. He lectured on the subject at the González
Prada Popular University in Lima. He emphasized the importance
of the economic, social, and agrarian aspects of the revolution, and
he believed that the revolution was the beginning of the social
20
transformation of Latin America.
The painter and muralist Rivera was a vivid embodiment of
the connections among the thinkers from Peru, Nicaragua, and
94
=====第119页=====
Cuba. In addition to his use of art to express his support for
indigenous, peasant, and socialist struggles, Rivera also was
politically active in the Mexican Communist Party and the Anti-
Imperialist League of the Americas. Together with the exiled
Cuban communist leader Mella, he helped edit their respective
periodicals, El Machete and El Libertador. Rivera also worked with
the Hands-Off Nicaragua Committee which supported Sandino's
struggle in Nicaragua. From Peru, Mariátegui maintained contact
with Rivera and sent greetings to him through the Peruvian exile
Esteban Pavletich.{ Mariátegui considered Rivera to be a good
example of the New American art,2 and his art work graced the
pages and covers of both Amauta and Labor. In the December 1926
issue of Amauta, Mariategui printed a chronology of Rivera's life
together with prints and drawings of his work.23
The following
month Mariátegui printed more of Rivera's art work and an inter-
view with Rivera which Pavletich had written.
24
In an article
published in the popular Peruvian periodical Variedades, Mariátegui
called Rivera one of the best artists in the Americas. Mariategui
praised Rivera for not hiding his art work in museums or selling it
to the highest bidder but for displaying it publicly as murals in the
Mexican Ministry of Public Education. Rivera's art work expressed
the myths and symbols of the social revolution of the Mexican
indigenous culture that was more agriculturally than urban based.
Rivera's art work, Mariátegui concluded, was not a description but
a creation.
25
Mariátegui also actively used his journalistic outlets to criticize
United States policy in Nicaragua. In an article in Variedades,
Mariátegui denounced the American marine's invasion and reoccu-
pation of Nicaragua in January 1927. He saw the occupation as part
of a history of United States armed intervention in the domestic
successes of Nicaragua with the notorious goals and praxis of a
policy of expansion. Mariátegui recounted the history of the United
States overthrow of José Santos Zelaya, who had opposed American
economic penetration of Nicaragua. The United States imposed on
Nicaragua, against the will of the people, the presidency of Adolfo
Díaz, who Mariátegui called an unconditional servant of yanqui
capitalism.6 Mariategui also used Amauta to call for an end to the
American occupation of Nicaragua and for a preservation of that
country's sovereignty. Mariategui published a message from the
Peruvian students in Paris and the French writer Romain Rolland,
95
=====第120页=====
who protested the American invasion and cautioned that United
States aggression could mean an end to freedom in Nicaragua.
27
In April of 1927 Manuel Ugarte also contributed a manifesto against
the reintroductionof United States troops into Nicaragua2In the
May 1927 issue of Amauta, Jorge Basadre analyzed the relationship
of dependency between the United States and Central America.
Basadre recounted the Americans’ heavy-handed tactics in
Nicaragua, beginning with the overthrow of Zelaya in 199 and
including its refusal to abide by the Central American Court of
Justice's decision against the Chamorro-Bryan treaty which gave the
United States transisthmian canal and military base rights in
Nicaragua.
Nicaragua's neighbors argued that this treaty
encroachedon their territorial sovereignty.2M.Castroy Morales,
in an article on United States constitutional and international law,
referred to Nicaragua as a neo-colony of the United States, and
denounced the Chamorro-Bryan treaty as illegal and a violation of
Central American sovereignty.
30
In June of 1927 the Leguía dictatorship closed Amauta and
detained Mariátegui on charges of leading a communist conspiracy
to overthrow the Peruvian government. The United States embassy,
which was concerned about Mariátegui's continual forceful
denunciations of yanqui imperialism in Latin America and his strong
opposition to the marine's invasion of Nicaragua, placed pressure on
Leguía to stop publication of Amauta and to imprison its editors.
The June issue of Amauta, which had been dedicated to renouncing
yanqui imperialism in Latin America, had led Leguía to fabricate the
idea of a communist plot to "legalize* Mariátegui's arrest and the
closure of Amauta. From the San Bartolomé military hospital where
he was held for six days, Mariategui admitted that he was a
convinced and confessed Marxist but he denied any involvement in
a "gazette-like subversion plot.31
31
Mariátegui was obviously seen
as an influential voice in Latin American politics and thus a threat
to the hegemony of the Leguía regime.
Meanwhile, in Nicaragua the liberal General José María
Moncada had quit his fight against the United States Marines in
order to participate in the November 1928 presidential elections.
Sandino, however, refused to surrender and continued his struggle
against the American occupation. Sandino's struggle became for
Mariátegui an especially important cause, one which Mariátegui
energetically supported. When Amauta reopened in December
96
=====第121页=====
1927, Mariátegui continued his attacks on American policy in
Nicaragua.
Mariátegui published a statement from the Latin
American Union, a student group based in Buenos Aires, which
called the United States invasion the most hated intervention in the
history of North Americanexpansion. Thisgrouprequested that
a delegation comprised of Alfredo Palacios, José Vasconcelos, and
Victor Raúl Haya de la Torre go to Nicaragua to report on the
situation in that country. Tristan Marof, a Bolivian writer and close
collaborator with Mariátegui on Amauta, contributed an article
which argued that Sandino carried on the struggle begun by Simón
Bolivar to liberate Latin America from foreign economic, political,
and military domination.
33
In an article on the November 1928 presidential elections in
the United States and Nicaragua (which significantly, Mariátegui
noted, occurred at almost the same time), Mariátegui lamented the
acquiescence of the Liberal Party to United States interests. The
Conservatives had become tainted in Nicaraguan public opinion as
a pawn of the United States, and the United States suppored
General Moncada as the liberal candidate for president as a ploy to
undercut the popular support that Sandino's troops enjoyed. "The
only path of active resistance to yanqui domination is the heroic
path of Sandino, Mariategui declared.Manuel Ugarte, writing
for Latin American students in Paris, echoed similar concerns in a
manifesto printed in Amauta. The case of Nicaragua could not be
solved by electoral means, Ugarte maintained. He believed that the
Liberals and Conservatives formed a bloc which accepted foreign
domination and that Sandino alone raised the banner of the heroic
Sε
struggle for a Latin America free from Anglo-Saxon imperialism.
Sandino used Amauta to send messages from his base at El
Chipoton to the workers and intellectuals of Latin America. In one
such message in 1928, Sandino reaffirmed his "unalterable faith in
the triumph of our arms that in defending the liberty of one people
of our America they defend the liberty of the continent.36
Mariátegui also published a message from Henri Barbusse and the
proletariat and revolutionary intllectuals of France and Europe in
"represents an unforgettable historicalrole for his shining example
37
Mariátegui stressed the social and
and his generous sacrifices.
political aspects of Sandino's struggle, and fought against the
perception of him as a bandit and a vulgar highway robber.38
97
=====第122页=====
Mariátegui continued to stress Sandino's importance to Latin
America's anti-imperialist struggle, and in an article on Venezuela's
revolutionary movement noted that Gustavo Machado, the secretary-
general of Venezuela's Revolutionary Party, had previously been
one of Sandino's representatives in Mexico.
39
As Ricardo Luna Vegas has observed, of the many contacts
which Mariátegui maintained throughout Latin America, his
relationship with Sandino in Nicaragua was the most important one
in Central America.40
Mariátegui, however, was not the only
Peruvian who supported Sandino's struggle. Esteban Pavletich was
a Peruvian who fought with Sandino and eventually became one of
his advisors. Pavletich initially served as Sandino's contact with
Haya de la Torre's APRA party, but he later left it and became a
member of Mariategui's Peruvian Socialist Party. In a letter to
Mariátegui in 1928 Pavletich mentioned that he had seen a message
from Sandino in Amauta.4 In fact, it is possible that Pavletich may
have been the person responsible for putting Sandino and
Mariátegui in contact with each other. Mariátegui later suggested
to Pavletich that he write a book on Sandino. "In reality the theme
of Sandino has lost something,” Mariátegui wrote to Pavletich.
"But this is the reason such a book should be published as soon as
possible.*42
Although Pavletich never wrote this book, he did write
about Sandino's struggle for the pages of the Costa Rican journal
Repertorio Américano. The struggle for Nicaragua's freedom was the
struggle for the freedom of all of Latin America, Pavletich wrote in
1928.43 Foreshadowing Guevara's talk of a new man and reflecting
Mariategui's discussion of subjective factors in a revolution,
Pavletich said that Sandino was the leader of a new generation of
Latin Americans. "Sandino, who has much of Trotsky and some-
thing of [St. Francis of] Assisi, is capable of leading the new men
... to liberty and victory.'
Like TristanMarof, Pavletichsaw
Sandino as a modern-day Bolivar who would unite the struggles of
all Latin American countries and lead them to a victory against
United States imperialism.
Another Peruvian associate of Mariátegui who wrote on
Sandino was Mariátegui's longtime comrade César Falcón. In an
interview in Mexico in 1930, Falcón described Sandino's style of
leadership as very expressive and fiery, saying all that he feels.45
Falcón wrote that Sandino fought not only for the freedom of
98
=====第123页=====
Nicaragua, but also for the freedom of all Hispanic peoples.
Sandino was the first ray of Nicaraguan political resurrection.
46
As demonstrated by Mariátegui and other leftists, Sandino
gained a good deal of support for his struggle throughout Latin
America. In the March 1928 issue of Amauta, the Uruguayan poet
Blanca Luz Brum called for the formation of an army to go to
Nicaragua and join Sandino in his struggle against the maies7
many revolutionaries from all over Latin America did join Sandino
in his fight against imperialism.4Thefollowing month Ricardo
Martinez de la Torre wrote a poem in celebration of Sandino's
struggle. "We are with Sandino," Martinez de la Torre wrote,
"because he has put his arm and his spirit in defense of those who
are weak.4
In Cuba the revolutionary Grupo Minorista also
supported Sandino's struggle against the American marines. United
States aggression in Nicaragua was not seen as an isolated event but
one which affected all of Latin America and required actions of
solidarity from all of America. The José Martí Popular University
in Havana supported Sandino's fight as the first popular Latin
American insurrection against imperialist domination.
50
Like Mariátegui, Sandino encountered difficulties not only
with the governments of his own country and that of the United
States, but he was also censored by the Communist International.
Sandino had common goals with the communists; he wanted to
abolish exploitation and the capitalist system through a worldwide
proletarian revolution. He cooperated with the communists but he
disagreed with their more doctrinaire Marxist strategy and he
refused to take orders from them. Sandino's clearest break with
the Communist International came over the role of his personal
secretary, the Salvadoran communist leader Agustin Farabundo
Martí, in his general staff. "I had to expel him," Sandino later
reported, because Martí "had wanted to entangle me in the
intrigues of the communists. Actually, I never disagreed with him
ideologically.² They separatedfullof sadness and in the best of
harmony, Sandino said later, as two brothers who loved but could
53
Like Mariátegui, Sandino wanted to
not understand each other
follow an independent line and could not submit to Marti's rigid
adherence to the Communist International's directives. The price
Sandino paid for his independence was the loss of assistance from
the Communist International and the Mexican Communist Party.
Furthermore, when Sandino laid down his arms in 19, the
66
=====第124页=====
Communist International accused him of capitulation and passing
over to the side of the counterrevolutionary government of
Sacasa.
54
This insistence on an indigenous route to socialism was trans-
ferred from Mariátegui and Sandino to the Cuban and Nicaraguan
revolutions. Sandino's struggle in Nicaragua was both a military and
political one. Militarily he carried on a campaign of guerrilla
warfare that relied on ambushes and hit-and-run tactics carried out
by small bands of soldiers. Politically, Sandino organized among the
local peasant population and soon won their support. He relied on
them for information, and many of them joined his struggle on a
part-time basis. In Cuba, Castro used this strategy to gain victory in
the first successful Sandinista-style revolution in Latin America.
The Cuban revolution demonstrated the viability of both Sandino's
and Mariátegui's approach to a subjective and voluntaristic revolu-
tionary theory and passed this legacy on to a second generation of
Sandinistas in Nicaragua in the 1960s. It is significant that both the
Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions were not led by deterministic
Moscow-directed communist parties, but by a noncommunist Marxist
Left. Orthodox communist parties denounced these guerrilla
movements as adventuresome,and maintained that the objective
conditions were not right for a social revolution in Latin America.
The Nicaraguan Socialist Party, founded in 1944 and allied with the
Communist International, was no exception. It regarded Sandino as
a petty-bourgeois nationalist without a coherent political or
economic program and maintained that the objective economic
conditionsdid not exist for a revolutionary class struggle in
Nicaragua. But it was out of these conditions that the second
successful socialist revolution in Latin America emerged.555
Frente Sandinista para la Liberación Nacional
Except for Sandino's struggle against the United States
Marines in the 1920s and 1930s, Nicaragua remained largely isolated
from the labor and political organizational efforts which revolution-
aries carried on in much of the rest of Latin America. Leftists did
not organize the first communist party in Nicaragua until 1944,
almost twenty years later than their counterparts in Cuba and Peru.
As in Peru, the party called itself a socialist party—the Partido
Socialista Nicaragüense, or PSN. It had an urban proletariat as its
100
=====第125页=====
base and was formed during World War II under the influence of
Earl Browder, the secretary-general of the Communist Party of the
United States of America (CPUSA). With Germany threatening the
very existence of the Soviet Union, browderism argued that the
historic antagonism and contradiction between the bourgeoisie and
the working class had disappeared. Members of each country's
communist party should unite behind its government and join the
war effort to defeat the rise of fascism in Europe. In Nicaragua, the
PSN followed the same strategy and for several years it worked
openly with the Somoza regime. This strategy also benefited the
Somoza dictatorship, which had temporarily adopted a populist
stance in order to undercut the strength of leftist labor leaders. In
1948, with the onset of the Cold War, Anastasio Somoza García out-
lawed the PSN, imprisoned or exiled its members, or drove them
underground. Like other Latin American communist parties of this
era, the PSN followed the rigid ideology and United Front strategy
of the Stalinized Communist International. It was dogmatic,
sectarian, and ill-equipped to creatively fuse Marxism with the
national reality of Nicaragua.
As in Cuba, this party became
ineffective in its opposition to a brutal and oppressive dictatorship.
The PSN believed that due to the underdeveloped precapitalist
economy, the Nicaraguan masses lacked the potential to develop a
revolutionary consciousness. Thus, Nicaragua supposedly did not
meet the proper objective conditions which orthodox Marxists
The success of Castro's guerrillas in Cuba in 1959 convinced
several members of the PSN that they could foment a revolutionary
consciousness among the Nicaraguan people. Having lost patience
with the conservativism and passivity of the PSN, Carlos Fonseca
Amador, Tomas Borge Martinez, Silvio Mayorga, and Noel Guerrero
formed the Frente Sandinista para la Liberación Nacional (FSLN)
in 1961 as a guerrilla movement with the vision of toppling the
Somoza dynasty and replacing it with a socialist governmet. These
early Sandinistas condemned the PSN for its policies of class
collaboration,supporting the bourgeoisie,and being an accomlice
to American imperialism during World War II.5The PSN, for its
part, denounced the FSLN's efforts as utopian and premature
adventurism, much as the Communist Party had done to the 26th of
July Movement in Cuba. The PSN opted to wait for the proper
101
=====第126页=====
economic conditions for a revolution as it continued slowly to
organize the proletariat into a working-class movement.
59
The 1969 "Historic Program of the FSLN,* in which the FSLN
outlined its revolutionary aims, is representative of the Sandinista
ideology which emerged from this situation. In this document the
FSLN called itself the vanguard of a worker-peasant alliance in a
patriotic anti-imperialist and antioligarchic struggle.
The
Sandinista Front declared its commitment to an agrarian reform
which would benefit the peasant masses. In addition, the Sandinistas
declared their strong support for international solidarity. They
would actively support the struggle of the peoples of Asia, Africa,
and Latin America against the new and old colonialism and against
the common enemy: Yankee imperialism.6 The FSLN leaders,
many of whom were Marxist-Leninists and former members of the
Nicaraguan communist party, combined anti-imperialist nationalist
sentiment with the idea of an international Marxist class struggle.
They were not fighting for an abstract social or Marxist revolution,
however, but one firmly grounded in their own historical reality and
experience.
In 1975 and 1976 the FSLN broke into threefactions or
tendencies. The Proletarios followed an orthodox Marxist line
which stressed the formation of an urban, working-class vanguard
party to lead a class struggle between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie. Jaime Wheelock Román, an intellectual who had
studied Marxist economics in Chile during the socialist Salvador
Allende government of the early 1970s, headed this proletarian wing
of the FSLN. Wheelock rejected the Mariateguian and Guevarian-
style voluntarism which had earlier characterized the FSLN's
ideology. A second tendency,the Guerra Popular Prolongada
(GPP) or Prolonged People's War, emphasized a Maoist strategy of
concentrating military forces in the countryside rather than in the
city. Tomás Borge,one of the original founders of the FSLN, led
this tendency. The third tendency, known simply as the Terceristas,
favored a more flexible and innovative approach. The Terceristas
combined elements of the Proletarios' class consciousness and strug-
gle with the GPP's military strategy. They argued that the subjective
conditions existed in Nicaragua for a popular insurrection. They
brought non-Marxist elements such as the Social Democrats and
radical Christians into a unified Sandinista-led struggle against the
Somoza dictatorship. In 1978 Castro successfully urged the
102
=====第127页=====
reunification of these three tendencies, but it was the pragmatic
flexibility and ideological plurality of the Terceristas which
galvanized Sandinista leadership over a popular insurrection and
defined the unique nationalistic direction of the Nicaraguan
revolution. Tercerista Daniel Ortega Saavedra emerged as the
leader of the Sandinistas during their ten years in power. Although
this Tercerista-led Sandinista government deviated significantly from
orthodox Marxist theory, the Sandinistas energetically followed the
Mariateguian-inspired tradition of analyzing their own historical
situation in order to develop strategies appropriate to their reality.
Thus the Sandinista example not only demonstrated the strength of
a unified anti-imperialist struggle, but also the possibilities for a
nondeterministic approach to Marxist theory.
Carlos Fonseca Amador
Carlos Fonseca Amador was the one person who was largely
responsible for shaping the ideology of the new Sandinista
movement which emerged in the 1960s. Fonseca brought to the
FSLN a Marxist-Leninist analysis of Nicaraguan society that he had
learned from the PSN. Fonseca, however,used this analysis to
challenge the assumptions of the old line communist party. Fonseca
emphasized the importance of a creative and flexible approach to
revolutionary theory, and stressed that a strategy must be specifically
adapted to the concrete circumstances of a country rather than
dictated by people in distant Moscow. The models for guerrilla war-
fare which "Che" Guevara worked out in Cuba strongly influenced
Fonseca.
He also studied other international struggles and
philosophies from around the world, but ultimately believed that the
FSLN must root its struggle in Nicaragua's own reality. To this end,
Fonseca resurrected the image of General Sandino as a national
hero and promoted the social and political aspects of Sandino's
thought. Together, Guevara and Sandino influenced Fonseca's
creative intellectual development and, by extension, the formation
of the FSLN's militantly nationalistic ideology. Fonseca's emphasis
on the political education of the peasantry along with his flexible
approach to revolutionary theory and his ability to learn from his
mistakes led to a situation in which the Sandinistas ultimately
triumphed in their social revolution.
103
=====第128页=====
Fonseca began his career as a political activist while a student
in the 1950s at the Matagalpan high school in northern Nicaragua.
Together with his classmate Tomás Borge, Fonseca formed a student
activist group that established contacts with a local labor union.
Fonseca earned a reputation as an outstanding student and an avid
reader. Through his studies and during a brief tenure as a librarian
in Managua, he came in contact with a wide variety of European
and Latin American writers who influenced the development of his
Marxism. Fonseca graduated at the top of his high school class in
1955 after writing a thesis on Marx's thought entitled El capital y el
trabajo (Capital and Work). Not only was Fonseca the FSLN's
leading intellectual, he also stressed the importance of popular
education. Fonseca's mandate "and also teach them to read"
became the slogan of the 1980 literacy crusade which characterized
the early years of the revolution. Education was not to remain the
sole dominion of the elite classes, but it was to be a tool to empower
the peasant and working-class masses of Nicaragua.
Although Fonseca traced his political activities back to his
early years in school, like Guevara he claimed that the revolutionary
situation in Guatemala in the early 1950s awoke his revolutionary
consciousness. The overthrow of the leftist Jacobo Arbenz govern-
ment in Guatemala in 1954 led Fonseca to believe that the struggle
in Nicaragua was not only to overthrow a ruling clique, but to
overthrow an entire system.
62
After graduating from high school,
Fonseca and Borge studied law at the National Autonomous Univer-
sity in Leon where their political activism quickly became more
important than their studies. Both joined the Partido Socialista
Nicaragüense (PSN) in 1955 and together organized a communist
party cell and a Marxist study group at the university. The members
of this study group became increasingly more militant in their belief
that they could create a socialist revolution in Nicaragua. The PSN,
they believed, was too orthodox, dogmatic, and unrevolutionary in
its policies to lead this revolutionary struggle. Influenced by the
success of the Cuban revolution, Fonseca left the party in 1959 and
joined a guerrilla group which invaded Nicaragua with the intent to
overthrow the Somoza dynasty. This was one of several guerrilla
operations which the triumph of the Cuban revolution triggered in
Nicaragua, and these movements foreshadowed the formation of the
FSLN in1961.
104
=====第129页=====
In the development of the ideology of the Sandinista move-
ment, Fonseca referred repeatedly to both Sandino's and Guevara's
thought. In an interview in 1970 Fonseca stated that in the
revolutionary struggle they were guided by the most advanced
principles, by Marxist ideology, by the commandant Guevara, and by
Sandino.
63
Fonseca was the first Marxist in Nicaragua to look to
Sandino as a forebearer of the socialist revolution and to use him as
a model for the development of a nationally based insurrection.
Although the Nicaraguan Socialist Party criticized Sandino for his
alleged lack of a proper class analysis of Nicaraguan society,
Fonseca looked to him as a symbol of his struggle much like Casro
had used Martí to gain support for the 26th of July Movement in
Cuba. In the 195Os Fonseca collected Sandino's writings into an
anthology entitled Ideario politico del General Sandino in which he
stressed Sandino's thoughts on imperialism, internationalism, social
change, and moral integrity.64
 Although the founders of the FSLN
learned their Marxism from the PSN, they turned to Sandino's
writings in an effort to root their Marxism in a nationally based
Fonseca also acknowledged his intellectual debt to
Guevara and the Cuban revolution. He wrote that it was with the
success of the Cuban revolution in 1959 that Marxism arrived to the
rebel Nicaraguan spirit.66 Guevara was directly involved with the
formation of the FSLN; he helped train and arm the Nicaraguan
guerrillas and at one point he considered joining the Sandinistas'
struggle in Nicaragua.
67
Guevara's foco theory defined the
Nicaraguans'military strategy during the first phase of guerrilla
operations from 1962 to 1967.6 Together with Sandino, Guevara
helped define the new Marxism which Fonseca applied in Nicaragua.
Sandino and Guevara were the two most obvious and overt
influences on Fonseca, but there are also other important influences
which help explain his intellectual development. Various scholars
have pointed to the influence which the Italian philosopher Gramsci
had on Sandinista ideology. Gramsci's works were being translated
into Spanish in the 1960s and 1970s just as the Sandinistas were
developing their revolutionary ideologies. According to Donald
Hodges, Gramsci's Marxism appealed to Nicaraguan revolutionaries
because of its strong voluntarist and activist bent and because of is
justification for the FSLN'semphasis on the subjectiveconditions of
revolution. These factors led the Nicaraguans to honor Gramsci as
the single most important Marxist theoretician since Lenin.
69
105
=====第130页=====
Economist Doug Brown pointed to the socialist democratic (rather
than authoritarian) hegemonic nature of the Nicaraguan revolution
as evidence of Gramsci's presence in Nicaragua. Brown noted that
Gramsci created an opening in Marxism in which both religion and
nationalism could be injected.7{ Also central to understanding
Fonseca's place in the evolution of a Latin American revolutionary
theory, however, was Mariátegui. Although a generation separated
the two thinkers, and Mariategui had already been dead for six
years when Fonseca was born, their ideas demonstrate an important
continuity in Latin American Marxist thought. Harry Vanden has
written that Fonseca, like Mariátegui, believed that Marxism-
Leninism should provide the basis for national analysis and ideology,
but that national conditions would shape form and precise
content.
71
This influence was carried to Fonseca in a variety of
ways. Mariátegui supported Sandino's anti-imperialist struggle in
the 1920s, and Sandino therefore presented a bridge between Peru
and Nicaragua for Mariátegui's ideas on nationalism, agrarian
reform, and the importance of the political organizing and raising
the level of political consciousness of the peasantry. Similarly,
Guevara introduced elements of Mariátegui's thought that had been
incorporated into the Cuban revolution to the Nicaraguans. "What
Guevara incorporated from Mariátegui in developing his new Marx-
ism,"Donald Hodges has observed, "also rubbed off on Fonseca
and the FSLN.72
Because of Fonseca's interest in Marxism and the fact that he
was an avid reader who was conversant with the writings of a broad
range of Latin American intellectuals, it would logically seem that
at some point he would have encountered Mariátegui's ideas. In his
Marxist study group in León in the 195Os Fonseca had read
Argentine author Gregorio Selser's two-volume work on Sandino in
which Selser noted Mariategui's support for Sandino's cause.73
Contacts such as this demonstrate Fonseca's knowledge of
Mariátegui, but there is no evidence that Fonseca had read
Mariátegui's works,and he does not make direct mention of the
Peruvian Marxist in his writings. At first, this would appear to be
a curious omission not only because of Mariategui's stature among
Latin American Marxists, but also because of Fonseca's intellectual
pursuits and because of the contacts between Mariátegui and
Central America in the 192Os. In addition to his contact with
Sandino, Mariátegui also exchanged information and ideas with
106
=====第131页=====
Froylán Turcios's vanguard journal Ariel in Honduras and Joaquín
García Monge's journal Repertorio Américano in Costa Rica, both
supporters of Sandino's struggle. It would seem that remnants of
these contacts would have survived the twenty-five year period
between Sandino and Fonseca.
There are several explanations for the apparent lack of
continuity of Mariátegui's intellectual presence in Nicaragua. One
possible explanation pertains to the fact that although Mariátegui
was a strong internationalist with many contacts throughout Latin
America, he had fallen into disfavor with the international commu-
nist movement. Moscow's official line in the 1950s denounced
Mariategui as a populist who lacked a proper Marxist-Leninist
analysis,
4 and it was only later that he was returned to a position
of respect in official communist doctrine. Given the strong pro-
Moscow orientation of the PSN, Mariátegui's ideas would not have
received a warm reception in Nicaragua in the 1950s. After the
triumph of the Nicaraguan revolution, Nicaraguan poet Julio Valle-
Castillo explained the delayed entrance of Mariátegui's ideas into
Nicaragua.
"Withthe arrival oftheCold War,"Valle-Castillo
noted, "the discussion about Mariátegui [in Latin America] was
violently repressed." But with the triumph of the Cuban revolution,
throughout the continent the knowledge of Mariátegui became a
necessity for the revolutionary movement. He was revered as one
of the most original thinkers the continent has known, and
accredited with the introduction of Marxist reflection into Latin
America.
75
In addition, Nicaragua, unlike Cuba, did not have a strong
continuous tradition of leftist political and labor organizing which
would have transmitted Mariátegui's ideas to Fonseca's generation.
Until the 1970s and 1980s Nicaragua remained isolated from
international leftist intellectual currents. The early contact that
socialists in countries such as Argentina, Chile, Mexico, and Cuba
had with Marx and Marxist ideas would logically have made them
susceptible to Mariategui's influence, but Marxism came late and in
distorted forms to Nicaragua. Fonseca said that before the Cuban
revolution of 1959, Nicaragua remained ideologically on the level of
76
a cave, a prison into which Marxist ideas did not penetrate.
"Che" Guevara said that Latin America was a forgotten continent,
and Fonseca added that Nicaragua was the most forgotten of the
forgotten ones. Nicaragua was so isolated that Moscow ignored the
107
=====第132页=====
PSN, and the leaders of the PSN were therefore ignorant of many
of the disputes which tore apart the international communist
movement. It is doubtful that the leaders of the PSN would have
encountered Mariátegui's ideas, and Fonseca claimed that not even
the leader of the PSN was familiar with the content of the
Communist Manifesto. Later Borge wrote that in the 1950s no
more then half a dozen copies of Juan B. Justo's Spanish translation
of Marx's Das Kapital existed in Nicaragua. The 1918 Cordoba
University Reform Movement did not exert a strong influence in
Nicaragua until the 1950s, and the country was not represented at
the first conference of Latin American communist parties in Buenos
Aires in 1929. "Marxism was not known even in its dogmatic
version," Borge wrote. Not only did Nicaragua lack someone with
the organizing brilliance of Luis Emilio Recabarren of Chile, the
insightfulness of Mariátegui, or the political activity of Mella, but
the leaders of the PSN were also intoxicated by backwardness and
a mechanical Marxism.8 This early history of Nicaraguan Marxism
was a sad one, Borge stated, and in reality one of the characteristics
of the Nicaraguan revolution was that Marxism did not have a
history in the country.
79
Finally, although several of Mariátegui's books were in print
in the 195Os and the first stage of his Complete Works series was
released in 1959, they were not widely distributed until the 1970s
and Fonseca would have had difficulty locating them in Nicaragua.
No significant part of Mariátegui's writings was published in
Nicaragua until 1985 when the Editorial Nueva Nicaragua,in
conjunction with the Cuban Editorial Arte y Literatura, published
Mercedes Santos Moray's edited volume Marxistas de América, of
which an entire section is devoted to Mariátegui's writings.
Considering the political isolation and the presence of a conser-
vative dictatorship in Nicaragua in the 1950s, more surprising than
the lack of references to Mariátegui's thought are the connections
that Fonseca did manage to make with international Marxist
thinkers. It is possible that Fonseca came to his conclusions
independent of any direct influence from Mariátegui. It is also
clear, however, that Sandino and the Cuban revolutionaries (such a
Guevara and Castro) who had read Mariategui's works and had
assimilated his ideas into their struggles influenced Fonseca.
Furthermore, Borge has argued that Fonseca was no stranger to the
works of Mariátegui nor world revolutionary experience. Fonseca
108
=====第133页=====
was Nicaragua's first and most lucid Marxist who not only studied
revolutionary theory, but also knew how to apply it to Nicaragua's
concrete reality.80 Fonseca's thought not only reflects many of the
concerns which Mariátegui originally had raised, but it is also a
logical extension and application of Mariátegui's ideology.
Unlike the rather indirect influences of Guevara and others
on Fonseca's Marxism, other Nicaraguans (such as economist
Orlando Núnez) have acknowledged that Mariátegui's writings and
example influenced succeeding generations of Marxists in Peru and
Latin America.
81
Significantly, the writings and pronouncements
of Fonseca's friend and comrade Tomas Borge do show a direct,
overt, and conscious Mariateguian influence. Borge, the only
surviving founder of the FSLN, acknowledges Mariátegui's influence
on him and makes numerous references to the Peruvian thinker in
his writings. Borge and FSLN commandant Henry Ruiz lived in
Peru for several months under the populist military regime of
General Juan Velasco Alvarado. Before his departure for Peru,
Fonseca told Borge that while in Peru he should establish contact
with Pavletich, Sandino's former advisor, and study Mariategui's
writings. These contacts with Pavletich were not lost, and Pavletich
continued to organize support in Peru for the FSLN. In 1970 when
the Costa Rican National Guard imprisoned Fonseca, Rufo Marn,
and Humberto Ortega, Pavletich, together with Roque Dalton in EI
Salvador and Jean Paul Sartre in France, organized an international
campaign of solidarity for their release.
82
Pavletich's continued
support for the Sandinistas is evident in an article which he wrote
for the Cuban journal Casa de las Américas shortly after the triumph
of the 1979 revolution. In the article, Pavletich denounced the
history of United States imperialism and military intervention in
83
Nicaragua and championed the victory of the Sandinista uprising.
In an interview in 1982, Borge spoke of his fondness for the
Peruvian people and the influence that they had on him. The people
he met in Peru and continued to maintain contact with, including
Pavletich and the liberation theologian Gustavo Gutiérrez, undoubt-
edly introduced him to the significance of Mariategui's thought.84
Inevitably, Borge brought this influence back to Fonseca in Nicara-
gua. Peruvian journalist and writer Ricardo Luna Vegas wrote that
in the 198Os Borge, along with other leaders of the Sandinista
government,frequently invoked the name and revolutionary ideas
Through these
of Mariategui along with those of Sandino.85
109
=====第134页=====
contacts with Borge, Pavletich, and others, Mariátegui had an
influence on the development of Fonseca's thought.
The homage which the prorevolutionary Nicaraguan news-
paper El Nuevo Diario paid to Mariátegui in 1980 on the fiftieth
anniversary of his death is evidence of Mariategui's continued
significance for the Nicaraguan revolution. In a front-page article
in the cultural supplement Nuevo Amanecer Cultural, the editor Julio
Valle-Castillo traced the influence and interpretations of
Mariátegui's thought in Latin America from the 193Os through the
1970s. He noted the importance of Mariategui's political and labor
organizational efforts as part of the anti-imperialist struggle. Valle-
Castillo concluded that the history of the reception of Mariategui
justly proved that far from decreasing, his work had increased in
importance in Latin America. In an effort to "present several of the
facets of his work and his personality," this supplement included a
biography of Mariátegui by the Argentine Raúl Larra, an analysis of
the significance of his written work by the Italian Antonio Melis,
and an article by the North American scholar Harry Vanden show-
ing the Marxist influence on Mariátegui's thought. This was to be
followed in subsequent months with excerpts on Sandino from
Mariátegui's journal Amauta.
86
Valle-Castillo first encountered Mariátegui's writings while
studying at the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México in
Mexico City in the 1970s. Since then he has been instrumental in
introducing Mariátegui's ideas into Nicaragua. He noted that
intellectuals such as former Nicaraguan vice-president Sergio
Ramírez and FSLN commandants Jaime Wheelock Román and
Tomás Borge have taken an active interest in Mariátegui's thought,
but for most Nicaraguans the process of encountering Mariátegui's
ideas is more natural and organic. For many people, Mariátegui was
a basic sense; people knew his thought without knowing it, Valle-
Castillo said. Mariategui dealt with the fundamental problems of
Latin America: questions of indigenism, national struggles, and anti-
imperialism. For the Latin American mind, Mariátegui's analysis
National Marxism
Mariátegui's subtle influence on the Nicaraguan revolution is
evident in the Sandinistas'view of a flexible and nondogmatic
110
=====第135页=====
Marxism. In a speech in Mexico in 1981 Borge declared that the
Sandinista revolution was not a copy of another country's experi-
ences. He alluded to Mariátegui's statements in the editorial
"Aniversario y balance" in Amauta to claim that "It is our revolu-
tion, a heroic creation and not a copy, which fulfills the prophecy of
Mariátegui.* Borge stressed the need for a flexible approach to
the application of Marxist doctrines in Nicaragua. "We are, essen-
tially,he added,"antidogmatic because we are realists.
Mariátegui's ideas are also reflected in the Sandinistas'view of
history. Mariátegui wrote that true revolutionaries never proceed
as if history began with them. Likewise, the Sandinistas rooted
their struggle in Nicaragua's rich tradition of rebellion against
Spanish, British, and United States domination; but, Fonseca
argued, these struggles lacked the revolutionary consciousness
necessary for progressive revolutionary change. The Nicaraguans
have traditionally been a rebel people, but not a revolutionary
people, Fonseca wrote.
91
He struggled to foment a revolutionary
consciousness in the Nicaraguan people, which led him to apply
creatively and flexibly his revolutionary Marxism to the Nicaraguan
situation.
This application of a flexible and organic Marxism to a
national situation is called national Marxism and is a form of
Marxism which characterized both Mariátegui's and the Sandinistas'
ideologies. Ricardo Morales Avilés, a university professor from
León who was a member of the FSLN National Directorate before
being killed in combat in 1973 and who helped to define Sandinista
ideology during the 1970s, wrote that Nicaraguans must study their
history and their reality as Marxists, and study Marxism as
Nicaraguans. Fonseca also emphasized that their struggle had to
be rooted in their own country and culture and adapted to Nicara-
guan conditions. "We don't only base ourselves on the experiences
of other Latin American guerrilla movements," Fonseca asserted.93
It is this adaptation of Marxism to Nicaraguan conditions which
strongly characterized the Sandinista struggle and is perhaps one of
the clearest manifestations of an application of this aspect of
Mariategui's ideology to a Latin American situation. In Europe,
nationalism, especially as manifested in Nazi Germany, had a
fundamentally reactionary character. When Sandino used
nationalism and national identity tools to fight against foreign
imperialism and for social change, members of the Communist
111
=====第136页=====
International (even in Latin America) condemned him as a heretic
and an agent of imperialism.9⁴ But as Mariátegui argued in the
1920s, and as the Cubans and Nicaraguans demonstrated through
their revolutionary processes,this concept and understanding of
nationalism could not be mechanically imported into Latin America.
This element of national Marxism is an important consider-
ation in understanding the absence of numerous overt references to
Mariátegui in Sandinista writings. As in Cuba where the revolu-
tionaries first pointed to national heroes such as Martí before
discussing international figures, Fonseca and the FSLN looked for
their roots in Sandino's example before acknowledging their
intellectual debt to foreign influences. It is not so much that the
Nicaraguans wished to reject or isolate themselves from interna-
tional intellectual currents, as it is the characteristic nature of the
Latin American revolution that they would rather first look for the
indigenous roots of their struggle in their own country. Ironically,
the absence of an overwhelming number of references to Mariátegui
and other international Marxist figures in favor of a concentration
on Sandino and other national heros is a strong indication of the
presence and influence of Mariátegui in the Nicaraguan revolution.
Nationalism and Internationalism
Although the Sandinistas wrapped their struggle in patriotic
and nationalistic language, the international dimensions of the
Sandinista struggle cannot be ignored and it is important to consider
the interplay of nationalism and internationalism in the Nicaraguan
revolution. Like Sandino, the Sandinistas had a broad international
vision of an anti-imperialist war to implement social change on an
international scale.
Borge once defined Sandinista ideology
(sandinismo) as the thought of Fonseca and Sandino, applied
together with worldwide revolutionary experience and the concrete
Victor Tirado López, one of the nine commandants on the FSLN's
National Directorate, also stressed the international character of
Sandinista ideology. Tirado López noted that although Fonseca's
revolutionary ideology developed in the Nicaraguan national context,
it was greatly enhanced by the wealth of experience of the
international revolutionary movement. Like Mariátegui, however,
Fonseca clearly understood that international revolutionary
112
=====第137页=====
doctrines are useless if they are not combined with national
revolutionary thought and politics. His ideology did not form in
isolation from the broader picture of revolutionary struggles not only
in Latin America but throughout the Third World.
After the triumph of the Nicaraguan revolution, the United
States government was concerned that the Sandinistas would
attempt to export their revolution as the Cubans had done twenty
years earlier. The FSLN felt a moral obligation to assist other
revolutionary movements, especially that of the Farabundo Martí
National Liberation Front in neighboring El Salvador, but this
remained largely in the realm of political and moral sollidarity.
Borge stated that revolutions were the result of each people's effort;
they could be exported. Likewise, the Salvadoran guerrillas also
attacked the belief that revolutions could be exported; revolutions
would always grow out of local conditions and events and were not
the result of Soviet-Cuban interference.
86
Borge stressed that the
most important role of the FSLN would be to carry forward the
Sandinista revolution as an example to other guerrilla groups that
victory was possible. As the example of the Cuban revolution had
stimulated guerrilla warfare in Nicaragua, the Sandinistas would
demonstrate to others how alliances in the revolution could be
created, maintained, and expanded. After the triumph of the
Sandinista revolution, Alejandro Bendaña, Nicaragua's ambassador
to the United Nations, stated that as Sandino and his successors
believed that the Nicaraguan struggle was part of a single worldwide
struggle for freedom, the Sandinistas also recognized the importance
of international support for Nicaraguan liberation.
100
Although
the Sandinistas had a clear international vision, they realized that
this vision must be rooted in national conditions.
Thisreflects
Mariátegui's concern fifty years earlier that the Peruvian Socialist
Party would have the character of an international socialist revo-
lutionary movement, but yet retain its base in the concrete reality of
that country.
101
Anti-imperialism is another common theme which runs in both
theSandinistas'and Mariátegui's thought.
CarlosVilas,an
Argentine lawyer who worked with the Sandinistas in the Ministry
of Planning, drew on Mariátegui's ideas in order to resolve
questions on the nature of Nicaragua's national sovereigntyVilas
noted that Mariategui had differentiated between an anti-
imperialism that has class exploitation and oppression as its central
113
=====第138页=====
focus and one which is constituted on the basis of national
oppression.102
He quoted from Mariátegui's thesis "Punto de vista
anti-imperialista" that the bourgeois could be drawn to an anti-
imperialist position for reasons of expansion and capitalist growth
and not for reasons of social justice and socialist doctrine.1
103
Vilas
emphasized that for Nicaragua the class struggle was more essential,
more basic, than the struggle against United States imperialism. He
quoted Mariátegui's statement that although anti-imperialism could
be used to mobilize people in a struggle for national liberation, it
does not annul the antagonism between classes, nor does it
eliminate their different class interests.1o4 Mariátegui continued
that only a socialist revolution could oppose the advance of
imperialism with a real, definitive barrier.
105
Indigenismo
In addition to writing on anti-imperialism and class struggle in
the Nicaraguan context, Vilas has also written a book about
Nicaragua's Atlantic Coast and the issues which the indigenous
population raisedfor Nicaragua.
106
Indigenismo was a central
tenet of Mariátegui's thought and became an important part of revo-
lutionary governments in Latin American countries with large
surviving native populations such as in the aftermath of the Mexican
revolution, Jacobo Arbenz's government in Guatemala in the 1950s,
and General Juan Velasco Alvarado's revolutionary ruling Junta in
Peru from 1968 to 1975. In the previous chapter we have examined
how this issue reflected itself in the Cuban revolution in a country
where the native population had been completely annihilated four
hundred years earlier during the Spanish conquest. It might
surprise some that this issue also was important to Sandinista
ideology, especially since those opposed to the revolutionary
government have roundly criticized the Sandinistas for their policies
toward the Miskito, Sumu, and Rama Indians on the Atlantic Coast.
Hodges, in his outstanding work Intellectual Foundations of the
Nicaraguan Revolution,totally ignores this aspect of Sandinista
ideology. Many of those who do bridge this topic do so in a manner
that is highly critical of the Sandinistas,emphasizing the actions of
those who joined paramilitary organizations allied with the counter-
revolutionary forces which sought to overthrow the Sandinista
government.Many of these treatments, however,ignore the complex
114
=====第139页=====
historical realities which led to the Sandinistas' misguided efforts to
incorporate the Atlantic Coast of Nicaragua into the rest of the
country. Rather than emphasizing the naive idealism and resulting
human rights abuses which resulted from this policy, it is instructive
to reflect on why the Sandinistas sought to break from Somoza's
policy of ignoring the Atlantic Coast with the determination to bring
the benefits of the revolution to the coast and to incorporate it into
mainstream Nicaraguan life.
Although Nicaragua was not home to the highly developed
indigenous civilizations which the Spanish encountered in Mexico
and Peru, it did have a sizable native population at the time of the
Spanish conquest. The Spanish conquest of Nicaragua began in
1523 from both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts. Although the
Spaniards quickly established a foothold on the Pacific Coast, they
never controlled the Atlantic Coast, and indigenous rebellions in the
interior long repelled Spanish advances into their territory. In 1612
the Spanish began a serious effort to conquer the interior of
Nicaragua, an effort which finally succeeded 150 years later, not
through military power but through the religious zeal of Franciscan
missionaries. The conquest of Nicaragua was not an easy one. In
1743, over two hundred years after the beginning of the Spanish
conquest of Nicaragua, a Spanish military official named Luis Dies
Navarro counted fourteen indigenous revolts against Spanish rule.
He claimed that the Pantasmas, Lencas, Bocayes, Cuge, Tomayes,
Nanaicas, and other indigenous ethnic groups which lived in central
and northern Nicaragua were "the most disloyal subjects of his
Spanish Majesty.
#107
Even after the Spanish subjugation, the
indigenous population continued to agitate for political reforms. In
1817,in an act which marked one of the first labor protests in
Nicaragua, an indigenous delegation walked from northern
Nicaragua to the colonial center of power in Guatemala to lodge a
complaint with the Spanish officials over the low salaries and bad
working conditions which they suffered. Even after the end of
Spanish rule, the indigenous people continued to revolt against the
foreign rule which the Spanish-speaking Nicaraguan leaders repre-
sented. In 1856, Matagaipan Indians played a significant role in the
fight againstthe ilibuster William Walker,and in181they carried
108
on a seven-month uprising against the Nicaraguan government.
Although by the twentieth century the Spanish had subjugated the
Matagalpans and incorporated them into the dominant Hispanic
115
=====第140页=====
culture, the Miskitos, Sumus, and Ramas on the Atlantic Coast still
retained their separate cultural and ethnic identities. Their history
was one of alienation from the Spanish-speaking Pacific Coast, and
they viewed the revolutionary Sandinista government not as a
change from the long history of Spanish imperialism and cultural
domination that stretched back to the sixteenth-century conquista-
dors, but merely as another chapter in a lengthy and continuous
history.
Although most Sandinistas were Spanish-speaking mestizos
from Nicaragua's Pacific Coast, it is important to recognize that they
regarded their struggle as a continuation of that which the indige-
nous people had begun in the sixteenth century against colonial
oppression. Rather than treating the indigenous population as dirty,
backward savages, which is still common in much of Latin America,
both Sandino and the Sandinistas saw indigenous struggles as
related to their own. Tomás Borge,president of the Autonomy
Commission, which sought to resolve the political status of
Nicaragua's Atlantic Coast, noted in a speech in 1985 that Sandino
had worked with and relied on the help and aid of the Miskitos and
Sumus as he fought in the Departments of Segovia and Zelaya
Norte.10Neill Macaulay relates the story of Adolfo Cockurn
well-regarded Miskito leader with a large following along the Coco
River on the Honduran-Nicaraguan border. In 1930 he was commis-
sioned as a general in Sandino's army, and the following year the
United States Marines captured and executed him
110
In these
and in other ways, Sandino and the indigenous population of
Nicaragua integrated their struggles.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the Sandinistas enjoyed a high degree
of support within the Indian neighborhoods of Monimbó in Masaya
and Subtiava in León. The Sandinistas drew on their actions and
those of Indians in Matagalpa and elsewhere as part of a long
history of resistance to colonial domination. During years of
political organizing in the Nicaraguan mountains the Sandinistas
came in daily contact not only with mestizo peasants, but also
members of the Miskito, Sumu, and Rama ethnic groups. Unlike
the purely strategic alliances which the Contras later built with these
groups, the Sandinistas sought to merge the two struggles.
Numerous Sandinista intellectuals have expounded on this theme of
the importance of the indigenous struggles. While in exile in the
early 1970s, Jaime Wheelock Román wrote a treatise entitled
116
=====第141页=====
"Indigenous roots of the anti-colonial struggle in Nicaragua”in
which he criticized the majority of historians for identifying with
Spanish colonialists and ignoring the history of indigenous
resistance. Although Wheelock as leader of the proletarian wing of
the FSLN rejected the Marxist voluntarism which characterized
Mariátegui's thought, he did identify with Mariátegui's views on
indigenismo. "The roots of the anti-colonial indigenous struggle run
deep," Wheelock wrote in this work, which is clearly sympathetic
with the plightof the indigenous people.11Tomas Borge in La
paciente impaciencia, his autobiographical history of the Sandinista
revolution, refers to his native region of Matagalpa as being that of
an Indian people. He links the early indigenous and the later
Sandinista struggles both symbolically and concretely. The early
indigenous guerrillas marched into battle with their faces and bodies
painted red and black, significantly the same colors that Sandino
and later the FSLN chose to represent their struggle.
112
In the 1969 "Historic Program of the FSLN," the Sandinistas
gave an early articulation of their plans for the Atlantic Coast and
the importance which they placed on the region. They condemned
the neglect and exploitation which the Atlantic Coast suffered and
vowed to wipe out the odious discrimination to which the indigenous
Miskitos, Sumus, Zambos, and Blacks of this region were
subjected.11 When the Sandinistas came to power in 1979 they
sought to put these ideals into practice. Many of the inhabitants of
the Atlantic Coast, however, saw this as nothing more than another
Spanish invasion into their lives. They had not experienced the
intense repression of the Somoza dynasty, but rather appreciated the
independence which resulted from Somoza's neglect of the Atlantic
Coast. When the Sandinistas came with their ideals of bringing the
benefits of their revolution to the indigenous peoples, cultural and
linguistic differences led to human rights abuses and many of the
people whom they sought to help instead took up arms against the
revolution. To their credit, the Sandinistas listened to the people
from the coast and together they formed an Autonomy Commission
which devised a plan of autonomy that would preserve the language
and cultural expression of the indigenous population.
"The
historical enmities of the indigenous peoples and Atlantic Coast
communities, the Autonomy Commission declared,"through the
affirmation of its popular and anti-imperialistic character formed
part of the struggle of the Popular Sandinista Revolution.'
n114
117
=====第142页=====
Placed in its proper historical setting, the process of autonomy was
not a whim of the coastal people nor a paternalistic gift from the
Sandinistas but an exercise in self-determination and an affirmation
of a country's ethnic and racial diversity.
The Nicaraguan Autonomy Commission declared Nicaragua to
be a multiethnic country, a major step in breaking from the
traditional Pacific Coast/Spanish-speaking orientation of Nicaragua
and recognizing the cultural and ethnic diversity of the country.
115
Few other countries have made such expressions, and the desire for
the government to recognize the multiethnic component of a country
has become a common element of indigenous struggles throughout
the hemisphere. Not only do the Sandinistas' actions reflect
Mariátegui's influence on their ideology,their policies have also
inspired historical developments in other countries. Although the
indigenous population comprises only about 5 percent of the
Nicaraguan population, the Sandinistas'actions set an example
which had profound ramifications for liberation struggles throughout
Latin America, including countries such as Guatemala and Peru
where the indigenous people comprise more than half of the
population.
116
This theme of indigenismo was also reflected in the thought
of Ernesto Cardenal, the minister of culture in the revolutionary
Nicaraguan government. He believed that it was his revolutionary
duty to help preserve the indigenous people's language and culture
from "cultural ethnocide."117 John Beverley and Marc Zimmerman
have observed that "like Mariátegui in his articulation of the Inca
ayllu as a prototype of communist society indigenous to America,
Cardenal came to posit the classic Mayan cities as peaceful, classless
societies whose values more or less coincided with the Christian
utopia he was seeking to propagate in Solentiname."118
Cardenal
saw a link between cultural and political oppression, and stressed
the necessity to affirm a native identity in order to liberate the
people fully. He believed that part of the revolutionary process was
to engender an appreciation for Nicaragua's own indigenous culture
and to use that culture to raise people's revolutionary consciousness.
Indigenismo was also central to the cultural journal Nicaráuac which
Cardenal's Ministry of Culture began publishing less than a year
after the triumph of the 1979 revolution. In an editorial introducing
the first issue of this journal, Cardenal explained the significance of
the name. “We want to give this cultural journal of the New
118
=====第143页=====
Nicaragua the precolumbian name that was, perhaps, the first name
of our land," Cardenal wrote. After exploring the possible linguistic
roots of the word Nicaráuac in the Nahuatl and Arawak languages
and explaining how the Spanish conquistador Gil González Dávila
understood it as "Nicaragua," Cardenal stated that with this
"ancient name we want to reinvigorate the formidable Sandinista
Revolution with our most vital and ancient indigenous and
American roots.'
Although the Nicaraguans probably did not consciously pattern
their journal after the cultural journal Amauta which Mariategui
published in Peru in the 192Os, Cardenal's editorial introducing
Nicaráuac reflects three themes that Mariátegui presented in his
editorial in the first edition of Amauta. The first and most obvious
common theme is the affirmation of the country's indigenous roots
and the use of an indigenous word which has historical national
significance as a title for the journal. Similar to Cardenal's
comments introducing Nicaráuac, Mariátegui, in his editorial intro-
ducing the new Peruvian journal, wrote that the choice of his title
demonstrated "our adherence to the Race" and to the spirit of the
ancient Inca Empire.120
The two other strong parallels between
Amauta and Nicaráuac concern the themes of Pan-Americanism and
the "new man." Cardenal did not envision his journal to be just for
Nicaragua but for all of Latin America. "The cause of Nicaragua is
the cause of all of Our America,121
Cardenal wrote, exhibiting
the strong internationalist character which has been an important
part of the Latin American revolution beginning with Bolivar and
carried on through the thoughts and actions of Martí, Mariátegui,
and the Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions. A final common theme
relates to the concept of the new man, one possible translation of
the word "Nicarauac" from the Arawak word Nec arahuac,or
Hombres Valientes—Valiant Men. For Cardenal, a valiant man was
a new man who was part of the historical process of constructing a
122
Aswe have already seen in the
new society in Nicaragua.
previous chapter, although internationalism was an important part
of the Cuban revolution and talk of a socialist new man is generally
associated with Che Guevara, these concepts have roots in
Mariategui's thought. In his editorial in Amauta, Mariategui pro-
claimed the importance of Peru in a worldwide socialist movement
and that his journal would "unite the new men of Peru, first with
119
=====第144页=====
the other people of America and then with all of the people of the
world.123
Revolutionary Myth
In addition to the presentation of a nationalistic, anti-
imperialistic, peasant-based revolution which valued the contri-
butions of the indigenous population to the popular struggle, the
Sandinistas also confirmed Mariátegui's belief in the value of an
open, non-deterministic, subjective Marxism. Sheldon Liss has
written that Fonseca believed that in order "to mobilize the masses
for revolution ... both scientifically oriented theory as well as
nonrational beliefs that relate to human emotions are needed, an
idea he picked up from the writings of Mariátegui."124
Nicaragua
is a land of poets, a situation which helped emphasize the subjective
and emotional aspects of the revolutionary struggle in Latin
America. During the Nicaraguan insurrection in the 1970s, poetry
or sermons from radical priests frequently proved more inspirational
than obscure Marxist tracts that had little to do with local conditions
or supposed directives from Moscow.125
Burbach and Núñez have
acknowledged this influence in saying that it was no exaggeration to
say that poets and novelists in Latin America have played a much
more important role than social scientists in raising the political
consciousness of the masses against authoritarian regimes and
imperialism.
126
Poetry not only helped to form Nicaragua's
national identity; the Sandinistas also used it in practical ways such
as to instruct the population in the art of making armaments. An
appeal to the nonrational as well as the rational can be seen in the
thought of several of the leaders of the FSLN. Tomás Borge has
said that the Sandinista insurrection was not only a function of
bullets, but also was fought with guitars and poems.
127
The roots of using poetry and culture as a tool for raising
political consciousness, though, predates the Sandinistas. As early
as the nineteenth century Rubén Dario's writing had a strong
political component. In the 1920s, at the same time that Mariátegui
and the Vanguardist movement flourished in Peru, a similar
phenomenon swept Nicaragua. In La paciente impaciencia, Borge
places Mariátegui in the context of what he calls "The Generation
of 27," a group of revolutionary vanguardistas from the 1920s that
included the Cordoba University Reform Movement, Sandino,
120
=====第145页=====
Mariategui, and the Nicaraguan poet José Coronel Urtecho.128
Coronel and the Vanguardist movement swung from lending support
to Sandino's nationalistic campaign in the 192Os to supporting the
Somoza dictatorship in the 1930s, but later Coronel denounced the
abuses of the Somoza dictatorship and became a Sandinista partisan.
He became an intellectual leader and revolutionary poet similar in
status to Cardenal, Borge, and Sandinista vice-president Sergio
Ramírez in creating and defining the Nicaraguan national identity.
Borge once said, as he quoted from Mariátegui's La escena
contemporánea,"our fight is not only for bread but also for
beauty.'
129
Borge stressed that human liberation and the creation
of a new society were the main goals of the Sandinista revolution.
In a continuation of Mariátegui's and Guevara's thoughts on the
New Socialist Man, Borge argued that the reconstruction of man
was, in his opinion, the most important part of national reconstruc-
tion.
130
Fonseca also pointed to the importance of a revolu-
tionary's duty to struggle for humanity. Hodges has written that
Fonseca agreed with Mariátegui's analysis that people need more
than theory to move them to action, that revolutionaries must
appeal to nonrational as well as rational motives,to the will to
believe and to basic human sentiments.
131
Fonseca's strategy led
to the formation of a higher level of political consciousness in a new
generation of Nicaraguan revolutionaries.
132
Fred Judson, who has written on the influence of a revolu-
tionary myth on the Cuban revolution, also pursued this discussion
in the Nicaraguan case. Placing his argument in the context of
writings by Sorel, Gramsci, and Mariátegui on subjective Marxism
and revolutionary myths, Judson states that in Nicaragua revolution-
ary consciousness was supplemented by faith, the conviction that not
only is revolution necessary, but possible and imminent.
133
As did
Fonseca, Judson argued that political education was necessary in
order to establish a revolutionary morale in Nicaragua. Further-
more, the dialectic symbolism of life and death results in martyrs
134
who live in the works of the revolution.
The resulting
Nicaraguan revolutionary myth of sandinismo was based in the
political culture as well as the ideological and political struggles.
135
In these and other ways, Judson demonstrates how the subjective
elements of a revolutionary morale (or revolutionary myth) becomes
a very concrete objective factor in determining the direction of a
revolutionary process.
121
=====第146页=====
Perhaps the most vivid embodiment of the Sandinista-style
subjective Marxism came in the realm of religion. Marx believed
that religion was the opium of the people and that it prevented
people from realizing their full human potential. "The abolition of
religion as the illusory happiness of men, is a demand for their real
the positive expressio of huma slfconscios3
Subsequent
Marxist revolutions and revolutionaries, including those in Russia,
China, and Cuba, largely followed this interpretation of religion.  In
Cuba, the Communist Party believed that in a communist society the
It
reflected Marx's belief that communism begins where atheism
begins.
139
The result in Cuba was a polarized situation with
strained relations between the government on one side and the
Catholic and Protestant churches on the other.
The Sandinistas, however,took a radically different stance
toward religion and conducted one of the first leftist revolutions to
accept openly the role and contribution of religious workers to the
process of social change. Sandinista ideology broke decisively with
Marxism's claim that religion was a form of alienation and a false
consciousness. The Sandinistas acknowledged that religion histori-
cally had served as a mechanism for spreading false consciousness
among people and as a theoretical basis for political domination, but
they believed that now religion could also be used to heighten
people's revolutionary consciousness.140 Several factors account
for the different attitudes toward religion in Nicaragua and Cuba.
The Catholic church in Cuba was not the strong institution that it
was in Nicaragua. It did not reach much beyond the urban middle
class and was thus divorced from the reality of the majority of the
Cuban population. With notable exceptions such as Frank País, who
was a Protestant, few combatants in Castro's 26th of July Movement
were religious. Nicaragua, on the other hand, had a strong Catholic
tradition and many devout believers joined the FSLN in the cam-
paign to overthrow the Somoza dictatorship. In addition, radical
shifts in the theology of the Catholic church in the 1960s due to the
Second Vatican Council,liberation theology,and the rise of a
political and revolutionary Popular Church created a situation which
allowed for a greater involvement of religious actors in the political
process in Nicaragua than had occurred with their counterparts in
Cuba in the 1950s. At the 1968 Latin American Bishops conference
122
=====第147页=====
at Medellin, Colombia, the Catholic bishops declared their prefer-
ential option for the poor. Traditionally, the Catholic church had
been an ally of the wealthy elite; now progressive elements of the
Church were calling for religious participation in leftist social move-
ments. Many revolutionaries, in addition, began to deemphasize
Marx's views on religion in favor of an acceptance of the positive
contributions of religious actors to the revolutionary process. The
success of the Sandinista revolution represented another large step
in the closing of this gap between Marxist revolutionary theory and
religious activism, and has permanently realigned Marxist-Christian
relations in Latin America.
141
This interplay between religion and Marxist theory is one of
the chief characteristics of the Nicaraguan revolution, and it is in
this issue that Mariátegui's influence on Sandinista ideology once
again becomes apparent. "To a degree unprecedented in any other
revolutionary movement in Latin America," the FSLN said in an
official communiqué on religion, "Christians have played an integral
part in our revolutionary history.
142
Initially there was mutual
suspicion between the Christians and the Sandinistas, but largely
through the initiative and efforts of Catholic priests and Christian
base communities, the struggles of the two groups were combined
into one unified fight against Somoza. During the insurrection,
elements of Nicaragua's progressive Popular Church worked openly
with the Sandinista movement, and the Sandinistas willingly
accepted their contribution toward the building of a new society in
Nicaragua. The crucial importance of their actions led Tomas Borge
to conclude that a leftist revolution could not succeed in Central
America without the militant participation of Christians.
143
María
Haydee Teran, Carlos Fonseca's wife, noted that although Fonseca
was an atheist and spoke often about communism, he never asked
her to abandon the Christian faith. For him, and also for her, there
was no contradiction between the two ways of thinking. Her state-
ment recalls Mariategui's contention that the revolutionary critic no
longer disputes with religion and the church the services they have
"Through their interpretation of faith,"
rendered to humanity.144
the Sandinista communiqué on religion concluded, "many FSLN
members and fighters were motivated to join the revolutionary
struggle.
145
Mariategui's influence was also transmitted to Nicaragua
through the example of priests who joined guerrilla armies which
123
=====第148页=====
fought for a social revolution. Camilo Torres, who was killed while
fighting with the communist-led National Liberation Army (ELN) in
Colombia, proclaimed that he took off his cassock to be more truly
a priest, and that the duty of every Catholic was to be a
revolutionary, the duty of every revolutionary to make the revolu-
tion.
146
Reflecting Guevara's influence, Torres wrote that he
believed that he had given himself to the revolution out of love for
his fellow man.
147
Mariategui's emphasis on the importance of a
revolutionary myth or faith in bringing a social revolution to realiza-
tion influenced, through Guevara, Torres's views. In turn, Torres
inspired Catholics in Nicaragua to join the struggle for a social
revolution. Gaspar García Laviana was one such priest who was
influenced by Torres's example and joined the' FSLN. The
Sandinistas consider García, who was killed while fighting within the
FSLN guerrilla ranks, to represent "the highest synthesis of
Christian vocation and revolutionary consciousness.
148
García
wrote that his faith and Catholicism obliged him to take an active
part in the FSLN's revolutionary process because the liberation of
an oppressed people was an integral part of the total redemption of
Christ.
149
García was not alone; other radical priests, influenced by
radical trends in Catholic theology, began to organize social action
based on a Marxist-influenced analysis of society. One such priest,
Father Uriel Molina, organized Christian Base Communities, which
mobilized grass roots support in poor neighborhoods in Nicaragua
Other priests such as Ernesto
Cardenal, Fernando Cardenal, and Miguel D'Escoto also joined
forces with the FSLN and later took positions in the Sandinista
government after the triumph of the 1979 revolution.
151
Trappist
Father Ernesto Cardenal emerged from a religious community at
Solentiname in Lake Nicaragua in the 1960s to lead the religious
opposition to the Somoza dictatorship. His theological reflections
led him to an increased awareness of the economic injustices in
Nicaragua and the need for political action to change that reality.
A trip to Cuba in 1970 led Cardenal to believe that there was no
contradiction between Marxism and Christianity.
152
He became an
avowed Marxist revolutionary and presented the most articulate
fusion of Catholic theology and the theory of Marxist class struggle
in Nicaragua. Cardenal considered primitive Christian communalism
to be a precursor of Marxism, and he believed that Christianity
124
=====第149页=====
expressed in religious terms the same class struggle that Marx
expressed in scientific terms. This struggle extended itself to a
struggle between the reactionary Christianity of the Somoza
dictatorship and the revolutionary Christianity of the proletariat and
the Popular Church. The goal of this struggle was the establishment
of the biblical Kingdom of Heaven on earth, which would be a
society without exploitation of man by man, without domination of
any kind, which would be the complete fraternity of perfect love
among people.
153
Catholics were not the only ones who joined
c
forces with the FSLN; a growing radicalism among small Protestant
sects also contributed to the development of the revolutionary
process in Nicaragua.
154
In total, religious actors took a larger
role in Nicaragua's revolutionary struggle than ever before. Rather
than being a reactionary force, the Sandinistas saw that a religious
faith could aid in the fomentation of a revolutionary consciousness
and in the development of a new society. Together, these religious
actors helped bring to the FSLN the dimensions of a revolutionary
faith and consciousness which Mariátegui had drawn from Sorel and
other sources and had introduced to Latin America in the 1920s.
Liberation theology is the fullest articulation of the Christian
theology which Mariátegui influenced and which the Sandinistas
carried forward in their revolutionary struggle. Liberation theology,
a movement which employed Marxist analytical tools to reflect criti-
cally on societal problems, represented a historic turning point in
the attitude of the Catholic church toward popular movements for
social justice. Traditional Christian theology, which emerged from
the articulations of the elite classes, endeavored to dictate orders to
the lower classes. Liberation theologians sought to reverse that
relationship, to give hope to the aspirations of an oppressed people
and to lead people to realize that they must take a conscious
responsibility for their own destiny. Rather than presenting an
escapist religion, liberation theology led to empowerment and
change. An important element of liberation theology is the concept
of praxis. Praxis is the combination of theory and practice in a
revolutionary situation; liberation theology's praxis often leads far
away from the domain of religion and theology into the realm of
politics, economics, and history. Liberation theologians are not
afraid to use tools of social analysis in order to understand their
historical situation, and this analysis forms the basis for their
theological reflections.
125
=====第150页=====
Mariátegui foreshadowed liberation theologians' attempts to
use religion as a device to foment a revolutionary consciousness in
the masses. Vanden has pointed to Mariátegui's contribution to the
Latin American intellectual base on which liberation theology was
developed, and Eugenio Chang-Rodriguez has noted that Mariátegui
anticipated several of the fundamental points that liberation
theology later would maintain.155
In order to understand the
nature of this influence, it is important to consider the importance
that Gustavo Gutiérrez, a Peruvian theologian, gave in articulating
the major aspects of liberation theology. Gutiérrez and Mariátegui
never met (Mariátegui died when Gutiérrez was two years old) but
Gutiérrez attended the university in Lima with Mariátegui's son and
had extended contact with Mariátegui's ideas. Gutiérrez later
taught a class on Mariátegui's thought for several years in the
university and he was clearly conversant with the historiographic
material on Mariátegui.
156
In an interview in 1980, Gutiérrez
noted the significance that the originality of Mariátegui's thought
had for creating a new Peruvian society. Social change, Gutiérrez
believed, could come from the oppressed and exploited lower
classes. Unlike many other intellectuals who were part of the elite
classes, Mariátegui was one of few people to combine popular class
political action and reflective thought into a revolutionary praxis.
Furthermore, Mariategui's writings were not sterile relics of the
1920s, Gutiérrez noted. Many of the points which Mariátegui
forwarded were still relevant to the current situation.
157
Virtually all scholars conversant in Peruvian intellectual
history who have written on Gutiérrez's thought have noted the
central importance of Mariátegui's ideas on his intellectual
development. One theologian has noted three main themes from
Mariátegui's writings that became central to Gutiérrez's thought: the
search for an indigenous socialism, the option for class struggle over
interclassism, and the unity of theory and praxis.
158
References to
Mariategui's  thought and writing are scattered
throughout
Gutiérrez's works. In his 1971 book A Theology of Liberation, the
first book to articulate the central tenets of liberation theology,
Gutiérrez acknowledged Mariátegui's contribution to an indigenous
socialism for Latin America. Gutiérrez considered socialism to be
the most fruitful and far-reaching approach for Latin American
liberation. He quoted Mariátegui's nondeterministic statements that
Marxism was not a body of principles which could be applied rigidly
126
=====第151页=====
the same way in all historical climates and all social latitudes, but
that socialism must be a heroic creation,adapted to a specific
historical situation.159
Class struggle was also a central tenet of
Gutiérrez's theology, and he allied himself with Mariátegui in the
ideological battle against Haya de la Torre's interclassist APRA
politics.
160
Gutiérrez also employed Mariátegui's method of
reflecting critically on a concrete situation and then using that
reflection to develop appropriate and indigenous solutions for the
problems of one's society. To reach such a historical praxis,
Gutiérrez quoted Mariategui's statement that "the ability to think
history and the ability to make it or create it become one.161
Gutiérrez emphasized that solutions must be adapted to specific
historical situations. Because of very different situations the
analyses of one social formation cannot be unqualifiedly transposed
to other situations, he wrote in A Theology of Liberation.
162
Gutiérrez strove to build a different society, freer and more human.
In the process, however, he wished to avoid a mechanical transfer
of an approach foreign to our historical and social coordinates.
163
The most significant aspect of Mariátegui's thought that is
reflected in liberation theology is his characterization of the mythical
elements of spirituality and social change. As a theologian,
Gutiérrez looked for the role of the Christian in a liberation
struggle. To answer this question, he looked toward Mariátegui's
thoughts on the role of the religious factor in the life and history of
164
the people of Peru.
Not only did Gutiérrez concur with
Mariategui's discovery of the poor as historical subjects who could
move history, he also saw the poor as the embodiment of the myth
creating a new national spirit.165
Mariátegui stressed the
importance of Sorel's revolutionary myth in the fomentation of a
revolutionary consciousness. "The strength of revolutionaries is not
in their science, Mariátegui wrote in 1925, "it is in their faith.6
"As Sorel predicted," Mariategui concluded in an essay on religion,
"the historical experience of recent years has proven that present
revolutionary and social myths can occupy man's conscience just as
Like liberation theologians,
fully as the old religious myths.
Mariátegui saw Marxism less as a finished metaphysical explanation
of reality than as a tool for interpreting and changing that reali-
168
Mariategui justified the blending of Marxist ideologies and
ty.
Christian theology into a subjective understanding of revolution.
127
=====第152页=====
The tenets of liberation theology left an unmistakable
impression on Nicaragua and the Sandinista ideology, and Gustavo
Gutiérrez, through his example and visits, had a strong influence in
that country.
169
Liberation theology, therefore, became a clear
and direct conduit of Mariátegui's influence on the Nicaraguan
revolution. Liberation theology had a profound impact on the
Sandinistas' open attitude toward religion, and it helped make them
less antagonistic toward religion than their counterparts in Cuba.
Unlike in Cuba, there was no contradiction in Nicaragua between
religious involvement and active membership in the ruling party.
The influx into Cuba of Sandinista party militants who had fused
religion and politics led the Cuban government also to be more
open to the idea of the involvement of religious actors in the
construction of a new society. This stimulated them to reorient their
thinking and party policy toward religion. As Sandino influenced
the Cuban revolution, the present generation of Sandinistas has also
influenced the ideology of the Cuban government, and in this
manner elements of Mariátegui's thought have once again informed
the Cuban revolution.
Religion is only one aspect of the nature of the Sandinistas'
National Marxism. Although the Cuban revolution influenced
Sandinista ideology, the Sandinista revolution evolved in a direction
independent of Cuba. This is in part a rejection of an orthodox
Marxist approach to socialism and is also an affirmation of
Mariátegui's praxis that a revolutionary movement must consider the
concrete historical situation in which it operates and orient its
actions accordingly. "Just as the Sandinistas found Sandino,so
young intellectuals and radicals throughout the continent are
rediscovering Mariátegui," Vanden wrote. "He is considered by
many to be the intellectual precursor of Latin America's second
revolution."170
Mariátegui continues to play a central role in the
evolution of Latin American revolutionary theory.
128
=====第153页=====
5
THE LEGACY OF MARIATEGUI
Over the past sixty years, Mariátegui has influenced revolutionary
theory in a variety of ways throughout Latin America. He inspired
his contemporaries to develop new and compelling analyses of their
national reality. He helped adapt Marxist theory to countries
without a high level of capitalistic development. Mariátegui argued
for the revolutionary potential of the peasantry, an important factor
in largely rural Latin American societies. Mariátegui's contributions
to revolutionary theory also include his thoughts on the "open" and
nondogmatic application of Marxism to a national situation. Not
only have his theories influenced revolutionaries and social move-
ments throughout Latin America, Mariátegui also played a role in
the development of liberation theology in Latin America, which has
brought the importance of a revolutionary myth to popular social
movements.
For a period of time in the 1980s, sandinismo became a symbol
of the Latin American socialist struggle. For many leftists through-
out Latin America, the triumph of the Sandinista revolution was an
inspiration. It had been twenty long years since the triumph of the
Cuban revolution, and there had been many defeats of guerrilla
armies in Peru, Bolivia, Guatemala, and other Latin American
countries. The Nicaraguan revolution demonstrated that a
nationally based leftist insurrection could defeat an entrenched
right-wing dictatorship. Furthermore, the Sandinistas triumphed in
a situation which did not meet Marxism's economic criterion for a
social revolution. The Sandinistas demonstrated that subjective
factors could be substituted for objective ones,and that a revo-
lutionary consciousness could be fomented in an underdeveloped
society. As Thomas Angotti has noted, this development led many
revolutionary leftists to reflect on the historical significance of
Mariátegui's writings. In 1982 Vanden concluded that the ideology
129
=====第154页=====
of the Nicaraguan revolution was at once the recuperation of a long
history of national struggle and the specific Nicaraguan manifesta-
tion of the new wave of revolution that was sweeping the Third
World.² "Indeed," Vanden speculated, "perhaps Mariátegui's long
awaited generation is now emerging in Central America.³
Many
leftists expected that the Sandinista movement would be the model
for the future, the vanguard of a revolutionary movement which
would institute national Marxist governments throughout Latin
America.
In the minds of many people, world events during the later
part of the 1980s and early 1990s have obliterated almost completely
this possibility for a socialist Latin American revolution. Many
people on the political Right enthusiastically greeted the overthrow
of communist governments in Eastern Europe, the dissolution of the
Soviet Union, and the electoral defeat of the Sandinistas in
Nicaragua, and hoped that it would be only a matter of time before
a similar fate befell the revolutionary Cuban government. Without
the Soviet Union, many expected that revolutionary Marxism would
fade away and soon be a dead ideology. These views, however,
naively perceive Third World Marxist movements as having
emanated from Moscow. Many in the Latin American Left have
rejected authoritarian forms of government and do not see changing
one dictatorship for another as an overall improvement. Increas-
ingly there are calls for a democratic revolution based on a pluralist,
rather than one-party, state model which guarantees freedoms of
speech, press, organization, conscience, and religion. The crisis of
Stalinism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union altered the
correlation of forces in the East-West conflict, but it left intact a
North-South conflict that historically has left the Third World in a
marginalized and underdeveloped position. Revolutionary move-
ments in Latin America were the result of internal conditions and
not the product of the Cold War. Many Third WorId Marxists
viewed with dismay the breakup of the Soviet Union, not because of
the loss of its leadership, but because of fears of United States
imperialism. "We feel that this is going to lead to a unipolar world,
where the United States is going to lead in the world," one Indian
communist leader said. "For all Third World countries a unipolar
world doesn't augur well."4 Many people in the Third World had
come to rely on the Soviet Union's military power to help check the
United States' imperialist expansion, and these people feared facing
130
=====第155页=====
United States economic and political power without the protection
of the Soviet Union as a bulwark against their enemies.
Although the industrial and technical advances in the Soviet
Union in the 1950s created a shining model which appealed to many
in the Third World, by the 1980s the burdensome and inefficient
centralized bureaucratic Soviet state was not an example that many
wished to emulate. A common view which emerged among leftists
was that the Soviet model for building socialism was a failed model,
and its implementation in Eastern Europe was doomed to failure.
Revolutionary Marxism, this line of thinking argues, must develop
from a specific historical context and cannot be transplanted from
one society to another. In an article in NACLA's Report on the
Americas, Argentine Marxist Carlos Vilas declared that "if we admit
that state socialism in the Soviet bloc was not the only, nor the best
version of socialism, the Soviet collapse seems not so relevant to
Latin America,from either an economic or a political perspective."
In an important article in the journal Monthly Review, Vilas further
articulated such a critique of Eastern Europe in which over-
centralized, bureaucratic authoritarian regimes created an explosive
social, economic, and political situation. Although the rejection of
socialism in Eastern Europe challenged the theoretical possibilities
for socialism in the Third World, Vilas argued that the need for
indigenous forms of socialist theory were stronger than ever.
Without socialism, Third World countries would not experience
capitalist development, but capitalist peripheralization. Socialism,
Vilas concluded,was therefore the only possible alternative for
Third World countries that are looking not just for economic
development, but for real and effective democracy as well.6
After the fall of hard-line regimes in Eastern Europe, United
States president George Bush denounced Castro as the Iast
surviving Stalinist leader and pushed for his ouster. Bush's
statements indicated that he, along with many others, did not
understand that the political tradition from which Castro emerged
did not have its roots in the Soviet Union, but in the Latin
American reality. Cuba had maintained close economic ties with the
Soviet Union, but this did not mean that Castro was a pawn or
proxy of the Soviet Union in the Caribbean. Rather, Cuba was an
ally which sought to establish relations on an equal footing with the
Soviet Union. Cuba carefully refrained from publicly criticizing
political decisions or changes in the Soviet Union, and this was a
131
=====第156页=====
reciprocal understanding that for more than thirty years character-
ized the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union. A good
example of this relationship was Operation Carlota, the military
campaign in which Cuba came to the support of the leftist Angolan
government in the 1970s and 1980s. In order to achieve their
objectives, Cuba needed the Soviet's military hardware while the
Soviet Union needed the Cuban troops who were familiar with the
operation of the hardware. Thus, their roles in Angola tended to
complement each other, and mutual respect characterized their rela-
tions. Rather than a Soviet war by proxy, the Cuban involvement in
Angola is better understood as a war by Marxist allies who had
different interests which sometimes converged.8
Although the Cubans did not search for opportunities to
diverge from the Soviet Union, neither were they afraid to express
their independence from their ally. In the wake of Mikhail
Gorbachev's perestroika and economic reforms in the Soviet Union,
Granma, the official paper of the Cuban Communist Party, stated
that "whatever happens in the Soviet Union, we will not move away
from the path we have chosen." It declared that the Cubans would
press onward with their national, anti-imperialist revolution toward
the most just, most humane, and most rational society known to
man: the socialist society. The editorial continued with that
affirmation that with the lessons derived from the concrete
experiences of the Cuban revolution, Cuba would continue with its
independent, Cuban, socialist line.⁹ "To those who argue that Cuba
should be crushed, humiliated and destroyed because there are no
longer a Soviet Union nor a European socialist community," Castro
added, "we say that our revolution is and always will be as Cuban
as the palm trees, that we didn't ask anybody permission to carry out
the revolution,and that the revolution exists and will keep on
existing because of the sovereign will of our people.10
Although
the loss of Soviet aid was a blow to the Cuban economy, United
States predictions that the future of Cuban communism hinged on
the Soviet Union were greatly exaggerated. This analysis did not
take into account the nature of an indigenous Latin American
Marxist theory. Despite rhetoric from the United States govern-
ment, Cuba was not a Stalinist regime, and the Cuban people were
more politically conscious than are their counterparts in Eastern
Europe. Factors indigenous to the Americas were at work in the
development of socialism in Cuba, and as Cuban socialism was a
132
=====第157页=====
response to specific historic realities, so too must the future of that
country be understood in that context. Those who find the collapse
of the Cuban government inevitable do not understand that Cuban
Marxism cannot be equated with Eastern European Marxism. Even
though Cuba had to a large extent become economically and
militarily dependent on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, to
assume that political developments in Europe would radically alter
the ideological makeup of the Cuban revolution is to fall into a
colonialistic and Eurocentric mentality which denies to Latin
Americans the right to be their own historical persons.
The United States government has held similar misconceptions
of radical change in other Latin American countries. During the
course of the eleven years of the FSLN in power in Nicaragua, the
United States government was afraid that the Sandinistas would
pursue a Cuban path to socialism. There were many people who
greeted the electoral defeat of the Sandinista Front in the February
1990 Nicaraguan elections as an end to the Sandinista revolution
and socialist experimentation in that country. These views, however,
are a narrow and overly simplified perception of the nature of revo-
lutionary change in Latin America. Although there are similarities
between Cuba and Nicaragua, the two countries have their own
unique national identities and histories. Revolutionaries in the two
countries have their own individual objective and subjective realities
with which they need to struggle. In Nicaragua, a decade of United
States-sponsored Contra terror and related economic warfare not
only derailed many of the socialist aspects of the revolution, but also
challenged the basis of Sandinista ideology itself. Economic
hardships proved to be more crucial for determining the electoral
outcome than did the revolutionary fervor and idealism of the
Sandinistas. Rather than subjective factors fomenting a political
consciousness, economic factors seemed to pull Nicaraguan society
away from its revolutionary idealism, apparently demonstrating a
lack of a revolutionary consciousness in that country.
Had the Sandinistas'subjective Marxism failed to institute
lasting revolutionary change in Nicaragua? The Sandinistas did not
institutionalize their revolution to the extent that the Cubans had
done, and, unlike Castro with his declaration in April 161, the
Sandinista leadership never declared the Nicaraguan revolution to
be of a Marxist-Leninist nature. Developments in Nicaragua are
perhaps a caution against a purely subjective interpretation of a
133
=====第158页=====
revolutionary process. Economic factors continue to play a large
role in the evolution of social and political events and cannot be
ignored. The fact that the Sandinistas suffered an electoral defeat
does not necessarily mean, however, that the subjective revolution-
ary factors which helped bring them to power are no longer at work.
The period after the electoral loss was one in which the Sandinistas
struggled to develop fresh and innovative analyses with which to
critique the new and emerging social order. The defeat of the
Sandinista government was also a caution that a revolutionary
movement could not be a purely (or even chiefly) centralized, statist
affair. The lasting revolutionary changes in Nicaragua have been
those which popular mass-based organizations have launched. The
revolutionary process is not, as Gramsci said some sixty years earlier,
simply a matter of gaining control of a government, but rather a
question of transforming the political consciousness of the people.
Rather than subverting the value of Mariategui's writings and ideas,
the Sandinistas'ongoing process of applying a new analysis to a
different historical reality is an important contribution to the
development of a Latin American revolutionary theory.
Historical events in Latin America beyond the Cuban and
Nicaraguan revolutions are further evidence of the unique and
indigenous roots of socialism in the western hemisphere. In Chile,
revolutionaries espoused many of the same goals of anti-imperialism,
agrarian reform, and economic nationalization which the
Nicaraguans and Cubans had raised, but their methodology was truly
Chilean. In 1970,for the first time in history, a Marxist government
took power in a country through democratic means. Allende's
victory came in a country with a long and solid democratic tradition.
Unlike the Cuban and Nicaraguan guerrillas who used violence and
extralegal methods to gain power, Allende's leftist Unidad Popular
coalition worked entirely within the existing legal and constitutional
structures. The socialist victory in Chile had its roots in that
culture, and it was not a foreign import from Cuba or the Soviet
Union. Although Allende and Castro were close friends and allies,
revolutionary changes in Chile were not a Cuban export. At the end
of a three-week visit to Chile in 1971, Castro noted that although
Cuba had the first socialist revolution in Latin America, it had won
its revolution through traditional means—violence. Chile, on the
other hand, had proceeded with its revolution in an unusual and
unique way which aroused the curiosity, interest, understanding,
134
=====第159页=====
solidarity, and moral support of the Cubans. "We are treading
a new path," Allende proclaimed shortly after his victory. "Our task
is to define and to put into practice, as the Chilean road to
socialism,a new model of the State.2 The Chilean road to
socialism ended three years later with an American-backed military
coup, and since then both activists and academics have argued the
value and lessons of the Chilean experiment. Regardless of what
these might be,an overriding theme is that the Chilean road to
socialism had its roots in its own national reality and was part of the
construction of indigenous forms of Marxist thought in Latin
America.
This search for an indigenous road to socialism in the 1990s
has not been an undertaking unique to Latin America. In the
context of a worldwide crisis of socialism, the South African
Communist Party (SACP) also searched for the development of
nondogmatic socialist solutions within its own national context. Not
only was it willing to study openly and learn from the failure of
socialism in other parts of the world, but it was also able to adapt
international Marxist theory to its own situation. The SACP's
refusal to be tied to a dogmatic ideology has allowed it to remain
strong in a world that appeared to be moving away from Marxism.
As the debate within the party on the nature of its socialist future
continued, the SACP presented a powerful and insightful model
which could provide important lessons for those struggling for
revolutionary change in Latin America. The call for a flexible and
nondogmatic revolutionary theory not only echoed Mariátegui's and
other Latin American pronouncements in breaking away from the
rigid demands of the Communist International in the 1920s, it also
demonstrated that the SACP remained on the cutting edge of
redefining Marxist theory for the 1990s.
The continued strength of Third World leftist groups demon-
strates that they draw on roots quite different from those in Eastern
Europe. It is not just a coincidence that in El Salvador in November
1989, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN)
launched a major guerrilla offensive at the same time that the Berlin
Wall fell in Germany and hard-line Stalinist regimes were crumbling
across Eastern Europe. In spite of the collapse of communism in
Europe, and the disorientation of much of the traditional Left
elsewhere, one analyst has written, the FMLN not only retained its
vitality as one of the strongest organizations of the revolutionary
135
=====第160页=====
Left in Latin America, but has forged for itself a central role in
Salvadoran society. The FMLN's staying power cannot be atri-
buted solely to its military strategy, for when the conditions were
right it was willing to enter into peace negotiations with the
Salvadoran government. Central to this phenomenon was the
FMLN's willingness to discard mechanistic thinking and to adapt its
political strategy to changing national circumstances. In an article
in the journal Foreign Policy, Commander Joaquín Villalobos of the
FMLN National Directorate and a leading FMLNtheoretician
emphasized this point. "Revolutions reflect the concrete reality in
which they develop," Villalobos wrote. "Accordingly, each revolu-
tionary process must develop its own concepts and models.14
Villalobos maintained that it was not even possible that there could
have been a mechanical transfer of the Bolshevik revolution or
Eastern Europe socialist regimes to El Salvador. Furthermore, "It
would be politically absurd to link the Soviet Union to all emerging
revolutions by some form of ideological umbilical cord," he
FMLN, but he guarded against any dogmatic application of ideolog-
ical tenets to a specific situation. In what may very well be a
reference to Mariátegui's influence on the Salvadoran revolution,
Villalobos noted that the struggle against dogmatism within Latin
American revolutionary thought predates perestroika.
16
Shafik
Handal, general secretary of the Salvadoran Communist party and
a member of the FMLN High Command, has echoed Villalobos
statements.
In an interview with Marta Harnecker, Handal
commented on the model Cuba presented in adapting Marxism to
a national situation. "The originality of the Cuban revolution was
one of the main factors that account for its enormous appeal and
mass influence in Latin America and the Third World as a whole,"
Handal said. "We follow with the utmost interest the extra-
ordinarily complex effort that is being undertaken in Cuba in an
original and creative fashion, where they are trying to find their own
solutions to problems which are very different from those of the
socialist countries in Eastern Europe and the USSR.17 The
FMLN remained one of Latin America's strongest leftist insurgency
groups not because of any alleged covert military support from Cuba
or the Soviet Union and Eastern bloc countries, but because of its
willingness to shed orthodoxy and adapt its strategies to new
18
national and international realities.
136
=====第161页=====
Not only do Handal's and Villalobos's comments on a non-
dogmatic, national Marxism reflect Mariátegui's influence in El
Salvador, so do their comments on agrarian reform and liberation
theology.
The support which the FMLN enjoyed among the
Salvadoran peasantry demonstrates that, like Mariategui, the
Salvadoran guerrillas understood that in Latin America the revolu-
tionary Left has to go beyond the urban working class in order to
cultivate a high level of revolutionary consciousness in the
population. Villalobos stressed the need for both economic and
social democracy that would break the oligarchy's economic
hegemony in the country and implement a peasant-oriented agrarian
reform. Reform of the land tenure system in El Salvador (as in
Peru and throughout Latin America) remains central to achieving
social change. Villalobos also emphasized the contributions of
Christians to the Salvadoran revolution, and the role which martyred
archbishop Oscar Romero played in awakening the revolutionary
spirit of the Salvadoran people.19
19
 Villalobos went on to say that
"The history of Eastern Europe made it crystal clear that absolute
power is an error and that people do not live by bread alone."20
Villalobos's statement clearly echoes those concerns which
Mariátegui raised in the 1920s. His declaration that "people do not
live by bread alone" parallels Mariátegui's proclamation (which
Tomas Borge, the Sandinista revolutionary, also repeated) that "for
poor people the revolution will be the conquest not only of bread,
but also beauty, of art, of thought, and of all the pleasures of the
spirit.'
21
In his study Marxism, Socialism, and Democracy in Latin
America, Richard Harris outlines a radical democratic project that
would avoid rigid dogmatism and sectarian divisions in order to
revitalize the Latin American Left. He argues for the continued
relevance of Marxist theory in Latin America. Because there is no
universal model or general theory of transition to socialism in Latin
America, leftists must undertake a nondogmatic critical application
of Marxism to the specifics of their own society. Pursing the
philosophy that socialism is inherently democratic, Harris's model
employs a Gramscian critique of the ideological and cultural, as well
as political and economic,dimensions of the revolutionary struggle.
He contrasts a participatory model of democracy with a representa-
tional one, and contends that the Sandinistas lost power in
Nicaragua because "they discarded the opportunity to establish a
137
=====第162页=====
radical democratic political system, based upon bottom-up forms of
self-government and self-management that would have given the
workers and peasants not only direct control over the revolutionary
process but ownership and management of the means of produc-
tion.22
A revolutionary struggle for political democracy must not
lose sight of the more important struggle for economic and social
democracy. It is not sufficient, however, to transform the material
conditions of underdevelopment; the subjective conditions also must
be transformed, and in their place must be developed a new revolu-
tionary culture and a new revolutionary social consciousness.23
Marxism may yet prove to be resilient against current
geopolitical changes in the world scene. More than demonstrating
the inherent weakness of Marxist theory, recent world events illus-
trate the inevitable shortcomings of applying a hundred-year-old
political analysis to a contemporary situation. Although Marxism as
a dogmatic guide to a historical situation has been discredited, those
who are willing to work openly and fluidly with Marxist thought
have survived. In a treatise on revolutionary theory in Nicaragua,
Roger Burbach and Orlando Núñez called the Sandinista experi-
ment in the 1980s a political beacon for others throughout the
Americas and the rest of the world to discard old ideas and
concepts which were no longer adequate and to seize the initiative
in the Americas.24
Before his death in 1990,Peruvian Marxist
historian Alberto Flores Galindo wrote that although socialism had
been dealt a blow in other countries, in Latin America it still had a
future if leftists were capable of rethinking it, and of imagining new
scenarios. Flores Galindo appealed for a creative and innovative
application of Marxism in Latin America. "Socialism is not just one
path," he continued. "The doors to socialism are not permanently
closed; we just have to find new ways to open them.
25
There is
not a single road to socialism, and what worked in one country may
not necessarily work in a different place, culture, or time. Similarly,
in an interview shortly before his death in 1991, Mariateguian
scholar José Aricó called for an open debate among the leftists and
said that it was time to rethink everything.
26
Even with drastic changes in the Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe and the shakeup in Marxist ideologies, Mariátegui's thought
has remained relevant to revolutionary movements in Latin America.
In an article on perestroika in the Mexican newspaper El Día
Latinoamericano, Vanden asserts that by following in Mariátegui's
138
=====第163页=====
tradition Marxists can avoid the abuses and shortcomings of a
dogmatic Stalinism.27
Likewise, the editors of Anuario
Mariateguiano maintained that in the face of these changes
Mariátegui's thought retained its value and that the study of his
work was still important for the establishment of a modern
socialism.
28
Although in Latin America there are commonalities which are
the result of a history of colonialism and economic underdevelop-
ment, and the familiar themes of anti-imperialism, peasant-based
revolutionary movements, and subjective forms of Marxist theory
surface in divergent situations, there are many specifics which
remain for each individual revolutionary movement to work out in
its own concrete historical situation. The challenge facing Latin
American Marxists, therefore, is to adapt the writings of Marx and
Lenin and other revolutionaries to the conditions of the 190s.
Statements from various leftist revolutionary movements around the
world parallel Mariátegui's demand that Indo-American socialism be
a heroic creation born out of "our own reality and in our own
language,," and not simply be the result of developments in Europe
and elsewhere.
29
The revival of Marxist thought may not come
from Europe,where its intellectual origins lie, but rather from
groups in the Third World who are willing to work openly and
flexibly with Marxist doctrines. Revolutionary groups who follow a
Mariateguian-inspired brand of subjective Marxism could still raise
the banner of revolutionary passion throughout Latin America. As
in Nicaragua and Cuba, this struggle must grow out of a study of
local conditions. Groups who are able to do this remain as a
witness to the revolutionary potential that remains for a Latin
American brand of Marxist theory which Mariátegui first articulated
in Peru in the 1920s.
139
=====第164页=====
NOTES
Chapter 1
1.
Luis Aguilar argues in his book Marxism in Latin America
that "Marx and Engels paid very little direct attention to
Latin America," 3. Aricó counters Aguilar's commonly held
perception with the argument that "today we have evidence
in the texts of Marx and Engels that direct or indirect refer-
ences to Latin America are more abundant than what was
previously believed." Aricó, Marx y América Latina, 44.
2.
Cited in Aguilar, Marxism in Latin America, 100-101.
3.
Ibid., 98.
4.
Arico, Marx y América Latina, 128.
5.
Ibid., 59.
6.
Aguilar, Marxism in Latin America, 4.
7.
Liss, Marxist Thought, 31.
8.
Alexander, Communism in Latin America, 32.
9.
Poppino, International Communism in Latin America, 151.
10.
Ibid., 55.
11.
Ibid., 21.
12.
Blasier, Giant's Rival, 134, 140, 151. To his credit, Blasier
did note that it was a common and serious misperception
140
=====第165页=====
among United States politicians that the Soviet Union
caused or exported social revolutions to Latin America (177).
13.
Miller, Soviet Relations with Latin America, 13.
14.
Ibid., 23.
15.
Liss, Marxist Thought, 43.
16.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 74.
17.
Liss, Marxist Thought, 34.
18.
Caballero, Latin America and the Comintern, 7.
19.
Rapoport, "Argentina and the Soviet Union," 240-41.
20.
Caballero, Latin America and the Comintern, 39.
21.
Ibid., 24.
22.
Ibid., 57.
23.
Ibid., 53.
24.
Munck, Revolutionary Trends in Latin America, 13-14.
25.
Alba, Politics and the Labor Movement, 120.
26.
Caballero, Latin America and the Comintern, 43.
27.
Miller, Soviet Relations with Latin America, 41.
28.
Cerdas Cruz, La hoz y el machete, 255-305. For an in-depth
examination of this uprising, see Anderson, Matanza, and
Dalton, Miguel Marmol.
29.
Caballero, Latin America and the Comintemn, 26-27.
30.
Ibid., 47-48, 39.
141
=====第166页=====
31.
Loveman, Chile, 217.
32.
Recabarren, Obras Escogidas, 58.
33.
Jobet, Luis Emilio Recabarren, 38.
34.
Loveman, Chile, 223.
35.
Recabarren, Obras Escogidas, 23, 55.
36.
Loveman, Chile, 304.
37.
Ibid., 233.
38.
Lafertte, Vida de un Comunista, 57.
39.
Recabarren, Obras Escogidas, 102.
40.
Liss, Marxist Thought, 75.
41.
Ibid., p. 73.
42.
"Economic Development Program of the Popular Unity," in
Johnson, Chilean Road to Socialism, 131. Spanish communist
leader Santiago Carrillo, however, has faulted the strongly
statist and centralized nature of the Chilean revolution for
its eventual collapse. He argued that "the State apparatus
continued to be an instrument of capitalist rule which
overturned the whole process, abolished the democratic
constitution and established a savage military dictatorship."
Carrillo, Eurocommunism and the State, 13. Emphasis his.
43.
Keller and Rothchild, Afro-Marxist Regimes, 7.
44.
Ibid., 4, 5-6.
45.
The name was changed from the Communist Party of South
Africa (CPSA) to the South African Communist Party
(SACP) in 1953 when militants reestablished the party in the
142
=====第167页=====
South African underground after it had been banned in
1950.
46.
Ellis and Sechaba, Comrades against Apartheid, 19.
47.
Red Flag in South Africa, 16, 18, 21.
48.
Ellis and Sechaba, Comrades against Apartheid, 206.
49.
Steinberg, "Leninist Fantasies and SACP Illusions," 29, 31.
50.
Cronin, "Is the SACP Travelling in the Right Direction?" 26.
Over the past several years, the leftist South African journal
Work in Progress has been an excellent venue to trace the
ideological changes which are transforming the SACP.
51.
Ibid., 28.
52.
Slovo, "Has Socialism Failed?" 55.
53.
Ibid., 63.
54.
Pillay, "Having Its Cake and Eating It, 20.
55.
Mariátegui, "Principios programaticos del Partido Socialist,"
in Ideologia y politica, 162.
56.
Further evidence of the South African Left's interest in and
affinity for the Cuban revolution is apparent in the essays,
news articles, and book reviews (especially those from
Cronin) which are regularly published on the subject in Work
in Progress.
57.
Narkiewicz, Eurocommunism 1968-1986,vii. For a good
discussion of the historical and theoretical significance of
Eurocommunism from a variety of critical Left perspectives,
see the essays collected in Boggs and Plotke, Politics of
Eurocommunism.
58. Carrillo, Eurocommunism and the State, 103.
143
=====第168页=====
59.
Ibid., 9.
60.
Ibid., 12.
61.
Harrington, Twilight of Capitalism, 345.
62.
Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, 403.
63.
Ibid., 407.
64.
Boggs, Gramsci's Marxism, 16.
65.
McLellan, Marxism after Marx, 175.
66.
Boggs, Gramsci's Marxism, 19.
67.
Gorman, "Gramsci, Antonio, in Gorman, Biographical
Dictionary of Neo-Marxism, 178.
68.
Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, 204.
69.
While acknowledging the importance of Gramsci's ideology,
in his study of peasant intellectuals in Tanzania Steven
Feierman rejects the possibility for democracy in a
centralized party and argues that the Tanzanian peasants did
not need the leadership of the working class or of a
communist party in order to recognize their historical
situation.
See Feierman, Peasant Intellectuals, 18-21.
Feierman's rejection of a rigid centralism is an important
theme in neo-Marxist thought (including Eurocommunism),
but it must also be remembered that, as with Marxism in
general, Gramsci's thought cannot be transferred rigidly from
one national situation to another.
70.
Harrington, Twilight of Capitalism, 12.
71.
Ibid., 347. Similarly, Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel have
critiqued an orthodox Marxism which is mechanical, lacking
in a revolutionary spirit, and in general "a mental straight
jacket impeding socialist revolution."
See Albert and
144
=====第169页=====
Hahnel, UnOrthodox Marxism, 6.
72.
Arico, La cola del diablo, 12.
73.
Ibid., 20.
74.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 179.
75.
Ibid., 183.
76.
Chavarría, José Carlos Mariátegui, 27-33.
77.
Paris, La formación ideológica, 12.
78.
Mariátegui,
"Aniversarioy
balance,"Amauta
3/17
(September 1928): 2.
79.
Sánchez Vázquez, "El marxismo en la América Latina," 8.
80.
Albornoz, "Mariátegui en el Ecuador," 43, 51.
81.
Ibid., 53.
Chapter 2
1.
Rouillón, La creación heroica, vol. 1, 32. Rouillón's two-
volume work is the standard biography of Mariátegui.
2.
Ibid., 20.
3.
Ibid., 28.
4.
Ibid., 41.
5.
Ibid., 45, 48.
6.
Mariategui, "Del Autor," in Ideologia y politica, 17.
7.
Vanden, National Marxism, 118.
145
=====第170页=====
8.
Rouillón, La creación heroica, vol. 1, 205, 227.
9.
Bazán, Mariátegui y su tiempo, 56.
10.
Núñez, La experiencia europea, 20.
11.
Vanden, National Marxism, 13.
12.
Bazán, Mariátegui y su tiempo, 64.
13.
Ibid., 66.
14.
Mariátegui, "The Problem of Land," in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 42. Much of the early scholarship on Mariátegui did
not emphasize his Marxism. Harry Vanden in Mariátegui
demonstrated conclusively that Mariátegui had access to
classic works of Marxism, that he employed Marxist concepts,
and that he was intentional in his adaptation of Marxism to
his Peruvian reality.
15.
Mariátegui, Historia de la crisis mundial. In an interesting
new study, Ramon Antonio Romero Cantarero surveys
Mariategui's written works to argue for a shift in his
theoretical focus. During 1923 and 1924 (following his
return to Peru and during the time that he gave this series
of lectures) fifty-four of sixty works concerned international
issues. During the years 1924 to 1928 (ending with his best
known work, Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality) he
penned about seventy essays on Peru's national problems. In
a third and final period (1928 until his death in 1930),
Mariátegui focused on the intellectual and practical founda-
tion for a revolutionary movement in Peru. See Romero
Cantarero, "New Marxism of José Carlos Mariátegui," 131.
Letter from José Carlos Mariategui to Samuel Glusberg, 10
16.
January 1928, in Mariátegui's José Carlos Mariátegui:
Correspondencia (hereafter, Correspondencia), vol. 2, 332.
17.
Mariategui,"Author's Note," in Seven Interpretive Essays,
xxxvi.
146
=====第171页=====
18. Bazán, Mariátegui y su tiempo, 15.
19.
Mariátegui, "Public Education, in Seven Interpretive Essays,
122.
20.
Mariátegui, "La ensenanza y la economía," in Temas de
educación, 39, and "Enseñanza única y enseñanza de clase,"
ibid., 54.
21.
Mariátegui, "Principios programáticos del Partido Socialist,"
in Ideologia y politica, 161.
22.
"Presentacion de Amauta," Amauta 1/1 (September 1926): 1.
23.
Wise, "Mariátegui's Amauta (1926-1930)," 288.
24.
Reedy, "Cohesive Influence of José Carlos Mariátegui," 143.
25.
Wise, "Labor,"118-19.
26.
Ibid., 125.
27.
Mariátegui, "Author's Note," in Seven Interpretive Essays,
xxxvi.
28.
Ibid., xxxv.
29.
The issue of Mariátegui's lost book has triggered a fair
amount of controversy among his followers.
Ricardo
Martínez de la Torre, in his Apuntes para una interpretación
marxista, vol. 2, 404, introduced the idea that Falcon had lost
the book. In an appendix to his book El hombre en su acción
(197-224), Jorge Falcon presents a lengthy defense in favor
of the innocence of his brother. As Ricardo Luna Vegas
argues in a epilogue on Mariátegui's posthumous works in
José Carlos Mariátegui (103), it is highly unlikely that
Mariátegui would have sent the originals of such an impor-
tant work to Spain without keeping a copy for himself.
Ricardo Melgar Bao argues in his essay "La Tercera
Internacional y Mariátegui"(47-78) that the Communist
147
=====第172页=====
International played a role in the book's disappearance. An
advertisement which appeared in issue 31 of Amauta shortly
after Mariátegui died indicated that Editorial Historia Nueva
in Madrid was publishing a book entitled Ideologia y politica
en el Perú which was to be the continuation of 7 ensayos
(Amauta 4/31 [June-July 1930], inside back cover); unfortu-
nately, Biblioteca Amauta did not reproduce any of these
advertisements in the much more widely available 1974-1976
facsimile edition of Amauta. In any case, Biblioteca Amauta
considers the work in question permanently lost and pub-
lished the essays in Ideologia y politica as a substitution (see
Mariátegui, Ideologia y politica, 7-8).
30.
Amauta 4/31 (June-July 1930), inside back cover. Also see
Luna Vegas's discussion in Jose Carlos Mariátegui, 95-98.
31.
Mariátegui,
"Principiosprogramaticos
del Partido
Socialista," in Ideologia y politica, 162-64.
32.
"Labor continúa,” Labor 1/9(18 August 1929): 1, also
reprinted in Ideologia y politica, 255-56.
33.
Mariategui,
"Principios programaticos
del
Partido
Socialista," in Ideologa y politica, 162.
34.
In addition to the primary source documentation on
Mariátegui's labor union activities in Martínez de la Torre's
Apuntes para una interpretación marxista (especially chapter
six, "Con la C.G.T.P. de José Carlos Mariátegui" in volume
1, and volume 3, “La Confederación General de
Trabajadores del Perú"), see Falcón, Mariátegui: Arquitecto
Sindical, and Kapsoli, Mariátegui y los congresos obreros.
35.
Vanden, National Marxism, 72.
36.
Letter from José Carlos Mariátegui to César Alfredo Miro
Quesada in Mariátegui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 67. Also
see Wise, "Labor," 122-23, and Flores Galindo, Los mineros
de La Cerro de Pasco, 53-57. Flores Galindo's book gives a
good overview of the history of labor struggles at this mine.
148
=====第173页=====
37. Mariategui, "Principios programáticos del Partido Socialist,"
in Ideologia y politica, 159.
38.
Mariátegui, "Mensaje al Congreso Obrero, in Ideologia y
politica, 112.
39.
See, for example, Marx, "Private Property and Communism,"
in Early Writings, 162.
40.
Mariategui, "El determinismo marxista," in Defensa del
marxismo, 65, 67.
41.
Vanden, National Marxism, 78.
42.
Mariátegui, "El determinismo marxista," in Defensa del
marxismo, 67.
43.
Vanden, National Marxism, 77.
44.
Lenin, "Our Programme,, in Selected Works, 34.
45.
Lenin, What Is To Be Done? 61.
46.
Mariátegui, "Henri de Man y la crisis’ del Marxismo,"in
Defensa del marxismo, 21-22.
47.
Mariátegui,
"Principios programaticos
del
Partido
Socialista," in Ideologia y politica, 160.
48.
Ibid., 159.
49.
Vanden, National Marxism, 89. For a fuller analysis of the
Leninist influence on Mariátegui, see Choy et al., Lenin y
Mariátegui.
50.
Núñez, La experiencia europea, 27.
51.
Quijano, Introducción a Mariategui, 43. The nature of the
relationship between Gramsci and Mariátegui is a point of
contention among Gramscian and Mariateguian scholars.
149
=====第174页=====
Antonio Melis in his essay "Mariátegui, el primer marxista
de América" (in Aricó, Mariátegui y los origenes del marxismo
latinoamericano, 205) argues that Mariátegui had personal
contact with Gramsci and other Italian thinkers of the 1920s,
an assertion that he probably takes from Mariátegui's state-
ments in his article "La influencia de Italia en la cultura
hispano-americana" in El alma matinal, 156. Mariátegui's
widow, Anna Chiappe de Mariátegui, also asserted that the
two men knew each other (Vanden, National Marxism, 14).
Robert Paris, on the other hand, argues in La formación
ideológica that his archival research and oral interviews do
not support any significant or sustained contact between the
Peruvian and the Italian (85-86). Gramscian scholar Francis
Guibal contends that Gramsci did not have a direct influence
on Mariátegui, but that there were "numerous and signifi-
cant coincidences" between the thought of the two men
(emphasis his). The study of these parallels, however,
remains valid and useful for gaining a better understanding
of the "philosophy of praxis" in Latin America. See Guibal's
appendix, "Mariátegui, iun Gramsci peruano?” in his
Gramsci: filosofia, politica, cultura, 339. Also see the chapter
"Gramsci y Mariátegui" in Guibal and Ibañez, Mariátegui
hoy, 133-45.
52.
Mariátegui, "La prensa italiana, in Cartas de Italia, 13.
Also see Mariátegui's references to Gramsci in "La política
socialista en Italia," in La escena contemporánea, 141, and
"La economia y Piero Gobetti, El alma matinal, 139.
53.
See Gramsci, "Americanism and Fordism," in Selections from
the Prison Notebooks, 279-318, and Mariátegui, "El caso y
teoria de Ford," in Defensa del marxismo, 151-54.
54.
Antonio Gramsci, "Letter to Tatiana," 15 December 1930, in
Letters from Prison, 193.
55.
Mariátegui, "El mito de la nuevo generación," in Defensa del
marxismo,94.
56.
Roncagliolo, "Gramsci, marxista y nacional,," 120.
150
=====第175页=====
57.
See Paris's book La formación ideologica and his articles "El
marxismo de Mariátegui," in Aricó, Mariátegui y los origenes
del marxismo latinoamericano, 119-44, and "Mariáteguiy
Gramsci," 31-54, for a comprehensive analysis of the
parallels between the two men's thought. Also see Vanden,
National Marxism, 13-14, 87-91.
58.
César Lévano, "Mariátegui: la voz del Perú integral,in
Romero and César Lévano, Regionalismo y centralismo, 66.
59.
Aricó, La cola del diablo, 123.
60.
Joll, Antonio Gramsci, 18. For an analysis of Gramsci's
influence on Mariátegui's critique of the orthodox Marxism
of the Communist International, see Fernandez Diaz,
"Gramsci y Mariátegui," 135-44.
61.
McLellan, Marxism after Marx, 175.
62.
Joll, Antonio Gramsci, 16.
63.
Guibal, Gramsci, 17.
64.
Mariátegui, "La filosofía moderna y el marxismo," in Defensa
del marxismo, 44.
65.
McLellan, Marxism after Marx, 184. See Gramsci, Selections
from the Prison Notebooks, 465. Francis Guibal also identifies
Gramsci's philosophy of praxis as fundamental to
understanding the development of Marxist thought in Latin
America. See Guibal, Gramsci, 332.
66.
Vanden, National Marxism, 90.
67.
Paris, "Mariátegui y Gramsci," 38.
68.
Vanden, National Marxism, 14.
69.
Flores Galindo, Buscando un Inca, 267. Melis, on the other
hand, citing Mariátegui's article "La influencia de Italia en
151
=====第176页=====
la cultura hispano-americana" in El alma matinal, assigns to
Croce the primary responsibility for the similarities between
Gramsci and Mariátegui. See Melis, "Mariátegui, primer
marxista de América," 208.
70.
Antonio Gramsci quoted in Cammett, Antonio Gramsci, 254,
n. 7. Also see Gramsci's comments on Sorel in his essay
"The Modern Prince" in Selections from the Prison
Notebooks, 125-30.
71.
Sorel, "La necessita e il fatalismo nel marxismo," in Saggi di
critica del marxismo (Milan, 1903), 92, quoted in Hughes,
Consciousness and Society, 93.
72.
Hughes, Consciousness and Society, 94.
73.
Mariátegui, "Henri de Man y la crisis’del Marxismo,"in
Defensa del marxismo, 20-21.
74.
José Aricó, "Introducción," in Mariátegui y los origenes del
marxismo latinoamericano, xv.
75.
Sorel, Reflections on Violence, 42.
76.
Ibid., 45.
77.
Ibid., 41-42.
78.
Ibid., 49.
79.
Judson, Cuba and the Revolutionary Myth, 2.
80.
Ibid., 8.
81.
Angotti, "Contributions of José Carlos Mariátegui," 38.
82.
Judson, Cuba and the Revolutionary Myth, 2.
83.
Mariátegui, "El grupo Clarte, in La escena contemporánea,
155.
152
=====第177页=====
84.
Mariategui, "El determinismo marxista, in Defensa del
marxismo, 68.
85.
Mariategui, "El hombre y el mito, in El alma matinal, 23.
86.
Ibid., 27.
87.
Ibid., 24, 23.
88.
Ibid., 27.
89.
Baines, Revolution in Peru, 113.
90.
Mariategui, "La lucha final," in El alma matinal, 30. In
general, see Flores Galindo's treatment of this theme in
Buscando un Inca, especially the sixth chapter, "El horizonte
utópico."
91.
Mariátegui, "El hombre y el mito," in El alma matinal, 28.
92.
Hughes, Consciousness and Society, 96.
93.
Sorel, Reflections on Violence, 127.
94.
Ibid., 50.
95.
Mariátegui, "1a Conferencia, la crisis mundial y el
proletariado peruano," in Historia de la crisis mundial, 15-16.
96.
Judson, Cuba and the Revolutionary Myth, 9.
97.
Hughes, Consciousness and Society, 96.
98.
Angotti, "Contributions of José Carlos Mariategui," 54.
99.
Barbusse, "El presente y el porvenir," Amauta 2/8 (April 27):
10.
100.
Mariategui, "El determinismo marxista, in Defensa del
marxismo, 69.
153
=====第178页=====
101.
Mariátegui, "Outline of the Economic Evolution," in Seven
Interpretive Essays, 3.
102.
Mariategui,
"The Problem of the Indian," in Seven
Interpretive Essays, 22.
103.
Mariátegui,
"Aniversario y Balance," Amauta 3/17
(September 1928): 3.
104.
Liss, Marxist Thought, 137. Elements of the indigenismo
movement, which was often made up of an elite and
presumptuous class of mestizo intellectuals far removed from
the realities of the indigenous population, have been rejected
and discredited by the indigenous people themselves. See,
for example, Gnerre and Bottasso, "Del indigenismo.”A
Marxist critique of similar theoretical issues is presented in
Díaz-Polanco,
"Indigenismo, Populism, and Marxism."
American Indian Movement (AIM) activist Ward Churchill
has worked to bridge the gap between Marxist and
indigenous visions for social justice. His statement "that a
uniquely American radical vision is a transcendent require-
ment to effecting positive social change ... imports, in and
of themselves, without critique and careful adaptation, can
only worsen an already intolerable situation" parallels
Mariátegui's views on indigenismo over half a century earlier.
See Ward Churchill, "Introduction: Journeying Toward A
Debate," in Marxism and Native Americans, ed. Ward
Churchill (Boston, Mass.: South End Press, 1983), 10.
105.
"Manifiesto de la Confederación General de Trabajadores
del Perú' a la clase trabajadora del pais, in Ideologia y
politica, 139.
106.
"El Ayllu," Labor 1/9 (18 August 1929), 6.
107.
Mariátegui, "El problema de las razas en la américa latina,"
Ideologia y politica, 32. Also see Angotti, "Contributions of
José Carlos Mariátegui,” 50, and Chavarría, José Carlos
Mariátegui, 160-61.
154
=====第179页=====
108. Mariátegui, "El problema de las razas en la américa latina,"
in Ideologia y politica, 81.
109.
Ibid., 42.
110.
Ibid., 84-85. Although the terms of debate on this "National
Question" have revolved around the question of whether the
indigenous peoples were exploited because of their race or
class,it apparently never occurred to Mariátegui or the
Communist International to inquire of the indigenous people
whether or not they wished to have an autonomous state.
Recent indigenous movements in the Andes, together with
their historic divergence from some of the strategies and
agendas of Marxist activists, suggests that if asked they may
have wished to have one.
111.
Mariátegui, "The Problem of the Indian,” in Seven
Interpretive Essays, 29.
112.
Mariátegui wrote that "to expect that the Indian will be
emancipated through a steady crossing of the aboriginal race
with white immigrants is an antisociological naiveté that
could only occur to the primitive mentality of an importer of
merino sheep" (ibid., 25).
113.
Mariátegui, "The Problem of Land," in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 59.
114.
Mariátegui, "Principios de política agraria nacional,"in
Peruanicemos al Perú, 149.
115.
Marx, "The Communist Manifesto," in Karl Marx, Selected
Writings, 229. For an excellent analysis of the relationship
among Marx, Marxism, and the peasantry in Latin America
see Vanden, "Marxism and the Peasantry."
116.
Mariategui, "The Problem of the Indian," in Seven
Interpretive Essays, 29.
155
=====第180页=====
117.
Mariátegui, "Manifiesto de laConfederación General de
Trabajadores del Perú' a la clase trabajadora del país," in
Ideologia y politica, 139.
118.
Wolf, Peasant Wars.
119.
Vanden, National Marxism, 91, 107. For specific quotes from
Mao Tse-Tung and Amilcar Cabral see Mao Tse-Tung, "On
Contradiction," in Mao Tse-Tung, 224, and Cabral, Return to
the Source, 77.
120.
Mariategui, "The Religious Factor,in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 124.
121.
Klaiber, Religion and Revolution in Peru, 98.
122.
Mariátegui, "Outline of the Economic Evolution," in Seven
Interpretive Essays, 5; cf. Sorel, Reflections on Violence, 7.
123.
Mariátegui, "Politica colonial burguesa e imperialista frente
a las razas," in Ideologia y politica, 57-58.
124.
Mariátegui, "The Religious Factor," in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 151.
125.
Klaiber, Religion and Revolution, 106.
126.
Mariategui, "Literature on Trial," in Seven Interpretive Essays,
212.
127.
Mariategui, "El hombre y el mito," in El alma matinal, 28; cf.
Sorel, Reflections on Violence, 35.
128.
Mariategui, "The Religious Factor" in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 152.
129.
Wiesse, José Carlos Mariátegui, 16.
130.
Klaiber, Religion and Revolution, 98.
156
=====第181页=====
131. Chang-Rodriguez, La literatura politica, 15.
132.
Baines, Revolution in Peru, 112-13.
133.
Schutte, "Nietzsche, Mariátegui, and Socialism," 79.
134.
Many of these international contacts are documented
through the letters collected in Melis's edited volumes José
Carlos Mariátegui: Correspondencia. Ricardo Luna Vegas
surveys Mariátegui's correspondence with people in twenty-
four different countries through eighteen essays originally
published in the Peruvian newspaper Dario La República in
1984 on the ninetieth anniversary of Mariátegui's birth and
reprinted as Chapter 3 of Historia y trascendéncia.
135.
Dumpierre, "Mariategui, Cuba y la lucha contra el
imperialismo," 228.
136.
Mariátegui, "Punto de vista anti-imperialista," in Ideologia y
politica, 95.
137.
"Guía del Lector: Elenco de revistas y periodicos," Labor 1/2
(24 November 1928): 4-5. Altogether, the list contains forty-
two items from France, Germany, Spain, and the United
States, in addition to nine Latin American countries
(Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay). Mariátegui also reprinted the
list in the following issue of Labor, see Labor 1/3 (8
December 1928): 6.
138.
Amauta 4/32 (August-September 1930), inside front cover.
139.
Ricardo Martínez de la Torre, "2o. aniversario de Sacco y
Vanzetti," Labor 1/9 (18 August 1929): 1. The coverage of
the Sacco and Vanzetti case included a two-part study of the
case by Harvard University professor Felix Frankfurter. See
Felix Frankfurter, "El Proceso de Sacco y Vanzetti," Labor
1/9 (18 August 1929): 2, and Labor 1/10 (7 September 1929):
4-5.
157
=====第182页=====
140.
Mariátegui, "Principios programaticos
del Partido
Socialista," in Ideologia y politica, 159.
141.
Alba, Politics and the Labor Movement, 121.
142.
Ravines, Yenan Way, 75.
143.
Martínez de la Torre, Apuntes para una interpretación
marxista, vol. 2, 423.
144.
Ravines, Yenan Way, 7O. See Flores Galindo's essay "La
polémica con la Komintern in his book La agonia de
Mariátegui, 19-146, for an extended discussion of Mariátegui's
relations with the Communist International.
145.
Ravines, Yenan Way, 60-61.
146.
Quijano, Introducción a Mariátegui, 110.
147.
Reid, Peru: Paths to Poverty, 32.
148.
Frank, "Great American," 704.
149.
Liss, Marxist Thought, 137.
150.
Ibid., 162.
151.
Mariátegui,
"Aniversario
y
balance,"Amauta 3/17
(September 1928): 2.
152.
Castro,"The Duty of a Revolutionary is to Make the
Revolution," in Fidel Castro Speaks, 115.
Chapter 3
1.
Dumpierre, "Mariátegui: luz de América," 86.
2.
Mariátegui, "Public Education," in Seven Interpretive Essays,
91.
158
=====第183页=====
3.
Liss, Marxist Thought, 244; Fabio Grobart,"Prologo, in Julio
Antonio Mella, Escritos Revolucionarios, 18. Many of
Mariátegui's writings on this topic are collected in volume 14
of his Complete Works series, Temas de educación. Martínez
de la Torre discusses the University Reform Movement in
chapter six of Apuntes para una interpretación marxista (see
especially 258-64 for his comments on Mariategui), and
Edgard Montiel presents a synthesis of Mariátegui's involve-
ment in the movement in Mariátegui Universidad. For a good
overview of the University Reform Movement in general, see
Manuel Agustin Aguirre, Universidad y movimientos
estudiantiles, 169-252.
4.
Chavarría, José Carlos Mariátegui, 72.
5.
Orrillo, "Primeras huellas," 179.
6.
Mella, "Carta al representante del Perú," in Documentos y
articulos, 99.
7.
Roa, El fuego de la semilla, 117.
8.
Dumpierre, "Mariategui, Cuba y la lucha contra el
imperialismo," 216-21.
9.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 88.
10.
Mella, "Carta," in Documentos y articulos, 99.
11.
Mella, *Declaración de la Liga Antimperialista de las
Américas,," in Documentos y articulos, 262-63; Instituto de
Historia del Movimiento Comunista y de la Revolución
Socialista de Cuba, "Prólogo," ibid., 8.
12.
Mella, Julio Antonio Mella, 157. Also see chapter 7, "Mella
con Sandino," 155-67.
13.
Ibid., 164.
159
=====第184页=====
14.
"Necrología: Julio Antonio Mella," Amauta, 3/20 (January
1929), 96.
15.
"El asesinato de Julio Antonio Mella,” Labor 1/5 (15
January 1929), 8.
16.
Labor 1/8 (1 May 1929): 1.
17.
Departamento de Orientación Revolucionaria del Comité
Central del Partido Comunista de Cuba, José Carlos
Mariátegui, 25, 29.
18.
Santos Moray, "Nota de presentación," in Mella et al,
Marxistas de América, 6.
19.
Mella,"La cruz del sur,” in Mella et al., Marxistas de
America, 20-21; cf. Mariátegui, "Elibero-americanismoy
pan-americanismo,," ibid., 119-22.
20.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, xiv-XV.
21.
Mella,"Glosas al pensamiento de
José Martí,” in
Documentos y artticulos, 267-74.
22.
Mella, "La lucha revolucionaria contra el imperialismo. Qué
esel ARPA? Amauta 4/31(June-July 1930): 41-49; and
Mella, “iQué es el ARPA?" Amauta 4/32 (August-
September 1930): 24-37. As part of his polemic, Mella refers
to APRA as the American Revolutionary Popular Alliance
(ARPA) instead of the more common American Popular
Revolutionary Alliance (APRA).
23.
Orrillo, "Primeras huellas," 179.
24.
Mella, “iQué es el ARPA? Amauta 4/32 (August-
September 1930), 32.
25.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 65.
26.
Cairo, El Grupo Minorista, 116.
160
=====第185页=====
27. Liss, Roots of Revolution, 102.
28.
Santos Moray,"Nota de presentación, in Mella et al.,
Marxistas de América, 10.
29.
Castellanos, "Conversacion a los 75, 6.
30.
See the numerous references to Marinello's writings on
Mariátegui on these and other occasions in Rouillón, Bio-
bibliografia de José Carlos Mariátegui, and in Antuña and
García-Carranza, Bibliografia de Juan Marinello.
31.
Marinello, "El gran Amauta del Perú," in Nieto, Mariátegui,
poema, 13.
32.
Manuel Galich, "Comentario y glosa al codice Juan
Marinello: Guatemala nuestra," in Peréz and Simón,
Recopilación, 558-59.
33.
Cairo, El Grupo Minorista, 97.
34.
Ibid., 112-14, 144, 154. See Unruh, "Mariátegui's Aesthetic
Thought," for an analysis of Mariategui's significance as a
literary critic and his relationship to the international
vanguardist movement.
35.
Letter from Oliverio Girondo to José Carlos Mariátegui on
3 October 1924 in Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 1, 57.
36.
Orrillo, "Raúl Roa," 4-5.
37.
"La palabra para alimentar la hoguera," in Peréz and Simón,
Recopilación, 53.
38.
See Mariátegui, "La escena contemporanea: la revisión de la
obra de Anatole France,," Social 11/4 (April 1926): 16-17;
reprinted from Mariátagui, La escena contemporánea, 169-73.
161
=====第186页=====
39.
Letter from José Carlos Mariátegui to Emilio Roig de
Leuchsenring on 24 October 1926 in Mariátegui, Corres-
pondencia, vol. 1, 183.
40.
Roa, El fuego de la semilla, 173; Orrillo, "Raúl Roa," 5.
41.
Roa, El fuego de la semilla, 177.
42.
Santos Moray,"Nota de presentation," in Mella et al,
Marxistas de América, 7.
43.
Los Cinco, "Al levar el ancla," Revista de Avance (Havana)
1/1 (15 March 1927): 1.
44.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 68.
45.
Letter from Mariátegui to Juan Marinello on 16 March 1930
in Mariátegui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 745. Apparently
Mariátegui died before he had a chance to send the
mentioned essay.
46.
Another example of these exchanges is the advertisements
for Revista de Avance in Amauta listing, by name, the current
editors (Francisco Ichazo, Felix Lizazo, Jorge Maach, Juan
Marinello). See Amauta 4/32 (August-September 1930),
inside front cover. In a 1929 letter to Revista de Avance
editor Jorge Maach, Mariátegui states that he wanted to
standardize and expand these literary exchanges (letter from
José Carlos Mariátegui to Jorge Manach on 28 September
1929 in Anuario Mariateguiano 3 [1991]: 24).
47.
Orrillo, "Raúl Roa, 5.
48.
Juan Marinello,"Mariátegui, Amauta,” Revista de Avance
(Havana) 1/8 (30 June 1927): 181-82.
49.
Roig de Leuchsenring, "Notas del director literario," Social
12/8 (August 1928): 6.
162
=====第187页=====
50. Letter from Mariátegui to Roig de Leuchsenring on 10
October 1927 in Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 1, 306.
Roig de Leuchsenring agreed to represent Amauta in Cuba.
51.
Mariategui, "Segundo acto, Amauta 2/10 (December 1927):
1.
52.
Mariátegui, "Les Enchainements'de Barbusse," Social 12/8
(August 1927): 11, 78-79; reprintedfrom Mariátegui, La
escena contemporanea, 158-64.
53.
Letter from Mariátegui in "Notas del director literario,"
Social 14/12 (December 1929): 6 (also printed as letter from
Mariátegui to Roig de Leuchsenring on 30 June 1929 in
Mariátegui, Corresspondencia, vol. 2, 599). Also see
Mariátegui, "Indología’de José Vasconcelos,” Social 13/1
(January 1928): 10, 62, 66, later published in Mariátegui,
Temas de nuestra América, 78-84. The article, "esquema de
una explicación de Chaplin," was published in Social 14/12
(December 1929): 11, 69, 82, 88, and later published in El
alma matinal, 67-74.
54.
E. Giménez Caballero, "Elogio al Bidet,” with a "Nota
polémica,," Amauta 3/15 (May-June 1928): 40.
55.
"Discrepancias," Revista de Avance (Havana) 3/25 (15 August
1928): 203-4; E. Giménez Caballero's poem "Oda al Bidet"
was originally published in Revista de Avance 3/19(15
February 1928): 46.
56.
"Notas: 1928'y la 'Oda al bidet Amauta 3/17 (September
1928): 91. See also the letter from José A. Foncueva to
Mariátegui in Mariátegui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 439.
57.
Orrillo, "Carlos Rafael Rodriguez," 16-17.
58.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 148-49.
59.
Orrillo, "Carlos Rafael Rodríguez," 17.
163
=====第188页=====
60.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 125.
61.
Ibid., 130-31.
62.
Roa, El fuego de la semilla, 179.
63.
Raúl Roa quoted in Orrillo, "Raúl Roa," 5.
64.
Roa, El fuego de la semilla, 177, 418.
65.
Ibid., 179; also see Orrillo, "Raúl Roa," 6.
66.
Marinello, "Literatura y revolución,” 43-44.
67.
Letter from Foncueva to Mariátegui in January 1928 in
Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 345.
68.
Foncueva, Escritos, 179-80, 237-38, 192-93.
69.
Ibid., 238.
70.
Foncueva, "Novisimo retrato de José Martí," Amauta 3/14
(April 1928): 22-24.
71.
Letter from Foncueva to Mariátegui on 20 September 1928
in Mariátegui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 438. Mariátegui Iater
stated that perhaps as many as half of his letters were "lost."
See letter from Mariategui to Jorge Maach on 28
September 1929 in Anuario Mariateguiano 3 (1991): 24.
72.
Antonio Soto, "Aspectos habaneros.
.Mariateguiy
Foncueva," El Comercio (Cienfuegos, Cuba) 28/4 (3 July
1930); reprinted in Foncueva, Escritos, 285.
73.
Nicolas Gamolin, “Apuntos sobre Foncueva," Social
(Havana) 15/7 (July 1930): 43; reprinted in Foncueva,
Escritos, 288.
74.
Fernández de Castro, "Canto dionisiaco sobre la tumba de
un amigo," Amauta 3/15 (May-June 1928): 31-32.
164
=====第189页=====
75.
Letter from Marof to Mariátegui on 6 August 1928 in
Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 408. See also the letter
from Tristán Marof to Mariátegui on 22 April 1928 in ibid.,
374. In the letter of 3 October 1924 in which Olliverio
Girondo introduced Mariátegui to the members of the
Cuban Grupo Minorista, Girondo mentioned Fernández de
Castro and attached an article to the letter which Fernandez
de Castro and Felix Lizaso had written on modern poetry;
see ibid., vol. 1, 57.
76.
Cairo, El Grupo Minorista, 136, 147.
77.
Mariátegui, "Crónica de Revistas: Revista de la Habana,"
Amauta 4/29 (February-March 1930): 104.
78.
Fernández de Castro, "La muerte de José Carlos Mariátegui:
duelo de América," Revista de la Habana 2/2 (May 1930):
219-20.
79.
(Untitled), Social 15/6 (June 1930): 11.
80.
Marinello, "El Amauta José Carlos Mariátegui," Revista de
Avance 5/47 (15 June 1930): 168-72; later reprinted in Bazán,
Mariátegui y su tiempo, 199-201.
81.
Magda Portal, "Cronica de Libros, Amauta 3/23 (May
1929):100-102; Xavier Abril, "Mosaico contemporaneo,"
Amauta 3/26 (September-October 1929): 28-29.
82.
Luis Alberto Sanchez, "Literatura-Perú-1929,”Revistade
Avance (Havana) 5/42 (15 January 1930): 24-27.
83.
Dorticós Torrado, "Contorno y significación de José Carlos
Mariategui," Polémica (Cienfuegos, Cuba) (1 August 1936):
14-15, cited in Dumpierre, "Mariategui, Cuba y la lucha
contra el imperialismo," 229.
This debate is preserved in Aricó, Mariategui y los origenes
84.
del marxismo latinoamericano, 55-115. More recent Soviet
writings have tended to be much more sympathetic towards
165
=====第190页=====
Mariátegui's thought. For example, Yuri Zubritski called
Mariátegui the heir of his country's democratic-revolutionary
traditions who arrived at a Marxist-Leninist interpretation of
Peruvian reality. See Zubritski, "Amauta: el 80 aniversario,"
117.
85.
Santos Moray, "Nota de presentación" in Mella et al,
Marxistas de América, 5.
86.
Marinello, "Literatura y revolución," 43-44. Liss notes that
Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was also a liaison between the
Cuban Communist Party and Castro's guerrillas in the
mountains in the 1950s. See Liss, Roots of Revolution, 146.
87.
Cairo, El Grupo Minorista, 222.
88.
K. S. Karol relates the history of the Cuban Communist
Party before the revolution,which he considers to be a
failure "as the direct result of unquestioning adherence to
the Soviet brand of Marxism-Leninism ... which blinded the
PSP to the specific conditions and the real potentialities of
a semicolonial country such as Cuba, and which on the wider
plane is still responsible for the notorious impotence of the
Communists in the Third World." Karol, Guerrillas in Power
156. See esp. chapter 2, "The Communists and the
Revolution."
89.
Sánchez Vázquez, "El marxismo en la América Latina," 11.
90.
For more on what Castro gained from Sandino, see
Macauley, Sandino Affair, 163-66.
91.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 171.
92.
Ibid., 173.
93.
Ibid., 180, 181.
94.
Karol, Guerrillas in Power, 156.
166
=====第191页=====
95.
Debray, Revolution in the Revolution? 98.
96.
Ibid., 21.
97.
Debray, Strategy for Revolution, 128.
98.
Ibid., 80.
99.
Vanden, Mariátegui, 9-10.
100.
Alberto Tauro, "Prólogo," in Pesce, El factor religioso, xl.
101.
Macauley, Sandino Affair, 262.
102.
Gadea, Ermesto, 32, 49.
103.
Ibid., 5.
104.
Gadea noted that the Guatemalans commemorated the
twentieth anniversary of Sandino's assassination, ibid., 27.
105.
Ibid., 33.
106.
Liss, Roots of Revolution, 157.
107.
See Mariategui, "Henri de Man y la crisis'del marxismo,"
in Defensa del marxismo, 19-23, and "El determinismo
marxista," in Defensa del marxismo, 65-69.
108.
Mariategui, "Ethics and Socialism by José Carlos
Mariátegui," Tricontinental3(1967): 20-27; cf. Mariategui,
"Etica y socialismo," in Defensa del marxismo, 55-63.
109.
Mariátegui, "1a conferencia,” Historia de la crisis mundial,
15-16.
110.
Guevara, "Guerrilla Warfare," in his Guerrlla Warfare, 48.
111.
Ibid.
167
=====第192页=====
112.
Debray, Revolution in the Revolution? 20.
113.
Ibid., 107.
114.
See, for example, the critique of the Trotskyite Hugo Blanco,
Land or Death, 62-64.
115.
Letter from Mariátegui to Samuel Glusberg on 30 April 1927
in Mariátegui, Correspondencia, vol. 1, 273.
116.
See Chavarría, José Carlos Mariátegui, 74.
117.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 182.
118.
Ibid., 179.
119.
Judson, Cuba and the Revolutionary Myth, 13.
120.
Castro, "The Duty of a Revolutionary is to Make the
Revolution," in Fidel Castro Speaks, 115.
121.
Castro, Una América Latina más unida, 26.
122.
Castro,"Economic Problems confronting Cuba and the
Underdeveloped World," in Fidel Castro Speaks, 145.
123.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 175.
124.
Ibid., 178. For an expanded, though somewhat antagonistic,
examination of the use of subjective factors in forming a
revolutionary political consciousness in Cuba, see Medin,
Cuba: The Shaping of Revolutionary Consciousness.
125.
Guevara, "Man and Socialism in Cuba," in Venceremos! 398.
126.
"Presentación de Amauta,," Amauta 1/1 (September 1926): 1.
127.
Mariátegui, La escena contemporánea, 12.
128.
Mariátegui, "El alma matinal," in El alma matinal, 14.
168
=====第193页=====
129. Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 179.
130.
Gadea, Ernesto, 51-52.
131.
Castro, Una América Latina más unida, 13.
132.
Betto, Fidel and Religion, 17.
133.
Ibid., 18-19.
134.
Departamento de Orientación del CC del PCC, José Carlos
Mariátegui, 14.
135.
Ibid., 11.
136.
Mariátegui, El problema de la tierra, back cover.
137.
Mariátegui, "El problema de la tierra," ibid.; quoted from
Mariátegui, "The Problem of the Land," in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 32.
138.
Ibid., 33.
139.
Ibid., 70-74.
140.
Concha, "Mariátegui y su critica del latifundio," 15-27.
141.
Mariátegui, "iExiste un pensamiento Hispano-Americano?"
in El problema de la tierra; quoted from Mariátegui, "Existe
un pensamiento Hispano-Americano?" in Temas de nuesttra
américa, 23.
142.
Mariátegui, "El destino de norteamerica," in El problema de
la tierra; and "Yanquilandia y el socialismo," ibid. Both
essays are in Mariategui, Defensa del marxismo, 145-50 and
155-59.
143.
Baeza, "Nota preliminar,” in Mariategui, 7 ensayos de
interpretación (Havana, 1963), xi.
169
=====第194页=====
144. Ibid., xii.
145.
Baeza,"Nota preliminar," in Mariátegui, 7 ensayos de
interpretación (Havana, 1969), xii.
146.
Baeza, "Prólogo," in Mariátegui, 7 ensayos de interpretación
(Havana, 1973), xvii.
147.
Posada Zarate, Los origenes, 24.
148.
The books are Anderle, Los movimientos politicos (discussed
below); Gargurevich Regal, La razón del joven Mariátegui;
Mariátegui, José Carlos Mariátegui: Obras (discussed below).
The articles are Butazzoni, "Sobre Mariategui y la
literatura"; Castro H., "El proceso de la cultura
latinoamerica"; Concha, "Mariátegui y su critica del Iati-
fundio;" Dessau,"Literatura y sociedad"; Luna Vegas, "A
los cuarentinuevo aos; Luna Vegas, "Genaro Carnero
Checa";Marinello,
“Literatura y revolución"; Melis,
"Mariátegui: primer marxista de América"; Moretic,
"Proceso del realismo en Mariátegui"; Orrillo, "Primeras
huellas"; Valdes-Dapena, “El Mariátegui de Yerko
Moretic." This list does not include, of course, countless
other works which employ Mariategui's Marxist analysis but
without making him or his ideas the central focus of study.
149.
"Montado en un relámpago." Enrique de la Osa, "Prólogo,"
in Mariátegui's José Carlos Mariátegui: Obras, 26. Winton
Orrillo uses the same metaphor for the two thinkers in Martí,
Mariátegui, 29.
150.
See de la Osa's comments on 31, 34, and 57.
151.
Santos Moray, "Prólogo," in Mariátegui, Ensayos literarios, 8.
152.
Ibid., 18.
153.
Ibid., 9.
154.
Ibid., 10.
170
=====第195页=====
155. Santos Moray, "Nota de presentación, in Mella et al.,
Marxistas de América, 5.
156.
Ibid., 6.
157.
"Declaración para la convocatoria del Premio Extraordinario
José Carlos Mariátegui," Casa de las Américas 19/113
(March-April, 1979): 159.
158.
"Ultimas actividades de la Casa de las Américas," Casa de
las Américas 21/125 (March-April, 1981): 189, 190.
159.
"Continuidad del Amauta," Casa de las Américas 30/180
(May-June 1990): 157.
160.
See Moretic and Valdes-Dapena; Moretic, José Carlos
Mariátegui.
161.
See Casa de las Américas 12/68 (September-October 1971):
6-39. The literary aspects of Mariátegui's thought are also
dealt with by Guillermo Castro, Dessau, and Butazzoni.
162.
Riverend, "Es bueno, es indispensable," 203.
163.
Orrillo, Martti, Mariátegui, 217.
164.
Ibid., 237-38. In the conclusion to his book, Orrillo gives
seventeen specific coincidences in the literary and political
thought of Martí and Mariátegui.
165.
Ibid., 215. Orrillo points to Foncueva's article "Novisimo
retrato de José Martí" which Mariátegui published in
Amauta as one of Mariátegui's few direct contacts with
Martí's thought.
166.
Ibid., 213.
167.
The Bohemia articles are Crespo Giron, "José Carlos
Mariátegui;” Dumpierre, "Mariátegui: luz de América";
"Mariátegui, el Amauta,," Bohemia 72/15 (11 April 1980): 84-
171
=====第196页=====
88;Orrillo, "Raúl Roa;" Juan Sánchez, "Mariátegui, un
peleador de ahora"; Santos Moray, "José Carlos Mariategui,
el Amauta; Santos Moray, "Mariátegui en los albores de las
letras sovieticas."
168.
Sánchez, "Mariátegui, un peleador de ahora," 66.
169.
Mariátegui, "La unidad de la América Indo-Española,"
Bohemia 72/15 (11 April 1980): 85-86; also in Mariátegui,
Temas de nuestra América, 13-17.
170.
Mariátegui, "Henri Barbusse," Bohemia 72/15(11 April
1980): 88; also in Mariátegui, La escena contemporánea, p.
158.
171.
Dumpierre, "Mariategui, Cuba y la lucha contra el
imperialismo," 231.
172.
Vanden, "Ideology of the Insurrection," 49.
Chapter 4
1.
Mintz argues this line of thought in his article, "Rural
Proletariat," 291-325.
2.
Burbach and Núñez, Fire in the Americas, 5.
3.
Brown, "Sandinismo," 39.
4.
Vanden, "Marxism and the Peasantry in Latin America,," 93.
5.
Carlos Fonseca Amador, "Nicaragua: Zero Hour," in Borge
Martínez, Sandinistas Speak, 39.
6.
Sandino, "Manifiesto," in Sandino, El pensamiento vivo, vol.
1, 119.
7.
Letter from Sandino to Gustavo Alemán Bolaos on 9
September 1929 in Sandino, El pensamiento vivo, vol. 1, 389.
172
=====第197页=====
8.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 85, 10.
9.
Vanden, "Ideology of the Insurrection," 42.
10.
 Sandino, "Manifiesto," El pensamiento vivo, 117.
11.
Vanden, "Ideology of the Insurrection," 45.
12.
Sandino, "Mensajes: Sandino y la libertad de los pueblos,"
Amauta 4/20 (January 1929): 95.
13.
Letter from Sandino to Gustavo Alemán Bolaos on 9
August 1931 in Sandino, El pensamiento vivo, vol. 2, 189.
14.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 15.
15.
Ibid., 39.
16.
Ibid., 142.
17.
Sandino, "Manifiesto Luz y Verdad," El pensamiento vivo,
vol. 2, 159-60.
18.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 26.
19.
Mariategui, "The Problem of Land," in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 50.
20.
"La revolución mexicana-conferencia de José Carlos
Mariátegui," in Mariátegui, Historia de la crisis mundial, 167.
For an analysis of Mariátegui's thought on the Mexican
revolution, see Paoli Bilio, "Mariátegui, interprete dela
revolución mexicana," Bassols Batalla's comments in Marx y
Mariátegui, 259-68, and Falcon, Mariátegui: Arquitecto Sindical.
Falcón's work emerged from an article which he originally
wrote for the conference "Mariátegui y la revolución
latinoamericana," which the Universidad Autónoma de
Sinaloa held in Mexico City in 1980.
173
=====第198页=====
21. Letter from Mariátegui to Pavletich on 25 September 1929
in Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 636.
22.
Letter from Mariátegui to Samuel Glusberg on 9 February
1930 in Mariátegui, Corresspondencia, vol. 2, 726.
23.
"Diego Rivera: Biografa sumaría," Amauta 1/4 (December
1926): 5-8.
24.
Esteban Pavletich, "Diego Rivera: El artista de una clase,"
Amauta 2/5 (January 1927): 5-9.
25.
Mariátegui, "Itinerario de Diego Rivera," El artista y la
época, Obras Completas, vol. 6, 97. The article originally
appeared in Variedades (Lima), 18 February 1928.
26.
Mariátegui, "El imperialismo yanqui en Nicaragua,"in
Temas de nuestra América, 145. The article originally
appeared in Variedades, 22 January 1927.
27.
See Romain Rolland, "Mensaje de Romain Rolland,
Amauta 2/6 (February 1927): 4.
28.
Manuel Ugarte, "Manifiesto de Manuel Ugarte a la juventud
latino-americana," Amauta 2/8 (April 1927): 37-39.
29.
Jorge Basadre, "Mientras ellos se extienden," Amauta 2/9
(May 1927): 9.
30.
M. Castro Morales, "Estados Unidos en la historia del
Derecho," Amauta 2/9 (May 1927): 32.
31.
Martínez de la Torre, Apuntes para una interpretación
marxista, vol. 2, 273-74.
32.
"La union latino-americana," Amauta 2/11 (January 1928):
36.
33.
Tristan Maroff [sic],"Spartacus y Sandino,” Amauta 3/14
(April 1928): 26.
174
=====第199页=====
34. Mariategui, "Las elecciones en Estados Unidos y Nicaa-
gua," in Temas de nuestra América, 149. Originally the article
appeared in Variedades (10 November 1928).
35.
Manuel Ugarte, "Manifiesto de Manuel Ugarte y los
estudiantes latinoamericanos de Paris, Amauta 3/16 (July
1928): 34.
36.
Augusto César Sandino, "Mensaje de Sandino," Amauta 3/16
(July 1928): 1; also see letter from Sandino to Mariátegui on
20 May 1928 in Mariátegui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 380.
37.
Henri Barbusse, "Mensaje," Amauta 3/19 (November-
December 1928): 92-93.
38.
Luis A. Rodrigo called Sandino un vulgar salteador de
caminos in a letter to Mariátegui on 15 April 1929in
Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 540.
39.
Mariategui, "El movimiento revolucionario venezolano,"in
Temas de nuestra América, 158.
40.
Luna Vegas, Historia y trascendéncia, 89.
41.
Letter from Pavletich to Mariátegui on 15 July 1928 in
Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 397; Pavletich referred
to Sandino's message in the issue of Amauta that had just
been published in July of 1928.
42.
Letter from Mariátegui to Pavletich on 25 September 1929
in Mariategui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 635.
43.
Pavletich, "La causa de la libertad de Nicaragua es la causa
de la libertad de América," quoted in Instituto de Estudio
del Sandinismo, El Sandinismo: documentos básicos, 189.
44.
Letter from Pavletich to Joaquin García Monge on 8 June
1928 in Repertorio Américano (San José, Costa Rica) 17/2 (14
July 1928): 19. (Also in ibid., 190.)
175
=====第200页=====
45.
 Selser, Sandino, 120.
46.
Falcón quoted in Instituto de Estudio del Sandinismo, El
Sandinismo: documento, básicos, 229.
47.
Blanca Luz Brum, "Nicaragua," Amauta 3/13 (March 1928):
18; cf. her comments in a letter to Mariátegui on 1 February
1928 in Mariátegui, Correspondencia, vol. 2, 347.
48.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 135.
49.
Ricardo Martínez de la Torre, "Aviso Luminoso," Amauta
3/14 (April 1928): 7.
50.
Roa, El fuego de la semilla, 182, 187.
51.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 94.
52.
Román, Maldito pais, 137.
53.
Sandino quoted by Carlos Fonseca Amador, "Sintesis de
algunos problemas actuales," in Fonseca Amador,Obras:
Tomo 1, 185.
54.
"The Situation of the Latin American Communist Parties on
the Eve of the Seventh Congress of the Comintern,in
Aguilar, Marxism in Latin America, 153. Cerdas Cruz gives
an excellent examination of the relationship between Sandino
and the Communist International in his book, La hoz yel
machete, 181-253.
55.
Vanden, "Ideology of the Insurrection," 49; Hodges,
Intellectual Foundations, 17.
56.
Vanden, "Ideology of the Insurrection," 48-49.
57.
Booth, End and the Beginning, 115. In an important new
study which challenges these traditional perceptions of the
PSN, Jeffrey Gould argues that a strong, leftist rural labor
176
=====第201页=====
movement emerged from the confines of the PSN in
Chinandega in the 1940s. See Gould, To Lead as Equals.
58.
Mattarollo, "Civilizar a la burguesia," 6.
59.
Ibid.
60.
FSLN,"The Historic Program of the FSLN," in Borge
Martínez et al., Sandinistas Speak, 13.
61.
Ibid., 21.
62.
Fonseca Amador, "Entrevista, 1970," in Obras: Tomo 1, 289.
63.
Ibid., 301.
64.
Fonseca Amador, "Ideario político del General Sandino," in
Obras: Tomo 2, 169-99.
65.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 187.
66.
Fonseca Amador, "Viva Sandino," in Obras: Tomo 2, 85.
67.
Blandón, Entre Sandino y Fonseca Amador, 109. Guevara
never joined the FSLN.
68.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 168-69.
69.
Ibid., 183, 179.
70.
Brown, "Sandinismo," 56.
71.
Vanden, "Fonseca Amador, Carlos," in Gorman, Biographical
Dictionary of Marxism, 110.
72.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 179.
73.
Borge Martnez, Carlos, 22; cf. Selser, Sandino, 139.
177
=====第202页=====
74.
See V. M. Miroshevski, "El populismo' en el Perú. Papel de
Mariátegui en la historia del pensamiento social latino-
americano," in Arico, Mariátegui y los origenes del marxismo
latinoamericano, 55-70.
75.
Valle-Castillo, "José Carlos Mariátegui (1895-1930)," 1.
76.
Fonseca Amador, "Viva Sandino," in Obras: Tomo 2, 85.
.77.
Fonseca Amador, "Notas sobre la montaña y algunos otros
temas," in Obras: Tomo 2, 200.
78.
Borge Martínez, La paciente impaciencia, 86-87.
79.
Mattarollo, "Civilizar a la burguesia," 6.
80.
Ibid.
81.
Burbach and Núñez, Fire in the Americas, 22.
82.
Instituto de Estudio del Sandinismo, Carlos: el eslabon vital,
31.
83.
Pavletich, "Perspectivas de la Revolución Nicaragüense," 94-
96.
84.
Borge Martinez, "Large Scale Aggression, 119.
85.
Luna Vegas, Historia y trascendéncia, 90. In a continuation
of Mariátegui's solidarity with Nicaragua, Luna Vegas stated
that in the 198Os, "in the face of a new and serious North
American aggression against Sandinista Nicaragua, the
Peruvian followers of Mariátegui express our fraternal
solidarity without reserve” for the new generation of
Sandinistas.
86.
Valle-Castillo, "José Carlos Mariátegui (1895-1930),”1.
Unfortunately, the Nuevo Amanecer Cultural never carried
through on its intent to publish Sandino's communiques.
178
=====第203页=====
87.
Interview with Valle-Castillo, Managua, Nicaragua, 18 June
1990. José Antonio Fernández Salvatecci, a Peruvian
military official who fought with the Sandinista guerrillas
before their 1979 triumph, without mentioning Mariátegui
points to many of these theoretical factors which originated
with Mariátegui as strengths which led to the success of the
Sandinista revolution. Fernández Salvatecci, "Teorización de
la practica revolucionaria nicaragüense," in Militar en el Perú,
157-62.
88.
Borge Martinez, Los primeros pasos, 280; cf. Mariategui's
editorial "Aniversario y balance* in Amauta: "we certainly
do not want socialism in America to be a copy. It has to be
a heroic creation." Amauta 3/17 (September 1928): 3.
89.
Borge Martinez, Los primeros pasos, 9.
90.
Mariátegui, "Heterodoxia de Ia tradición," Peruanicemos al
Perú, 162.
91.
Fonseca, "Nicaragua: Zero Hour," 29.
92.
Morales Avilés, Obras, 82.
93.
Fonseca, "Nicaragua: Zero Hour," 37.
94.
Mattarollo, "Civilizar a la burguesia, 6.
95.
Borge Martinez, "Large Scale Aggression," 119.
96.
Tirado, El pensiamento Politico de Carlos Fonseca Amador,
4-6.
97.
Borge Martinez, quoted in Christian, Nicaragua, 170.
98.
"The idea that revolution will be exported to others is also
absolutely false,"Joaqu illalobos,"ADemocratic Revolu-
tion for El Salvador, Foreign Policy 74 (Spring 1989): 115.
99. Borge Martinez, quoted in Christian, Nicaragua, 170.
179
=====第204页=====
100.
Bendaña, "Foreign Policy of the Nicaraguan Revolution,"
321.
101.
Mariategui, "Principios programaticos,"in Ideologia y
politica, 159.
102.
Vilas, Sandinista Revolution, 29.
103.
Ibid., 26; cf. Mariátegui, "Punto de vista anti-imperialista,"
in Ideologia y politica, 89.
104.
Vilas, Perfiles de la revolución sandinista, 73; cf. Mariátegui,
"Punto de vista anti-imperialista," in Ideologia y politica, 90.
105.
Mariátegui, "Punto de vista anti-imperialista," in Ideologia y
politica, 91.
106.
Vilas, State, Class & Ethnicity in Nicaragua. This book is a
good introduction to the issues raised on the following pages.
107.
Jinotega, 94 aniversario, 15.
108.
For an excellent survey of the history of indigenous
resistance to the Spanish conquest in Nicaragua, see
Wheelock Roman, Raices indigenas.
109.
Tomás Borge Martínez, "Discurso del Comandante de la
Revolución Tomás Borge M., Ministro del Interior, en la
clausura del Seminario de la Comisión Nacional de
Autonomía," in Autonomia, 72-73.
110.
Macaulay, Sandino Affair, 18, 210.
111.
Wheelock Román, Raices indigenas, 1, 117.
112.
Borge Martinez, La paciente impaciencia, 32-33.
113.
FSLN, "The Historic Program of the FSLN," in Borge et al.,
Sandinistas Speak, 19.
180
=====第205页=====
114.
Comisión de Autonomía, "Principios y Políticas para el
Ejercicio de los Derechos de Autonomía de los Pueblos
Indigenas y Comunidades de la Coast Atlántica de
Nicaragua," in Autonomia 46.
115.
Ibid., 48.
116.
Bourgois, "Problematic of Nicaragua's Indigenous Minori-
ties," 304.
117.
Cardenal, "Toward a New Democracy of Culture, 347.
118.
Beverley and Zimmerman, Literature and Politics, 68.
119.
Cardenal, "El Valiente Nombre Nuevo," 6.
120.
"Presentación de Amauta," Amauta 1/1 (September 1926): 1.
121.
Cardenal, "El Valiente Nombre Nuevo," 7.
122.
Ibid., 6-7.
123.
"Presentación de Amauta," Amauta 1/1 (September 1926): 1.
124.
Liss, Radical Thought, 186.
125.
Vanden, National Marxism, 1.
126.
Burbach and Núñez, Fire in the Americas, 100.
127.
Borge Martinez, quoted in White, Culture & Politics in
Nicaragua,5. The theme of using popular culture as an
expression of revolutionary aspirations in Nicaragua is also
treated in Beverley and Zimmerman, Literature and Politics.
128.
Borge Martinez, La paciente impaciencia, 362.
129.
Borge Martnez, Los primeros pasos, 151. In his essay "Henri
Barbusse" in La escena contemporánea (158), Mariátegui
wrote that "For poor people the revolution will be the
181
=====第206页=====
conquest not only of bread, but also beauty, of art, of thought,
and of all the pleasures of the spirit" (emphasis mine).
130.
Borge Martinez, Los primeros pasos, 199.
131.
Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 188-89.
132.
Tirado López, El pensamiento de Carlos Fonseca Amador, 10.
133.
Fred Judson, "Sandinista Revolutionary Morale," 20.
134.
Ibid., 31.
135.
Ibid., 22.
136.
Marx, "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of
Right: Introduction," in Early Writings, 44.
137.
Marx, "Third Manuscript," ibid., 167.
138.
Kirk, Between God and the Party, xviii.
139.
Marx, "Third Manuscript," in Early Writings, 156.
140.
National Directorate of the FSLN, "The Role of Religion in
the New Nicaragua," in Borge et al., Sandinistas Speak, 107.
141.
Lancaster, Thanks to God and the Revolution, 164. The role
of religious workers as a subjective factor in religious
movements in Central America is placed in a broader
historical context in Phillip Berryman, The Religious Roots of
Rebellion: Christians in Central American Revolutions
(Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbin Books, 1984).
142.
National Directorate of the FSLN, "The Role of Religion in
the New Nicaragua," in Borge et all., Sandinistas Speak, 107.
143.
Mattarollo, "Civilizar a la burguesia," 6.
182
=====第207页=====
144. Borge Martinez, La paciente impaciencia, 279; Mariategui,
"The Religious Factor," in Seven Interpretive Essays, 124.
145.
National Directorate of the FSLN, "The Role of Religion in
the New Nicaragua," in Borge et al., Sandinistas Speak, 105.
146.
Torres, Revolutionary Priest, xiii.
147.
Ibid., 368.
148.
National Directorate of the FSLN, "The Role of Religion in
the New Nicaragua," in Borge et al., Sandinistas Speak, 106.
149.
"El Evangelio en la revolución," 7.
150.
Dodson and Montgomery,"Churches in the Nicaraguan
Revolution," 166.
151.
See Cabestrero, Ministers of God and Cabestrero, Revolution-
aries for the Gospel for interviews with Catholic priests who
worked with the revolutionary Sandinista government.
152.
See Cardenal, In Cuba.
153.
Cardenal, quoted in Hodges, Intellectual Foundations, 285.
154.
See the discussion of these sects in Dodson and
Montgomery, "Churches in the Nicaraguan Revolution," 166-
68.
155.
Vanden, National Marxism, 20; Chang-Rodriguez, Poetica e
ideologia, 84.
156.
See Gutiérrez's discussion of secondary works on Mariátegui
in Gutiérrez, Theology of Liberation, 98.
157. Peirano, "Entrevista con Gustavo Gutiérrez," 116.
158. Candelaria, "José Carlos Mariátegui," 886.
183
=====第208页=====
159.
Gutiérrez, Theology of Liberation, 90; Gutiérrez quotes from
Mariátegui, "Aniversario y balance, in Ideologia y politica,
249,and "Mensaje al Congreso Obrero,"inIdeologia y
politica, 112. Also see Gutiérrez, Power of the Poor, 189.
160.
Gutiérrez, Power of the Poor, 217.
161.
Gutiérrez, Theology of Liberation, 18, quoted from
Mariátegui, "Heterodoxia de la tradición," in Peruanicemos
al Perú, 164.
162.
Gutiérrez, Theology of Liberation, 284.
163.
Ibid., ix.
164.
Gutiérrez, Power of the Poor, 97. See Mariátegui's essay
"The Religious Factor," in Seven Interpretive Essays, 124-52.
Gutiérrez also mentioned this influence in his interview with
Luis Peirano in Peirano's “Entrevista con Gustavo
Gutiérrez," 115.
165.
Judd, "Gustavo Gutiérrez," 69.
166.
Mariategui, "El hombre y el mito," in El alma matinal, 27.
167.
Mariategui, "The Religious Factor," in Seven Interpretive
Essays, 152.
168.
Klaiber, Religion and Revolution in Peru, 107-8.
169.
See, for example, Jerez, "Gustavo Gutiérrez," 59-64.
170.Vanden, National Marxism, 2.
Chapter 5
1. Angotti, "Contributions of José Carlos Mariátegui," 33.
2. Vanden, "Ideology of the Insurrection," 58.
184
=====第209页=====
3. Vanden, "Marxism and the Peasantry in Latin America,"95.
Gargan, "India's Communists Reel in Soviet Upheaval," 8A.
4.
5.
Vilas, "What Future for Socialism?" 14-15.
6.
Vilas, "Is Socialism Still an Alternative for the Third
World?"108.
7.
"Nuestro deber más sagrado," 1.
8.
Durch, "Cuban Military," 71-72.
9.
"Nuestro deber más sagrado," 1.
10.
Castro, "Only Those Who Resist Will Win."
11.
Castro, "Fidel Castro on Chilean Fascism and Revolution,"
in Johnson, Chilean Road to Socialism, 341.
12.
Allende, "First Message to the Congress by President
Allende," in Debray, Chilean Revolution, 174-75.
13.
Robinson, "Transition in El Salvador."
14.
Villalobos, "Democratic Revolution," 103.
15.
Ibid., 118, 113.
16.
Ibid., 113.
17.
Shafik Handal, "Cuba, El Salvador and the Perestroika."
18.
For a solid assessment of the FMLN's adaptive "new
thinking" of the late 1980s, which allowed them to rise above
sectarian beliefs and mechanical thinking in order to build
what is today the strongest revolutionary movement in the
hemisphere (15), see Miles and Ostertag, "FMLN: New
Thinking."
185
=====第210页=====
19.
Villalobos, "Democratic Revolution," 120.
20.
Quoted in Robinson, "Transition in El Salvador."
21.
Mariátegui, "Henri Barbusse," in Escena contemporánea, 158.
Also see Borge Mariátegui, Los primeros pasos, 151.
22.
Harris, Marxism, Socialism, and Democracy, 201-2.
23.
Ibid., 177-78.
24.
Burbach and Núñez, Fire in the Americas, 1.
25.
Flores Galindo, "Peru: A Self-critical Farewell," 9-10.
26.
Arico, "Rethink Everything, 21-23.
27.
Vanden, "José Carlos Mariátegui y la perestroika," 22.
28.
"Nota editorial," Anuario Mariateguiano 2 (1991): 7.
29.
Mariategui, "Aniversario y balance," Amauta 3/17
(September 1928): 3.
186
=====第211页=====
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aguilar, Luis E., ed. Marxism in Latin America. Revised edition.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1978.
Aguirre, Manuel Agustín. Universidad y movimientos estudiantiles,
volume 1. Quito: Editorial Alberto Crespo Encalada, 1987.
Aguirre Gamio, Hernando. Mariátegui: destino polemico. Lima:
Instituto Nacional de Cultura, 1975.
Alba, Victor. Politics and the Labor Movement in Latin America.
Translated by Carol de Zapata. Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1968.
Albert, Michael, and Robin Hahnel. UnOrthodox Marxism: An Essay
On Capitalism, Socialism and Revolution. Boston: South End
Press, 1978.
Albornoz P., Oswaldo. "Mariátegui en el Ecuador." Revista
Ecuatoriana de pensamiento marxista 13 (September 1989):
43-53.
Alexander, Robert J. Communism in Latin America. New Brunswick:
Rutgers University Press, 1957.
. Organized Labor in Latin America. New York: The
Free Press, 15.
Amauta: revista mensual de doctrina, literatura, arte, polémica. Nos.
1-32. Lima, 1928-1930. Facsimile edition. Lima: Emprea
Editora Amauta, 1974-1976.
187
=====第212页=====
Anderle, Adam. Los movimientos politicos en el Perú entre las dos
guerras mundiales. Havana: Casa de las Américas, 1985.
Anderson, Thomas P. Matanza: El Salvador's Communist Revolt of
1932. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1971.
Angotti, Thomas. "The Contributions of José Carlos Mariátegui to
Revolutionary Theory.* Latin American Perspectives 13/2 (49)
(Spring 1986): 33-57.
Antuña, María Luisa, and Joséfina García-Carranza. Bibliografia de
Juan Marinello. Havana: Editorial Orbe, 1975.
Anuario Mariateguiano. Lima: Empresa Editora Amauta, 1-3 (1989-
1991).
Aricó, José. La cola del diablo: Itinerario de Gramsci en América
Latina. Caracas: Editorial Nueva Sociedad, 1988.
, ed. Mariategui y los origenes del marxismo latino-
americano. Second edition, corrected and expanded. México:
Cuadernos de Pasado y Presente (60), 1980.
. Marx y América Latina. Lima: Centro de Estudios
para el Desarrollo y la Participación, 1980.
"Rethink Everything (MaybeIt's Always Been
This Way).* Report on the Americas 25/5 (May 1992): 21-23.
Autonomía. Managua: Dirección de Información y Prensa de la
Presidencia de la República de Nicaragua, 1985.
Baines, John M. "José Mariátegui and the Ideology of Revolution
in Peru." The Rocky Mountain Social Science Joural 7/2
(October 1970): 109-16.
. Revolution in Peru: Mariátegui and the Myth.
University, Ala.: The University of Alabama Press, 1972.
188
=====第213页=====
Bassols Batalla, Narciso. Marx y Mariátegui. Mexico: Ediciones E
Caballito, 1985.
Bazán, Armando, et al. Mariategui y su tiempo. Mariátegui's Obras
Completas, volume 20, tenth edition. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta,
1987. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1959.)
Bendaña, Alejandro. The Foreign Policy of the Nicaraguan
Revolution." In Nicaragua in Revolution. Edited by Thomas W.
Walker. New York: Praeger, 1982, 319-27.
Betto, Frei. Fidel and Religion. Havana: Publications Office of the
Council of State, 1987.
Beverley, John, and Marc Zimmerman. Literature and Politics in the
Central American Revolutions. Austin: University of Texas
Press, 1990.
Blanco, Hugo. Land or Death: The Peasant Struggle in Peru. Trans-
lated by Naomi Allen. New York: Pathfinder Press, 1972.
Blandon, Jesús Miguel. Entre Sandino y Fonseca Amador. Managua:
Talleres de Impresiones y Troqueles, 1980.
Blasier, Cole. The Giant's Rival: The USSR and Latin America.
Revised edition. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1987.
Boggs, Carl. Gramsci's Marxism. London: Pluto Press, 197.
Boggs, Carl, and David Plotke, eds. The Politics of Eurocommunism:
Socialism in Transition. Boston: South End Press, 1980.
Booth, John A. The End and the Beginning: The Nicaraguan Revolu-
tion. Second edition, revised and updated. Boulder: Westview
Press, 1985.
Borge Martnez,Tomas. Carlos, The Dawn Is No Longer Beyond Our
Reach. Vancouver: New Star Books, 1984.
189
=====第214页=====
. "Large Scale Aggression is Being Prepared."
Intercontinental Press (New York), 21/4 (28 February 193):
118-19.
. La paciente impaciencia. Managua: Editorial
Vanguardia, 1989.
Los primeros pasos: la revolución popular
sandinista. Fourth edition. México: Siglo Veintiuno, 1985.
Borge Martinez, Tomas, et al. Sandinistas Speak. Edited by Bruce
Marcus. New York: Pathfinder Press, 1982.
Bourgois, Philippe. "The Problematic of Nicaragua's Indigenous
Minorities." In Nicaragua in Revolution. Edited by Thomas W.
Walker. New York: Praeger, 1982, 303-18.
Brown, Doug. "Sandinismo and the Problem of Democratic
Hegemony. Latin American Perspectives 17/2 (65) (Spring
1990): 39-61.
Brown, Robert McAfee. Gustavo Gutiérrez: An Introduction to
Liberation Theology. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1990.
Burbach, Roger, and Orlando Núñez. Fire in the Americas: Forging
a Revolutionary Agenda. London: Verso, 1987.
Burns, E. Bradford. At War in Nicaragua: The Reagan Doctrine and
the Politics of Nostalgia. New York: Harper and Row, 1987.
Butazzoni,Fernando."Sobre Mariategui  la literatura. Casa de las
Américas 21/126 (May-June 1981): 140-43.
Caballero, Manuel. Latin America and the Comintern, 1919-1943.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Cabestrero, Teofilo. Ministers of God, Ministers of the People:
Testimonies of Faith from Nicaragua. Translated from the
Spanish by Robert R. Barr. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books,
1983.
190
=====第215页=====
. Revolutionaries for the Gospel: Testimonies of
Fifteen Christians in the Nicaraguan Government. Translated
from the Spanish by Phillip Berryman. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis
Books, 1986.
Cabral, Amilcar. Return to the Source, Selected Speeches of Amilcar
Cabral. Edited by Africa Information Service. New York:
Monthly Review Press, 1973.
Cadorette, Curt. From the Heart of the People: The Theology of
Gustavo Gutiérrez. Oak Park, Illinois: Meyer Stone, 1988.
Cairo, Ana. El Grupo Minorista en su tiempo. Havana: Editorial de
Ciencias Sociales, 1978.
Cammett, John M. Antonio Gramsci and the Origins of Italian
Communism. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1967.
Candelaria, Michael. "José Carlos Mariátegui: Forgotten Forerun-
ner of Liberation Theology." The Christian Century 104/29 (14
October 1987): 885-87.
Cardenal, Ernesto. In Cuba. Translated by Donald D. Walsh. New
York: New Directions Books, 1974.
. "Toward a New Democracy of Culture." In The
Nicaragua Reader: Documents of a Revolution under Fire. Edited
by Peter Rosset and John Vandermeer. New York: Grove
Press, Inc., 1983.
"ElValiente Nombre Nuevo.”Nicaráuac1/1
(May-June, 1980): 6-7.
Carnero Checa, Genaro. La acción escrita: José Carlos Mariátegui,
periodista. Lima: Rights reserved by the author, 1964.
Carney, Padre J. Guadalupe. To Be a Revolutionary. San Francisco:
Harper & Row, 1985.
191
=====第216页=====
Carrillo, Santiago. Eurocommunism and the State. Westport, Conn.:
Lawrence Hill, 1978.
Castellanos, Orlando. "Conversación a los 75." La Gaceta de Cuba
(Havana) 117 (November 1973): 4-10.
Castro, Fidel. Fidel Castro Speaks. Edited by Martin Kenner and
James Petras. New York: Grove Press, 1969.
. "Only Those Who Resist Will Win: Fidel Castro's
Message to January 25 Rally." The NY Transfer News
Service, 30 January 1992.
. Una América Latina más unida. Conferencia de
prensa en Quito, 13 de agosto de 1988. Havana: Editora
Política, 1988.
Castro Arenas, Mario. Reconstrucción de Mariátegui. Lima: Okura
Editores, 1985.
Castro H., Guillermo. "El proceso de la cultura latinoamerica: 1898-
1930: José Carlos Mariátegui." Casa de las Américas 20/118
(January-February 1980): 9-34.
Cerdas Cruz, Rodolfo. La hoz y el machete: La Internacional
Comunista, América Latina y la revolución en Centro América.
San José, Costa Rica: Editorial Universidad Estatal a
Distancía, 1986.
. Sandino, el Apra y la Internacional Comunista,
Antecedentes Históricos de la Nicaragua de Hoy. San José, Costa
Rica: Centro de Investigación y Adiestramiento Político
Administrativo (CIAPA), 1979.
Chang-Rodrguez, Eugenio. La literatura politica de González Prada,
Mariátegui y Haya de la Torre. México: Colección Studium 18,
1957.
. Poetica e ideologia en José Carlos Mariátegui.
Madrid: José Porrua Turanzas, 1983.
192
=====第217页=====
Chavarria, Jesús. José Carlos Mariátegui and the Rise of Modern Peru,
1890-1930. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
1979.
Choy, Emilio, et al. Lenin y Mariátegui. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta,
1970.
Christian, Shirley. Nicaragua: Revolution in the Family. New York:
Vintage Books, 1986.
Concha, Jaime. "Mariátegui y su critíca del latifundio." Casa de las
Américas 24/140 (September-October 1983): 15-27.
Crawford, Wiliam Rex. A Century of Latin American Thought.
Revised edition. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1966.
Crespo Giron, Xiomara. "José Carlos Mariátegui." Bohemia 65/45
(9 November 1973): 16-23.
Cronin, Jeremy. "Is the SACP Travelling in the Right Direction?"
Work in Progress 74 (1991): 25-28.
Dalton, Roque. Miguel Marmol. Translated by Kathleen Ross and
Richard Schaaf. Willimantic, Conn.: Curbstone Press, 1987.
Davis, Harold Eugene. Latin American Social Thought. The Univer-
sity Press of Washington, D.C., 1961,
. Latin American Thought. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University, 1972.
Debray, Régis. The Chilean Revolution: Conversations with Allende.
New York: Vintage Books, 1971.
. Revolution in the Revolution? Translated by Bobye
Ortiz. New York: Grove Press, 1967.
. Strategy for Revolution. Edited with an introduction
by Robin Blackburn. London: Jonathan Cape, 1970.
193
=====第218页=====
Departamento de Orientacion Revolucionaria del Comité Central
del Partido Comunista de Cuba. José Carlos Mariátegui y la
revolución antimperialista y socialista en america latina. Havana,
1975.
Dessau,Adalbert. "Literatura y sociedad en las obras de José
Carlos Mariátegui."  Casa de las Américas 14/84 (May-June
1974): 19-39.
Díaz-Polanco, Héctor. "Indigenismo, Populism, and Marxism." Latin
American Perspectives 9/2 (33) (Spring 1982): 42-61.
Dodson, Michael, and T.S. Montgomery. "The Churches in the
Nicaraguan Revolution." In Nicaragua in Revolution. Edited by
Thomas W. Walker. New York: Praeger, 1982, 161-80.
Dodson, Michael, and Laura Nuzzi O'Shaughnessy. Nicargua's
Other Revolution: Religious Faith and Political Struggle. Chapel
Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1990.
."Religion andPolitics." In Nicaragua: TheFirst
Five Years. Edited by Thomas W. Walker. New York: Praeger,
1985, 119-43.
Dumpierre, Erasmo. "Mariátegui, Cuba y la lucha contra el
imperialismo." In Mariátegui: Unidad de pensamiento y acción.
Edited by Jorge del Prado. Lima: Ediciones Unidad, 1986,
213-36.
."Mariátegui: luz de América.” Bohemia 76/33 (8
June 1984)): 84-89.
Durch, William J. "The Cuban Military in Africa and the Middle
East: From Algeria to Angola.  Studies in Comparative
Communism 11/1-2 (Spring-Summer 1978): 34-78.
Ellis, Stephen,and Tsepo Sechaba. Comrades against Apartheid: The
ANC and the South African Communist Party in Exile.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992.
194
=====第219页=====
"El Evangelio en la revolución." Managua: Instituto Histórico
Centroamericano, 1979.
Espinoza R., Gustavo, and Carlos Malpica S.S. El problema de la
tierra. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1970.
Falcón, Jorge. El hombre en su acción: César Falcón. Lima: Ediciones
Hora del Hombre, 1982.
. Mariategui: Arquitecto Sindical. Lima: Empresa
Editora Amauta, 1980.
. Mariátegui: la revolución mexicana y el estado 'anti'-
imperialista. Lima: Empresa Editora Amauta, 1980.
Feierman, Steven. Peasant Intellectuals: Anthropology and History in
Tanzania. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1990.
Fernández Diaz, Osvaldo. "Gramsci y Mariátegui: frente a la
ortodoxia." Nueva Sociedad 115 (September-October 1991):
135-44.
Fernández Salvatecci, José Antonio. Militar en el Perú, guerrillero en
Nicaragua. Lima: Editorial Venceremos, 1979.
Flores Galindo, Alberto. La agonia de Mariátegui. Lima: Instituto de
Apoyo Agrario, 1989.
. Buscando un Inca: identidad y utopia en los andes.
Lima: Instituto de Apoyo Agrario, 1987.
. Los mineros de la Cerro de Pasco, 1900-1930.
Lima: Pontificia Universidad Católlica del Perú, 1983.
"Peru: A Self-critical Farewell. Report on the
Americas 24/5 (February 1991): 8-10.
Foncueva, José Antonio. Escritos de José Antonio Foncueva. Edited
by Ricardo Luis Hernandez Otero. Havana: Editorial Letras
Cubanos, 1985.
195
=====第220页=====
Fonseca Amador, Carlos. Obras: Tomo 1: Bajo la bandera del
sandinismo. Third edition. Managua: Editorial Nuevo
Nicaragua, 1985.
. Obras: Tomo 2: Viva Sandino. Second edition.
Managua: Editorial Nuevo Nicaragua, 1985.
Foster, David William. Peruvian Literature: A Bibliography of
Secondary Sources. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1981.
Frank, Waldo. "A Great American." The Nation 130/3389 (18 June
1930): 704.
. America Hispana; South of Us: The Characters of
the Countries and the People of Central and South America. New
York: Garden City, 1940.
Gadea, Hilda. Ernesto: A Memoir of Che Guevara. Translated by
Carmen Molina and Walter I. Bradbury. New York:
Doubleday, 1972.
Gargan, Edward A. "India's Communists Reel in Soviet Upheaval."
New York Times (9 September 1991), 8A.
Gargurevich Regal, Juan. La razón del joven Mariátegui. Havana:
Casa de las Américas, 1980.
Garrels, Elizabeth. Mariategui y la Argentina: un caso de lentes ajenos.
Gaithersburg, Md.: Ediciones Hispamerica, 1982.
Gnerre, Mauricio, and Juan Bottasso. "Del indigenismo a las
organizaciones indigenas." In Del indigenismo a las
organizaciones indigenas. By various authors. Second edition.
Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala, 1986, 7-27.
Gorman, Robert A., ed. Biographical Dictionary of Marxism.
Westport: Greenwood Press, 1986.
. Biographical Dictionary of Neo-Marxism. Westport:
Greenwood Press, 1985.
196
=====第221页=====
Gould, Jeffrey L. To Lead as Equals: Rural Protest and Political
Consciousness in Chinandega, Nicaragua, 1912-1979. Chapel
Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1990.
Gramsci, Antonio. Letters from Prison. Selected, translated from the
Italian, and introduced by Lynne Lawner. New York: Harper
& Row, 1973.
. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Translated
and edited by Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith. New
York: International Publishers, 1971.
Guevara, Ernesto "Che." Guerrilla Warfare. With an introduction
and case studies by Brian Loveman and Thomas M. Davies, Jr.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1985.
. Venceremos! The Speeches and Writings of Emesto
Che Guevara. Edited with an introduction by John Gerassi.
New York: Macmillan, 198.
Guibal, Francis. Gramsci: filosofia, poltica, cultura. Lima: Tarea,
1981.
Guibal, Francis, and Alfonso Ibaez. Mariátegui Hoy. Lima: Tarea,
1987.
Gutiérrez, Gustavo. The Power of the Poor in History. Translated
from the Spanish by Robert R. Barr. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis
Books, 1983.
. A Theology of Liberation. Translated and edited
by Sister Caridad Inda and John Eagleson. Maryknoll, N.Y.:
Orbis Books, 1973.
Handal, Shafik. "Cuba, El Salvador and the Perestroika."
Venceremos! (London) (September 1991).
Harrington, Michael. The Twilight of Capitalism. New York: Simon
& Schuster, 176.
197
=====第222页=====
Harris, Richard L. Marxism, Socialism, and Democracy in Latin
America. Latin American Perspectives Series, no. 8. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1992.
Hodges, Donald C. Intellectual Foundations of the Nicaraguan Revolu-
tion. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986.
Hughes, Henry Stuart. Consciousness and Society: The Reorientation
of European Social Thought, 1890-1930. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 1961.
Instituto de Estudio del Sandinismo. Carlos: el eslabon vital:
cronologla básica de Carlos Fonseca jefe de la revolución, 1936-
1976. Managua: Instituto de Estudio del Sandinismo, 1985.
. El Sandinismo: documentos básicos. Managua:
Editorial Nueva Nicaragua, 1983.
Jerez, César, SJ. "Gustavo Gutiérrez: A Friend of Nicaragua" In
The Future of Liberation Theology: Essays in Honor of Gustavo
Gutiérrez. Edited by Marc H. Ellis and Otto Maduro.
Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1989, 59-64.
Jinotega, 94 aniversario. Jinotega, Nicaragua: Centro Popular de
Cultura "Carlos Fonseca"y el Museo Municipal "Lina
Herrera," 1985.
Jobet, Julio César. Luis Emilio Recabarren: Los origenes dl
movimiento obrero y del socialismo Chilenos. Santiago: Prensa
Latinoamericana, 1955.
Johnson, Dale L., ed. The Chilean Road to Socialism. New York:
Anchor Books, 1973.
Joll, James. Antonio Gramsci. London: Penguin Books, 1977.
"José Carlos Mariátegui, el Amauta.” Bohemia 72/15 (11 April
1980): 84-88.
198
=====第223页=====
Judd, Stephen, MM. "Gustavo Gutiérrez and the Originality of the
Peruvian Experience." In The Future of Liberation Theology:
Essays in Honor of Gustavo Gutiérrez. Edited by Marc H. Ellis
and Otto Maduro. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books,199,6-7.
Judson, C. Fred. Cuba and the Revolutionary Myth. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1984.
"Sandinista Revolutionary Morale." Latin
American Perspectives 14/1 (52) (Winter 1987): 19-42.
Kapsoli, Wilfredo. Mariátegui y los congresos obreros. Lima:
Biblioteca Amauta, 1980.
Karol, K. S. Guerrillas in Power: The Course of the Cuban Revolution.
Translated from the French by Arnold Pomerans. New York:
Hill & Wang, 1970.
Keller, Edmond J., and Donald Rothchild, eds. Afro-Marxist Regimees:
Ideology and Public Policy. Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1987.
Kirk, John M. Between God and the Party: Religion and Politics in
Revolutionary Cuba. Tampa: University of South Florida Press,
1989.
Klaiber, Jeffrey L., S.J. Religion and Revolution in Peru, 1824-1976.
Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1977.
Kutéischikova, Vera. “José Carlos Mariátegui y la literatura
soviética." América Latina (USSR) 7 (1980): 80-91.
Labor: quincenario del información e ideas. Nos. 1-10. Lima,10
November 1928 - 7 September 1929. Facsimile edition. Lima:
Empresa Editora Amauta, 1974.
Lafertte, Elías. Vida de un Comunista. Santiago, 191.
Lancaster, Roger N. Thanks to God and the Revolution: Popular
Religion and Class Consciousness in the New Nicaragua. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1988.
199
=====第224页=====
Lenin, V. I. Selected Works. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1969.
. What Is To Be Done? Translated by S.V. and
Patricia Utechin. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963.
Liss, Sheldon B. Marxist Thought in Latin America. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1984.
. Radical Thought in Central America. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1991.
. Roots of Revolution: Radical Thought in Cuba.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1987.
Loveman, Brian. Chile: The Legacy of Hispanic Capitalism. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Luna Vegas, Ricardo. "A los cuarentinueve años de la muerte de
Mariátegui: dos preguntas autocritícas." Casa de las Américas
20/115 (July-August 1979): 134-36.
"Genaro Carnero Checa: gran periodista,
discípulo de Mariátegui." Casa de las Américas 22/128
(September-October 1981): 104-7.
. Historia y trascendéncia de las cartas de Mariátegui:
Un testimonio polemico al alcance de todos. Lima: Ediciones
Rincón Rojo, 1985.
. José Carlos Mariátegui 1894-1930: ensayo biográfico.
Lima: Editorial Horizonte, 1986.
. Mariátegui y el Perú: de ayer, de hoy, y de manana.
Lima: Ediciones Rincon Rojo, 1981.
Macaulay, Nill.The Sandino Affair. Second edition.Duke Univer-
sity Press, 1985.
McLellan, David. Marxism after Marx. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company, 1979.
200
=====第225页=====
Mao Tse-Tung. Mao Tse-Tung: An Anthology of His Writings. Edited
with an introduction by Anne Fremantle. New York: Mentor
Books, 1971.
Mariátegui, José Carlos. El alma matinal y otras estaciones del
hombre de hoy. Obras Completas, volume 3, tenth edition.
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1987. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1950.)
. El artista y la época. Obras Completas, volume 6,
twelfth edition. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1987. (First edition,
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1959.)
. Cartas de Italia. Obras Completas, volume 15,
eighth edition. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1987. (First edition,
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1969.)
. Defensa del marxismo, polémica revolucionaria.
Obras Completas, volume 5, thirteenth edition. Lima:
Biblioteca Amauta, 1987. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1959.)
. Ensayos literarios. Selection and prologue by
Mercedes Santos Moray. Havana: Editorial Arte y Literatura,
1980.
La escena contemporanea. Obras Completas,
volume 1, fourteenth edition. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1987.
(First edition, Lima: Editorial Minerva, 1925.)
."Ethics and Socialism by José Carlos Mariátegui."
Tricontinental 3 (1967): 20-27.
. Figuras y aspectos de la vida mundial, Tomo I
(1923-1925).Obras Completas,volume16,ninth edition.ima:
Biblioteca Amauta, 1988. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1970.)
. Figuras y aspectos de la vida mundial, Tomo II
(1926-1928). Obras Completas, volume 17, eighth edition.
201
=====第226页=====
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1989. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1970.)
. Figuras y aspectos de la vida mundial, Tomo III
(1929-1930). Obras Completas, volume 18, seventh edition.
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1989. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1970.)
. Historia de la crisis mundial: conferencias (años
1923 y 1924). Obras Completas, volume 8, eleventh edition.
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1986. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1959.)
. Ideologia y politica. Obras Completas, volume 13,
nineteenth edition. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1990. (First
edition, Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1969.)
José Carlos Mariátegui: Correspondencia. 2
volumes. Edited by Antonio Melis. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta,
1984.
. José Carlos Mariátegui: Obras. 2 volumes. Selection
by Francisco Baeza, with a prologue by Enrique de la Osa.
Havana: Casa de las Américas, 1982.
,et al. El marxismo en América Latina. Selection
and prologue by Carlos Altamirano. Buenos Aires: Centro
Editor de América Latina, 1972.
. La novela y la vida, Siegfried y el Profesor Canella.
Obras Completas, volume 4, thirteenth edition. Lima:
Biblioteca Amauta, 1988. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1955.)
. Obra politica. México: Ediciones Era, 1979.
. La organización del proletariado. Lima: Ediciones
Bandera Roja, 1967.
202
=====第227页=====
. Peruanicemos al Perú. Obras Completas, volume
11, eleventh edition. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1988. (First
edition, Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1970.)
.El problema de la tierra y otros ensayos. Havana:
Editora Popular de Cuba y del Caribe, 1960.
. La Revolución Mexicana ante el pensamiento de
José Carlos Mariátegui. Edited by Manuel González Calzada.
México: Consejo Editorial del Gobierno del Estado de
Tabasco, 1980.
. Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality.
Translated by Marjorry Urquidi with an Introduction by Jorge
Basadre. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971.
. 7 ensayos de interpretación de la realidad peruana.
Obras Completas, volume 2, fifty-fifth edition. Lima:
Biblioteca Amauta, 1989. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1928.)
. 7 ensayos de interpretación de la realidad peruana.
With a "Nota Preliminar" by Francisco Baeza. Havana: Casa
de las Américas, 1963, 1969, and 1973.
Signos y obras. Obras Completas, volume7,
seventh edition. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1982. (First edition,
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1959.)
. Temas de educación. Obras Completas, volume 14,
twelfth edition.Lima: Biblioteca Amauta,1989.(First edition,
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1970.)
Temas de nuestra América. Obras Completas,
volume 12, ninth edition. Lima, Biblioteca Amauta, 1986.
(First edition, Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1959.)
Marinello, Juan. Literatura hispanoamericana. México: Ediciones de
la Universidad Nacional de México, 1937.
203
=====第228页=====
. "Literatura y revolución: una meditación en dos
tiempos." Casa de las Américas 12/68 (September-October
1971): 40-47.
Martínez de la Torre, Ricardo. Apuntes para una interpretación
marxista de la historia social del Perú. 4 volumes. Lima:
Empresa Editora Peruana, 1948.
Marx, Karl. Early Writings. Translated and edited by T.B.
Bottomore. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1963.
. Karl Marx, Selected Writings. Edited by David
McLellan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977.
Mattarollo, Rodolfo. "Civilizar a la burguesia: reportaje a Tomás
Borge." Crisis (Argentina) (24 May 1986): 4-8.
Medin, Tzvi. Cuba: The Shaping of Revolutionary Consciousness.
Translated by Martha Grenzback. Boulder: Lynne Rienner,
1990.
Melgar Bao, Ricardo. "La Tercera Internacional y Mariátegui;
Proposito de un libro: Ideología y política en el Perú.'"
Nuestra América 1/2 (May-August 1980): 47-78.
Melis, Antonio. "Mariátegui: primer marxista de América." Casa de
las Américas 8/48 (1968): 16-31.
. "Mariátegui: el primer marxista de America." In
Mariátegui y los origenes del marxismo latinoamericano. Edited
by José Aricó. México: Cuadernos de Casado Presente 60
(1980): 201-25.
Mella, Julio Antonio. Documentos y articulos. Havana: Editorial de
Ciencias Sociales, 1975.
. Escritos Revolucionarios. With a prologue by Fabio
Grobart. México: Siglo Veintiuno, 1978.
204
=====第229页=====
. Julio Antonio Mella en El Machete: antologia
parcial de un luchador y su momento histórico. México: Fondo
de Cultura Popular, 1968.
et al. Marxistas de América. Selection and
prologue by Mercedes Santos Moray. Havana: Editorial Arte
y Literatura, 1985.
Meseguer Illan, Diego. José Carlos Mariátegui y su pensamiento
revolucionario. Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos, 1974.
Miles, Sara, and Bob Ostertag. "FMLN: New Thinking." Report on
the Americas 23/3 (September 1989): 15-38.
Miller, Nicola. Soviet Relations with Latin America, 1959-1987.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Mintz, Sidney W. "The Rural Proletariat and the Problem of Rural
Proletarian Consciousness." The Journal of Peasant Studies 1/3
(April 1974): 291-325.
Montiel, Edgard. Mariátegui Universidad: Ciencia y revolución. Lima:
Empresa Editora Amauta, 1978.
Morales Avilés, Ricardo. Obras: No pararemos de andar jamas.
Managua: Editorial Nueva Nicaragua, 1983.
Moretic, Yerco. José Carlos Mariategui. Su vida e ideario. Su
concepción del realismo. Santiago,Chile: Ediciones de la
Universidad Tecnica del Estado, 1970.
."Proceso del realismo en Mariátegui.* Casa de las
Américas 13/75 (November-December 1972): 42-65.
Munck, Ronald. Revolutionary Trends in Latin America. Center for
Developing Area Studies Occasional Monograph Series, o.
17. Montreal: McGill University, 1984.
Narkiewicz, Olga A. Eurocommunism 1968-1986: A Select Bibli-
ography. London: Mansell, 1987.
205
=====第230页=====
Neira, Hugo. "El pensamiento de José Carlos Mariátegui: los
mariateguismos." Socialismo y Participación 23 (September
1983): 55-76.
Neruda, Pablo, ed. Poemas a Mariátegui. Mariátegui's Obras
Completas, volume 9, eleventh edition. Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1987. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1959.)
Nieto, Luis Carlos. Mariátegui, poema. Con un recuerdo de Juan
Marinello. Cuzco, Perú: n.p., 1942.
"Nuestro deber más sagrado: salvar la Patria, la Revolución y el
Socialismo." Granma 27/187 (29 August 1991): 1.
Núñez, Estuardo. La experiencia europea de José Carlos Mariátegui y
otros ensayos. Lima: Empresa Editora Amauta, 1978.
Núñez, Orlando, and Roger Burbach. Democracia y revolución en las
américas (Agenda para un debate). Managua: Editorial
Vanguardia, 1986.
Orrillo,
Winston. “Carlos Rafael Rodriguez habla sobre
Mariategui." El Caiman Barbudo(Havana) 132 (December
1978): 16-17.
.Martí, Mariátegui: literatura, inteligencia y revolución
en América Latina. Lima: Editorial Causachun, 1989.
. "Primeras huellas de Mariátegui en Cuba." Casa
de las Américas 16/100 (1977): 178-81.
"Raúl Roa habla sobre Mariátegui." Bohemia
68/37 (1976): 4-6.
."La solidaridad cubana con Mariátegui: cartas
ineditas." Revista de Critica Literaria Latinoamericana 2/4
(1976): 133-37.
206
=====第231页=====
O'Shaughnessy, Laura Nuzzi, and Luis H. Serra. The Church and
Revolution in Nicaragua. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Center
for International Studies, 1986.
Paoli Bilio, Francisco J. "Mariátegui, interprete de la revolución
mexicana." Reporte de Investigación 5 (1979): 1-21.
Paris, Robert. La formación ideológica de José Carlos Mariátegui.
Translated by Oscar Teran. México: Cuadernos de Pasado y
Presente (92), 1981.
"Mariátegui y Gramsci: prolegómenos a un
estudio conrastado de la difusión del marxismo." Socialismo
y Participación 23 (September 1983): 31-54.
, et al. El marxismo latinoamericano de Mariátegui.
Argentina: Ediciones de Crisis, 1973.
Pavletich, Esteban. "Perspectivas de la Revolución Nicaragüense."
Casa de las Américas 20/117 (November-December 1979):
94-96.
Peirano, Luis. "Entrevista con Gustavo Gutiérrez." Quehacer 3
(March 1980): 104-17.
Peréz, Trinidad, and Pedro Simón, eds. Recopilación de textos sobre
Juan Marinello. Havana: Casa de las Américas, 1979.
Pesce, Hugo.El factor religioso. With a prologue by Alberto Tauro.
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1972.
Pillay,Devan."Having Its Cake and Eating ItCan The Party Make
Up Its Mind?" Work in Progress 80 (January-February 1992)
20-22.
Poole, Deborah, and Gerardo Renique. "The New Chroniclers of
Peru: U.S. Scholars and their Shining Path' of PeaANt
Resistance.* Bulletin of Latin American Research 10/2 (1991):
133-91.
207
=====第232页=====
Poppino, Rollie E. Intemational Communism in Larin America: A
History of the Movement, 1917-1963. London: The Free Press
of Glencoe, 1964.
Posada Zarate, Francisco. Los origenes del pensamiento marxista en
latinoamérica. Madrid: Colección Cuadernos Ciencía Nueva,
1968.
del Prado Chavez, Jorge. Mariátegui: Unidad de pensamiento y acción.
Lima: Ediciones Unidad, 1986.
"Unity of  Thought, Will and Action." World
Marxist Review 27/12 (December 1984): 22-31.
Quijano, Anibal. Introducción a Mariátegui. México: Ediciones Era,
1982.
Quintero, Rodolfo. Mariátegui y nuestras culturas. Caracas:
Universidad Central de Venezuela, 1985.
Ramirez, Sergio. El muchacho de Niquinohomo. Havana: Editora
Política, 1988.
Rapoport, Mario. "Argentina and the Soviet Union: History of
Political and Commercial Relations(1917-1955)." Hispanic
American Historical Review 66/2 (May 1986): 239-85.
Ravines, Eudocio. The Yenan Way. New York: Charles Scribner's
Sons, 1951.
Recabarren, Luis Emilio. Obras Escogidas. Santiago de Chile:
Editorial Recabarren, 1965.
The Red Flag in South Africa: A Popular History of the South African
Communist Party, 1921-1990. Johannesburg: Jet Printers, n.d.
Reedy, Daniel R. "The Cohesive Influence of José Carlos
Mariátegui on Peruvian Art and Politics. In Artists and
Writers in the Evolution of Latin America. Edited by Edward
208
=====第233页=====
Davis Terry. University, Alabama: University of Alabama
Press, 1969, 137-49.
Reid, Michael. Peru: Paths to Poverty. London: Latin American
Bureau, 1985.
Revista de Avance (Havana). Nos. 1-50. 15 March 1927 - 15
September 1930.
Revista de la Habana. (Havana). Nos. 1-12. January-December 1930.
Riverend, Julio Le. "Es bueno, es indispensable, enfatizar el pasado
lejano de unidad y coincidencía profundas." Revista de la
Biblioteca Nacional José Marti 29/2 (May-August 1987): 202-4.
Roa, Raúl. El fuego de la semilla en el surco. Havana: Editorial
Letras Cubanas, 1982.
. La revolución del 30 se fue a bolina. Havana:
Editorial de Ciencias Sociales, 1976.
Robinson, William I. "Transition in El Salvador—Revolution and
Democracy: Transformation of the F.M.L.N.* Central America
Update. Latin American Institute, University of New Mexico:
Latin America Data Base, 23 August 1991.
Rodriguez, Carlos Rafael. Letra con filo. 3 volumes. Havana:
Ediciones Union, 1987.
Rojas Samanez,Alvaro. Partidos politicos en el Perú. Sixth edition.
Lima: Editorial F & A, 1987.
Roman, José. Maldito pais. Managua: Edicion definitiva, 1983.
Romero, Emilio, and César Levano. Reionalismo y centralism.
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1969.
Romero Cantarero, Ramon Antonio. "The New Marxism of José
Carlos Mariategui. Ph.D. dis., The Florida State University,
1990.
209
=====第234页=====
Roncagliolo, Rafael. "Gramsci, marxista y nacional." Quehacer 3
(March 1980): 118-28.
Rouillón, Guillermo. Bio-bibliografia de José Carlos Mariátegui. Lima:
Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, 193.
. La creación heroica de José Carlos Mariátegui.
Volume 1: La edad de piedra (1894-1919). Lima: Editorial
Arica, 1975.
. La creación heroica de José Carlos Mariátegui.
Volume 2: La edad revolucionaria. Lima: Editorial Arica, 1984.
Sánchez, Juan. "Mariátegui, un peleador de ahora." Bohemia 67/12
(21 March 1975): 66-69.
Sánchez Vázquez, Adolfo. "El marxismo en la América Latina."
Casa de las Américas 30/178 (January-February 1990): 3-14.
Sandino, Augusto César. El pensamiento vivo de Sandino. 2 volumes.
Second edition, revised and expanded with selection and notes
by Sergio Ramirez. Managua: Editorial Nueva Nicaragua,
1984.
Santos Moray, Mercedes. "José Carlos Mariátegui, el Amauta."
Bohemia 73/42 (16 October 1981): 88-89.
"Mariátegui en los albores de las letras
sovieticas." Bohemia 77/15 (12 April 1985): 16-19.
Schutte, Ofelia. "Nietzsche, Mariátegui, and Socialism: A case of
'Nietzschean Marxism' in Peru?" Social Thought and Practice
14/1 (Spring 1988): 71-85.
Selser, Gregorio. Sandino.Tranlated by Cedric Blfrage.New York:
Monthly Review Press, 1981.
Skinner,Geraldie.José Carlos Maitegu and the Emergence of
the Peruvian Socialist Movement." Science and Society 43/4
(Winter 1979-1980): 447-71.
210
=====第235页=====
Slovo, Joe. "Has Socialism Failed?" In The Future of Socialism:
Perspectives From the Left. Edited by William K. Tabb. New
York: Monthly Review Press, 1990, 48-63.
Snarr, Neil, and Associates. Sandinista Nicaragua. Ann Arbor: The
Pierian Press, 1989.
Social. (Havana). Vols. 1-15. 1916-1930.
Sorel, Georges. Reflections on Violence. Translated by T. E. Hulme
and J. Roth with an introduction by Edward A. Shils. New
York: Collier Books, 1950.
Stein, William W. "An Anthropological Appreciation of José Carlos
Mariátegui." In Dialectical Perspectives in Philosophy and Social
Science. Edited by Pasquale N. Russo. Amsterdam: B.R.
Gruner, 1983, 69-96.
Steinberg, Jonny. "Leninist Fantasies and SACP Illusions: A
Response to Kitson and Slovo." Work in Progress 74 (1991):
29-31.
Tannenbaum, Frank. Ten Keys to Latin America. New York: Vintage
Books, 1966.
Tauro, Alberto.Amauta y su influencia (sintesis). Mariátegui's Obras
Completas, volume 19. Lima: Biblioteca Amauta, 1960.
Teran, Oscar. Discutir Mariátegui. México: Editorial Universidad
Autonoma de Puebla, 1985.
Tirado López, Victor. El pensamiento politico de Carlos Fonseca
Amador. Secretaria Nacional de Propaganda y Educación
Politica de F.S.L.N., n.d.
Torres, Camilo. Revolutionary Priest. Edited with an introduction by
John Gerassi. New York: Random House, 1971.
211
=====第236页=====
Unruh, Vicky. "Mariategui's Aesthetic Thought: A Critical Reading
of the Avant-Gardes." Latin American Research Review 24/3
(1989): 45-69.
Valdes-Dapena, Jacinto. "El Mariátegui de Yerko Moretic." Casa
de las Américas 12/72 (May-June 1972): 163-65.
Valle-Castillo, Julio. "José Carlos Mariátegui (1895-1930), Medio
siglo despues." Nuevo Amanecer Cultural.1/30 (28 December
1980), 1.
Vanden, Harry E. "The Ideology of the Insurrection." In Nicaragua
in Revolution. Edited by Thomas W. Walker. New York:
Praeger, 1982, 41-62.
"José Carlos Mariátegui y la perestroika." El Día
Latinoamericano 1/32 (31 December 1990): 22.
. "The Making of a Latin Marxist: José Carlos
Mariátegui's Intellectual Formation." Revista Interamericana de
Bibliografia 36/1 (1986): 5-28.
. Mariátegui: influencias en su formación ideologica.
Translated from the English by José María Quimper. Lima:
Biblioteca Amauta, 1975.
."Mariategui: Marxismo, Comunismo, and Other
Bibliographic Notes." Latin American Research Review 14/3
(1979): 61-86.
"Marxism and the Peasantry in Latin America:
Marginalization or Mobilization?" Latin American Perspectives
9/4 (35) (Fall 1982): 74-98.
. National Marxism in Latin America: José Carlos
Mariategui's Thought and Politics. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne
Rienner, 1986.
212
=====第237页=====
. "The Peasants as a Revolutionary Class: An Early
Latin American View." Journal of Inter-American Studies and
World Affairs 20/2 (1978): 191-209.
. "Socialism, Land and the Indian in the 7 Essays."
Inti: Revista de Literatura Hispanica 4 (Fall 1976): 71-75.
Vernon, Richard. Commitment and Change: Georges Sorel and the
Idea of Revolution. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1978.
Vilas, Carlos M. "Is Socialism Still an Alternative for the Third
World?" Monthly Review 42/3 (July-August 1990): 93-109.
. Perfiles de la revolución sandinista. Havana: Casa
de las Américas, 1984.
. The Sandinista Revolution: National Liberation and
Social Transformation in Central America. Translated by Judy
Butler. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1986.
. State, Class & Ethnicity in Nicaragua: Capitalist
Modernization and Revolutionary Change on the Atlantic Coast.
Translated by Susan Norwood. Boulder: Lynne Rieffer, 199.
"What Future for Socialism?" Report on the
Americas 25/5 (May 1992): 13-16.
Villalobos, Joaquin. "A Democratic Revolution for El Salvador."
Foreign Policy 74 (Spring 1989): 103-22.
Wheelock Roman, Jaime.Races indigenas de la lucha anticolonialista
en Nicaragua. Seventh edition. Mexico: Siglo Veintiuno
Editores, 1986.
WhitevenCutueandliticsinNcru:Tsioeof ts
and Writers. New York: Lumen Books, 1986.
Wiesse,Mara.JoséCarlos Mritegui,aas de su via.Maiteguis
Obras Completas, volume 10, eleventh edition. Lima:
213
=====第238页=====
Biblioteca Amauta, 1986. (First edition, Lima: Biblioteca
Amauta, 1959.)
Williams, Philip J. The Catholic Church and Politics in Nicaragua and
Costa Rica. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989.
Wise, David O. "Labor (Lima 1928-1929), José Carlos Mariátegui's
Working-Class Counterpart to Amauta.* Revista de Estudios
Hispanicos 14/3 (October 1980)): 117-28.
. "Mariátegui's Amauta (1926-1930), A Source for
Peruvian
Cultural History." Revista Interamericana de
Bibliografia 29/3-4 (1979): 285-304.
Wolf, Eric R. Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century. New York:
Harper & Row, 1969.
Zubritski, Yuri. "Amauta: el 80 aniversario de José Carlos
Mariátegui." América Latina (USSR) 3 (1974): 117-24.
214
=====第239页=====
MONOGRAPHS In INTERNaTioNAL StUDIES
ISBN Prefix 0-89680-
Africa Series
38.
Wright, Donald R. Oral Traditions From the Gambia: Volume
II, Family Elders. 1980. 200pp.
084-9
$15.00
43.
Harik, Elsa M. and Donald G. Schilling. The Politics Of
Education in Colonial Algeria and Kenya. 1984. 102pp.
117-9
$12.50
45.
Keto, C. Tsehloane. American-South African Relations 1784-
1980: Review and Select Bibliography. 1985. 159pp.
128-4
$11.00
46.
Burness, Don, and Mary-Lou Burness, eds. Wanasema: Conver-
sations with African Writers. 1985. 95pp.
129-2
$11.00
47.
Switzer, Les. Media and Dependency in South Africa: A Case
Study of the Press and the Ciskei "Homeland." 1985. 80pp.
130-6
$10.00
48.
Heggoy, Alf Andrew. The French Conquest of Algiers, 1830: An
Algerian Oral Tradition. 1986. 101pp.
131-4
$11.00
49.
Hart, Ursula Kingsmill. Two Ladies of Colonial Algeria: The
Lives and Times of Aurelie Picard and Isabelle Eberhardt. 1987.
156pp.
143-8
$11.00
51.
Clayton, Anthony, and David Killingray. Khaki and Blue:
Military and Police in British Colonial Africa. 1989.235p.
147-0
$18.00
52.
Northrup, David. Beyond the Bend in the River: African Labor
in Eastern Zaire, 1864-1940. 1988. 195pp.
151-9
$15.00
=====第240页=====
53.
Makinde, M. Akin.African Philosophy,Culture, and Traditional
Medicine. 1988. 175pp.
152-7
$13.00
54.
Parson, Jack ed. Succession to High Office in Botswana. Three
Case Studies. 1990. 443pp.
157-8
$20.00
55.
Burness, Don. A Horse of White Clouds. 1989. 193pp.
158-6
$12.00
56.
Staudinger, Paul. In the Heart of the Hausa States. Tr. by
Johanna Moody. 1990. 2 vols. 653pp.
160-8
$35.00
57.
Sikainga, Ahmad Alawad. The Western Bahr Al-Ghazal Under
British Rule: 1898-1956. 1991. 183pp.
161-6
$15.00
58.
Wilson, Louis E. The Krobo People of Ghana to 1892: A
Political and Social History. 1991. 254pp.
164-0
$20.00
59.
du Toit, Brian M. Cannabis, Alcohol, and the South African
Student: Adolescent Drug Use 1974-1985. 1991. 166pp.
166-7
$17.00
60.
Falola, Toyin, ed. The Polirical Economy of Health in Africa.
1992. 254pp.
168-3
$17.00
61.
Kiros, Tedros. Moral Philosophy and Development: The Human
Condition in Africa. 1992. 178pp.
$18.00
171-3
62.
Burness, Don. Echoes of the Sunbird: An Anthology of Contem-
porary African Poetry. 1993. 198pp.
$17.00
173-X
Glew, Robert S., and Chaibou Babale. Hausa Folkiales from
63.
Niger. 1993. 136pp.
176-4
$15.00
=====第241页=====
Latin America Series
9.
Tata, Robert J. Structural Changes in Puerto Rico's Economy:
1947-1976. 1981. xiv,104pp.
$11.00
107-1
11.
O'Shaughnessy, Laura N., and Louis H. Serra. Church and
Revolution in Nicaragua. 1986. 118pp.
$11.00
126-8
12.
Wallace, Brian. Ownership and Development: A comparison of
Domestic and Foreign Investment in Colombian Manufacturing.
1987. 186pp.
145-4
$10.00
13.
Henderson, James D. Conservative Thought in Latin America:
The Ideas of Laureano Gomez. 1988. 150pp.
148-9
$13.00
14.
Summ, G. Harvey, and Tom Kelly. The Good Neighbors:
America, Panama, and the 1977 Canal Treaties. 1988. 135pp.
149-7
$13.00
15.
Peritore, Patrick. Socialism, Communism, and Liberation
Theology in Brazil: An Opinion Survey Using Q-Methodology.
1990. 245pp.
156-X
$15.00
16.
Alexander, Robert J. Juscelino Kubitschek and the Development
of Brazil. 1991. 429pp.
$25.00
163-2
17.
Mijeski, Kenneth J., ed. The Nicaraguan Constiturion of 1987:
English Translation and Commentary. 1990. 355pp.
$25.00
165-9
18.
Finnegan, Pamela May. The Tension of Paradox: José Donoso's
The Obscene Bird of Night as Spiritual Exercises. 199. 179pp.
169-1
$15.00
=====第242页=====
19.
Sung Ho Kim and Thomas W. Walker, eds., Perspectives on
War and Peace in Central America. 1992. 150pp.
172-1
$14.00
Southeast Asia Series
47.
Wessing, Robert. Cosmology and Social Behavior in a West
Javanese Settlement. 1978. 200pp.
072-5
$12.00
56A.
Duiker, William J. Vietnam Since the Fall of Saigon. Updated
edition. 1989. 383pp.
162-4
$17.00
64.
Dardjowidjojo, Soenjono. Vocabulary Building in Indonesian: An
Advanced Reader. 1984. xviii, 256pp.
118-7
$26.00
65.
Errington, J. Joseph. Language and Social Change in Java:
Linguistic Reflexes of Modernization in a Traditional Royal
Polity. 1985. xiv, 211pp.
$20.00
120-9
66.
Binh, Tran Tu. The Red Earth: A Vietnamese Memoir of Life on
a Colonial Rubber Plantation. Tr. by John Spragens. Ed. by
David Marr. 1985. xii, 98pp.
$11.00
119-5
68.
Syukri, Ibrahim. History of the Malay Kingdom of Patani. Tr. by
Connor Bailey and John N. Miksic. 1985. xix, 113pp.
$12.00
123-3
69.
Keeler, Ward. Javanese: A Cultural Approach. 1984. xxxvi,
522pp., Third printing 1992.
$25.00
121-7
70.
Wilson, Constance M., and Lucien M. Hanks. Burma-Thailand
Frontier Over Sixteen Decades: Three Descriptive Documents.
1985. x, 128pp.
$11.00
124-1
=====第243页=====
71.
Thomas, Lynn L., and Franz von Benda-Beckmann, eds. Change
and Continuity in Minangkabau: Local, Regional, and Historical
Perspectives on West Sumatra. 1986. 363pp.
127-6
$16.00
72.
Reid, Anthony, and Oki Akira, eds. The Japanese Experience in
Indonesia: Selected Memoirs of 1942-1945. 1986. 411pp., 20
illus.
132-2
$20.00
73.
Smirenskaia, Zhanna D. Peasants in Asia: Social Consciousness
and Social Struggle. Tr. by Michael J. Buckley. 1987. 248pp.
134-9
$14.00
74.
McArthur, M.S.H. Report on Brunei in 1904. Ed. by A.V.M.
Horton. 1987. 304pp.
135-7
$15.00
75.
Lockard, Craig Alan. From Kampung to City. A Social History
of Kuching Malaysia 1820-1970. 1987. 311pp.
136-5
$16.00
76.
McGinn, Richard. Studies in Austronesian Linguistics. 1988.
492pp.
137-3
$20.00
77.
Muego, Benjamin N. Spectator Sociery: The Philippines Under
Martial Rule. 1988. 232pp.
138-1
$15.00
79.
Walton, Susan Pratt. Mode in Javanese Music. 1987. 279pp.
144-6
$15.00
80.
Nguyen Anh Tuan. South Vietnam Trial and Experience: A
Challenge for Development. 1987. 482pp.
$18.00
141-1
81.
Van der Veur, Paul W., ed. Toward a Glorious Indonesia:
Reminiscences and Observations of Dr. Soetomo. 1987. 367pp.
$16.00
142-X
=====第244页=====
82.
Spores, John C. Running Amok: An Historical Inquiry. 1988.
190pp.
140-3
$13.00
83.
Malaka. From Jail to Jail. Tr. and ed. by Helen Jarvis. 1990.3
vols. 1,226pp.
150-0
$55.00
84.
Devas, Nick. Financing Local Government in Indonesia. 1989.
344pp.
153-5
$16.00
85.
Suryadinata, Leo. Military Ascendancy and Political Culture: A
Study of Indonesia's Golkar. 1989. 250pp.
154-3
$18.00
86.
Williams, Michael. Communism, Religion, and Revolt in Banten.
1990. 356pp.
155-1
$14.00
87.
Hudak, Thomas John. The Indigenization of Pali Meters in Thai
Poetry. 1990. 237pp.
159-4
$15.00
88.
Lay, Ma Ma. Not Out of Hate: A Novel of Burma. Tr. by
Margaret Aung-Thwin. Ed. by William Frederick. 1991. 222pp.
167-5
$20.00
89.
Anwar, Chairil. The Voice of the Night: Complete Poetry and
Prose of Anwar Chairil. 1993. Revised Edition. Tr. by Burton
Raffel. 180pp.
$17.00
90.
Hudak, Thomas John, tr. The Tale of Prince Samutakote: A
Buddhist Epic from Thailand. 1993. 275pp.
$20.00
174-8
91.
Roskies, D. M., ed. Text/Politics in Island Southeast Asia:
Essays in Interpretation. 1993. 321pp.
$25.00
175-6
=====第245页=====
ORDERING INFORMATION
Orders for titles in the Monographs in International Studies series
may be placed through the Ohio University Press, Scott Quadrangle,
Athens, Ohio 45701-2979 or through any local bookstore. Individuals
should remit payment by check, VISA, or MasterCard.* People
ordering from the United Kingdom, Continental Europe, the Middle
East, and Africa should order through Academic and University
Publishers Group, 1 Gower Street, London WC1E, England. Orders
from the Pacific Region, Asia, Australia, and New Zealand should be
sent to East-West Export Books, c/o the University of Hawaii Press,
2840 Kolowalu Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, USA.
Other individuals ordering from outside of the U.S. should remit
in U.S. funds to Ohio University Press either by International Money
Order or by a check drawn on a U.S. bank.** Most out-of-print titles
may be ordered from University Microfilms, Inc., 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106, USA.
Prices are subject to change without notice.
*
Please include $3.00 for the first book and 75c for each additional
book for shipping and handling.
**
Please include $4.00 for the first book and 75c for each additional
book for foreign shipping and handling.
=====第246页=====
Ohio University
CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
The Ohio University Center for International Studies was estab-
lished to help create within the university and local communities a
greater awareness of the world beyond the United States. Comprising
programs in African, Latin American, Southeast Asian, Development,
and Administrative studies, the Center supports scholarly researh,
sponsors lectures and colloquia, encourages course development within
the university curriculum, and publishes the Monographs in Internat-
ional Studies series with the Ohio University Press. The Center and its
programs also offer an interdisciplinary Master of Arts degree in which
students may focus on one of the regional or topical concentrations, and
may also combine academics with training in career fields such as jour-
nalism,us,and lugcig.Frd
certificate programs are also available.
For more information, contact the Vice Provost for International
Programs, Burson House, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701.
=====第247页=====