Two
Important
Documents
of
the
Central
Committee
of the Communist
Party of Peru
Develop
Guerrilla
Warfare
Don't Vote!
Instead,
Expand
the
Guerrilla
JeM
Seize
to
Power
for
the
People!
=====第1页=====
Publisher's Note
Two Important Documents
of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Peru
This booklet contains English translations of two important
documents issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of Peru. The first of these, Develop Guerilla Warfare, was issued by
the Central Committee nearly two years after the initiation of the
Develop
armed struggle in May, 1980. Is-is a document developed of the
richness of this experience of people's war and is an historic
document of continuing importance in understanding the struggle in
Guerrilla
Warfare
Peru. The second document, "Don't Vote! Instead, Expand the
Guerilla War to Seize Power for the People", was issued in
February of 1985, in relation to the then approaching Peruvian
PAGE
ONE
elections, but its significance is definitely not limited to that time and
place.
Unofficial translation from the Spanish.
Don't
tVote!
Published under the auspices of
Instead,
Expand the
THE COMMITTEE TO SUPPORT THE REVOLUTION IN PERU
2483 Hearst Ave. #225
Guerrilla
aWartoSeize
Berkeley,CA 94709
Power for the People!
November 1985
PAGE TWENTY-FIVE
=====第2页=====
2
Develop
Guerrilla
Warfare
=====第3页=====
1982 DOCUMENT OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU
''He who is not afraid of death
by a thousand cuts
dares to unhorse the emperor."'
4
I. The Armed Struggle Blazes Victoriously
The Communist Party of Peru — the organized vanguard of the
proletariat founded by Mariategui, reconstituted through more than
fifteen years of stubborn struggle as a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Party of
a new type, and assuming its historic and inevitable role of fighting for
the state power of the proletariat and the people — set burning the in.
vincible and ever-growing flames of armed struggle, of guerrilla war-
fare, in our country in May of 1980. This struggle is linked up with and
rooted more deeply every day in the class struggle in our land which
will sooner or later become a raging hurricane of armed battle to
demolish the old, rotten prevailing order, and to bring to life a really
free, sovereign country that provides for the well-being of the millions
of exploited and oppressed.
In twenty-one months the Party has vigorously initiated and
developed the only means for our people's and nation's emancipation:
the armed struggle, the guerrilla war which blazes victoriously in the
two thousand nine hundred armed actions that have swept the land in
all but four departments —that stirs the jungle,the coast, and the
highlands most of all, that shakes the city and especially the country-
side, whose struggle is served by the former. And so it is, since the
mountain region and the countryside are the powerful and natural
support for any possible revolutionary war in our country. Thus, this is
a peasant war that is being led by the Party. It is converting the
·Department—a political land division much like states. Each of Peru's twenty-five Depart-
ments is divided into provinces and has a capital city.
1
=====第4页=====
countryside into an armed bastion of the revolution, concentrated in
new and old type— like in Airabamba, Aisarca, Urpihuata, Palermo,
base areas — in bases of the New State of workers and peasants —
Toxama, and Pincos, among others — real rejoicing of the peasants
isolating the reactionaries and their imperialist masters in the cities,
witnessing a vibrant reemergencc of their hopes and combativity which
where the proletariat and the masses, by burning the soles of the
has never languished. To this list could be added the very important
enemy's bloody paws mainly through armed actions that serve the
seizure of cities like Acosvinchos, Vinchos, Cayara, Pomatambo, and
struggle in the countryside, the center of the storm, prepare conditions
Occroro, which intensely and profoundly stir the countryside by ad-
for the final assault on the cities and the total, complete and thorough
vancing the participation of the masses in the armed struggle.
defeat of the reactionary order and the army that maintains it. This
Solid actions have hit directly against Yankee imperialism, the
road, the only road to revolution, is now open; this is the road on
principal imperialist power on our soil — like the attack against
which more and more of the proletariat and the masses, our people,
Southern in the south of the country,the series of actions against U.S.
are moving towards their own armed emancipation, by their own
companies or those connected with them in the capital, and, especial-
hands, since: "'The people, and the people alone, are the motive force
ly, the resounding blow against the U.S. embassy and the symbolic
in the making of world history.
blasting of Kennedy's statue in Miraflores — as well as the blows at the
4
Chinese embassy assessed Deng Xiaoping and his lackeys, that sinister
Two thousand nine hundred actions! Actions that began with the
guardian of revisionism, that notorious chum and accomplice of
poycott of the general elections of 1980, realized in Chuschi and many
Yankee imperialism, and vile traitor to the international communist
ther places; striking wich agitation and armed propaganda through
movement and principally to Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
he seizure of radio stations, leaflets, and posters; and direct actions
Vitally important actions have been carried out against the state, its
hat sow panic among the reactionaries and arouse the enthusiasm of
repressive apparatus and forces, especially the police. Many actions
he people with our rallying cries of"Armed struggle,"Government
have been conducted against the courts, government offices, labor
f workers and peasants," and "Down with the reactionary govern-
recruitment headquarters, tax offices,voter registration offices, ciy
nent.'' This showed a new world to win through the hammers and
halls and ministries, and a great number of the offices of Accion
ickles that light the hills, and through the unfading red flags that
Popular all over the country, including their central headquarters in
ominate the heights proclaiming 'It's right to rebel!'
Lima, and even the National Parliament and local offices of the GC,
These actions are armed mobilizations that arouse the peasants,
GR, and PIP throughout the country, as well as the punishment
each the people, and alarm the reactionaries — such as the actions in
meted out to known agents of repression like those in Arequipa and
Miraflores* and San Isidro. Sabotage weakens and undermines the
Huaraz among others, and against certain arrogant landlords and petty
ocial and economic system of the ruling exploiters, as in demolishing
landowners known to be enemies of the people and murderers of com-
nicrowave and electrical towers and producing blackouts in wide areas
batants. Above all, the very important and audacious assaults on police
in the center and north of the country, including in the capital itself.
stations and outposts like those of Ocobamba, Luricocha, La Ramada,
Fires have hit ENCI in Huacho, San Martin de Porres, Fiat, Toyota,
Quinua, Tapuc, Yauli, Tambo, Quicapata, Totos,Yanahorco, Acchi,
and in Puno and Tacna, whose effectiveness was highly expressed in
Hindu-Hogar in Lima, and in the cane plantations of the norh.
the recent assault on San José de Secce; in the disarming of police in
Repeated actions have been taken against banks throughout the coun-
Lima and especially Ayacucho; and in the important raid on the naval
try, and against reactionary companies like Bata, Hartinger, Cen-
air base at Callao which they have unsuccessfully tried to cover up. All
tromin, etc., or against renowned elitist colleges, which are concen-
trated and humiliating expressions of a fiercely reactionary, foreign
these actions have hit powerfully at the reactionary armed forces, their
education.
personnel contingents who, as mere cannonfodder, are being used for
Overwhelming actions that rock the semifeudal foundations of the
interests other than their own; actions that have allowed us to take
state, unleashing armed vindicating actions against landlords of the
·The Guardia Civil,Guardia Republicana, and Policia de Investigaciones del Pcru:three dif-
ferenr police agencies - Trans.
A wealthy suburb of Lima.
3
=====第5页=====
arms from the enemy — the main source of our weapons— and, most
forms of action but whose axis is the guerrilla war— which all the other
importanly, have delivered powerful blows to the morale of the reac-
actions serve. These armed actions are fueled by and based on our peo-
tionary state apparatus and their forces.
ple's class struggle and thrive solely on the inexhaustible energy of the
Also there has been a brilliant and successful application of the
people themselves, especially the workers and peasants.
policy of breakouts — the concentrated expression of which is the
Successful armed actions,increasing and offering a bright future,
March 2 [1982] assault on the Public Jail of Ayacucho. This was an
have until now yielded four great victories. First, the tempering of the
heroic action that marks an historic milestone in our armed struggle
Party — leaders, cadres, militants, and fighters, together in the strug-
and in the annals of the Peruvian revolution:freeing our comrades and
gle, become forged in the only definitive revolutionary crucible: the
ighters from the dungeons of the reactionary Peruvian state. With the
armed struggle. But though this is already a great victory, we must add
udacity, strength, and blood of the people's soldiers, our guerrilla war
to this another of obvious and clear consequence: the formation and
as been strengthened and has taken a great leap in its development.
construction of an armed force led by the Party which surges into the
ut even while we celebrate this undeniable victory,we protest, de-
life-giving flames of guerrilla warfare as the principal instrument for
ounce, and condemn the despicable murder and massacre of three of
completing the political tasks of the Peruvian revolution and which,
ur brave comrades by the police who, rabid in their defeat and sinister
under proletarian leadership, has established an armed force that is
atred, carried out a vile,cowardly murder in the Regional Hospital of
developing as an arm of the New State of workers and peasants. A
at city[Ayacucho], and attempted to execute two other sons of the
third victory is to be found in the continually increasing quantity and
cople (who were saved by other patients and employees who snatched
growing quality attained by our armed actions — actions that have
emfrom the claws of the henchmen). The five were recovering in
taken on a mass character both in their number and in the ability of the
at hospital under police custody. The people will not allow this
nation's sons and daughters to carry them out, as well as in the increas-
testable murder to go unpunished! We are fighters and we know
ing quality shown by the higher level that has been achieved. And,
at the armed struggle demands its measure of blood and, as the peo-
finally, there is a fourth victory which because of its importance is prin-
e and the proletariat have taught us and as the revolution demands;
cipal: the emergence and development of guerrilla zones within whose
offer our lives — our practice proves it. But in our revolutionary
boundaries, because of the vigorous and growing tide of armed srug-
ar,we apply and will continue to apply a policy towards prisoners
gle, we can establish our future base areas— those advanced revolu-
hichcorrespondstothelaws of war,andas we do we demandbe
tionary bastions that are the legacy of the military thought of Chair-
ne. Thus the tortures, the rapes, the crimes against and murders of
man Mao Tsetung — base areas that are the very essence of the road of
e sons and daughters of the people, and especially of our fighters,
surrounding the cities from the countryside, the very essence of peo-
ll be punished as the justice of the people demands, and we, their
ple's war.
Idiers, will carry them out no matter how long it takes. Peruvian rea-
Because of all this, we say to our class, the proletariat, and to the
on and its government led by Belaunde and his gang, using its police
people of our country, especially to our indomitable peasantry, THE
ARMED STRUGGLE BLAZES VICTORIOUSLY. ThrOugh its initial
rces, have mounted a new campaign against us. Basing ourselves on
flames signaling the great blaze to come, the masses themselves will
ur just and revolutionary war, we will only say that, this campaign,
take their own destiny in their triumphant, creative, and sure hands —
ke the previous ones, will fail. And finally, we can say that the
the source of all history and every revolution.
magogue Belaúnde has already directly received our reply: On the
Oth of March we rocked his "Government Palace' with a dynamite
last so that he might continue to hear the voice of the armed people.
These twenty-nine hundred actions clearly prove the com-
I1. Counterrevolutionary Action Kindles Our
ativeness and aggressiveness of our nascent revolutionary armed
Struggle
orce, which embraces Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and is led wholly by
And what has been the reactionary response? What has been the
he Party. Armed actions that take place in the countryside and in the
reaction of the democratic government, as it calls itself, that self-
ities, mainly in the former,are armed struggle that assumes diverse
5
=====第6页=====
proclaimed upholder of constitutional order and of sacred human
reaction, especially its errand boys and media hacks, all in the name of
rights? It has responded in the manner that its reactionary character
'order' and "social peace,"call for the "drastic application of the
and logic demands. Since the beginning it has hurled persecution,
law.'' Thus the so-called autonomous judicial power has put in motion
repression, torture, jail, and murder against us revolutionary militants
its sinister intrigue; oppressive laws, judges, trials, and prisons; utiliz-
and fighters. Belaunde's phoney democratic, hypocritical, demagogic
ing contrived evidence, accelerated procedures,twisting laws and sell.
government has set loose its forces of repression, mainly its police, to
ing the principles that they claim to safeguard. They have begun to
drown in blood our nascent armed revolution.
swing their rotten club on the sons and daughters of the masses, im-
Trampling on the most basic, universally recognized rights set
posing monstrous punishments that even some reactionaries have
forth in their much-bragged-about constitution of 1979, the reac-
criticized for being vile and counterproductive. Blind and dumb reac-
ionary Belaúnde government and their so-called forces of order have
tionary justice has been put in motion, as it must, in defense of the dy-
rutally broken into and looted whatever homes they've wanted; they
ing, exploitative, and repressive order. But in so doing, it cannot but
ave persecuted, arrested, and jailed whomever their arrogance and
reveal its profoundly counterrevolutionary essence, and expose even
buse has led them to; they have burned, qbbed, raped, and
more the dark nature of the legal system and the sacrosanct judicial
nurdered with impunity the sons and daughters of the people in ac-
power. But even this old legal butchery cannot bend the sons and
ord with their basest instincts; they have gorged their dark, reac-
daughters of the people who proudly defy it in the revolution.
But beyond persecution and repression, torture and jaill, legal club
onary zeal on savage beatings of the masses, mainly the peasants, in a
upid attempt to intimidate them and drive them away from the arm-
and judicial machinery, and the actions of their police bloodhounds of
 struggle; they have generalized the use of torture, trying to crush
the security and intelligence units — some of whose henchmen the
e will and extract false confessions, despicably and perversely
people have and will keep clearly in mind — the government has
miliating people so as to bend the revolutionary morale and destroy
mounted independent police operations and joint actions with the
police forces of the GC, GR, and PIP and their corresponding ani-
ghters; they have used rapes as an infamous, vile, and abusive means
subversive Sinchi and Dircote units in particular. They have mounted
force submission and to tarnish the pure, resolute, and firm spirit of
c daughters of the people;they have denied all rights and guarantees
two large operations up till now: the first in January 1981 and the sec.
prisoners, forcing them to endure continuous persecutions even
ond, of a larger magnitude and importance, in October of the same
hind bars in filthy dungeons, and they have extended their harass.
year, where they declared a state of emergency in five provinces in the
department of Ayacucho in order to give themselves more freedom of
ent and repression to include the prisoners' families. Thus the
rsecution and repression of the armed struggle and the people un-
action and broader impunity, counting upon the support and advice of
the armed forces.
Ids as a treacherous farce on the most basic rights and as a real and
What has been the result of the well-publicized October opera-
nister plan to crush the people through counterrevolutionary
tion? Categorical failure; it was even ended quietly without fanfare or
olence. But all thishas failed toproduce itsdark,hoped-forendsfor
glory and without even the merest public report summing up the
e sons and daughters of the people, the class, and of the Party, hold
results of the vast police mobilization which obviously entailed enor-
eir heads high, victorious and firm in their war trenches wherever
mous expenses. That the"definitive operation,"as it was called, was
nat may be.
an anticlimax and more noise than substance is easily proven. It failed
The despicable Belaúnde government has also appealed to the
in its deftly understood objectives: to eradicate the armed struggle,.
gislature, promulgating D.L. No.46, a real terroristic law raised like
destroy the armed organizations of the people, and annihilate the Par-
club against the armed struggle and the people. This neanderthal
ty in the affected region. That none of this was achieved is testified to
ecree violates the most elementary principles ofthe bourgeoisie's own
when one remembers that on December 1o, in the midst of the still-
riminal law, and establishes punishment of unusual proportions. And
operative state of emergency, an assault was carried out against the
they have not yet instituted the death penalty that they so eagerly
police outpost of Totos, and other actiens immediately followed in the
nid cunningly seek, it is because the present constitution prohibits it
Ayacuchan region culminating in the resounding action at San Jose de
nd they have not yet found the conditions to modify it. The whole
7
=====第7页=====
Secce.
revolution, which can in no way be compared with the sinister center of
What did the antisubversive operation reveal? Plainly and simply
contemporary revisionism which has converted Lenin's and Stalin's
that the masses reject and resist aggression; that reactionary brutality,
homeland into the hegemonic superpower of today.
arrogance, and violence did not dishearten them, but rather it so
As should be expected, the Peruvian reaction, their Belaúndist
aroused their just class anger that they even confront with their bare
government, and their media hacks can do nothing else but apply at all
hands the armed aggressors protected by their cumbersome state. It
cost the orders and directives of their master,imperialism. But it is not
shows that the people support and protect the armed struggle, the
they alone who condemn our armed struggle as 'terrorism:",Also
guerrilla warfare that they sustain and defend with their lives, and that
jumping on this bandwagon are the opportunists manipulated by the
their understanding, heart, and will, go out to the guerrilla war
hardened revisionist Jorge Del Prado and his clique, who obediently
because it advances and serves their liberation. The police operations
follow the baton of the Russian imperialist boss and worldwide pup-
and all the repressive actions only confirm that the war is gaining in
peteer,Brezhnev. And it is only natural that these enemies of the
trength and developing, and that if we pay with our sweat, suffering,
revolution act this way since they cannot remain with their arms crossed
nd blood, this is no more than our quota for having risen in arms in a
while their position over the masses, as old-time sellouts-in the service
ast and necessary rebellion for the class and thepeople. It is proven
of the collusion and contention between social-imperialism and
nat we learn warfare through waging warfare, and that we have ad.
Yankee imperialism, is being undermined. In this same chorus we find
anced and will advance further as we follow the leadership of the Par.
'Patria Roja,which calls furiously to the self-proclaimed "left''to
more closely and better, whose just and correct ideological and
unleash a holy war against the supposed "terrorism,' and in their role
litical line is expressed and molded in irrefutable deeds like those
in an ominous division of labor calls for waging an ideological/political
at mark the past twenty-one months of vigorous revolutionary armed
struggle againstterrorism," leaving the task of physical repression to
uggle.
the government. Yesterday's enemies of Deng Xiaoping, and today
And what is the essence of the government's political and military
his admirers, they must attack us for fighting Yankee imperialism, the
sition with regard to the guerrillas? It is to combat them as "ter-
partner of their new revisionist boss,and even more so, for applying
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, which they yesterday invoked, and today
rists.' But in this, Peruvian reactionaries,their state, and their
laúndist government are only following the model set down by their
reject. Nevertheless,others have united with this chorus of clowns, still
dazzled by the so-called "democratic opening and"parliamentary
nkee imperialist masters on how to counter the armed struggle. It is
own to all that U.S. President Reagan, his Secretary of State Haig,
road," who've yet to realize that the world has smashed their dreams
into smithereens, and who continue to be deluded by parliamentary
d their followers put the brand of"terrorism' on revolutionary wars
w being waged in the world. With this they try to discredit armed
1
cretinism while they daydream of the '8s elections.
But in the end, while some here and others there added up may
tion,playing on the masses'correct rejection of the old individualist,
archist, dead-end terrorism long condemned by Marxism, lumping
seem to be a lot, they are nothing but representatives of a thin film
floating on the fathomless sea,of the masses of our country. And we
gether the defense of property and so-called 'social peace'' along
must keep in mind that for Marxism, there is only one tactic with
th what they claim is the defense of life — all with the idea of winn-
regard to the masses — to draw a sharp line of demarcation between
g the masses to their side or at least neutralizing them.
the broad masses, who ascend from the depths, and the filthy, decay-
This method of branding the armed struggle as "terrorism''is
ing scum that floats unsteadily on the waves as a fragile base for
othing but the demagogic and reactionary position of Yankee im-
bureaucratic trade unionism and counterfeit proletarian parties, truly
erialism, raised up in order to oppose the armed revolution, seeking
'bourgeois workers' parties.' This tactic impels us to educate the
cover it in a cloak of slander while they mount the bloodiest repres-
masses, theoretically and practically in revolutionary violence and in
on and genocide. Further, they use this rotten maneuver in their con-
the consequent resolute and firm struggle against opportunism.
ention for world hegemony with Russian social-imperialism, trying to
To one and all who claim to be Marxists and revolutionary fighters,
ink revolutionary action,through so-called"terrorism,"to the social-
whether they lead, go along with, or embrace the imperialist perver-
mperialist superpower. In this way they seek also to discredit genuine
6
=====第8页=====
sion of labeling the armed sruggle that emerges fromthe very hear of
the class struggle of our people as "terrorism," we reprint these
those who, serving distant revisionist masters, join the chorus, while
others follow in this same vein or approach this path. And even as the
paragraphs from the great Lenin:
people support and encourage us, further strengthening our forces,
there are those who want to smother our revolutionary advances under
"And so matters are moving ahead! Despite the incredible and u-
the ragged cloak of "terrorism,' since we are the advancing armed
terly indescribable dificulties, headway is being made in the matter
revolution. There are those who call us 'Sendero Tenebroso,the
of getting armed. Individual terrorism, bred of intellectualist im-
potence, is gradually becoming a thing of the past. ...military
gloomy path, while trying to perpetuate the shadows that begin to
operations together with the people are now commencing. It is by
recede from the brilliant light of our actions guided by Marxism-
engaging in such operations that the pioneers of armed struggle
Leninism-Maoism. There are those who call us 'unpatriotic'' while
become fused with the masscs not merely in word but in deed,
continuing to sell the country to imperialism. There are those who call
assume leadership of the combat squads and contingents of the pro-
us"infantile' without any proof whatsoever and without even seeing
letariat, train in the crucible of civil war dozens of popular leaders
that even if such was the case, the genuine struggle of the class and the
who,tomorow, on the day of the workers' uprising, will be able to
people teaches and matures while opportunist senility rots and is a
help with their experience and their heroic courage thousands and
disease that contaminates without regard to age. There are those who
tens of thousands of workers....
brand us as'provocateurs' without ever noticing in their blindness
''Long live the pioneers of the people's revolutionary army!
that they are persistently provoking the righteous anger of the people
"It is no longer a plot against some detested individualno act of
for their frustrated and unrepentant promotion of mass capitulation.
vengeance or desperation, no mere 'intimidation' — no, it was a
And finally,there are those who call us'adventurists' without notic-
well-thought-out and prepared commencement of operations by a
ing in their political stupidity that they are just the same old political
contingent of the revolutionary army, planned with due regard for
swindlers and petty professional social climbers. Nevertheless,they are
the correlation of forces.. ..
totally and completely right about one thing: we have no love for
"Fortunately, the time has passed when revolution was 'made'
parliamentary cretinism and we do not worship electoral opportunism.
by individual revolutionary terrorists, because the people were not
We are simply and plainly Marxist-Leninist-Maoists.
revolutionary.The bomb has ceased to be the weapon of the solitary
Chairman Mao Tsetung has taught us: 'It is a good thing to be at-
'bomb thrower,' and is becoming an essential weapon of the
people.".
tacked by the enemy, since it proves that we have drawn a clear line of
"We went from experience to experience, we sought to create a
1
demarcation between ourselves and the enemy. It is still better if the
willful army marching blindly, groping our way, searching for the
enemy attacks us wildly and paints us as utterly black without a single
1
path to fulfill che task in that situation. And the task was clear. At
virtue. It demonstrates that we have not only drawn a clear line of
present we are still very far off from having freed ourselves from
demarcation between the enemy and ourselves, but achieved a great
these difficulties. At first we acted in a completely abstract way, like
deal in our work.''
revolutionaries who make speeches but who completely ignore ways
For all that has been said, we reaffirm roundly that COUNTER-
to overcome problems. Naturally, many people accuse us, and all
REVOLUTIONARY ACTION KINDLES OUR STRUGGLE!
the socialists and social democrats continuc to accuse us even today,
of having started something without knowing how to carry it
through to the cnd. But these are no more than ridiculous accusa-
tions of the living dead. How could it be possible to launch into
making the greatest of revolutions knowing beforehand how to carry
II. The Crisis of the Reactionary Order Becomes
it to the end! No, our decisions could only arise out of the experience
More Pronounced and the People Call for Armed
of the masses.
Revolution
In conclusion, while the initiated armed struggle develops as fiery
guerrilla warfare with brilliant prospects, the counterrevolution,
What is the current situation of the reactionary forces? The former
military government, which lasted twelve years, came to power with
following its reactionary logic, fights and attacks us. And there are
10
11
=====第9页=====
two goals to achieve: (1) to strengthen bureaucratic capitalism, and (2)
unemployment and declining real wages while working conditions
to reqrganize Peruvian society. To complete the first task, it took as the
deteriorate and prior gains are negated or threatened every day, such as
principal lever the functions of the state-controlled economy. In order
the right to strike. The petty bourgeoisie suffers increasing pauperiza-
to fulfill che second, the government was guided by a fascist political
tion, the intellectuals in particular are thwarted and the people in
outlook and promoted the reorganization of society along corporate
general confront the urgent problem of hunger while the new reac-
lines. In its first phase it made advances in obtaining its objectives, but
tionary government tries to subjugate them even more. The national
the economic crisis generated by this, and especially the persistent
bourgeoisie and medium-sized capitalists see growing restrictions on
struggle of the masses,forced the military government to restate its ob-
their businesses, suffering also the consequences of the government's
ectives and limit itself to a general readjustment in order to later pro-
intensified undermining of national industry. Meanwhile, in the very
ceed with corporate reorganization and to constitutionalize those
bosom of the big bourgeoisie, a sharp struggle — between the
hanges that they had set out from the beginning, and, moreover, to
bureaucratic and comprador factions, and even within these factions—
roceed to a future transfer of state power. Nevertheless, the deepen.
is.taking place over who will reap the most benefits.
g ofthe economiccrisis and theintensification oftheclasstrugglecut
1
In sum, then, guided by an orientation that sees developing big
ort their goals, and the new constitution — representing the third
monopoly — mainly Yankee capital — as the motor of economic
1
organization of the Peruvian state in this century — did not achieve
development, the present government aims at further developing the
1
e molding of a corporate Peruvian society. It only allowed for the
subjugating semifeudal structure, that still rules the country, for the
engthening of executive power at the expense of the parliament, and
direct benefit of the old and new type landowners and the old type rich
f
greater participation of the armed forces in the running of the state.
peasants. The current government undermines the basic industrial
1
a corollary to the military measures, two elections were held, the
structure of the country in order to orient it even more toward extrac-
tion production, particularly mining and petroleum. .And now, it
ctions for the constituent assembly and the general elections of
transfers and seeks to auction off the state enterprises — those which
80. In both, voter turnout declined, part of a trend common
the former government had concentrated in the hands of the state at
roughout Latin America, showing a loss of faith in elections and
the cost of a staggering public debt placed on the backs of the people —
vernment.
thus preparing a succulent offering to the insatiable appetite of big,
Under these conditions Belaúnde took over the government, and
particularly imperialist, capital. The current reactionary government,
day,more than one and a half years since his term began, the
whose head, prime mover, and most responsible representative is
onomic crisis continues, the longed-for resurgence of the economy is
Belaúnde, is as servile as any before it in its eagerness to build up
where in sight, a persistent, growing inflation continues to pound
bureaucratic capital (big monopoly capital, vassal to the feudal land-
y economic advance, and the budget deficits, the very basis of the
owners and subjugated to imperialism) principally to the benefit of big
vernment's measures, increase uncontrollably, gravely threatening
monopoly capital, especially big banking and finance capital under the
increasingly battered Peruvian economy. Imperialist domination
asphyxiating and ever widening expansion of North American im-
nks its fangs deeper into our country, seizing ever more of our natural
perialism. But even if this is the outline and scheme of thegovernment,
sources, especially oil, extending its grip into the peasant areas, and
the same complex conflict of interests among the exploiters, the persis-
roadening its control over the country's commerce and finance. The
tent and deepening crisis,and even more, the class struggle which
.called"agrarian reform'has been concluded. The electoral oppor-
grows more polarized day by day, does not allow.the governmentto
nists join the chorus of those claiming that the land problem is ended
overcome its present difficulties, a crucial matter in order to otganize
nd resolved. They try to sell the peasants on the botched "farming
and work out a coherent plan based on the clear and defined program
nd cattle-raising programs at the same time as they advocate the
that the ruling order loudly demands.
evelopment of the"associative property' to cover the return of the
On the political plane, the government continues to face a complex
ig landowners to promote bureaucrat capitalism in agriculture under
and entangled turning point of the class struggle which generates the
ne control of the big banks and with the direct participation of Yankee
introduction of a new constitution, the consolidation of a bureaucracy
nperialism. The proletariat and workers are burdened with growing
13
2
=====第10页=====
totally devoted to it, and a regrouping of reactionary political forces
feebleness of the reaction. And,this is precisely what is principal, the
placed in hibernation during the previous twelve years, and, principal-
crisis of bourgeois-democratic principles and the social order that,
ly,generates the need to rein in the masses who have been drowning in
superceded by historical development, by the class struggle, by the
years of stifling crisis that propels them one more time into action to de-
vigorous rise of the proletariat and the popular masses, and the great
fend their own vital interests— masses trained in the long harsh years
radical transforming process that has put the stamp of Marxism-
f a demagogic government pretending to berevolutionary and aid-
Leninism-Maoism the world over, is left more exposed in the light of
d (as always!) by the same opportunists, and who have seen their most
day.not only inthe historical sense, but also in the sense that every day
asic needs mocked. All this has created an already quite complicated
its political decrepitude grows more pronounced. Every day witnesses a
olitical situation for the reactionary rulers. Nevertheless, the reality is
decline in the influence of bourgeois-democratic principles which, if in
harper still. In a year and a half the decrepitude of the
centuries past were revolutionary, have for decades been reactionary.
emocratic/bourgeois order has become abundantly clear to the peo-
That their hold on people is waning can be seen from the results of the
e, who see the contrast in a hypocritical invocation of human rights
last election. Belaunde took office with 46 percent of the votes and felt
d liberties alongside their brutal negation. The obsolete parliamen-
exalted to the heavens, the holder of absolute power, the unchallenged
y institutions are coming apart like an empty baurel rolling downhill,
voice above the class struggle and contentions. Nevertheless, a year and
king in the pompous and sterile rhetoric of the anointed'fathers of
a half has been enough to smash his electoral sand castle, dissolving it
country, while basic legislative functions give in to the arrogant
like rotten foam, with his fictitious"great authority' cast among the
asion of jurisdiction by the Executive. And an arthritic and anemic
pounding waves and swirling vortexes, totally in rins.
called judicial power carries out its functions,compelled only by the
Finally, we should speak, though it be in passing, on the question
untains of pending proceedings,crooked dealings and servile sub.
of Ecuador. Ecuador's questioning of the Rio Protocol of 1942 goes
gation to whatever arrogant authority is in charge, and in constant
back many years. This situation has become aggravated in recent years
lation of its own reactionary laws — directed, as always, against the
I
as proven by the border incident of the Cordillera del Condor of
；
ople and which, especially today, feeds on revolutionary fighters.
January 1981. But the present Peruvian government and Belaúnde
d then there is also the so-called autonomous electoral power that
who heads and leads it (even more, being the person who directly con-
tinely rigs elections, covering up its crudest manipulations. Added
ducts international politics and who consequently is principally respon-
this is the sharp contention and division between the reactionary par-
sible) has been dealing with this delicate and important problem in a
that are repeatedly revealed in public scandals and which find ex-
totally erroneous and iresponsible way; instead of looking for a means
ession in all kinds of lawless proceedings. Thus the reactionary
to clarify the border question, they adopt an alarmingly superficial and
liticalsystemclearlyrevalsthe frailty and rottennessthat it attempts
frivolous attitude: if the Ecuadoran question is not treated justly and
hide behind the mask of democracy and its phony concern for the
correctly, it could create grave and serious problems of vast conse-
asses (who are needed only for occasional voting and for demagogic
quences. This will obviously not be felt directly by anyone but the peo-
um beating). In this way, as Marxism teaches,the armed forces and
ple, who with their own blood and efforts have given us the territory
e police, mainly the former, are ever more the true backbone of the
which makes up our country. Here too the reactionary politics and
actionary state and their true bastion; hence their growing impor-
measures of the Belaúndist government are evident, since no one can
nce and growing interference in the running of the state. Never-
fail to see that the many conflicts in our Latin American countries and
eless, we can never forget that an armed force, in essence, strategical-
the many wars our people have had to confront all derive from the
is only as strong as the social orderit defends, no matter how heavily
union of interests of the imperialists, in contention with those of its
med it may be tactically.
agents and internal partners who govern our republics. And this is a
The ruling, exploitative, oppressive order is also in an ideological
greater worry -today when the Latin American scene reveals various
risis despite its hypocritical handwringing over the so-called"moral
potential conflicts unfolding in the stirred-up climate of contention
risis of the people,"which is nothing but the destruction of old prin-
between the superpowers in their pursuit of world domination.
iples shattered bythe blows of acute economic crisis and the political
In sum, we see the sharpening crisis of the reactionary order as it
i
15
=====第11页=====
faces its own grave prospects in 1982.
which our country has cried out for so long. The reactionaries defend
And what is the present situation of the people? A peasantry with a
this evil destructive system with blood and fire to the benefit of the
centuries-old fundamental goal,"Land to the tiller,"whom despite its
landlords, of the old and new type, of big comprador or bureaucratic
undaunted struggle, has yet to achieve its goal. This is a.peasantry
bourgeoisie and their masters, Yankee imperialism, which for every
whom they have tried to deceive with three supposed agrarian reform
dollar it investsextracts five.This rottenbloodysystem is held together
laws in the past twenty years. And yet, after the bombastic
by the oppression imposed by the old reactionary landlord-
demagoguery has died down, the peasant is left with the same old un-
bureaucratic state, through its state apparatus, its bureaucracy, its arm-
satisfied thirst for land. A proletariat, whose long,vigorous strugle has
ed forces, its judiciary, its jails, and its ancient and scheming repression,
ielded only a few miserable wage and other concessions from its ex-

but principally through the armed forces and their repressive actions
loiters — only to lose them in each economic crisis society endures.
which are the real backbone of the ruling-class dictatorship that
his is a proletariat who struggles inside a vicious circle and who once
dominates and increases its profits extracted from the sweat,toil, and
gain today is involved in the unending battle over wages, hours, and
blood of our people.
orking conditions. A petty bourgeoisie — making up a broad strata
If you're talking about exploitation and oppression, you're talking
aracteristic of a backward country — that sees its dreams ruined by
about the state; if you're talking about the state, you're talking about
erelentless impoverishment to which the ruling order subjects it.
classes; if you're talking about classes you're talking about class strug-
ere is a middle bourgeoisie, a national bourgeoisie that is weak and
gle; if you're talking about class struggle, you're talking about mass
ks capital, that totters between revolution and counterrevolution,
struggle; and, as time has shown over and over again, if you're talking
ile each new crisis crushes it nearly to the point of suffocation. These
about mass struggle you're talking about rebellion, armed struggle,
the four classes that historically make up the people of our land. Of
guerrilla warfare— as our own situation proves today. Our people, like
m, it is the peasantry which is the principal motive force, as much as
all the peoples of the world, have their own proud history of struggle
s the proletariat that rises and develops as the class leading our
etched with their blood and heroism. The most earthshaking, tur-
olution. United, they make up the worker-peasant alliance, the only
bulent, and splendid battles have been those waged untiringly by the
sible solid base for any possible revolutionary front. The petty
peasantry, especially the poor peasants, throughout the centuries. It is
urgeoisie unites with them, and together,the three, under the
sufficient here to remember that our republican emancipation was won
dership of the proletariat, are the pillar of the revolutionary front,
as a result of the great armed peasant actions of the 18th century, and
ich is nothing if it is not a front for the armed struggle and the class
our own 2oth century has been marked by big peasant struggles in the
nework for the New State. This solid union, this solid front, is held
'20s and '6Os. These and the powerful struggle of '63 are sources of ex-
ether so long as the proletariat firmly retains its hegemony, bases
traordinary experiences, to which it is necessary to add the armed strug.
lf on the worker-peasant alliance — forged and developed in the
gle led by MIR [Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria]* back in
nace of the armed struggle, of guerrilla warfare. It is this front of
1965— a struggle which left us invaluable lessons which every revolu-
tionary must know about. Nevertheless, it is with the appearance of
sses that the national bourgeoisie will sometimes join (and
1
Marxism and the Communist Party that the peasant struggle acquired
netimes leave) depending on the raging winds of the class struggle.
its full revolutionary expression. With the leadership of the proletariat,
And the Peruvian people, this immense majority, these masses that
through its Party, the peasantry has met with and is following the real
the true makers of history, these powerful productive forces, are
road to the overthrow of the present exploiting order - that is,
nstrained by the persistent decrepitude of the exploitative social rela-
people's war, the highest expression of proletarian military thought
ns that impose unemployment and under-employment on 56.3 per-
established by Mao Tsetung.
nt of the"economically active population'' (according to the govern-
Thus our people, like all people, have been nurtured and have ad-
ent's own statistics), and in the countryside, two of every three
vanced in the course of revolutionary violence. It is here, in its diverse
asants are underemployed. Thus the decrepit system of exploitation
estroys and holds back the powerful creative forces of the people, the
nly forces capable of the thorough revolutionary transformation for
·Movement of the Revolutionary Left
0
17
=====第12页=====
forms and gradations that our people have won demands, rights and
glenecessarily leads to thestruggle for power,and thatthiscan oly
liberties. None of this fell from the skies, nor was it given; "despie
won through violent revolution which for us means revolutionary war,
what traitors might say. In the final analysis all was conquered and
armed struggle — the guerrilla warfare of people's war. Only in this
defended with revolutionary violence in fierce contention with reac-
way can power be seized by the class and people. And only in this way
tionary violence. That is how the 8-hour day was won, how territory was
can the New State arise and the dictatorship of the proletariat be
won and held, and how rights were won and tyrants overthrown.
established, so as to carry out the great and complete transformation of
Revolutionary violence is the essence of our historical process and, if the
society so that, finally, the brilliant, resolute light of communism will
freedom of the republic was won with arms on the battlefield, it is easy
shine in our own land. This spirit already dwells among the people.
to understand that the development and triumph of the Peruvian
This is clearly shown in the countryside and in the cities where the peo-
revolution, of our democratic revolution, of the emancipation of the
ple begin to once again use violence to repel reactionary violence in
eople and the class, will be won only through the most splendid
defense of their rights. And, more important and demonstrative still is
evolutionary war of our people,rising in arms en masse through peo-
the greater support the people give the armed struggle, the guerrilla
le's war.
war, led by the Party. Though they may not yet understand it in its total
And today, our heroic people, inheritors of such a rich history and
depth and scope (that requires its continued development), with the
llowing the glorious path, wage battles against the new reactionary
wisdom of collective action the people are fully capable of seeing that
these flames of today begin to presage the armed bonfires to come, and
overnment, wage battle in the countryside against the big and small
ndlords, the social base of reactionary state power in agriculture; wage
in this the real hopes for inexorable emancipation is bellowed and
attle in the factories and mines against their exploiters and oppresors,
welded.
This is, according to our Marxist-Leninist-Maoist way of seeing
age battle in the countless barrios,striking out against hunger and
things,the situation of the reaction and of the people. In this con-
isery; wage battle in the universities and colleges for their need to
tradictory situation we see the two concrete aspects and specifics of to-
arn and become educated; wage battles in the small and medium-
day's revolutionary situation. So we can see clearly the revolutionary
zed cities against a suffocating centralism; wage battle in education,
situation manifesting itself and how Lenin understood it: those on-top
ience, and culture for the undeniable right to nourish the spirit and
ajoy peace of mind; wage battle in the streets for the right to earn a liv-
can no longer continue ruling as they did yesterday, and those on the
bottom are no longer willing to live as they have until now. In the reac-
g; wage battle for rights and liberties already won—the freedom to
tion we can see the lack of a precise and defined acceptable program
nink, the freedoms of speech, of organization, of assembly, of strik-
capable of welding the reaction and the erratic jumble of moves and
ng,and numerous other victories wrenched through their struggle and
countermoves that betray the lack of a fixed course, the understandable
il which, despite being stamped into law and in the National Con-
result of the lack of a unified program and much less an accepted one.
titution, are trampled on, questioned, and denied twenty-four hours
Among the people we can see the firm and decisive move toward armed
day by the arrogant and abusive actions of those in power, and by
revolution, their will for revolutionary transformation — although
hatever highly placed social climber is in a position of authority (as is
with some limitations, sometimes only expressing itself in the desite to
he natural order of things among those who run the state).If our peo-
！
overthrow the decrepit ruling system. But still, if this was all there was
le are more conscious than yesterday, more politicized than yesterday,
to it, it is enough and it is basic to a sound and correct evaluation — to
nd more organized,firm, and decisive than yesterday, it is because of
finding the correct course, since it is a sound and true testament that
he enormous presence of the proletariat guided by unconquerable
the armed struggle itself, through its accomplishments, will open even
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism that arms their minds and fists. Our heroic
wider the road of armed struggle and, likewise, bring home forcefully
fighting pople enter into battle even when this means taking on clubs,
the correctness of this road in human minds, and thus the masses
bombs, bullets, and fierce battalions of reaction. They do it in certainty
become more and more part of this great road of people's war.
that struggle tempers, mobilizes, organizes, politicizes, and arms and
Such are the concrete issues of the developing revolutionary situa-
prepares them for the great battles to come. And if our people are
tion. We have reached this point due to two factors: (1) The polariza-
learning anything,today more than yesterday, it is that the class srug.
18
19
=====第13页=====
tion of the class struggle, and (2) the armed struggle that is sprung
fromthe very heart ofthisclassstruggle in thecountry and is unfolding
And later he says:
as guerrilla warfare.The polarization oftheclass struggle and its further
''Before the outbreak of war, all organizations and struggles have as
development as armed struggle has intensified the preexisting revolu-
their goal preparing for it.... After the outbreak of war, all organiza-
tionary situation. Thus, today, and in perspective, we can see that as
tions and struggles must be coordinated directly or indirectly with the
the developingrevolutionarysituation heatsupitwillfurther stimulate
war effort.'
the class struggle and both will strongly impel the further advance of
The Communist Party of Peru, a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Party of a
the armed struggle.This is,in synthesis,the current situation of both
new type, loyal to its principles and program,conscious of its historic
the people and the reaction. The later proposes, through the Belaún-
mission as the organized vanguard of the Peruvian proletariat, has
7
dist government, a'social pact'or"reconciliation."' This is nothing
assumed its responsibility to launch the armed struggle to fight for the
but a rehash of the position of the previous government, but the peo-
seizure of power by the working class and the people, and is developing
ole's point of view is one: support the armed struggle.
guerrilla warfare, learning from advances and setbacks, fanning more
Thus,the class struggle is polarized and will continue to be polariz-
widely the living flames of armed conflict and rooting them more deep-
d around: reconciliation vs. support for the armed struggle. Recon-
ly among the poor peasants, principally, and will lead in building
iliation is the black flag of the reaction; support for the armed struggle
revolutionary base areas that will finally give concrete form to the
triumphant road of people's war.
the red flag of the people. Reconciliation is the flag of reaction bent
n binding the people's hands and feet, and, in more limited terms, to
Previously the Party had to be reconstituted, following the expul-
sion of Del Prado and Co. — standard-bearers of revisionism in the
veld together the contending factions in the reactionary camp. To
Party's ranks. In the IV National Conference of January 1964, we
chieve this the reactionaries will resort to whatever means, including
entered the long and complex process of reconstitution, agreed to later
epression, with the objective of maintaining their dominance. In the
by the VI Conference of January 1969 in which the Party threw off the
ast resort they increase the use of armed force, since that is che card
weight of revisionism and became a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Party of a
eaction keeps up its sleeve for the opportune moment. Support for the
new type. With the completion of this arduous and glorious task the
rmed struggle is the red flag of the people and must be their necessary
9th Plenary Session of the Central Committee in 1979 approved the
erspective since, for the people, reconciliation is capitulation. The
launching of the armed struggle.
oad for our people begins to manifest itself with greater clarity and
Once this historic mandate was completed, in May 1980, the armed
Hetermination: supporting and building the armed struggle is the only
struggle was initiated with the proclamation of the two basic slogans:
nistoric road that corresponds to the path of the people— there is no
"Armed Struggle!"and "Workers' and Peasants'Government!''
other. Supporting the armed struggle today means simply to develop
Thus our actions were initiated, unfolding as guerrilla warfare, and
guerrilla warfare.
now, in accord with the Central Committee of January 1981, we are
For all that has been said we conclude: THE CRISIS OF THE
further developing the guerrilla warfare.
REACTIONARY ORDER DEEPENS AND THE PEOPLE CRY OUT
The armed struggle initiated and led resolutely by the Party is the
FOR ARMED REVOLUTION.
continuation of the class struggle of the Peruvian people; it is the armed
continuation of its political struggle and is profoundly linked to and in.
dissolubly united with the masses, mainly the poor peasants. The
IV. Develop Guerrilla Warfare
masses are our only base and support, the source of our strength and
vigor. We are firm practitioners of the great principle of relying on our
Chairman Mao has written:
own strength, as we are firm followers of proletarian internationalism,
'The central task and highest form of revolution is the seizure of
unfurling that immortal call of Marx and Engels, 'Workers of All
power by means of armed struggle, that is, the settlement of the issue
Countries Unite!,' and as communists we always raise highest the
through war. This revolutionary Marxist-Leninist principle is a univer-
three great banners of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism — Marx, Lenin,
sal truth applicable in China as in all countries."'
Mao — which demands that we be irreconcilable enemies of revi-
20
21
=====第14页=====
sionism and all forms of opportunism.In waging the revolution in our
country we are serving the world proletarian revolution which will not
rest until communism shines over the face of the carth.
The revolutionary reality of our country shows that in fact the arm-
ed struggle burns victoriously, that the counterrevolutionary actions
kindle our struggle,that the reactionary order sinks in crisis, and the
people call for armed revolution. Thus our heroic people are faced with
the pressing historic necessity to support the armed sruggle, which to-
day means developing guerrilla warfare.
The Communist Party of Peru, the Party founded by Mariategui,
he Party reconstituted asa Party ofa new Marxist-Leninist-Maoist type,
nas begun the armed struggle in our country and has, through twenty-
ne months of the enrichment of combative life,developed it as guer-
Don't Vote!
illa warfare. The Communist Party of Peru, which has raised to the
eavens the red flags of rebellion to serve the working class and the peo-
Instead, Expand the
le in their emancipation,calls on the Peruvian proletariat,and
specially the poor peasantry and broad masses throughout the coun-
Guerrilla War to Seize
ry, to take our historic destiny in our hands and overthrow the existing
ecadent,reactionary ruling order and build the new revolutionary
ocial order that the people demand and cry out for.
Power for the People!
Peruvian people! Proletarians, peasants, workers, women, youth,
and intellectuals, support the armed struggle! Support the develop-
nent of the guerrilla warfare!
Peruvian people!: your vigorous voice, like furious thunder, has
begun to be expressed in the vibrant and purifying language of revolu.
tionary violence,inarmedtruggle.Throughguerrilla actionstrogh
guerrilla warfare, you are creating milestones in your new history, your
definitive history. We have embarked on a great road, a long and ar-
duous one, but victory will be decisive,sinceexcept for state power,
allis butilusion!''
DEVELOPGUERRILLAWARFARE!
F
LONGLIVE THECOMMUNISTPARTYOFPERU!
GLORYTOMARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM!
A
CENTRAL COMMITTEE
COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU
Peru, March '82
=====第15页=====
'Strengthen the People's Committees, develop the base areas and
advance the New Democratic People's Republic.
Communist Party of Peru
"All reactionaries try to eliminate the revolution through mass
E
slaugbters and think that the more people they kill the more they will
weaken the revolution. But, despite their wisbes, facts show that the
more people they kill; the stronger the revolution becomes and the
closer reactionaries come to their doom. This is an irrefutable law."'
Chairman Mao
I. THE GENERAL CRISIS OF PERUVIAN
SOCIETY
Contemporary Peruvian society is in general crisis. This society,
whose trajectory began towards the end of the last century, is gravely ill
and incurable. It can only be transformed through the armed struggle
which the Communist Party of Peru is leading the Peruvian people in
doing today. There is no other solution.
The fact is that Peru today is a semifeudal and semicolonial society in
which a bureaucratic capitalism is developing, a belated capitalism
linked to the landlords' interests and which, consequently, in no way
seeks the destruction of semifeudal conditions but at most its evolu-
tion. More importantly, it is a capitalism completely subjugated to im.
perialism — in our case principally Yankee imperialism — and
therefore does not develop the potentially great productive forces of
our country. Furthermore, it wastes, shackles, or destroys the produc-
tive forces and in no way develops a national economy; on the contrary,
it is completely at the service of imperialism's increasing exploitation
and is totally against the national interests of the majority,of the most
basic and most urgent needs of our masses.
25
=====第16页=====
Thus the modern Peruvian economy was born retarded and ill at its
ing cliques — elected or not — which exercise dictatorship over the
oots.Itis intrinsically linked tocherotten semifeudalsystem which,in
people, over the proletariat, the peasantry, petty bourgeoisie, and
pite of the government's bragged-about agrarian laws,cunningly call-
even over the national or middle bourgeoisie itself, in the service of the
d'agrarian reform,continues to exist and characterizes the country
big bourgeoisie (especially big bankers today), of the landlords
rom its most basic foundations to its most elaborate ideas.This situa-
(manifesting itself today primarily in the authority of the landlord to
ion maintains the great land problem — the motive force of the
exercise power in the countryside), in the service of the ruling classes
easants'class struggle, especially the poor peasantry which is the im-
and Yankee imperialism, and totally against the people's interests and
nense majority. Furthermore, the Peruvian economy is subjugated at
those of the nation. And this neither needs much historic recounting
s roots by imperialism — the final stage of capitalism,precisely
nor examples, since the proof is right in front of our eyes — Belaúnde's
haracterized as monopolistic, parasitic, and moribund — an im-
government and his gang, a system born of elections from the voting
erialism which consents to our political independence only so long as
booths, from the "sacrosanct electoral system.' This is the govern-
serves its interests. Imperialism controls the entire Peruvian
ment that more than any other has sold the country to imperialism and
conomic process: our natural wealth, export products, industry,
sunk Peruvian society in its most serious crisis in modern history; it has
anking and finance. In sum, it sucks the blood of our people, devours
submerged the people in the most implacable hunger, it has
e energies of our national development, and today, especially, it
persecuted, jailed, tortured, and assassinated the people, even com-
ueezes us through external debt— just as it does other oppressed na-
mitting massacres and genocide because the people, along with the
ons. Therefore, the modern Peruvian cconomy — bureaucatic
Communist Party, have dared to rise up in arms proclaiming 'It's
pitalism — is intrinsically linked to its half-buried, semifeudal
right to rebel''— the irrevocable right of every people drowned in ex-
daver and subjugated to moribund imperialism, which lives ever
ploitation and oppression, the irrevocable right of every people and
ore off the blood of the oppressed, reaped from exploitation
class that refuse to be enslaved.
aranteed by its own weapons and those of its lackeys, while the
This is the reality of the country, of Peruvian society and the perfor-
mination of the world is disputed in a never ending crisis and con-
mance of the present government. And this will remain the same so
ntion waged primarily by the two superpowers— the United States
long as we don't overthrow the present order by force of revolutionary
d the social-imperialist Soviet Union. In conclusion, we are in the
arms through people's war. The history of the world as well as of our
idst of the general crisis of Peruvian society. This crisis,including the
country has proven this, and what's more, it is right in front of our
isis of bureaucratic capitalism which has entered into its final stage,
eyes: the reactionary government of Belaúnde and his sinister gang
as fully matured the conditions for the development and triumph of
that starves and murders people will go down in history as the govern-
e revolution — thus the general crisis that plagues the old society en.
ment of famine and genocide.
mpasses the revolution in its entirety and in all its manifestations.
This is our reality, this is the foundation on which Peruvian society
sts and che material roots of our problems and the misfortunes of our
eople. This is the social system that the ruling classes and their
II. TO VOTE IS TO ENDORSE THE SOCIAL.
ankee imperialist masters are faithful to and defend with blood and
SYSTEM AND ELECT ANOTHER GOVERNMENT
ire, through their bureaucratic-landlord state based on their reac-
THAT WILL BRING MORE HUNGER AND MORE
onary armed forces; constantly exercising their class dictatorship (of
GENOCIDE
he big bourgeoisie and landlords), whether it be through de facto
1
nilitary governments like the many we have had — for example,
What are the conditions in which the new general elections are tak-
elasco and Morales Bermúdez, to mention just the most recent ones
ing place?
—or through governments born out of elections and called constitu-
Economically, all agree that the country is suffering the gravest
ional like Belaunde's government today.
crisis in at least the last hundred years. What's more, the future is
Thus the governments in Peru — civilian or military — are the rul-
bleak. In the year 2000 the economy would barely be meeting its 1976
6
27
=====第17页=====
levels;that is,a quarter of a century would have been lost to this much-
Public Ministry. The Executive has become the real legislative power,
publicized economic development. And the problem does not end
with the most basic laws of the land in the hands of rancid bureaucrats
there. Since World War 2 the country has regularly suffered a crisis in
and technocrats trained and advised by imperialism; with super-
the second half of each decade, each one worse than the previous one,
ministers who, like the old autocrats, do as they please; with broad and
and the next one is already rearing its head.The reactionary economists
repressive powers used daily,from the gavels, bombs, bullets, etc., to
hemselves paint'a bleak picture for the coming years. Furthermore,
the state of emergency decree used even to confront a strike; and let's
eliance on highly glorified foreign capital is impeded by the present
not forget the much called-for implementation of a state of siege.
xternal debt and the impossibility of paying even the interest on it. At
Finally the reactionary armed forces and police have shown all their
he same time, internal savings are reduced, industrial production is in
antipeople hatred and brutality that is characteristic of their actions,
ecession, agriculture is in crisis,the prices of our export commodities
they have shown clearly that they "authorize' any mistreatment and
ontinue to decline, foreign markets are shrinking, etc. In sum, it is a
even the unpunished assassination of any son and daughter of the peo-
leak panorama with no real solution in sight whatsoever, much less
ple. And those armed forces which call themselves"protective institu-
ne that would satisfy the increasing basic needs afthe masses, which
tions'— as if the Peruvian people were solely made up of children —
te delayed more each day, offering only more unemployment, loner
and who are as specialized in being defeated by foreigners as they are
orking days just to survive, lower wages and salaries,fewer rights, and
experienced in smashing our disarmed people through blood and fire,
ore cutbacks of past gains and benefits. Thus, there is an ominous
today manifest more clearly the reactionary interests which they de-
conomic perspective in store for the rotten Peruvian society and more
fend and all the class hatred contained in their intervention against the
xploitation and oppression for the people.
I
victorious armed struggle. Their leadership — the Joint Command,
Politically,the '79 constitution, just like with the rest of its type,
the National Defense Council, and headed up by Belaúnde himself —
enies every right it recognizes. Furthermore it didn't even satisfy the
in its futile and desperate attempt to isolate the masses from the armed
ctions of the reactionary camp,much less the people. That's why
revolution, has found no solution other than the monstrous and in.
odifying it is, and will continue to be, an arena of contention. The
famous genocide which the fraudulent Peruvian democracy and that
esent constitution gives direct participation to its armed forces and
false democrat and cunning demagogue Belaunde have revealed to our
lice in every aspect of social life,fortifying its predominance, and at
people and to the whole world with their sinister antiguerrilla actions.
e same time it strengthens the powers of the Executive and organizes
Thus, on top of these ominous economic perspectives, old and
e most repressive police system of our history. Despite all its filthy
reactionary institutions are erected that only survive by the force of in.
magogy,in comparison with all previous constitutional charters the
ertia and the arms that sustain them, always spilling more blood and
esent constitution is the crudest, most violent and bloody collision
bathing in the incendiary blood of the disarmed and cruelly oppressed
ith our conditions. This is shown by the contrast between the so-
people who have begun to say, enough!— a people who every day
lled"right to live'and the sinister genocide being carried out with
believes less in the old state and expects less from the government. In
uelty and impunity in the Ayacuchan region by the armed forces
conclusion, the loss of prestige, the disorder, the chaos on top of cor-
irected by Belaúnde himself.
ruption, and the most shameless wantonness all work to corrode the
landlord-bureaucratic state. Thus a few demagogues of poorly conceal-
And how do the sanctified bourgeois-democratic institutions
ed interests and uncontrollable ambitions are once again frivolously
ork? Parliament abdicated its legislative functions, turning them
and happily competing with one another for the government — with
ver to the Executive. The courts,incapable of prosecuting thousands
verbal skirmishes and perhaps with one or another conflict. They are,
accused, much less applying their own laws, even agree and protect
Alva Orlandini, Bedoya Reyes, Morales Bermúdez, and Alan Garcia,
e plan to annihilate prisoners of war in the known concentration
candidates of Accion Popular, Democratic Convergence, Democratic
mps like "El Fronton' and in the secret ones like those in Totos,
Front of National Unity, and APRA, respectively. All are well-known
Los Cabitos," the Stadium in Huanta, etc., in complicity with the
defenders of the existing order. And among them is also that devious
and opportunistic Barrantes Lingan -false Mariateguist and real loyal
his has no relation to rhe reactionary"right to lifemovement in the U.S.
29
=====第18页=====
defender and supporter of the ruling system — representing the so-
drowned our people in the darkest and bloodiest famine and genocide.
called United Left, an organization which was organized by its leaders
Furthermore, looking at the prospects, what can the people, the
as the most blatant expression of the old road of electoral opportunism
masses, expect from participating in the general elections of 1985,
and parliamentary cretinism in the country.
when in fact, simply and concretely: To vote is to endorse the social
But the oppressive legacy does not end there. The class struggle of
system and elect another government that will bring more hunger and
our people has developed into armed struggle against the old social
'more genocide! It will aid the landlord-bureaucratic state to replace —
order, the old state, and its reactionary armed forces and police. The
according to its laws and conditions — their authorities who will exer-
revolutionary war is now entering its fifth year,two of those against the
cise their class dictatorship against the people, and aid them in main-
old armed forces themselves. This historic fact has radically changed
taining the semifeudal and semicolonial character of the society, in
he conditions: it has shown how through armed struggle the old rot-
whose womb bureaucratic capitalism is developing, in the service of
en system can be overthrown piece by piece and a New Power built for
the ruling classes and its principal master, Yankee imperialism. To
he people, for the oppressed. This new and irreversible process will
vote is to aid in the establishment of a government that will bring more
ontinue to increasingly unfold as the main problem of the Peruvian
hunger, since this is determined by the needs and the class character of
ate because it will be its negation, its destruction. It is against this
the state of which it is apart. To vote is to aid in the establishment of a
rocess that the state will have to increasingly concern itself in defense
more genocidal regime, since this too is determined by the needs of the
the exploiting classes and their imperialist master. The people, the
old state to defend its decrepit society in the face of the developing
asses — mainly the peasantry — will increasingly join the advancing
people's struggle and, most of all, in the face of the armed struggle
asant war, since as Lenin said: 'In the West, tens of millions of peo-
which is advancing and with arms is destroying the old and building
 are suffering the torments of starvation.It is this that makes social
the new: the forms of the New Power, of the New Society, supported
volution inevitable,for social revolution stems not from programmes
by the people rising in arms.
t from the fact that tens of millions of people say: 'Rather than live
The people cannot serve their exploiters and oppressors, cannot
d starve, we prefer to die for the revolution.'
help chem solve their problems, cannot endorse their social system —
Therefore, we must ask, what are the implications of the elections?
to say nothing of electing another government that will bring more
othe people need to go to the ballot boxes? Is it worthwhile for the
hunger and cause more genocide. This is not the road the people
ople to vote? Looking at Peru's own experience, what revolutionary
should take, and it does not serve the interests of the people. The only
nsformations have the people won through elections or in parlia.
thing left to do js NoT voTE! That is the only true popular response
entary activities? Everything won by the people has been wrenched
in the face of the elections of the reactionary state that brings hunger
the course of the people's struggle. As a resuit of these struggles laws
and genocide.
ere enacted. From the beginning the state started cutting back and
itiating a process to reduce the effect of these laws or do away with
em entirely — the history of labor legislation is proof enough. The
ctory of politicalrightshas followed asimilarcourse.Allof thisclearly
III. EXPAND THE GUERRILLA WAR TO SEIZE
as been won short of seizing power since, for a revolutionary, power
POWER FOR THE PEOPLE!
an only be seized through revolutionary violence. In Peru this can
The Communist Party of Peru, a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist party, a
nly mean armed struggle from the countryside to the city. But, fur-
hermore, let us ask ourselves what benefits have the people really won
communist party reconstituted combating revisionism— including in-
y their participation in the Constituent Assembly and in the 1980
ternally — a party of a new type to seize power for the proletariat and
the people, assumed its role of going over to the armed struggle on
eneral elections: in the first case, simply to serve the third restructur-
May 17, 198o. Thus the class struggle of the Peruvian proletariat and
ng of the reactionary Peruvian state in this century, and the results are
people has taken a leap in its long journey. The political struggle con-
lready known. In the second case, the emergence of Belaunde's
tinues as a revolutionary war, taking armed struggle as its main form
government, one of the biggest sellouts of our history and whichr has
31
0
=====第19页=====
and the revolutionary armed force as its principal form of organization.
Force — with the Army as the main force and with the intention of
Thus our party has left behind historical baggage, more than So years
sharing responsibility, since none of these branches wants to take full
old, and has overcome the dark and rotten electoralism imposed on the
responsibility for the inevitable loss of prestige that their counter-
masses. With dynamite and bullets it began to write genuine popular
revolutionary work carries with it. From the beginning the self-
liberation, armed and united from the beginning with the popular
proclaimed"protective inscicutions of the countryused armed thugs
masses— principally the peasantry — who have always supported the
(groups of landlords, landowners, and their lackeys) to camouflage
most heroic actions of the Peruvian revolution, and do so today more
themselves, including dressing like peasants and civil guards, to com-
han ever as the armed struggle has concretized the centuries-old hope
mit atrocities and massacres in the vain attempt to separate us from the
n an unextinguishable bonfire.
masses. They carried out numerous cowardly and bloody massacres like
As Chairman Mao has said: "When its existence is threatened the
those in Huambo, Huaychao, Iquicha, Sacsamarca, etc. (among them
uling class always resorts to violence. As soon as it sees revolution arise
the massacre of the journalists). These actions were all approved by
 strives to exterminate it by force of arms...and when the people rise
the National Defense Council with the express authorization and con.
p to seize political power,right away it uses violence to suppress the
gratulations of Belaunde himself. Further, with the failure of their
evolutionary people."Or, as the second quote at the beginning says:
sinister plans at the hands of the powerful blows of the revolutionary
All reactionaries try to eliminate the revolution through mass
forces, and due to the necessities of the municipal elections of
aughters....
November 1983, the armed forces resorted to widespread massacres.
The Peruvian state, the old state, has acted according to these laws.
Thus in less than two months around the city of Ayacucho more than
irst they mobilized their police forces — GC,GR, PIP,*—and its
800 people turned up brutally massacred and people began to disap.
ecial forces - Sinchis, the self-proclaimed "Llapan Atic,'"
pear. These were vile, ignominious, and unpunished assassinations.
ircote,** etc. They carried out their well-known persecutions, tor-
July 1984 brought important state measures, although they were
ires, jailings, and assassinations with the brutality and cruelty that is
not public — which is yet another violation of their judicial system.
neir nature. Then they started their patrols, searches, and raids in the
The Joint Command was granted the right to intervene in any and
untryside and cities — mainly in the countryside — basing
every part of the country to combat the guerrillas and,on their decision
emselves on the reactionary law of'burn all,kill all, loot allThese
and request, to create political-military commandos and establish
med forces, at the height of their actions, were able at most to launch
emergency zones. Thus the country is at the whim of the Joint Com.
ree campaigns (in January and October 1981 and March 1982) which
1
mand, and the Executive gives the armed forces carte blanche to use
ere highly advertised and overstated in the press. Despite having
their loyalty as they see fit. This is the state of so-called Peruvian
irection and support from the armed forces, these campaigns ended
democracy today. It is under this authority that they carry out new
total failure, suffering humiliating defeats at the hands of the
plans, preplanned destruction and, under death threats, forcefully
evolutionary armed forces — a fact that even the reactionary press
push together sectors of the population to simulate a supposed strug-
ould not deny. Thus the police forces were used like cannonfodder
gle amongst peasants, when in fact it's simply and clearly a copy of the
nd guinea pigs caught in the contradictions in the reactionary camp.
"strategic hamlets'used in Vietnam,or the"peasant organizations''
Despite the clamor demanding their participation in the antiguer-
formed in nearby Guatemala under Yankee supervision. The war has
illa struggle, the armed forces of the Peruvian state did not directly in-
been intensified and broadened, especially in the arena where the
ervene until late 1982, due to the opposition of Belaunde who feared
armed forces have to confront a genuine peasant war led by the Com-
hat the military would use their intervention as a pretext to launch a
munist Party and despite the sinister genocide caused by their
oup d'etat against him or take over bit by bit. The military sent in the
pigheaded plans to isolate the guerrillas from the masses. Therefore,
hree branches of the armed forces— the Army, the Navy, and the Air
一
This refers to the massacre that was highly publicized in the U.S. press. mosr prominently
Guardia Civil, Guardia Republicana, Policia de Investigaciones del Perú.
in the New York Times Magazine in an article written by the renowned journahst Mario Vargas
Anti-"terroristpolice.
Llosa who was appointed by a presidenrial committee to investigare the massacre.
33
=====第20页=====
they can't proclaim victory, and recently the War Minister himself
bureaucratic capitalism; armed struggle which serves the world revolu-
talked of the necessity of taking time and having patience in com.
tion and receives the support of proletarian internationalism,prin-
bating the guerrillas, of the need for stronger measures and the sup-
cipally from the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement in which
port of all Peruvians. This was a clear confession of the difficulties they
our Party is a participant. We base ourselves on the masses of the coun-
have in confronting an armed struggle which follows the principles of
try who support us, principally the poor peasantry. We are not linked
eople's war. Such reactionary difficulties are even manifested in the
and will not be linked to any superpower nor any other power, since we
neasiness of the Pope who, while in Ayacucho — in that Papal
firmly serve the revolution guided by Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and
neeting basically of repressive forces, preceded by more than a month
the guiding thought which is the application of Marxism to our condi-
f intense persecution and raids — blessed the criminal weapons,con-
tions. And today our immediate goal is: Expand the guerrilla war to
crated the graves of infamy, sanctified the counterrevolutionary war,
seize power for the people!
lessed the genocidal armed forces and police— principally its bloody
iefs— exonerated, and what's more, supported Belaunde's govern-
ent and called on him to annihilate us as soon as possible. And in a
LONG LIVE THE ARMED STRUGGLE! DON'T VOTE!
mbastic tone he threatened us to change our course,to abandon the
LONG LIVE THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU!
volution, to in fact submit ourselves to the ruling order, to betray the
LONG LIVE CHAIRMAN GONZALO!
ople. To this 'communiquéwe have given our immediate, firm,
GLORY TO MARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM!
d complete answer with the big blackout on February 4 that com-
CENTRAL COMMITTEE
tely covered all of Lima and the whole central region of the country.
COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU
What has the armed struggle achieved in almost five years? 1980
aId be called the beginning; '81 and '82,the beginning of develop-
February 1985
the guerrilla warfare and the formation of the first People's Com-
ttees — embryonic forms of the New State. From then to the pre-
nt, the war has concentrated on reestablishment/counterestablish-
nt — that is, on the counterrevolutionary war to destroy the New
wer, and the revolutionary war to defend it, develop it, and build it
destroying little by lictle the old rotten and reactionary order. In
nost five years (up to the beginning in '85) we have carried out more
an 20,o00 actions. The Party has multiplied its membership many
nes over and has prestige as never before, both inside and outside the
untry. We have built a People's Guerrilla Army made up of
ousands of combatants and, more importantly, hundreds of
cople's Committees have been formed. We are pushing forward the
uilding of base areas and advancing the formation of the New Demo-
atic People's Republic — thus, the New Power has arisen and is de-
eloping by exercising real state functions.
In sum, the Communist Party of Peru leads a successful and grow-
ng armed struggle, following the standards of Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, the only true communist ideology; armed struggle serving a
emocratic revolution — according to Chairman Mao's New Democ-
acy — with the aim of doing away with imperialist domination, the
ubsisting feudal landlord property, and confiscating the resources of
34
=====第21页=====
The Committee to Support
the Revolution in Peru
Those of us who live in the U.S.A., the country that is most
responsible for the misery and poverty of the Peruvian people, have a
special duty to refute the slanders and attacks upon the Peruvian
revolution and its leadership, the Communist Party of Peru.
4
The Committee to Support the Revolution in Peru exists exactly
for this purpose. We want to popularize the development of revolu-
tionary struggle there and disseminate the truth of what is really
happening. We have a slide show with presentation and music, books
and information, and we are available for forums, panel discussions
and radio shows. We also have buttons, posters, and are preparing a
t-shirt for the near future.
We encourage all progressive and revolutionary-minded people to
join the Committee and/or contact us to arrange for the above-
mentioned activities and materials. Funding, to keep up our support
campaigns, research and the dissemination of materials and
information, is urgently needed: we encourage you to both
contribute and fund-raise.
THE COMMITTEE TO SUPPORT THE REVOLUTION IN PERU
2483 Hearst Avenue, #225
Berkeley, CA 94709
=====第22页=====