We are the initiators
We are the initiators and we should keep this fact deeply in our spirits.
This meetinihistoic.Comrades,wewillassitohitryasthnitiator.Fometime,heParty has
been writing this history on indestructible pages.
Wearethetaor.ThirtPrtMilitarySchoolisbotalandbracitconcludesandbgins.It
concludes the time of peace and opens the time of war. Comrades, our tasks with unarmed hands have
concluded, and today our armed words begin: Let us uplift the masses and peasants under the unfading flags of
Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought. One period has ended and the preparations for the new one have
concluded. From here, the past deeds are sealed and we open the future. The key of the future is determined by
actions, the objective is power. This we shall do, history demands it, the class urges it, the people have
foreseen and want it. We must accomplish it and it will be accomplished. We are the initiators.
We should discuss some problems. Just as you,I will also speak with an open heart, sincere words and a
rational sentiment. This also has a strict logic.

上
1
=====第1页=====
I. We Are Entering the Strategic Offensive of the World Revolution.
Centuries of devastating exploitation have passed. The masses have been exploited, subjugated, forced to yield
and implacably oppressed.But throughall this time, the exploited masses have always resisted, because they
have no other sentiment than the class struggle. However, throughout history, the masses were abandoned and
had no direction. Their words, protests, actions and rebellions were crushed and defeated. But the masses never
lost hope.Theclassalwayshashope.The massesarethelightof theworldthat orgethemselveahea. They
transform and create instruments with their own hands. They are the social fabric, the inexhaustible beat of
history. Thus, they have been generating ideas, science of the most advanced kind.
But thelawsofhistorythatcameaboutaaesultofthedevelopmentoftheclassstrugglhaveeneradone
lastlas:lhuliytem,
capitalism, which appeared sweating blood and muck from all its pores. A system in whose center the
combativerltaratdevlopedons,rkes,sistanceandvolutins.llohicamemboddi
Marxism, and the class, endowing itself with a Party, evolved into a mature class with its own interests. The
masses of the world finally have their liberator.In theoldtimes,the masses awaited fora liberator.They used
to puttheirathinthehandofsuposedaviors,untilthe owerfulandinvinciblproltariatappared, which
is capable of creating a true new order.The class organized itself politically, and another history begins to
unfold to become a reality.
In one hundred years of struggle, setbacks, and victories, the proletariat has learned how to fight and seize
power with arms. The workers took it once in an embryonic form but were crushed with blood and fire.
Nevertheless, we remember the Paris Commune, where those who were reviled are today heroes. And their
example lives on, while their tormentors are forgotten. The workers with Lenin seized power in Russia and
created a powerful tate.Theclassontinued fighting and with Mao Tse-tungpaved anew road and reolved
unsolved problems.Theclass begantoiht undr thelagofMarxism-Leiism MaoTe-tung Thought.
Around the econd World War,the revolution ntredtratgic equilibrium, leaving bhind the eactionary
holy alliances and their previously untouchable tormentors and enemies.
With theowerlrationalwrr'movmeiwaveooaliraomovements,
the development of Communist Parties, and thelevationof Marxism tothehigh summit of Mao Tse-tung
Thought, newsituationhaseecratd: WearentrintheraticofnsiveofworldevolutioIh
next50t0r,iofilidllxlillwtwHraot o
backwards. In the hands of the working class, under the leadership of the Communist Parties and through the
mighty force of poor peasants, the peoples war will be sustained and grow each day until overthrowing the old
order.
The world is entering into a new situation, the strategic offensive of world revolution. This is of transcendental
importance. As Chairman Mao said: "The storm draws near and the wind roars in the tower." Thus, the vortex
draws near, the vortex begins, and the invincible flame of the revolution grows, converting itself into lead and
steel. And from the din of battle along its inextinguishable fires will come forth the light. From the darkness a
light will appear and a new world will be born. The old order of reaction crackles, its old boat leaks and sinks
in desperation. But comrades, nobody can expect reaction to retire gently. Marx warned us: Even while
drowning, the reactionaries were capable of inflicting asphyxiating chokeholds and desperate blows in order to
see us sink. That is impossible. The reaction has the hyena's dreams of blood. Convulsive dreams shake their
somber nights.
Their hearts scheme sinister hecatombs. They arm themselves to the teeth but they cannot prevail. Their
destiny is weighed and measured.The time has come for the settlingof accounts.The imperialist superpowers,
U.S.A., U.S.S.R., and other powers seek to invade, penetrate, suffocate, destroy and drown everything with
terror. But as Chairman Mao said, by attacking, assaulting, and launching offensives they overextend
themselves and enter the powerful core of the people. The people rise up, arm themselves and rebel, putting
nooses on the necks of imperialism and reaction. The people take them by the throat, threaten their lives and
will strangle them out of necessity. The reactionary meat will be trimmed of fat, they will be torn to tatters and
rags, the scraps sunk into mire, and the remainders burned. The ashes will be thrown to the winds of the world
2
=====第2页=====
so that only the sinister reminder of what must never return will remain. Comrades, that is the world today. It
has befallen on us to live in an extraordinary epoch.
Thus it is wrten,mankind everhad such aheroi destiny.Tothe peopleoftoday,tthose people who
breath,fm
illuminating and magnificent mission given to any generation. We find ourselves in this situation: The world
revoll.
moreand lulllw
itsblodywfouw,mb,ndkt ith
thebloodofo.u o'oodliuouwiadickhonvtitself
into a powerful vengeful lash.
Their muscles andactions areconvertedintosteelbattering rams inordertodestroytheoppressor who will be
irremediablycrushed.Comrades,reaction will not prevailinany orm.Thehour has sounded,therevolution
will triumph.The struggle will be hard, arduous,cruel and dificult.Victory isours.The masses will prevail,
the peasants will arise, the working class will lead, the Communist Party will command and the Red Flags will
be raised forever. Reaction has entered its final chapter. We will develop in that world.
CRTEPOPULAR
中
ABIERTD
DE
II. Our People Begin to Seize Power Through Armed Struggle.
In this magnificent epic of world history, our people along with the Latin American working classes and
masses have a role to play. This role is being fulfilled. Our people begin to seize power through armed
struggle. It is hundreds of years of struggle in which the peasant movements have shaken the foundation of
exploitation, but they have not been able to uproot it as yet. In this country the Communist Party was forged as
pure steel.It brought light to the people by upholding Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought. Comrades,
in this country we are embarking upon a third epoch. The third epoch is a battle between armed revolution and
factories,itheoutrysid,andvenssasitingchildrwithhungand mieryitheimatrnal wombs.
3
=====第3页=====
Today, that sinister violence meets its match. The revolutionary violence prepares to take up the battle in arms.
Our people with a richhistoryare finally embarkingtothefinalchapter, thecompletionof the democratic
periodofvTmblodndrmpaaioithis
countryaswllawl,lamofakgevlwitlodand,owigitin
blood.Theeld,rk,andvltamsThrotaciamtutioaay.Time has
passeims
havebeenailuresoneafteranother,andthepasantshaveunderstoodthelesson:othingwillbegiven to
them, nothinwill deiveromlaw.Theland mustbeconquered bytheirwarmedhand.The working
classistutvlofutlllall
more powerful,and muchstrongrhaninthe past.The populamasseshavegrowinoucountry.The petty
bourgeoisieisbeingproltarianized.Ithasotherdestinythantoservetherevolutionand putitslf t th
disposalofthe proltariat.Itsonlycourseof actionisto servetherevolution accordingtothedictaes of the
working class and to forcefully fight behind the road paved by the Party.
This is good to remember, because from this experience we should particularly win over the intellectuals. As
Mariategui has already shown us, the masses must be mobilized and only in this manner will we will fulfill our
role and serve the great battle that history has arranged for us. Comrades, we have concluded that we are
embarking into the third epoch of contemporary Peruvian society. But just as yesterday, when we expounded
upon the two moments of contemporary Peruvian history as part of the process of the development of
bureaucratic capitalism in this country, some condemned us and rejected our thesis and ideals with insolence
and contemptibleaccusationofinfantilism.Weare putting forthtoday,withaclearand precisevision, that
ourcountryrdpoc.Theiwlllobeujcdiundtadig.utiolonger
possibletndmwhllablonlis,causeiimryahowutoberight
in manythis,adeywilaloarson[tanlat:ierttwoituglewitt.
Nevertheless, it is not easy for our accusers to easily accept and comprehend it. It requires convincing deeds,
concreteactionsthat pounditothirhardhadandshatheispculationtoieces,thattheyal may
carry therealityofthiscountry inthirspiitsTheunderstandingof thethirdpochiskeytohe advace of
our people.hdpclItlvl,oradein
seize w,twt4axliaddexliofcmrads,
we should think clearly, 400 yearsof foreign oppression, a vile slave system that continues to exist today, a
state whichalthoughweak,stillhasorce),impliesthateationwilltrytocontainusandpposetheadvance
of the revolution.It is well known by materialists that what exists refuses to die; reaction exists and therefore
refuses to die.It is an unburied corpse but it protests, negates, resists, and attacks with fury and desperation,
opposingits placement intoasket oitsurial.Thus, we mustunderstandthattherevolutionarruggle
will be hard, violent and cruelly contested by reaction.
They will send their sinister army armed to the teeth to fight us, assaulting the working class, the peasants and
popular masses, spreading their sinister claws.They will try to encircle,isolate, crush and wipe us out. But we
are the future, the strength, and history. Comrades, revolution and counterrevolution are also contending forces
in our country. They are two parts of a unity of opposites in constant struggle. The reactionaries are armed and
concentrated, defending the metropolis and capitals.We are rooted in the countryside, in small villages, with
the masses, especially with the poor peasants, with the force of the people, among their disorganized force in
order to organize it into a powerful army. But this will not be easy.
The dark, sinister armies of reaction will fight against us, mount powerful aggressions and great offensives.
We will respond in kind, spliting them, making them fall apart, and converting theirofensives into a
multitude of our small offensives. Therefore, those who encircle will be encircled, the would-be annihilators
will be annihilated, the would-be victors will be defeated and the beast will finally be corralled. As we have
been taught,theclamor of our armedvoices will make them tremble with terror.They will becrushed by their
own fears and beconvertedinto scattered black ashes.That iswhat will happen.Thisisthe way it is,
Comrades. Nevertheless, the fight will be hard, long, difficult and cruel.
We need to steel our spirits, be strong, vigorous,fearless and confident in our victory. May the confidence of
victory dwell in our hearts in as much as we serve the people and class. The problem is to initiate the armed
struggle with decisiveness and firmness. We must deploy it and populate the land with our flags and with
4
=====第4页=====
sonorous actions that history will record. Comrades, our people are embarking on the seizureof power with
arms.We arelauncingthemost magficent marchtaturcountryasevereebeore.Nothinglikethis
will everbeaai.Itillbelmkabl.Thiiswhatwwilloheole,helass,andthe
proletariat demands it. We can not and must not fail.
III. The Party Develops Itself Through Armed Struggle.
It has been more than 80yearsof workingclassstruggle and52 yearsoftheParty'sexistence.Ittookabout 10
years for a group of men and women, led by Mariategui, about 10 years to found the Party. His name is
imprinted forever in our ranks, the peoples of the world and the international working class.Time has passed,
many of us have fought, and will continue to struggle until exploitation is abolished.That isour destiny. We
are a growing torrent confronting fire, rocks and mud. But our power is greater.We convert everything into
our fire. The black fire will be transformed into red fire and the red is light. That is where we are, that is the
Reconstitution of the Party. Comrades, we are reconstituted.
The Party is a Party of a new type. The purpose of this Party of a new type is to seize power for the working
class and the people of this country. The Party can not be developed more but through the use of arms, through
armed struggle.That isthehard lesson we have learned in 50years, agreat lessonthat weshould never forget:
We have no power because we have no guns. Like Chairman Mao has written, whoever has more guns has
more power. Whoever wants to seize power must forge an army, and whoever wants to keep power must have
a powerful army.Thisiswhat we will accomplish.ThePartyhasmbarkedtodevelopitsel through armed
struggle, our historical course. We cannot go backwards. Comrades, we can now state that the development of
the Party has prevailed. Its possible destruction, as it had to be, has been averted. This is the conclusion we can
derive from the 2nd Plenary Session of the Central Committee and the First Military School. We have
completed a task that we only now have begun to appreciate.
We asked ourselves, how will we develop the Party? A plain and simple response is: Through armed struggle.
In critical times the situation enters into contentious struggles, and according to the lawof contradiction,
specificccumtacaaditodevlopmenrdetruio,ofourseary,utitsotceaseto
become a destruction if that could lead us to sink in the mud or march through a muddy place. The Party has
triumphed asithad to.Itdestructioncannot take place.The Partymbarksfirmly,decisively,voluntarily and
energetically in its development. Comrades, this is what is derived from these meetings. However, what
contradiction is being debated?
The launching of armed struggle presents a contradiction: The old versus the new. The development of the
Party through armed struggle is the new, and the old is our accomplishments up to now, including the good
ones. Even the best of our achievements have aged, and no matter how much we add to this tradition, we also
add to that great garbage which parties, classes and organizations generate throughout decades. We must be
very clear on this point. There is only one new thing, to develop the Party through armed struggle. Today, this
is our contradiction. Just like in the international arena where the contradiction is between the strategic
offensive and the strategic defensive of reaction, in our country the contradiction is between the armed people
and armed reaction. This contradiction, through the People's War, will inevitably lead to the triumph of the
class and sweep away 400 years of oppression. Comrades, in the Party there is also a contradiction. It calls for
serious reflection and no one should doubt it. Today, the Communists should be clear on the contradiction of
the old versus the new.
I reiterate, the new is the armed struggle: the unfading flames of People's War, the steel which must be made
purer, the sharp sword and piercing spears in order to wound the entrailsof reaction.This is new.Everything
else is old, it is the past, and from that past we must guard ourselves, because the past always tries to
reestablish itself in a thousand forms in the future. Comrades, let us not forget that in order to guarantee the
consolidation of 100, we need to advance as 200. Today, advancing with 200 means to initiate the armed
struggle, to begin the action is the guarantee of thoroughly sowing the new with lead, crumbling theold walls.
Comrades,thisisthe new.Everything lseisold.We should be absolutel clear and understandit.The Party
has embarked on its development through arms.This isour fundamental situation. Having stated this point, we
have three conditions:
5
=====第5页=====
First, we embarkonthestrategicoffensiveof worldrevolution.That isour situation.The revolutionarytde s
on our side.
Second,thepopletut tie owerwitharms.Thuturewill bedcidedthrouheadvancement of
People's War.
Third, the Party begins to develop through the armed struggle.
Thus, the Party will become the powerful Party which the revolution needs, and since it is needed it must be
forged. Comrades, the world process, the processofthe nationand the Party are interrelated.Therefore, the
future is assured, it is palpitating in the armed actions that we will commence to undertake. It is a delicate task
that needs to be nurtured with the clamor of our arms, developed with guerrilla warfare,fortified with People's
War, cared for and nourished like the seed of an army, giving birth to armed columns, allowing it to flourish
into a guerrillaarmythat we must build into a powerful army. Comrades, these three conditions determine that
the Party leads the armed struggle of the masses.
In our hearts, minds and wills, the powerof the peopleis alive, and we carry it with us.In the beginning we
have no rearguard or we will have one that is small, weak, fragile and uncertain. Comrades, we must never
forget the people's power, the State of the working class, the State of workers and peasants. This State marches
with us, we carry it on the muzzles of our rifles, nestled in our minds, throbbing in our hands, and it will
always be burning in our hearts.It is the first thing on our minds. We should never forget it. Comrades, the
armed struggle will be born fragile and weak because it is new, but its destiny will be to develop through
change, from the variation of fragility like atender plant. The roots we plant at the beginning will be the future
of a vigorous State.
Comrades, all this begins to flourish with the modest and simple actions that tomorrow we will carry out.
There are three interrelated things: world history, the history of our country, and the history of our Party. These
are three convergences, thre realities,threcombinationsandonlyone finalconclusion, onlyone unmovable
truth, only one future. We will respond to the flourishing revolution in our country.
IV. We Begin to Develop the Militarization of the Party Through Actions and Apply the Plan of
Initiation.
This is a derivation from the three issues discussed above. It is a logical, necessary, irrefutable and irreversible
conclusion. On the three previous issues, the Party in the Second Plenary Session of the Central Committee has
concluded as follows: The "Development of the Militarization of the Party through actions." It ratified that
through armed actions, the Party will be transformed into a powerful and recognized vanguard of the Peruvian
working class, and the legitimate center of the Peruvian revolution. The Second Plenary Session has also
ratified a "plan of initiating the armed struggle" that solves a problem unresolved until today, of how to begin
the armed struggle.
Comrades, this is not to instill ourselves with pride but to understand our immense responsibility. No trace of
vanity should ever be in us. Modesty and simplicity should accompany us, and the more we fulfill our tasks,
the more modest and simple we become, because we are the faithful servants of the people and class. We
should learn to conduct ourselves in that manner. Many things will change and even more profoundly among
us. We have comrades by way of the actions of universal history, by Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung
Thought,blaorofuroltidrrourms,eabooftears
of Party struggle and of innumerable Communists, and as a derivation from what our own founder initiated.
We have resolved the problem of initiating the armed struggle. We have resolved the first fundamental military
problem, how to initiate the armed struggle. We know what needs to be done and how to arm ourselves. Most
importantly, we know how to raise up the peasantry so that through arduous struggles we can unleash guerrilla
actions from that powerful land. We know how to confront and destroy their encirclements.
Comrades, the problem of initiating the armed struggle in Peru is resolved. No one should have doubts about
it. We have nothing to doubt. The problem is resolved. Take it for what it is, a derivation from Marxism-
Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought, a result of our people embarking on the seizure of power with arms. A
6
=====第6页=====
derivation from fifty yearsof the Party.Thus, we will have ahistorical sense, a comprehension and knowledge
of where we stand now, where we are going and the safe port we will arrive.
V. We Arm Ourselves in Theory and Practice to Launch the People's War.
We are arming ourselves in theory and practice with the Military Line and with the general political
mobilization. We are forming detachments and developing actions to initiate the armed struggle.This should
beindelibly recorded.This First Military Schoolishistoric.We askedourselves, whatisthisschool? Ifthe
Second Session of the Central Committee is the "Chime of Glory", what is this school? We will repeat it once
more,it is"the Seal and Breach", because itcloses and opens.It concludesour unarmed life and begins our
People's War. Comrades, that is this school. Here we have applied the agreements of the Second Plenary
Session of the Central Committee. We have successfully completed and resolved problems, that the Central
Committee shall ratify very soon, at the same time it arranges for the Party's readjustment and the
commencingof actions.Thus,the Party,throughitcntralorganzations,tseaderandcadres,armitself
with the military line in theory and practice.
Comrades, the last meeting is a demonstration of the distribution of forces: proof of the encirclement and
annihilation of pessimism and opposition. It has burned and annihilated what among us and inside of us could
have opposed. We have raised up optimism and are filled with enthusiasm. The victories to come have been
unfurled. We must understand it in this way. We have seen the fighters march, we have seen advanced fighters
with their leaders at the foreground, opening breaches; we have seen the ranks march in order to maintain and
support the actions.We have seen at last the definitive action, a passionate andardent faith toreach the
summit. What we have done today is a demonstration of how to act militarily. That is why we say we are
arming ourselvestheoretically and practically.Inthis manner, arming thecadres and leaders for basic
effectiveness, we have obviously entered the general political mobilization.
Remember what Chairman Mao said: the key is to mobilize the cadres. That has been accomplished. The
mobilization has begun, and what we have achieved here will be reverberated tomorrow in more powerful
waves, because the masses yearn to hear the Party say that we should begin to take action and they want to
know how to do this. Comrades, let us inform the bases of the good news. We must apply the plan of initiation
and we shouldtartitmow.Itiswhathebeainhatofthmiltntandthmasssthatworkjointly
with us desire tohear and dream of realizing. Comrades,the general political mobilizationof the Party is on
the march. Forming armed detachments and developing military actions we initiate the armed struggle. This
begins from here, and that is why this meeting is both a seal and abreach.
VI. We Are the Initiators.
We are the initiators. We began by stating we are the initiators. And we end by stating we are the initiators.
Initiators of what? Of the People's War and the armed struggle that is in our hands, shining in our minds,
beating in our hearts and irrepressibly agitating in our wills. This is what we are "a handful of men and
women, Communists, paying homage to the leadership of the Party, the proletariat and the people. On this 19th
of April, history will state, standing upright they expressed their declaration of revolutionary faith, with their
hearts burning with an inextinguishable passion, with firm and resolute wills, and with clear and bold minds,
assuming their historical obligation of being the Initiators.
What they decided on April 19th took shape in autumn with boycotts and the harvest, followed through with
actions against the reactionary power, aiming at local authority, continued with land seizures and with the
peasant masses in rebellion the guerrillas were raised up. The guerrillas generated the powerful army we have
become today, and the State based on it. Our country is free.…." That is what they will say,comrades. This is
materialized in our party decision, apparently simple but of great historical importance. Comrades, do these
three final issues also presents us with contradictions? Yes, they do. Here, in the Party, the focus is on our
agreement concerning the "Development of the Militarization of the Party through actions" and in applying our
Plan of Initiation is the essence of the new, a new part of the world which cannot be detained because our
armed hands have surged with more to follow tomorrow.
7
=====第7页=====
The new is focused in our country, the armed solution, and the Party's development through arms intensifes
through the armed struggle. Thus, on the question of developing and applying the plan of initiation, the new is
the focus and the old is confronted. The old will pledge itself to the opposite, but it is already defeated, it is a
great defeatorthe RiThirdtructioiladsured,hedevlopmenthaiumpheduhapeit
through thunder,writeitwithead,othatit emainwritnoreveron pagesofsteel upontheidgeof the
mountains;othatitcanneverberasedorwritninacontraryorm.Thatisthecontradiction.Atthe end,
everything reduces to a fifth problem.
The contradiction nters to addressthe problemsof arms, war,armed struggle and how toinitiate iIf up to
now we have acted as an unarmed people, the problem now is that we begin to act with armed hands. From
times of peace to times of war. And the times of war have other requirements and other urgent demands.
Comrades, thecontradictions will accumulate but we will handlethem. We have learned to handlehistory, the
laws and contradictions.Itis inour hands toresolve them,shaping them with armed deeds. Nothing will stop
us. We will pass throughtimesof irreversible war, the contradiction will unfold, it will take us to asuccessful
conclusion. We are the initiators. What contradiction is presented to us? We and the other Communists of our
bases, present or not, who reverberate within us, await with anxiety what is decided here. All of us have a
problem, a contradiction: the great rupture.
Comrades, the time has come.It is time for a great rupture. We will break all ties with what is old and rotten in
order to completely and thoroughly destroy it, for if we have an interest in that decrepit world, we would not
be able to destroy it. Men speaking individually can be weak. Each of us should think hard. As an individual,
each person can be fragile and weak.But therevolution isall-powerful, and the armed revolution even more
so, becauseit issustained by the masses, who are the force of the land and led by the Party, whichis the light
of the universe.
Comrades, we begin the great rupture. We have stated many times that we embark upon that rupture and that
manytesllkicikld,ed,ulvr
demolish it. Comrades, the time has come, there is nothing more to discuss, the debate has been exhausted. It is
timetoact,itiemomtofutueanitwilltbdowtowandtardymdiin,rithalls
rintl
and adequateorm,theonlyorm.Itisthrough actions,as wehavestudied,thattheconsciouscapacity of
peopleintensifies,hewillisnsr,ur assion more powerfulandurenrgyeraed.
Comrades,hroughactionswewillndthenery,rcandufiintapacityorthat rupture.We
have embarked upon this. The trumpets begin to sound, the murmur of the masses grows and it will continue
growing, it will deafen us, it will bring us to a powerful vortex, with one note: We will become the
protagonists of history, conscious, organized and armed. Thus, the great rupture will be open and we will
become the makers of a definitive dawn. This is what we have embarked upon, comrades. I want to conclude.
This School, this First Party Military School,isthe seal and the breach, it sealsthe deeds done up to today and
opens a breach for tomorrow. What we have accomplished until now is very positive and has borne fruit. There
is a saying that people are judged by their deeds. The deed is done, it is before us.There is nothing more to
prove. What has been done until now is good. The breach, what we must do, will be even greater and
definitively the only great thing we have to accomplish. It will come forth from arms, from the barrels of the
guns. It will come forth from the direct action of the Party upon the masses. It will come forth from the
People's War.
Comrades, this school is historic. We cannot understand its dimension, we cannot weigh it as it deserves unless
we turn our gaze decades into the future. This is the School of the Initiators. It is the name given to it by the
Central Committee. In a word it is IAS 80 (ILA 80), which means: Initiate the Armed Struggle in 1980. It is a
commitment and challenge. We are deployed. We will surpass it. I am not only saying that we will
accomplished it, but we will surpass it, because it is a mandate and a historic necessity imposed upon us by our
people, nobody can speak to the contrary. Comrades, the role of the School of Initiators, ILA 80 is: Initiate the
armed struggle in 1980. Decades later, in the future, it will interpreted like this: ILA 80, the armed struggle
was initiated in 1980. ILA was done here. That word is beautiful, it has a double meaning and if we look at it
even more, it has a further meaning. It is the synthesis of what we done up to now. It shapes all the past.
8
=====第8页=====
Comrades,whathasuiddu?TotiatthearmedtrugglewasotthiadiheNitlnum?
Comrade,ivcabl
accomplished.ILA 80 is also the implementationof our past agreement on initiating the armed struggle. In the
presentitmanimdugday,iadu.Thermedulewas
initiated in1.mrdsllatwhavedoeuiteseomplexays,inificultmomnts,ut ithe
fialol
Initiators: ILA 80." The Central Committe and the PoliticalBureauofthe Central Committeecongratulates
those tdlit
Congratulationstothe Party,because with itsactions,it has madethisrealityconcrete.
Congratulations to the masses and our people, because their actions through centuries have been realized here.
Congratulations to the working classof the world, the international proletariat and the peoples of the world,
because their actions have borne fruit here. We render homage,as always, to the unfading flagsof Marxism-
Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought, because their grandeur which will always live has been realized here. They,
now live withinus.Thespiritoftherevolution dwellsinthe Party,ur people,andourclass.Finallitas
arrived!
All our strugleshavebnvliad.omrades,allyithasbnalied:Intiatethearmedtruggletody.
Everythingtat wehaveacomplishd,ncludinorataveervdaexperenc,rlid.
Thisishflteuflt
andexpresouhhpakeraimmendlgbcausewehavecomldimplandmagficnt
task: That theinitiationof the armed struggle,ILA 80, dwellshere and putsthefinaltouchesonthe ast,
specifienomad,vldhuw
promi
le."
worki

dutyislWtuutlllwiole,
workers,darxim-mMo-Thou.madfvdiio
delight in thaccomlishedtasks,pleasdbywhathaseendon, andseek nocompensation.
The future is in the barrels of the guns!
The armed revolution has begun!
Glory to Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought!
Long Live the Communist Party of Peru!
Initiate the Armed Struggle!
(From the First Military School, April 19, 1980)
=====第9页=====