A Critique
of Soviet Economics
=====第1页=====
A Critique
of Soviet Economics
by Mao Tsetung
Translated by Moss Roberts
Annotated by Richard Levy
With an Introduction
by James Peck
MR
Monthly Review Press
New York and London
=====第2页=====
Contents
Introduction
7
Notes on the Texts
30
Copyright © 1977 by Moss Roberts
All rights reserved
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
Political Economy
33
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Mao, Tsetung, 1893–1976.
Concerning Economic Problems of Socialism
A critique of Soviet economics.
in the USSR
129
CONTENTS: Reading notes on the Soviet text Political
Economy.—Concerning Economic Problems of Socialismin
Critique of Stalin's Economic Problems
the Soviet Union.—Critique of Stalin's Economic
of Socialism in the USSR
135
Problems of Socialism in the Soviet Union.
1. Economics—Russia. 2. Akademiia nauk SSSR.
Notes
149
Institut ekonomiki. Politicheskaia ekonomiia.
3. Stalin, Iosif, 1879-1953. Ekonomicheskie problemy
sotsializma v SSSR. 4. Russia—Economic policy—
1917- 5. China—Economic policy. I. Title.
HB113.A2M34213
330'.0947
77-70971
ISBN 0-85345-412-4
Monthly Review Press
62 West14th Street, New York, N.Y. 10011
47 RedLion Street, London WC1R 4PF
Manufactured in the United States of America
10987654321
=====第3页=====
Introduction
These writings of Mao Tsetung, brought together here under
the title A Critique of Soviet Economics, date from the period
during and immediately after the Great Leap Forward, a time
when the Chinese Revolution began to break decisively with
the Soviet Union and its model of development. With the
Great Leap, a distinctive Chinese road to socialism emerged.
But it was a road paved with a decade of controversy over the
course of China's socialist development. At the heart of many
of those disputes within the Chinese Communist Party was
the question of the applicability of the Russian experience to
building socialism in China.
In analyzing their own society, the Chinese Communists
have long studied the Russian Revolution for inspiration and
practical suggestions, as well as for a general perspective on
the course of their own revolution. To them, the Soviet Union
is a model from which both negative and positive lessons can
be drawn. Thus it is not surprising to find Mao, at such a
pivotal stage in the Chinese Revolution as the Great Leap,
once again turning to a study of Soviet experience. This time
he did so through a critique of two Soviet books, Political
Economy: A Textbook and Joseph Stalin's Economic Problems
of Socialism in the USSR. By the time Mao wrote his critique,
however, he had moved away from trying to adapt Soviet
methods, as he and other party leaders had sought to do in
the early 1950s,and instead began to advocate strongly a
wide range of alternatives.
7
=====第4页=====
8
Introduction
Introduction
9
A Critique of Soviet Economics can usefully be read from
troversies over the nature and applicability of the Soviet
several, closely interwoven perspectives: (1) as a crucial ini-
model.
tial summing up by Mao of what the Soviet model was and
Until 1949, these disputes in China focused on the appro-
what it implied for China; (2) as a strong defense of the Great
priate strategy and tactics of the revolutionary struggle for
Leap Forward from the perspective of uninterrupted revolu-
power, the nature of the mass line, and the correct way to
tion; (3) as a pathbreaking examination of the principles of
apply Marxism-Leninism to the concrete conditions of China.
Soviet political economy and of several key aspects ofthe
Stalin only reluctantly tolerated the methods and innovations
Russian revolutionary experience, particularly the years
associated with Mao and his followers, especially as they
under Stalin's leadership.
were worked out during the years in Yenan (1937–1945). In
The texts translated in this volume include a critique of
the 194Os, he even opposed the successful struggle for libera-
the Soviet work, Political Economy: A Textbook, along with a
tion. '"The Chinese revolution won victory," Mao later said,
supplement Mao wrote to his own critique, a talk on Stalin's
"by acting contrary to Stalin's will. ... If we hadfollowed
Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR, and a critique
Wang Ming's, or in other words, Stalin's, method the
of the Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR. Mao's
Chinese revolution couldn't have succeeded." 1
consideration of Stalin's Economic Problems together with
With Liberation, however, the Chinese saw the Soviet
the Russian political economy text is quite appropriate, as
Union as the model for socialist development. Mao had
Stalin's work was itself written as a series of comments for
warned his colleagues in 1949 that "our past work is only the
the draft textbook on political economy, which was finished
first step in a long march of 10,000 li"—"a brief prologue to a
and released only after his death. This Russian text in its
long drama." Yet in these early days, there was no model of
various Russian/Chinese editions circulated in China from
socialist development other than the Russian, with its reli-
the mid-1950s on. After the Lushan Conference in 1959,
ance on elite-planned and bureaucratically administered pro-
Mao called upon party members to critically study the third
grams of economic development which unduly subordiate
edition. This was the edition upon which his critique is
the needs of the countryside to the demands of heavy indus-
based.
try. The Soviet Union, despite all, was a society which had
achieved industrialization and collectivization, key goals of all
the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party. The Soviet vic-
tory over fascism in the Second World War was to many
THE SOVIET MODEL
Chinese leaders proof of the success of that society. And at a
Throughout most of the history of the Chinese Communist
time of intense American government hostility, a U.S.-
backed blockade and bombings of its coast, and later a world-
Party,controversy over how to deal with the experience of
wide economic embargo, it was quite natural that China
the Russian Revolution has been at the heart of what the
leaned toward the Soviet Union in its defense and economic
Chinese call the "two-line struggle." From its founding in
policies.
1921, conflicts within the party have in one way or another
"In the early stages of Liberation," Mao writes in this vol-
been linked to individuals who favored the orthodox Russian
ume, "we had no experience of managing the economy of the
conception of revolution. The defeat of Li Li-san in the
entire nation. So in the period of the first five-year plan we
1930s, WangMing inthe 194Os,Kao Kang(Gau Gang)and
could do no more than copy the Soviet Union's methods, al-
P'eng Teh-huai (Peng Deh-huai) in the 1950s, and Liu
though we neverfelt altogether satisfied about it."³ This
Shao-ch'i (Liu Shau-qi) in the 196Os have all entailed con-
=====第5页=====
10
Introduction
Introduction
11
growing dissatisfaction focused around three main aspects of
Opposition to this rapid "Sovietization" was not far below
the Soviet model:(1)"primitive socialist accumulation"4at
the surface even in these early years after Liberation. Many
the expense of the peasantry; (2) a theory of productive
cadres were uneasy about the party's turning its back on the
forces and the dictatorship of the proletariat; (3) a conception
egalitarian. traditions of Yenan. Others, including such lead-
of the Communist Party in China.
ing members as Liu Shao-ch'i, came to oppose the concentra-
tion of economic power in the ministries in Peking and the
Primitive Socialist Accumulation at
highly centralized planning apparatus which they saw as
the Expense of the Peasantry
threatening their conception of the role and authority of the
Chinese Communist Party. In subsequent years, as someof
A Chinese slogan of the early 1950s, "the Soviet Union today
the ministries were made less bureaucratic and planning less
is our tomorrow," captures the spirit with which many Chi-
centralized after the mid-1950s, the party did expand its role.
nese undertook to copy Soviet methods. China's first five-year
One-man management systems were to give way to greater
plan was notable for its almost exclusive reliance on heavy
party involvement in the running of the factories. With the
industry; highly centralized, bureaucratic methods of planning;
Great Leap Forward, the party also greatly increased its role
and little emphasis on light industry and the productionof
in the rural areas.
consumer goods. The peasantry was considered largely as a
Many party leaders, therefore, were not opposed to some
source of savings. Powerful, centralized economic ministries
of the criticisms which Mao began to raise about the dangers
were established in Peking. They introduced rigid hierarchi-
of copying the Soviet model. Yetfor Mao,their criticismsdid
cal systems of control and "one-man management' in the
not go to the heart of the problem. In evaluating the applica-
factories, and relied on highly paid specialists alone to direct
tion of the Soviet model in the early 1950s, Mao beganto
them. To stimulate productive activity and monitor enterprise
warn of the dangers it posed to the revolutionary transforma-
performance, material incentives were widely promoted.
tion of the countryside. The growing gap between town and
The Soviet Union actively encouraged such develop-
country, he argued, was reinforcing ingrained habits of look-
ments. And China's relations with the socialist world after
ing down on those engaged in manual labor, especially peas-
1949 quite naturally entailed giving a priority to those areas
ants, an attitude that in turn nurtured bureaucratic and elitist
where cooperation was easiest and most meaningful: heavy
methods of leadership. And Mao feared that the growing reli-
industry, an educational system designed to train profession-
ance on industrial and technical development concentrated
als and technicians to administer the Soviet-style five-year
in the cities at the expense of pushing the social revolution in
plan; the spread of professionalization in the armed forces.
the countryside would exacerbate the very contradictions
Indeed, what was happening in the People's Liberation
that had to be overcome to transform China into an indus-
Army symbolizes what was happening throughout the urban
trialized,socialist society.
areas of China. With the adoption in February 1955 of the
In July 1955, Mao insisted that developments in the cities
"Regulations on the Service of Offi cers,," the Chinese ofi cer
and rural areas were intricately interrelated: "We must on no
corps acquired the trappings of a regular army. And in in-
account regard industry and agriculture, socialist indus-
troducing a system of ranks, titles, and widely divergent pay
trialization and the socialist transformation of agriculture as
scales for offi cers and enlisted personnel, the PLA was turn-
two separate and isolated things, and on no account must we
ing its back on the informal, egalitarian, and democratic
emphasize the one and play down the other." But not until
character which had been molded in years of revolutionary
April of 1956, in his speech "On the Ten Major Rela-
warfare.
tionships," did Mao directly challenge the Soviet model's reli-
=====第6页=====
12
Introduction
Introduction
13
ance on primitive accumulation at the expense of the peas-
ety could develop. The worker-peasant alliance would be
antry.
strengthened rather than torn apart by a sharp clash between
Mao sharply criticized the Soviet's "lopsided stress on
rural and urban interests. And by avoiding the imposition of a
heavy industry to the neglect of agriculture and light indus-
special burden on the peasants, a powerful, repressive state
try.'
."6 Calling for a reduction in the absolute priority given to
apparatus would not be needed to extract surplus production.
heavy industry, he argued that increased investment in light
With his speech "On the Ten Major Relationships,,as
industry and agriculture serves the daily needs of the people
Mao later said, we "made a start in proposing our own line for
while actually speeding up the accumulation of "capital" for
construction."9 Mao for the first time clearly rejected the idea
heavy industry. To implement this proposal, Mao urged local
of development through a privileged sector (heavy industry,
authorities to take greater initiative, criticizing the Soviet
and only later the other sectors) and distinct phases (first in
Union for "concentrating everything in the hands of central
material progress, only later in social relations and idology).
authorities, shackling the local authorities and denying them
The entire nation, he insisted, must undertake a massive
the right of independent action."7 Administrative costs had to
commitment to social, political, and economic unification
be cut, the staff of the national bureaucracies slashed by two-
that, like the methods used in the years in Yenan, would
thirds. Unified planning and discipline under a strong center
leave none behind and not benefit a few at the expense of the
were still essential, he insisted, but this was not the same as
many. In this pathbreaking analysis of the contradictions in
the domination of ministries administering a Soviet-style cen-
China, Mao firmly opposed any plans that would create new
tralization.
divisions in a nation already severely torn by imbalances be-
In this way, Mao went on to challenge the very basis of
tween the various regions, between various social classes and
the Soviet method of accumulation from the peasantry. The
groups, between the center and the regions, between the
Russians had made "grave mistakes' in handling the peas-
political and social spheres.
ants and taken measures which "squeeze the peasants very
A Theory of Productive Forces and
hard." Their methods of accumulation "had seriously damp-
ened the peasants' enthusiasm for production. You want the
the Dictatorship of the Proletariat
hen to lay more eggs and yet you don't feed it, you want the
While pointing out the dangers of blindly copying the Soviet
horse to run fast and yet you don't let it graze. What kind of
model of accumulation, Mao was also criticizing another,
logic is this?"8
closely associated aspect of that model, its theory of produc-
On no account, Mao was saying, would the Chinese fol-
tive forces. Essentially, this theory, as it was formulated in
low a development strategy for which the peasants had to pay
the Soviet Union during the years of Stalin's leadership,
the cost. Nor could China simply drain the surplus from
maintained that state ownership of the means of production,
the rural areas, as Stalin had done in the 193Os. Unlike
together with a rapid growth of the forces of production,
what both Soviet orthodoxy and bourgeois economists then
opens up the socialist road to communism. The dictatorship
claimed, the "capital' could not come from any preexisting
of the proletariat guides the development of the forces of pro-
source of surplus in the rural areas. For precious little "capi-
duction, while repressing the old ruling classes and defeating
tal" existed. Instead of taking the surplus from the rural
their inevitable counter-revolutionary attacks on the new
areas, therefore, Mao argued that the Chinese labor force, ag-
order.
ricultural and industrial alike, had to signifi cantly increase its
For the peasants and the workers, the dictatorship of the
productivity. In this way, a truly industrialized socialist soci-
=====第7页=====
14
Introduction
Introduction
15
proletariat is held to be a genuine democracy. The abolition
through the mass line and the development of new coopera-
of private property and other forms of class society is argued
tive work relationships. By changing the relations of produc-
to have ended all exploitation. Since exploitation is argued to
tion and encouraging the growth of new attitudes and ideas,
be impossible under such new conditions, the hierarchy,
rural productivity was increased. The party itself was only a
subordination, and disciplining of the workforce, even when
part of this process, not its master. For like the peasants, its
it appears to resemble sophisticated capitalist methods, is
members were molded through a process of continuous, step-
seen as merely the adaptation of rational patterns of work.
by-step transformation.
With the dying out of the old bourgeoisie and feudal rul-
Mao's strong advocacy of rapid collectivization in the
ing classes, the development of the forces of production and
years after Liberation was predicated upon this experience of
the continuous elevation of the standard of living of the
developing the productive forces through a step-by-step
masses, class struggle will diminish in intensity and eventu-
transformation of every aspect of rural life. Thus he criticized
ally disappear. Were it not for the international struggle with
the idea of "mechanization first, cooperation later on," argu-
ing instead that collectivization could and should precede
capitalism, the state itself would "wither away." Even though
mechanization of agriculture. Social transformation, followed
the state does remain as an apparatus to fight external ene-
and increasingly supported by technological changes, would
mies, the transition to communism can be worked out inter-
release the productive forces while decreasing polarization in
nally, dependent only on the development of the forces of
the countryside.
production.
Many leading party offi cials, influenced by the Soviet
In essence, the Stalinist theory of productive forces re-
model's reliance on the theory of primitive accumulation, op-
duced the concept of the capitalist mode of production to lit-
posed Mao's call for deepening the rural revolution in the
tle more than the system of private ownership of the means
early 195Os. Liu Shao-ch'i reportedly criticized as "utopian
of production. And consequently, once political power is
agrarian socialism" the attempt to promote cooperativization
seized and a system of public ownership of the means of pro-
before there was an adequate supply of agricultural tools and
duction instituted, no thought need be given to a thorough-
suffi cient mechanization. Nor was Liu alone in his doubts.
going socialist revolution on the political and ideological
Remembering what had happened in the Soviet Union, many
fronts. The creative role of the masses and mass campaigns
party leaders feared that accelerating collectivization in
are viewed as anachronistic; the struggle to refashion one's
China would lose them peasant support and disrupt their
worldview is ignored.
economic plans. As Mao commented in July 1955:
Mao's attack on this theory of productive forces grew out
of the lessons he had learned about revolutionary transforma-
some comrades have found in the history of the Communist
tion during the years of guerrilla warfare.10 The distinctive
Party of the Soviet Union grounds for criticizing what they call
features of the Yenan model are well known: self-reliance,
impetuosity and rashness in our present work of agricultural co-
decentralization, antagonism to bureaucratism and elitism,
operation ... but on no account should we allow these
collective aims and discipline, nonmaterial incentives, and
comrades to use the Soviet experience as a cover for their idea
of moving at a snaill's pace.11
the participation of the masses in all aspects of social and
economic activity. Development was comprehensive, de-
This debate was not just over the pace of collectivization,
signed to bring up all sectors, not just a chosen part.
however. Mao perceived that behind the opposition to his
Out of the struggles for revolutionary land reform, Mao
policies was a more fundamental opposition to continuing
argued, the peasants'political consciousness had been raised
=====第8页=====
16
Introduction
Introduction
17
class struggle and revolutionary methods of social transfor-
ergies on promoting the productive forces. This they did in a
mation. In June 1953 he warned party leaders that the transi-
way deeply marked by the Soviet model of development. For
tion period to socialism was "filled with contradiction and
by maintaining, as the Eighth Party Congress resolution
struggle. Our present revolutionary struggle is even more
stated, that "the essence of this contradiction [in socialist soci-
severe than past armed revolutionary struggle. This is a revo-
ety] is a contradiction between the advanced social system and
lution to bury once and for all capitalism and all exploitative
the backward social productive forces,"16 they turned their
systems.
"12
backs on the need for a simultaneous and interrelated social-
Yet rather than demonstrating an ability to lead such rev-
ist revolution on the political and ideological fronts. Revolu-
olutionary struggle, Mao saw numerous party leaders lagging
tionary struggle, they believed, would not unleash the pro-
behind the mass upsurge in the countryside.
ductive forces, but would only undermine the needed
Some of our comrades are tottering along like a woman with
stability for their rapid growth. Periods of acute class struggle
bound feet and constantly complaining, "You're going too fast."
were no longer essential to create the new cooperative organ-
Excessive criticism, inappropriate complaints, endless anxiety,
izations and attitudes favorable to economic growth. The
and the erection of countless taboos—they believe this is the
"advanced social system' already existed and needed only to
proper way to guide the socialist movement in the rural areas. 13
be consolidated.
In 1956 and 1957, Mao had himself argued that the tur-
If Mao saw the campaign for accelerating collectivization
bulent class struggles characteristic of previous revolutionary
as a testament to the mass line and the need for revolutionary
periods had in the main come to an end. But unlike other
struggle, many party offi cials argued that successful collec-
party leaders, he insisted that "the class struggle between
tivization set the stage for a new era in which such methods
the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, the class struggle be-
were no longer necessary. Thus even as they began to sup-
tween the different political forces, and the class struggle in
port Mao's position on primitive accumulation as expressed
the ideological field between the proletariat and the bourgeoi-
in "On the Ten Major Relationships,  Liu Shao-ch'i and
sie will continue to be long and tortuous and at times will
other party leaders concluded that China's collectivization
even become very acute."17 Thus he soon came to reject the
had progressed to a point where the development of the
Eighth Party Congress resolution that the contradiction in
productive forces required that "the principal method of
socialist society was between the "advanced social system"
struggle" could no longer be "to lead the masses in direct ac-
and the "backward social productive forces." Rather he ar-
tion."14 As Liu Shao-ch'i said at the Eighth Party Congress in
gued that
September 1956:
the basic contradictions in socialist society are still those be-
Now, however, the period of revolutionary storm and stress is
tween the relations of production and the productive forces, and
past, new relations of production have been set up, and the aim
between the superstructure and the economic base ...survi-
of our struggle is changed into one of safeguarding the success-
vals of bourgeois ideology, bureaucratic ways of doing things in
ful development of the productive forces of society, [and thus] a
our state organs, and flaws in certain links of our state institu-
corresponding change in the methods of struggle will conse-
tions stand in contrast to the economic base of sociallism.18
quently have to follow . . .15
There were thus serious weaknesses in the "advanced social
With the collectivization of agriculture and the public
system' which had to be struggled against. In essence, Mao
ownership of the means of production basically accomplished
insisted that only continued mass struggle could combat the
by 1956, Liu and others stressed the need to focus all en-
=====第9页=====
18
Introduction
Introduction
19
powerful hold of bourgeois ideology and bureaucratic ways of
doing things. The seizure of state power and the public own-
A Conception of the Communist Party
ership of the means of production, therefore, were insuf-
ficient for the building of socialism. By themselves, they
Mao's denunciation of such bureaucratic ways ran through-
could not consolidate the gains made. The mere growth of
the economic base could not automatically engender the very
out his entire revolutionary career. But with the seizure of
state power Mao faced questions for which he found no an-
attitudes and organizational forms necessary both to drive the
swers in Soviet revolutionary experience. How, for example,
revolution forward and unleash the productive forces of the
was the party to retain its intimate ties with the masses when
masses.
the tendency toward bureaucratic methods and elite privilege
In his critique, Mao spells out for his party colleagues
was so powerful? How was the revolution to be continued
what he saw as the long-term consequences of such an ex-
after state power was seized and the means of production
clusive emphasis on building up the economic base. As Mao
brought under public ownership?
notes, "in many ways(mainly production) the Soviets con-
Khrushchev's attack on Stalin in February 1956 point-
tinue to progress, but with respect to the production relations
edly raised such questions for Mao and other party leaders.
fundamentally they have ceased to progress."19 By resisting
Although the Chinese Communist Party sharply criticized
revolutionary social changes and not working to transform
Khrushchev's lack of a cogent theoretical perspective for eval-
the basic relations among people in production and society as
uating Stalin, at the same time the dangers of Stalinism
speedily as possible, the Soviets ensured that no qualitative
were not dismissed. In the first offi cial Chinese Communist
changes occurred at all. The relations of production were all
Party response in April 1956, the party strongly reaffirmed
but frozen. By excluding the creativity and initiative of the
the mass line and warned of the dangers of its neglect when
masses, the Soviets could not develop the new attitudes and
a communist party was in power:
organizational forms necessary for a socialist society and the
the personnel of the Party and the state, beset by bureaucratism
transition to communism.
from many sides, face the great danger of using the machinery
Indeed, at the heart of the Soviet theory of productive
of state to take arbitrary action, alienating themselves from the
forces, Mao argued, was a profound fear and distrust of the
masses and collective leadership, resorting to commandism,
masses and mass struggle. This was what the Soviet political
and violating Party and state democracy.20
economy text and Stalin's Economic Problems of Socialism
revealed in their preoccupation with the base at the expense
As Mao argued in "On the Correct Handling of Contra-
of the superstructure. For Mao, a host of closely related So-
dictions Among the People,," there are "contradictions be-
viet positions flowed from this preoccupation: disregard for
tween the government and the people in socialist coun-
the masses as the creators of history and a reliance on plan-
tries."21 By always talking about unity and consolidation, the
ners; preoccupation with technology and expertise; con-
Soviet Union was actually blocking the correct resolution of
the various contradictions in society, impeding the develop-
fidence in hierarchy and one-man management; reliance on
material incentives; and a total lack of interest in the trans-
ment of socialism. The real problems facing society remained
formation of an individual's worldview. The end result was
hidden. And a convenient ideological cover for bureaucratic
the growth of a powerful bureaucratic apparatus completely
domination was created.
But while various party leaders warned of the dangers of
alienated from the masses.
bureaucracy and spoke of the mass line, there were very pro-
=====第10页=====
20
Introduction
Introduction
21
nounced differences in how they understood them and the
There are no easy answers, no laws which can be simply ap-
role of the Communist Party. Liu Shao-ch'i was often labeled
plied. As he argues in the critique, years of arduous struggle
in the Chinese press during the Cultural Revolution as the
had been necessary before the correct methods emerged to
main ideological critic of Mao's views on the mass line. If so,
enable the Chinese revolutionaries to win the bourgeois-
he assuredly had significant support for his views; his posi-
democratic phase of the revolution. The building of socialism
tion in many ways followed the conception of the Communist
and communism would require an equally arduous struggle.
Party as it was enshrined in offi cial Soviet doctrine. For Liu,
Mao saw the masses as the real creators of history, those
the party, and only the party, could see what was necessary
from whom the Communist Party had to learn. Mistakes and
and could see to these necessary changes. To the masses, it
setbacks would emerge in any mass struggle; revolution is
would appear as a united, selfessly dedicated organization.
sometimes brutal and violent. But the creative breakthroughs
Purity of devotion and ideological orthodoxy were the ultimate
which lead to new cooperative methods and attitudes only
safeguards for the ability of the party to act correctly on behalf
come out of revolutionary struggle. This was how the soviets
of the masses. Only after its members had been taught "how
had emerged in the Russian Revolution, Mao maintained,
to be good communists" could the party effectively help the
and how the communes developed in China. Nor should one
masses to solve their problems. A selfless party elite should
fear failures. "People must go through practice to gain re-
thus be above external supervision; its mistakes could be
sults, meet with failures as problems arise; only through
satisfactorily rectified through intraparty channels. As Mao
such a process can knowledge gradually advance."24 Fail-
said in thefall of 1957, "Some seem to think that once in
ures, correctly analyzed, are often as illuminating as suc-
the Communist Party, people all become saints with no dif-
cesses. By studying those which occurred in the Great Leap
ferences or misunderstandings, and that the Party is not
Forward, for example, Mao sought to uncover the guidelines
subject to analysis, that is to say, it is monolithic and
within which consolidation of the communes could be ac-
uniform. ..
"22
complished.
At the heart of Mao's disagreement with Liu's orthodox
No leadership, in short, can create the new social forms
conception of the Communist Party was his insistence that the
and political and economic innovations out of its own heads,
party itself is only an instrument involved in, but not domi-
then apply them through administrative decree. New forms
nating, the dialectical process of continuous revolution.
and methods will emerge, Mao insisted, if cadres and the
Knowledge, he points out in the critique, is not first the ex-
masses are allowed to experiment, if they are mobilized and
clusive domain of the party elite. The party does not stand
encouraged by a party leadership willing to learn from their
outside the revolutionary process with foreknowledge of its
potential breakthroughs and capable of both shaping and
laws. "For people to know the laws they must go through a
being shaped in the process. As Mao said during the period of
accelerating collectivization in 1955: "Both cadres and peas-
process. The vanguard is no exception."2 Only through
ants will remold themselves in the course of the struggles they
practice can knowledge develop; only by immersing itself
themselves experience. Let them go into action and learn while
among the masses can the party lead the revolution.
Throughout the history of the Chinese Revolution, Mao
doing, and they will become more capable.
"25
Unlike Liu Shao-ch'i, therefore, Mao never saw ideologi-
criticized those who believed they knew exactly what had to
cal devotion and intraparty rectification movements as suf-
be done and relied on Marxism-Leninism as an abstract doc-
ficient to maintain the revolutionary role of the party. Only by
trine filled with ready-made answers. Revolution, Mao in-
being immersed in the masses, subject to their criticism, and
sisted, is an extraordinarily painful and diffi cult process.
=====第11页=====
22
Introduction
Introduction
23
sensitive to their needs could the party truly combat bureau-
tradictions between the economic base and the superstruc-
cracy, privilege, and elitism. And since for him the party did
ture. It always proceeds from general definitions and general
not stand above society, Mao came to see the contradictions
conceptions. It gives definitions without giving reasoned
within the party as intricately interwoven with those in the
explanations.
"29
society at large. In his editing of Socialist Upsurge in China's
Thus, Mao studies Stalin's Economic Problems of Social-
Countryside in 1955, Mao first mentioned the theme which
ism in order to think through specific practical and theoreti-
he was to raise in the critique and elaborate further in later
cal problems facing China, in this case the creation of the
years. There is a practice, he then warned, "prevalent almost
communes. With their creation as a new unit in society, anal-
to the point of being universal: right opportunists in the
ysis of how production and exchange should be carried out
party, working hand in glove with the forces of capitalism in
within and between communes and other units was a press-
society, are preventing the broad masses of poor and middle
ing necessity. Therefore, Mao's comments are largely focused
peasants from taking the road to the formation of coopera-
on the first three sections of Economic Problems of Socialism,
tives."26 This emphasis on rightists in the party linked to so-
those concerned with the character of economic laws, com-
cial forces was to undercut further the orthodox Soviet con-
modity production, and the law of value under socialism.
ception of the party and was used in the coming years as
What Mao finds useful in Stalin's writings is carefully sepa-
another reason for deepening the mass-line conception of
rated from what he concludes is unclear or inaccurate.
politics.
Mao argues that one of the most useful reasons for having
the cadres read Stalin's Economic Problems of Socialism is to
enable them to understand the ultra-left current (the "com-
munist wind") which had quickly spread over China with the
THE GREAT LEAP FORWARD
beginning of the commune movement. As Mao later said at
the Lushan Conference in July 1959, the cadres
Mao's writings in this volume can also be read as an analysis
of the Great Leap Forward. Here for the first time in his
had not studied political economy. They had not clearly under-
known writings, Mao is extensively exploring the process of
stood the laws of value, exchange of equal values, and remu-
uninterrupted revolution and the nature of the transition to
neration according to work done. ... If they have not under-
socialist and communist society.27 In so doing, he defends
stood the textbooks, let them study them some more. If the top
the Great Leap against unfounded attacks both from within
cadres in the communes do not understand a little political
and outside the party. At the same time, he is seeking to
economy, this won't do.30
elaborate the context within which the Great Leap's negative
To Mao, a better understanding of the economics of so-
features can be corrected and its positive aspects preserved.
cialism and the nature of the transition period would allow
These writings can be read for the fine insight they give
the cadres to cope with the problems arising in the Great
into the way Mao understood his own methods of study. He
Leap. In some areas, both cadres and peasants had been
does not start from rules, principles, Marxist laws, or as-
swept away by a desire to leap directly to the stage of com-
sumed defi nitions, "a methodology Marxism-Leninism has
munism rather than going through the many stages that Mao
always opposed."28 Only through concrete investigation can
argued were necessary to get there. The "strong tendency to
new principles be discovered. Indeed, one of his strongest
do away with commodity production' had to be countered
criticisms of Stalin and the Soviet political economy text is
and its role in socialist society correctly understood. "People
that "it does not proceed from concrete analysis of the con-
=====第12页=====
24
Introduction
25
Introduction
get upset the minute they see commodity production," Mao
political economy text, Mao concludes, does not satisfactorily
writes in his critique,"taking it for capitalism. But it looks as
cope with the "whole new series of problems" that have ap-
if commodity production will have to be greatly developed
peared with the period of socialism. It does not suggest how
and the money supply increased." And explaining this "poses
to move from one stage of the revolution to another, or the
a problem for the ideology of several hundred thousand
special characteristics of each stage. For example, he argues,
cadres as well as for the solidarity of several hundred million
it fails to consider how to advance the process of the trans-
peasants.
"31
formation of the small producers, what kinds of contradic-
In some areas of China, the cadres, in their impassioned
tions may be found in each stage of the transformation, and
desire to leap to communism, had simply seized the prop-
how they can be resolved. Indeed, the text speaks of "con-
erty of the production brigades and the teams. Were such
solidating fully" each and every stage. Rather than becoming
practices to go unchecked, Mao warned, the peasants would
a transient goal which is to be surpassed once it is partially
rise up and turn their wrath on the Communist Party itself.
achieved (and thus truly consolidated), the stage becomes an
Study of Stalin's Economic Problems of Socialism, because it
end in itself. In this way, Mao concludes, the Russians sim-
defends the survival of the commodity form into the socialist
ply repressed all consideration of a continuing revolutionary
period and discusses the principle of exchange of equal
process on the economic, political, and ideological fronts.
value, could help provide theoretical guidance against this
dangerous ultra-left current.
Mao's writings in this critique are transitional documents:
In his critique of the Soviet political economy text, Mao
they stand midway on the path to the Great Proletarian Cul-
further examined the lessons to be drawn from the Great
tural Revolution. As Mao's criticism of the Soviet model of
Leap. He studied the relationships that exist between the two
socialism deepened during the Great Leap, so did his con-
kinds of ownership of the means of production (socialist own-
viction that the transition to socialism was an arduous,
ership by the whole people and collective ownership, largely
protracted struggle that might take an entire historical epoch.
by the peasants) and compared them with those which ex-
Like Lenin, Mao became increasingly concerned with the ob-
isted in the Soviet Union. The abortive attempt to im-
stacles and difficulties in this transition. The drive toward so-
mediately make the commune rather than the production
cialism requires that every aspect of society undergo tremen-
team the basic accounting unit is examined. Questions of
dous change. In this critique, Mao writes of those forces
福
distribution of consumer goods are probed in terms of why
fighting tenaciously to resist such change, calling them "con-
the principle of "from each according to his ability, to each
servative forces" and "rightists." But Mao is still working out
according to his work" is still necessary during the stages of
the nature of such opposition and its relationship to the Com-
socialism. Mao, in brief, is working out the consequences of
munist Party; he is not stating it precisely. Nor is he saying
the use of the commodity system, exchange through money,
precisely what is meant by class struggle during the period of
and bourgeois right, particularly as they are reflected in the
socialist transition. Old bourgeois and feudal elements re-
three major differences: between workers and peasants, be-
main in Chinese society, but it is the hold of old values, ideas,
tween town and country,and between mental and manual
and habits of thought which increasingly concerns him.
labor.
These writings also demonstrate his efforts to challenge
Running through all his comments is the argument that
those in the party in positions of authority, the managers,
Soviet experience is in the final analysis utterly inadequate as
technicians, administrators, and other assorted experts who,
a positive model for China's drive to build socialism. The
compared to the workers and peasants, occupy positions of
=====第13页=====
26
Introduction
27
Introduction
financial reward and power. He finds the children of the
ace to these materials warns that they may not be fully accu-
cadres disappointing, too protected and with too many politi-
rate and complete. Yet even so, they are on the whole quite
cal airs. But the dangers to the revolution are still seen in
accurate and provide a remarkably valuable and detailed
心
terms of spreading bureaucratism rather than a question of
analysis of Stalin and the Soviet experience, the likes of
class. This is particularly evident in Mao's cautious explana-
which have never been publicly available in China.
tion of the bureaucratic nature of the Soviet Union and in his
Officially, the Chinese have for the most part defended
lack of a complete study of the material base of the
Stalin since Khrushchev's attack on him. "When Stalin was
bureaucracy's privilegedrole. Not until July 1964, in "On
criticized in 1956," Mao said, "we were on the one hand
_
Khrushchev's Phoney Communism and Its Historical Les-
happy, but on the other hand apprehensive. It was com-
sons for the World," did Mao state that "the contradiction
pletely necessary to remove the lid, to break down blind faith,
between the Soviet people and this privileged stratum is now
to release the pressure, and to emancipate thought. But we
the principal contradiction inside the Soviet Union and it is
did not agree with demolishing him at one blow."33
an irreconcilable and antagonistic class contradiction.
'32
Publicly, Stalin is seen as a "great Marxist-Leninist" who
The struggles with those in China who opposed the Great
inherited the cause of Lenin, led the Soviet people in achiev-
Leap Forward forced Mao to deepen the analysis of his
ing socialist industrialization, agricultural collectivization,
critics. Out of this attack on the Great Leap Forward, led first
and victory in the struggle against fascism. But he is ac-
by P'eng Teh-huai and continued by others in the coming
knowledged to have made serious mistakes. Over the last two
years, Mao was to elaborate his conception of "continuing
decades these have been said to include the following: de-
the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat." Not
parting from Marxist-Leninist dialectics in his understanding
until 1962, however, would  rightists within the party be la-
of the laws of class struggle in socialist society; failing to rec-
beled revisionists. And not until the Cultural Revolution
ognize that after the collectivization of agriculture antagonis-
would the conception of the "capitalist roader" be developed.
tic class struggle and the contradiction between the socialist
and capitalist roads would continue; failing to rely upon the
working class and the masses in the struggle against the
STALIN AND THE
forces of capitalism and reducing the threat of capitalist
restoration to one of armed attack from international im-
RUSSIAN REVOLUTION
perialism; seriously neglecting agriculture and peasant living
A Critique of Soviet Economics is quite suggestive for
standards and lopsidedly stressing heavy industry; lacking
reevaluating the Russian Revolution and the role of Stalin.
vigilance before the German attack on the Soviet Union; ex-
Although these pieces can usefully be read from this perspec-
cessively widening the scope of suppression of counter-
tive, they were not written by Mao as a historical study or
revolutionaries in the purges of the 1930s.
Mao's criticisms of Stalin in this book go to the very
even as a critical evaluation of the historic contribution of
heart of the methods used to industrialize the Soviet Union.
Stalin. Mao's real purpose was to think through problems fac-
Because of this, they provide an important Marxist analysis of
ing the Chinese Revolution in terms of the perspective of-
the Soviet Union which in the future may well be integrated
fered by a careful examination of aspects of the Soviet ex-
into official Chinese views, even as they should now contrib-
perience.
ute to a Marxist understanding of the Soviet Union which is
Although these writings were circulated for inner party
developing outside China.
discussion in China during the Cultural Revolution, they
have never been made offi cially available. The Chinese pref-
—James Peck
=====第14页=====
28
Introduction
29
Introduction
Notes
15. Ibid.
1. Mao Tsetung, "Talks at the Chengtu Conference, Talk of
16. "Resolution of the Eighth National Congress of the Communist
March 10, 1958," in Chairman Mao Talks to the People: Talks
Party of China," in Eighth National Congress of the Communist
and Letters, 1956-1971, ed. Stuart Schram (New York: Panth-
Party, p. 116.
eon, 1974), p. 102.
17. Mao Tsetung, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
2. Mao Tsetung, Selected Works of Mao Tsetung, vol. IV (Peking:
Among the People," in Selected Readings from the Works of
Foreign Languages Press, 1965), pp. 422 and 374.
Mao Tsetung, p. 463.
3. Mao Tsetung, A Critique of Soviet Economics, p. 122.
18. Ibid., pp. 443–44.
4. "Primitive socialist accumulation" was a phrase used by Evgeny
19. Mao Tsetung, A Critique of Soviet Economics, p. 101.
Preobrazhensky but it appropriately describes Stalin's policies.
20. Chinese Communist Party, The Historical Experience of the
See Paul Sweezy's use of the phrase and his analysis in "Theory
Dictatorship of the Proletariat (Peking: Foreign Languages
and Practice in the Mao Period,," Monthly Review 28, no. 9
Press, 1959).
(February 1977):1-12. Sweezy's explanation of the thery of
21. Mao Tsetung, "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions
productive forces in the Soviet Union has been drawn upon ex-
Among the People," p. 434.
tensively in this introduction.
22. Mao Tsetung, "A Dialectical Approach to Inner-Party Unity," in
5. Mao Tsetung, "On the Question of Agricultural Co-operation,"
Selected Works of Mao Tsetung, vol. V (Peking: Foreign Lan-
in Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tsetung (Peking:
guages Press, 1977), p. 515.
Foreign Languages Press, 1971), p. 406.
23. Mao Tsetung, A Critique of Soviet Economics, p. 73.
6. Mao Tsetung, "On the Ten Major Relationships," Peking Re-
24. Ibid., p. 2.
view 20,no. 1(January 1, 1977):11. Although various unof-
25. Mao Tsetung, "On the Question of Agricultural Co-operation,"
ficial versions of this speech have long been available, this ver-
p. 390.
sion is the first offi cially released one.
26. Mao Tsetung, Socialist Upsurge in China's Countryside (Pe-
7. Ibid., p. 16.
king: Foreign Languages Press, 1957), p. 159.
27. For a development of the theme of uninterrupted revolution see
8.Ibid., p. 15.
9. Mao Tsetung, "Talks at the Chengtu Conference," p. 101.
Victor Nee and James Peck, China's Uninterrupted Revolution
10. John G. Gurley, China's Economy and the Maoist Strategy
(New York: Pantheon, 1975).
28. Mao Tsetung, A Critique of Soviet Economics, pp. 73–74.
(New York: Monthly Review Press, 1976) provides a valuable
analysis of the formation of Mao's economic strategy from 1927
29. Ibid., p. 108.
to 1949.
30. Mao Tsetung, "Speech at the Lushan Conference,,"in Schram,
11. Mao Tsetung, "On the Question of Agricultural Co-operation,"
Chairman Mao Talks, pp. 135–36.
31. Mao Tsetung, A Critique of Soviet Economics, p. 140.
p. 407.
32. "On Khrushchev's Phoney Communism and Its Historical Les-
12. Mao Tsetung, "Refute Right Deviationist Views that Depart
sons for the World: Comment on the Open Letter of the Central
from the General Line," Selected Works of Mao Tsetung, vol. V
Committee of the CPSU(#9)" in Peking Review 7, no. 29(July
(Peking: Chinese Language Press, 1977). Translated from the
Chinese.
17, 1964).
33. Mao Tsetung, "Talks at Chengtu: On the Problem of Stalin," in
13. Mao Tsetung, "On the Question of Agricultural Co-operation,,"
p. 389.
Schram, Chairman Mao Talks, p. 101.
14. Liu Shao-chi, "The Political Report of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of China to the Eighth National Congress
of the Party,," in Eighth National Congress of the Communist
Party of China, vol. 1, Documents (Peking: Foreign Languages
Press, 1956), p. 82.
=====第15页=====
Notes on the Texts
31
Certain possible limitations to the translation of the Read-
ing Notes should be mentioned. The page references Mao cites
in making his critique are to the third Chinese edition of the
Soviet textbook, and no reference to the original Russian text
was made. We had no access to this Chinese edition so that
Mao's quotations from the original could not be checked
against their source and compared with the Russian.
Although a phonetic transliteration system, Pin-yin, is in-
creasingly widely used in China as the method of romanizing
Notes on the Texts
Chinese characters, we have used the modified Wade-Giles
system in the text because it is still the one recognized by
most Westerners. In both the Introduction and the Notes,
These writings by Mao Tsetung are part of a larger body of
however, we have included the new forms in parentheses for
materials, entitled Long Live the Thought of Mao Tsetung,
interested readers. For those names that appear in the text,
which appeared first in 1967 and again in an enlarged form
for which this procedure was too cumbersome, a representa-
in 1969. All three of the works translated here are in the
tive table of equivalents is provided below.
1969edition, and the first two are also in the 1967 edition.
Wade-Giles
Pin-yin
This means that there are two editions of the Reading Notes
Honan
Henan
on the Soviet Text Political Economy and the talk on
Hebei
Hopei
Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR.
Ch'engchou
Chengzhou
The two versions agree almost entirely, but there are a
Ch'engtu
Chengdu
few differences—some typographical, some substantive. The
Kuangtung
Guangdong
substantive ones are indicated in footnotes to the translation.1
Sinkiang
Xinjiang
Unless otherwise noted, the 1969 version is used when there
Ch'inghai
Qinghai
are minor stylistic differences between the two versions.
Fukien
Fujian
Mao's talk on Economic Problems of Socialism in the
Ninghsia
Ningxia
USSR was probably given at the Ch'engchou Conference in
Chihlo
Zhilo
November 1958, while his written critique was done in 1959.
Shaokuan
Shaoguan
The 1967 version of Long Live the Thought of Mao Tsetung
Chekiang
Zhejiang
gives the date of the Reading Notes as 1960; the 1969 edition
Hsiuwu
Xiuwu
gives 1961-1962. We believe that the date of the Reading
Notes is almost certainly 1960.
Finally, a comment on the making of A Critique of Soviet
The prefaces to these two collections warn that the mate-
Economics. Moss Roberts translated the texts, while Richard
rials are not for formal publication. Nothing more than specu-
Levy checked the translation and made many corrections.
lation exists as to who released the materials and with what
James Peck and Paul Sweezy read the translation and offered
intention. We believe the Chinese text we have used is a
additional suggestions. The introduction was written by
copy of the original version which probably left China
James Peck, but it owes much to the criticisms and sugges-
through Taiwan or Hong Kong conduits.
30
=====第16页=====
32
Notes on the Texts
tions of Richard Levy and Moss Roberts. The annotations
were written by Richard Levy and edited by James Peck and
Moss Roberts. Finally, those of us involved in this project
wish to give a special thanks to Karen Judd for her editorial
assistance, patience, and good cheer.
Reading Notes
on the Soviet Text
Notes
1. For an analysis of the substantive differences between the two
Political Economy
editions of Long Live the Thought of Mao Tsetung, the dating of
the writings translated here, and a study of the writings them-
(1961-1962)
selves, see Richard Levy, "New Light on Mao," The China
Quarterly 61 (1975).
PART I: CHAPTERS 20-23
1. From Capitalism to Socialism
The text says on pages 327-28 that socialism will "inevi-
tably" supersede capitalism and moreover will do so by "revo-
lutionary means." In the imperialist period clashes between
the productive forces and the production relations have be-
come sharper than ever. The proletarian socialist revolution
is an "objective necessity." Such statements are quite satis-
factory and should be made this way. "Objective necessity" is
quite all right and is agreeable to people. To call the revolu-
tion an objective necessity simply means that the direction it
takes does not hinge on the intentions of individuals. Like it
or not, come it will.
The proletariat will "organize all working people around
itself for the purpose of eliminating capitalism." (p. 327) Cor-
rect. But at this point one should go on to raise the question
of the seizure of power. "The proletarian revolution cannot
hope to come upon ready-made socialist economic forms."
"Components of a socialist economy cannot mature inside of
a capitalist economy based on private ownership." (p. 328)
Indeed, not only can they not "mature"; they cannot be born.
In capitalist societies a cooperative or state-run economy can-
not even be brought into being, to say nothing of maturing.
This is our main difference with the revisionists, who claim
33
=====第17页=====
34
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
35
that in capitalist societies such things as municipal public
velopment of the productive forces of China's socialism has
enterprises are actually socialist elements,and argue that
barely begun. Having gone through the Great Leap Forward
capitalism may peacefully grow over to socialism. This is a
of 1958-1959, we can look to 1960 as a year promising great
serious distortion of Marxism.
development of production.
2. The Transition Period
3. Universal and Particular Characteristics
of the Proletarian Revolution in Various
The book says, "The transition period begins with the es-
Countries
tablishment of proletarian political power and ends with the
fulfillment of the responsibility of the socialist revolu-
The book says, the October Revolution "planted the stan-
tion—the founding of socialism, communism's first stage."
dard," and that every country "has its own particular forms
(p. 328) One must study very carefully what stages, in the
and concrete methods for constructing socialism." This prop-
final analysis, are included in the transition period. Is only
osition is sound. In 1848 there was a Communist Manifesto.
the transition from capitalism to socialism included, or the
One hundred and ten years later there was another Commu-
transition from socialism to communism as well?
nist Manifesto, namely the Moscow Declaration made in
Here Marx is cited: from capitalism to communism there
1957 by various communist parties. This declaration ad-
is a "period of revolutionary transformation." We are pres-
dressed itself to the integration of universal laws and con-
ently in such a period. Within a certain number of years our
crete particulars.
To acknowledge the standard of the October Revolution is
people's communes will have to carry through the transfor-
to acknowledge that the "basic content' of the proletarian
mation from ownership by the basic team to ownership by
revolution of any country is the same. Precisely here we
the basic commune, and then into ownership by the whole
people.2 The transformation to basic commune ownership al-
stand opposed to the revisionists.
Why was it that the revolution succeeded first not in the
ready carried out by the people's communes remains collec-
nations of the West with a high level of capitalist productivity
tive ownership [and is not yet ownership by the whole peo-
and a numerous proletariat, but rather in the nations of the
ple].*
East, Russia and China for example, where the level of capi
In the transition period "all social relations must be fun-
talist productivity was comparatively low and the proletariat
damentally transformed." This proposition is correct in prin-
comparatively small? This question awaits study.
ciple. All social relations includes in its meaning the produc-
Why did the proletariat win its first victory in Russia? The
tion relations and the superstructure—economics, politics,
text says because "all the contradictions of imperialism came
ideology and culture, etc.
together in Russia. The history of revolution suggests that
In the transition period we must "enable the productive
the focal point of the revolution has been shifting from West
forces to gain the development they need to guarantee the
to East. At the end of the eighteenth century the focal point
victory of socialism." For China, broadly speaking, I would say
was in France, which became the center of the political life
we need 100-200 million tons of steel per year at the least.
of the world. In the mid-nineteenth century the focal point
Up to this year our main accomplishment has been to clear
shifted to Germany, where the proletariat stepped onto the
the way for the development of the productive forces. The de-
political stage, giving birth to Marxism. In the early years of
the twentieth century the focal point shifted to Russia, giving
*Bracketed material has been inserted for clarity by the translator.
=====第18页=====
36
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
37
birth to Leninism. Without this development of Marxism
comparatively high levelof capitalism; elsewhere the level
there would have been no victory for the Russian Revolution.
was comparatively low. And revolution has not broken out in
By the mid-twentieth century the focal point of world revolu-
any of the Western nations with a comparatively high level of
tion had shifted to China. Needless to say, the focal point is
development. Lenin had said, "The revolution first breaks out
bound to shift again in the future.
in the weak link of the imperialist world." At the time of the
Another reason for the victory of the Russian Revolution
October Revolution Russia was such a weak link. The same
was that broad masses of the peasantry served as an allied
was true for China after the October Revolution. Both Russia
force of the revolution. The text says, "The Russian proletar-
and China had a relatively numerous proletariat and a vast
iat formed an alliance with the poor* peasants." (p. 328–29,
peasantry, oppressed and suffering. And both were large
1967 edition) Among the peasants there are several strata,
states.. ..* But in these respects India was much the same.
and the poor peasant is the one the proletariat relied on.
The question is, why could not India consummate a revolu-
When a revolution begins the middle peasants always waver;
tion by breaking imperialism's weak link as Lenin and Stalin
they want to look things over and see whether the revolution
had described? Because India was an English colony, a col-
has any strength, whether it can maintain itself, whether it
ony belonging to a single imperialist state. Herein lies the dif-
will have advantages to offer. But the middle peasant will not
ference between India and China. China was a semicolony
shift over to the side of the proletariat until he has a compara-
under several imperialist governments. The Indian Commu-
tively clear picture. That is how the October Revolution was.
nist Party did not take an active part in its country's
And that is how it was for our own land reform, cooperatives,
bourgeois democratic revolution and did not make it possible
and people's communes.³
for the Indian proletariat to assume the leadership of the
Ideologically, politically, and organizationally the Bol-
democratic revolution. Nor, after independence, did the In-
shevik-Menshevik split prepared the way for the victory of
dian Communist Party persevere in the cause of the indepen-
the October Revolution. And without the Bolsheviks'struggle
dence of the Indian proletariat.
against the Mensheviks and the revisionism of the Second
The historical experience of China and Russia proves that
International, the October Revolution could never have
to win the revolution having a mature party is a most impor-
triumphed. Leninism was born and developed in the struggle
tant condition. In Russia the Bolsheviks took an active part in
the democratic revolution and proposed a program for the
against all forms of revisionism and opportunism. And with-
1905 revolution distinct from that of the bourgeoisie. It was a
out Leninism there would have been no victory for the Rus-
program that aimed to solve not only the question of
sian Revolution.
overthrowing the tsar, but also the question of how to wrest
The book says, "Proletarian revolution first succeeded in
leadership from the Constitutional Democratic Party in the
Russia, and prerevolutionary Russia had a level of capitalist
development suffi cient to enable the revolution to succeed."
struggle to overthrow the tsar.
At the time of the 1911 revolution China still had no com-
The victory of the proletarian revolution may not have to
munist party. After it was founded in 1921, the Chinese
come in a country with a high level of capitalist develop-
Communist Party immediately and energetically joined the
ment. The book is quite correct to quote Lenin. Down to the
democratic revolution and stood at its forefront. The golden
present time, of the countries where socialist revolution has
age of China's bourgeoisie, when their revolution had great
succeeded only East Germany and Czechoslovakia had a
* Ellipsis in original.
* Only in the 199 text.
=====第19页=====
38
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
39
vitality, was during the years 1905-1917. After the 1911 rev-
tries"? The main capitalist countries of Europe and North
olution the Nationalist Party was already declining. And y
America are armed to the teeth. Do you expect them to allow
1924 they had no alternative but to turn to the Communist
you to take power peacefully?
Party before they could make further headway. The proletar-
The communist party and the revolutionary forces of
iat had superseded the bourgeoisie. The proletarian political
every country must ready both hands, one for winning vic-
party superseded the bourgeois political party as the leader of
tory peacefully, one for taking power with violence. Neither
the democratic revolution. We have often said that in 1927
may be dispensed with. It is essential to realize that, con-
the Chinese Communist Party had not yet reached its matu-
sidering the general trend of things, the bourgeoisie has no
rity. Primarily this means that our party, during its years of
intention of relinquishing its political power. They will put up
alliance with the bourgeoisie, failed to see the possibility of
a fight for it, and if their very life should be at stake, why
the bourgeoisie betraying the revolution and, indeed, was ut-
should they not resort to force? In the October Revolution as
terly unprepared for it.
in our own, both hands were ready. Before July 1917 Lenin
Here (p. 331) the text goes on to express the view that
did consider using peaceful methods to win the victory, but
the reason why countries dominated by precapitalist eco-
the July incident demonstrated that it would no longer be
nomic forms could carry through a socialist revolution was
possible to transfer power to the proletariat peacefully. And
because of assistance from advanced socialist countries. This
not until he had reversed himself and carried out three
is an incomplete way of putting the matter. After the demo-
months' military preparation did he win the victory of the Oc-
tober Revolution. After the proletariat had seized political
cratic revolution succeeded in China we were able to take the
power in the course of the October Revolution Lenin re-
path of socialism mainly because we overthrew the rule of
mained inclined toward peaceful methods, using "redemp-
imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism. The in-
tion" to eliminate capitalism and put the socialist transforma-
ternal factors were the main ones. While the assistance we
tion into effect. But the bourgeoisie in collusion with fourteen
received from successful socialist countries was an important
imperialist powers launched counter-revolutionary armed up-
condition, it was not one which could settle the question of
risings and interventions. And so before the victory of the Oc-
whether or not we could take the road of socialism, but only
tober Revolution could be consolidated, three years of armed
one which could infuence our rate of advance after we had
struggle had to be waged under the leadership of the Russian
taken the road. With aid we could advance more quickly,
party.
without it less so. What we mean by assistance includes, in
addition to economic aid, our studious application of the posi-
5. From the Democratic Revolution to
tive and negative experiences of both the successes and the
the Socialist Revolution-Several Problems
failures of the assisting country.
At the end of page 330 the text takes up the transformation
4. The Question of "Peaceful Transition"
of the democratic revolution into the socialist revolution but
does not clearly explain how the transformation is effected.
The book says on page 330, "In certain capitalist countries
The October Revolution was a socialist revolution which con-
and former colonial countries, for the working class to take
comitantly fulfilled tasks left over from the bourgeois demo-
political power through peaceful parliamentary means is a
cratic revolution. Immediately after the victory of the October
practical possibility." Tell me, which are these "certain coun-
=====第20页=====
40
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
41
Revolution the nationalization of land was proclaimed. But
"the proletarian dictatorship does not use violence purely and
bringing the democratic revolution to a conclusion on the
simply in dealing with the exploiter and may even not use it
land question was yet to take a period of time.
primarily."
During the War of Liberation China solved the tasksof
When its life is at stake the exploiting class always resorts
the democratic revolution. The founding of the People's Re-
to force. Indeed, no sooner do they see the revolution start up
public of China in 1949 marked the basic conclusion of the
than they suppress it with force. The text says, "Historical
democratic revolution and the beginning of the transition to
experience proves that the exploiting class is utterly unwill-
socialism. It took another three years to conclude the land
ing to cede political power to the people and uses armed force
reform, but at the time the Republic was founded we imme-
to oppose the people's political power." This is not a complete
diately expropriated the bureaucratic capitalist enterprises—
way of stating the matter. It is not only after the people have
80 percent of the fixed assets of our industry and trans-
organized revolutionary political power that the exploiting
port—and converted them to ownership by the whole people.
class will oppose it with force, but even at the very moment
During the War of Liberation we raised antibureaucratic
when the people rise up to seize political power, the ex-
capitalist slogans as well as anti-imperialist and antifeudal
ploiters promptly use violence to suppress the revolutionary
ones. The struggle against bureaucratic capitalism had a two-
people.
sided character: it had a democratic revolutionary character
The purpose of our revolution is to develop the society's
insofar as it amounted to opposition to compradore capital-
forces of production. Toward this end we must first over-
ism,4 but it had a socialist character insofar as it amounted to
throw the enemy. Second we must suppress its resistance.
opposition to the big bourgeoisie.
How could we do this without the revolutionary violence of
After the war of resistance was won, the Nationalist Party
the people?
[KMT] took over a very large portion of bureaucratic capital
Here the book turns to the "substance" of the proletarian
from Japan and Germany and Italy. The ratio of bureaucratic
dictatorship and the primary responsibilities of the working
to national [i.e., Chinese] capital was 8 to 2. After liberation
class and laboring people in general in the socialist revolu-
we expropriated all bureaucratic capital, thus eliminating the
tion. But the discussion is incomplete as it leaves out the
major components of Chinese capitalism.
5
suppression of the enemy as well as the remolding of classes.
But it would be wrong to think that after the liberation of
Landlords, bureaucrats, counter-revolutionaries, and un-
the whole country "the revolution in its earliest stages had
desirable elements have to be remolded; the same holds true
only in the main the character of a bourgeois democratic rev-
for the capitalist class, the upper stratum of the petit
olution and not until later would it gradually develop into a
bourgeoisie, and the middle* peasants. Our experience shows
that remolding is diffi cult. Those who do not undergo persis-
socialist revolution." [No page reference]
tent repeated struggle can not be properly remolded. To elim-
6. Violence and the Proletarian
inate thoroughly any remaining strength of the bourgeoisie
Dictatorship
and any influence they may have will take one or two de-
cades at the least and may even require half a century. In the
rural areas, where basic commune ownership has been put
On page 333 the text could be more precise in its use of the
into effect, private ownership has been transformed into state
concept of violence. Marx and Engels always said that "the
state is by definition an instrument of violence employed to
* Only in the 1969 text.
suppress the opposing class." And so it can never be said that
=====第21页=====
42
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
43
ownership. The entire country abounds with new cities and
government was set up on the foundation of the North China
new major industry. Transportation and communications for
People's Government. All members of the various depart-
the entire country have been modernized. Truly, the eco-
ments were from the base areas, and the majority of the
nomic situation has been completely changed, and for the
mainstay cadres were Communist Party members.
first time the peasants' worldview is bound to be turned
around completely step by step. (Here in speaking of "pri-
8. Transforming Capitalist Industry
mary responsibilities" the book uses Lenin's words differently
and Commerce
from his original intention.)
To write or speak in an effort to suit the tastes of the
On page 335 there is an incorrect explanation of the process
enemy, the imperialists, is to defraud the masses and as a
by which capitalist ownership changed into state ownership
result to comfort the enemy while keeping one's own class in
in China. The book only explains our policy toward national
ignorance.
capital but not our policy toward bureaucratic capital (expro-
priation). In order to convert the property of the bureaucratic
7. The Form of the Proletarian State
capitalist to public ownership we chose the method of expro-
priation.
On page 334 the book says, "the proletarian state can take
In paragraph 2 of page 335 the experience of passing
various forms.' True enough, but there is not much dif-
through the state capitalist form in order to transform capital-
ference essentially between the proletarian dictatorship in
ism is treated as a singular and special experience; its univer-
the people's democracies and the one established in Russia
sal significance is denied. The countries of Western Europe
after the October Revolution. Also, the soviets of the Soviet
and the United States have a very high level of capitalist de-
Union and our own people's congresses were both represen-
velopment, and the controlling positions are held by a minor-
tative assemblies, different in name only. In China the peo-
ity of monopoly capitalists. But there are a great number of
ple's congresses included those participating as represen-
small and middle capitalists as well. Thus it is said that
tatives of the bourgeoisie, representatives who had split off
American capital is concentrated but also widely distributed.
from the Nationalist Party, and representatives who
After a successful revolution in these countries monopoly
were prominent democratic figures. All of them accepted the
capital will undoubtedly have to be expropriated, but will the
leadership of the Chinese Communist Party. One group
small and middle capitalists likewise be uniformly expropri-
among these tried to stir up trouble, but failed. Such an
ated? It may well be the case that some form of state capital-
inclusive form may appear different from the soviet, but it
ism will have to be adopted to transform them.
Our northeast provinces may be thought of as a region
should be remembered that after the October Revolution the
with a high level of capitalist development. The same is true
soviets included representatives of the Menshevik rightist
for Kiangsu (with centers in Shanghai and the southern part
Social Revolutionary Party, a Trotskyite faction, a Bukharin
of the province). If state capitalism could work in these areas,
faction, a Zinoviev faction, and so forth. Nominally represen-
tell me why the same policy could not work in other coun-
tatives of the workers and peasants, they were virtual repre-
tries which resemble these provincial sectors?
sentatives of the bourgeoisie. The period after the October
The method the Japanese used when they held our north-
Revolution was a time when the proletariat accepted a large
east provinces was to eliminate the major local capitalists and
number of personnel from the Kerensky government—all of
turn their enterprises into Japanese state-managed, or in
whom were bourgeois elements. Our own central people's
=====第22页=====
44
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
45
some cases monopoly capitalist enterprises. For the small and
nuclei, to promote the voicing of grievances, and to organize
middle capitalists they established subsidiary companies as a
the class ranks—all for the purpose of unfolding the class
means of imposing control.
struggle.
Our transformation of national capital passed through
The text says "the middle peasants became the principal
three stages: private manufacture on state order, unified gov-
figures in the villages." This is an unsatisfactory assertion. To
ernment purchase and sale of private output, joint state-
proclaim the middle peasants as the principals, commending
private operation (of individual units and of whole com-
them to the gods, never daring to offend them, is bound to
plexes). Each phase was carried out in a methodical way.
make former poor peasants feel as if they had been put in the
This prevented any damage to production, which actually de-
shade. Inevitably this opens the way for middle peasants of
veloped as the transformation progressed. We have gained
means to assume rural leadership.
much new experience with state capitalism; for one example,
The book makes no analysis of the middle peasant. We
the providing of capitalists with fixed interest after the joint
distinguish between upper and lower middle peasants and
state-private operation phase.7
further between old and new within those categories, regard-
ing the new as slightly preferable. Experience in campaign
9. Middle Peasants
after campaign has shown that the poor peasant, the new
lower middle peasant, and the old lower middle peasant have
After land reform, land was not worth money and the peas-
a comparatively good political attitude. They are the ones
ants were afraid to "show themselves." There were comrades
who embrace the people's communes. Among the upper mid-
who at one time considered this situation unsatisfactory, but
dle peasants and the prosperous middle peasants there is a
group that supports the communes as well as one that op-
what happened was that in the course of class struggles
which disgraced landlords and rich peasants, the peasantry
poses them. According to materials from Hopei province the
came to view poverty as dignified and wealth as shameful.
total number of production teams there comes to more than
This was a welcome sign, one which showed that the poor
forty thousand, 50 percent of which embrace the communes
peasants had politically overturned the rich peasants and es-
without reservation, 35 percent of which basically accept
tablished their dominance in the villages.
them but with objections or doubts on particular questions,
On page 339 it says that the land taken from the rich
15 percent of which oppose or have serious reservations
about the communes. The opposition of this last group is due
peasants and given to the poor and middle peasants was land
to the fact that the leadership of the teams fell to prosperous
the government had expropriated and then parceled out. This
middle peasants or even undesirable elements. During this
looks at the matter as a grant by royal favor, forgetting that
process of education in the struggle between the two roads, if
class struggles and mass mobilizations had been set in mo-
the debate is to develop among these teams, their leadership
tion, a right deviationist point of view. Our approach was to
will have to change. Clearly, then, the analysis of the middle
rely on the poor peasants, to unite with the majority of mid-
peasant must be pursued. For the matter of whose hands
dle peasants (lower middle peasants) and seize the land from
hold rural leadership has tremendous bearing on the direc-
the landlord class. While the party did play a leading role, it
tion of developments there.
was against doing everything itself and thus substituting for
On page 340 the book says, "Essentially the middle peas-
the masses. Indeed, its concrete practice was to "pay call on
ant has a twofold character." This question also requires con-
the poor to learn of their grievances," to identify activist ele-
crete analysis. The poor, lower middle, upper middle, and
ments, to strike roots and pull things together, to consolidate
=====第23页=====
46
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
47
prosperous middle peasants in one sense are all workers, but
and that further into state ownership. When state ownership
in another they are private owners. As private owners their
and mechanization are integrated we will be able to begin
points of view are respectively dissimilar. Poor and lower mid-
truly to consolidate the worker-peasant alliance, and the dif-
dle peasants may be described as semiprivate owners whose
ferences between workers and peasants will surely be elimin-
point of view is comparatively easily altered. By contrast, the
ated step by step.
private owner's point of view held by the upper middle and
11. The Transformation of Intellectuals
the prosperous peasants has greater substance, and they
have consistently resisted cooperativization.
Page 341 is devoted exclusively to the problem of fostering
10. The Worker-Peasant Alliance
the development of intellectuals who are the workers' and
peasants' own, as well as the problem of involving bourgeois
The third and fourth paragraphs on page 340 are concerned
intellectuals in socialist construction. However, the text fails
with the importance of the worker-peasant alliance but fail to
to deal with the transformation of intellectuals. Not only the
go into what must be done before the alliance can be devel-
bourgeois intellectuals but even those of worker or peasant
oped and consolidated. The text, again, deals with the need
origin need to engage in transformation because they have
of the peasants to press forward with the transformation of
come under the manifold influence of the bourgeoisie. Liu
the small producers but fails to consider how to advance the
Shao-t'ang, of artistic and literary circles, who, after becom-
process, what kinds of contradictions may be found at each
ing an author, became a major opponent of socialism, ex-
stage of the transformation, and how they may be resolved.
emplifies this. Intellectuals usually express their general out-
And, the text does not discuss the measures and tactics for
look through their way of looking at knowledge. Is it privately
owned or publicly owned? Some regard it as their own prop-
the entire process.
Our worker-peasant alliance has already passed through
erty, for sale when the price is right and not otherwise. Such
are mere "experts" and not "reds"9 who say the party is an
two stages. The first was based on the land revolution, the
"outsider' and "cannot lead the insiders." Those involved in
second on the cooperative movement. If cooperativization
had not been set in motion the peasantry inevitably would
the cinema claim that the party cannot lead the cinema.
Those involved in musicals or ballet claim that the party can-
have been polarized, and the worker-peasant alliance could
not offer leadership there. Those in atomic science say the
not have been consolidated. In consequence, the policy of
same. In sum, what they are all saying is that the party can-
"unified government purchase and sale of private output" 8
not lead anywhere. Remolding of the intellectuals is an ex-
could not have been persevered in. The reason is that that
tremely important question for the entire period of socialist
policy could be maintained and made to work thoroughly
revolution and construction. Of course it would be wrong to
only on the basis of cooperativization. At the present time our
minimize this question or to adopt a concessive attitude to-
worker-peasant alliance has to take the next step and es-
ward things bourgeois.
tablish itself on the basis of mechanization. For to have sim-
Again on page 34l it says that the fundamental contra-
ply the cooperative and commune movements without mech-
diction in the transition economy is the one between capital-
anization would once again mean that the alliance could not
ism and socialism. Correct. But this passage speaks only of
be consolidated. We still have to develop the cooperatives into
setting struggles in motion to see who will emerge the victor
people's communes. We still have to develop basic ownership
in all realms of economic life. None of this is complete. We
by the commune team into basic ownership by the commune
=====第24页=====
48
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
49
would put it as follows: a thoroughgoing socialist revolution
even though there was neither civil war nor armed interven-
must advance along the three fronts of politics, economics,
tion from abroad." It is also argued that "socialist transforma-
and ideology.
tion in these countries was realized without the ordeal of civil
The text says that we absorb bourgeois elements so that
war." It would have been better to say that what happened in
they may participate in the management of enterprises and
these countries is that a civil war was waged in the form of
the state. This is repeated on page 357.* But we insist on the
international war, that civil and international war were
responsibility for remolding the bourgeois elements. We help
waged together. The reactionaries of these countries were
them change their lifestyle, their general outlook, and also
ploughed under by the Soviet Red Army. To say that there
their viewpoint on particular issues. The text, however,
was no civil war in these countries would be mere formalism
makes no mention of remolding.
that disregards substance.
The text says that in the countries of Eastern Europe
12. The Relationship Between
after the revolution 'parliaments became the organs for
Industrialization and Agricultural
broadly representing the people's interests." In fact, these
Collectivization
parliaments were completely different from the bourgeois
parliaments of old, bearing resemblance in name only. The
The book sees socialist industrialization as the precondition
Political Consultative Conference we had during the early
for agricultural collectivization. This view in no way corre-
phase of Liberation was no different in name from the Politi-
sponds to the situation in the Soviet Union itself, where col-
cal Consultative Conference of the Nationalist period. During
lectivization was basically realized between 1930 and 1932.
our negotiations with the Nationalists we were indifferent to
Though they had then more tractors than we do now,still
the conference but Chiang Kai-shek was very interested in it.
and all the amount of arable land under mechanized cultiva-
After Liberation we took over their singboard and called into
tion was under 20.3 percent. Collectivization is not altogether
session a nationwide Chinese People's Political Consultative
determined by mechanization, and so industrialization is not
Conference, which served as a provisional people's con-
the precondition for it.
gress.10
Agricultural collectivization in the socialist countries of
The text says that China "in the process of revolutionary
Eastern Europe was completed very slowly, mainly because
struggle organized a people's democratic united front."(p.
after land reform, they did not strike while the iron was hot
357)Why only "revolutionary struggle” and not "revolu-
but delayed for a time. In some of our own old base areas,
tionary war?" From 1927 down to the nationwide victory we
waged twenty-two years of long-term uninterrupted war. And
too, a section of the peasantry was satisfied with the reform
even before that, starting with the bourgeois revolution of
and unwilling to proceed further. This situation did not de-
1911, there was another fifteen years'warfare. The chaotic
pend at all on whether or not there was industrialization.
wars of the warlords under the direction of imperialists
should also be counted. Thus, from 1911 down to the War to
13. War and Revolution
Resist America and Aid Korea, it may be said that continual
wars were waged in China for forty years—revolutionary war-
On pages 352-54 it is argued that the various people's
fare and counter-revolutionary warfare. And, since its found-
democracies of Eastern Europe "were able to build socialism
ing, our party has joined or led wars for thirty years.
A great revolution must go through a civil war. This is a
*Page 341, according to the 1967 text.
=====第25页=====
50
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
51
rule. And to see the ills of war but not its benefits is a one-
sided view.It is of no use to the people's revolution to speak
15. Is Large-Scale Industry the Foundation
onesidedly of the destructiveness of war.
of Socialist Transformation?
14.Is Revolution Harder in Backward
On page 364* the text says, "Countries that have taken the
Countries?
road of socialist construction face the task of eliminating as
quickly as possible the aftereffects of capitalist rule in order
In the various nations of the West there is a great obstacle to
to accelerate the development of large industry (the basis
carrying through any revolution and construction movement;
for the socialist transformation of the economy)." It is not
i.e., the poisons of the bourgeoisie are so powerful that they
enough to assert that the development of large industry is the
have penetrated each and every corner. While our bourgeoisie
foundation for the socialist transformation of the economy.
has had, after all, only three generations, those of England
All revolutionary history shows that the full development of
and France have had a 250-300 year history of development,
new productive forces is not the prerequisite for the transfor-
and their ideology and modus operandi have influenced all
mation of backward production relations. Our revolution
aspects and strata of their societies. Thus the English work-
began with Marxist-Leninist propaganda, which served to
ing class follows the Labour Party, not the Communist Party.
create new public opinion in favor of the revolution. More-
Lenin says, "The transition from capitalism to socialism
over, it was possible to destroy the old production relations
will be more difficult for a country the more backward it is."
only after we had overthrown a backward superstructure in
This would seem incorrect today. Actually, the transition is
the course of revolution. After the old production relations
less difficult the more backward an economy is, for the
had been destroyed new ones were created, and these cleared
the way for the development of new social productive forces.
poorer they are the more the people want revolution. In the
With that behind us we were able to set in motion the tech-
capitalist countries of the West the number of people em-
nological revolution to develop social productive forces on a
ployed is comparatively high, and so is the wage level. Work-
large scale. At the same time, we still had to continue trans-
ers there have been deeply influenced by the bourgeoisie, and
forming the production relations and ideology.
it would not appear to be all that easy to carry through a so-
This textbook addresses itself only to material precondi-
cialist transformation. And since the degree of mechanization
tions and seldom engages the question of the superstructure,
is high, the major problem after a successful revolution
i.e., the class nature of the state, philosophy, and science. In
would not be advancing mechanization but transforming the
economics the main object of study is the production rela-
people. Countries of the East, such as China and Russia, had
tions. All the same, political economy and the materialist his-
been backward and poor, but now not only have their social
torical outlook are close cousins. It is diffi cult to deal clearly
systems moved well ahead of those of the West, but even the
with problems of the economic base and the production rela-
rate of development of their productive forces far outstrips
tions if the question of the superstructure is neglected.
that of the West. Again, as in the history of the development
of the capitalist countries, the backward overtake the ad-
vanced as America overtook England, and as Germany later
overtook England early in the twentieth century.
* Page 349, according to the 1967 text.
=====第26页=====
52
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
53
16. Lenin's Discussion of the Unique
whether or not the socialist system itself can attain the high
Features of Taking the Socialist Road
rate. This is onesided. If there is only the need and not the
capability, tell me, how is the high rate to be achieved? 12
On page 375 a passage from Lenin is cited. It is well ex-
18.Achieve a High Rate of
pressed and quite helpful for defending our work methods.
Industrialization by Concurrent Promotion
"The level of consciousness of the residents, together with
of Small, Medium, and Large Enterprise
the efforts they have made to realize this or that pan, are
bound to be refected in the unique features of the road they
On page 381 the text touches on our broad development of
take toward socialism." Our own "politics in command"is
small- and medium-scale enterprise but fails to reflect ac-
precisely for raising the consciousness in our neighborhoods.
curately our philosophy of concurrent promotion of native
Our own Great Leap Forward is precisely an "effort to realize
and foreign, small, medium, and large enterprise. The text
this or that plan."
says we "determined upon extensive development of small-
and medium-scale enterprises because of the utter backward-
17. The Rate of Industrialization Is
ness of our technological economy, the size of our popula-
a Critical Problem
tions and very serious employment problems." But the prob-
lem by no means lies in technological age, population size, or
The text says, "As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, the
the need to increase employment. Under the guidance of the
rate of industrialization is a critical problem." At present this
larger enterprises we are developing the small and the me-
is a critical problem for China, too. As a matter of fact, the
dium; under the guidance of the foreign we are adopting na-
problem becomes more acute the more backward industry is.
tive methods wherever we can—mainly for the sake of
This is true not only from country to country but also from
achieving the high rate of industrialization.
one area to another in the same country. For example, our
northeastern provinces and Shanghai have a comparatively
19.Is Long-Term Coexistence Between
strong base, and so state investment increased somewhat less
Two Types of Socialist Ownership Possible?
rapidly there. In other areas, where the original industrial
base was slight, and development was urgently needed, state
On page 386 it says, "A socialist state and socialist construc-
investment increased quite rapidly. In the ten years that
tion can not be established on two different bases for any
Shanghai has been liberated 2.2 billion Chinese dollars11
length of time. That is to say, they can not be established on
have been invested, over 500 million by capitalists. Shanghai
the base of socialist industry, the largest and most unified
used to have over half a million workers, now the city has
base, and on the base of the peasant petty commodity econ-
over 1 million, if we do not count the hundreds of thousands
omy, which is scattered and backward." This point is well
transferred out. This is only double the earlier worker popula-
taken, of course, and we therefore extend the logic to reach
tion. When we compare this with certain new cities where
the following conclusion: The socialist state and socialist con-
the work force has increased enormously we can see plainly
struction cannot be established for any great length of time
that in areas with a deficient industrial base the problem of
on the basis of ownership by the whole people and ownership
by the collective as two different bases of ownership.
rate is all the more critical. Here the text only says that politi-
In the Soviet Union the period of coexistence between the
cal circumstances demand the high rate and does not explain
=====第27页=====
55
54
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
two types of ownership has lasted too long. The contra-
dictions between ownership of the whole people and collec-
20. The Socialist Transformation of
tive ownership are in reality contradictions between workers
Agriculture Cannot Depend Only on
and peasants.The text fails to recognize such contradition.
Mechanization
In the same way prolonged coexistence of ownership by
the whole people with ownership by the collectives is bound
Page 392 states, "The machine and tractor stations are impor-
to become less and less adaptable to the development of the
tant tools for carrying through the socialist transformation in
productive forces and will fail to satisfy the ever increasing
agriculture." Again and again the text emphasizes how im-
needs of peasant consumption and agricultural production or
portant machinery is for the transformation. But if the con-
of industry for raw materials. To satisfy such needs we must
sciousness of the peasantry is not raised, if ideology is not
resolve the contradiction between these two forms of owner-
transformed, and you are depending on nothing but ma-
ship, transform ownership by the collectives into ownership
chinery—what good will it be? The question of the struggle
by the whole people, and make a unified plan for production
between the two roads, socialism and capitalism, the trans-
and distribution in industry and agriculture on the basis of
formation and re-education of people—these are the major
ownership by the whole people for an indivisible nation.
questions for China.
The contradictions between the productive forces and the
The text on page 395 says that in carrying through the
tasks of the early stages of general collectivization the ques-
production relations unfold without interruption. Relations
tion of the struggle against hostile rich peasants comes up.
that once were adapted to the productive forces will no longer
This of course is correct. But in the account the text gives of
be so after a period of time. In China, after we finished
rural conditions after the formation of cooperatives the ques-
organizing the advanced cooperatives, the question of having
tion of a prosperous stratum is dropped, nor is there any
both large and small units came up in every special district
mention of such contradictions as those between the state,
and in every county.
In socialist society the formal categories of distribution ac-
the collectives, and individuals, between accumulation and
cording to labor, commodity production, the law of value, and
consumption,1³ and so forth.
Page 402 says, "Under conditions of high tide in the agri-
so forth are presently adapted to the demands of the produc-
cultural cooperative movement the broad masses of the mid-
tive forces. But as this development proceeds, the day is sure
dle peasantry will not waver again." This is too general.
to come when these formal categories will no longer be
There is a section of rich middle peasants that is now waver-
adapted. At that time these categories will be destroyed by
ing and will do so in the future.
the development of the productive forces; their life will be
over. Are we to believe that in a socialist society there are
21. So-Called Full Consolidation
economic categories that are eternal and unchanging? Are
we to believe that such categories as distribution according to
“
.. fully consolidated the collective farm system," it says
labor and collective ownership are eternal—unlike all other
on page 407. "Full consolidation"—a phrase to make one un-
categories, which are historical [hence relative]?
easy. The consolidation of anything is relative. How can it be
"full"? What if no one died since the beginning of mankind,
and everyone got "fully consolidated"? What kind of a world
would that be! In the universe, on our globe, all things come
=====第28页=====
56
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
57
into being, develop, and pass away ceaselessly. None of them
rior changes even though the exterior and the size do not. A
is ever "fully consolidated." Take the life of a silkworm. Not
company of soldiers is no different. After it has fought a bat-
only must it pass away in the end, it must pass through four
tle and lost dozens of men, a hundred-soldier company will
stages of development during its lifetime: egg, silkworm,
have to replace its casualties. Fighting and replenishing con-
pupa, moth. It must move on from one stage to the next and
tinuously—this is how the company goes through uninter-
can never fully consolidate itself in any one stage. In the end,
rupted partial qualitative change. As a result the company
the moth dies, and its old essence becomes a new essence (as
continues to develop and harden itself
it leaves behind many eggs). This is a qualitative leap. Of
The crushing of Chiang Kai-shek was a qualitative
course, from egg to worm, from worm to pupa, from pupa to
change which came about through quantitative change. For
moth clearly are more than guantitative changes. There is
example, there had to be a three-and-a-half-year period dur-
qualitative transformation too, but it is partial qualitative
ing which his army and political power were destroyed a sec-
transformation. A person, too, in the process of moving
tion at a time. And, within this quantitative change qualita-
through life toward death, experiences different stages:
tive change is to be found. The War of Liberation went
childhood, adolescence, youth, adulthood and old age. From
through several different stages, and each new stage differed
life to death is a quantitative process for people, but at the
qualitatively from the preceding stages. The transformation
same time they are pushing forward the process of partial
from individual to collective economy was a process of quali-
qualitative change. It would be absurd to think that from
tative transformation. In our country this process consisted of
youth to old age is but a quantitative increase without quali-
mutual aid teams, early-stage cooperatives, advanced cooper-
tative change. Inside the human organism cells are cease-
atives, and people's communes.14 Such different stages of
lessly dividing, old ones dying and vanishing, new ones
partial qualitative change brought a collective economy out of
emerging and growing. At death there is a complete qualita-
an individual economy.
tive change, one that has come about through the preceding
The present socialist economy in our country is organized
quantitative changes as well as the partial qualitative
through two different forms of public ownership, ownership
changes that occur during the quantitative changes. Quanti-
by the whole people and collective ownership. This socialist
tative change and qualitative change are a unity of opposites.
economy has had its own birth and development. Who would
Within the quantitative changes there are partial qualitative
believe that this process of change has come to an end, and
changes. One cannot say that there are no qualitative
that we will say, "These two forms of ownership will continue
to be fully consolidated for all time?" Who would believe that
changes within quantitative changes. And within qualitative
such formulas of a socialist society as "distribution according
changes there are quantitative changes. One cannot say that
to labor," "commodity production,," and "the law of value" are
there are no quantitative changes within qualitative changes.
going to live forever? Who would believe that there is only
In any lengthy process of change, before entering the
birth and development but no dying away and transformation
final qualitative change, the subject must pass through unin-
and that these formulas unlike all others are ahistorical?
terrupted quantitative changes and a good many partial qual-
Socialism must make the transition to communism. At
itative changes. But the final qualitative change cannot come
that time there will be things of the socialist stage that will
about unless there are partial qualitative changes and consid-
have to die out. And, too, in the period of communism there
erable quantitative change. For example, a factory of a given
will still be uninterrupted development. It is quite possible
plant and size changes qualitatively as the machinery and
that communism will have to pass through a number of dif-
other installations are renovated a section at a time. The inte-
=====第29页=====
58
Mao Tsetung
59
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
ferent stages. How can we say that once communism has
ily. The text uses the term steadily or without interruption a
been reached nothing will change, that everything will con-
good many times, but only to speak of quantitative transfor-
tinue "fully consolidated,”that there will be quantitative
mation. There is litle mention of partial qualitative change.
change only, and no partial qualitative change going on all
the time.
22. War and Peace
The way things develop, one stage leads on to another, ad-
vancing without interruption. But each and every stage has a
On page 408 it says that in capitalist societies "a crisis of
"boundary." Every day we read from, say, four o'clock and
surplus production will inevitably be created, causing unem-
end at seven or eight. That is the boundary. As far as socialist
ployment to increase." This is the gestation of war. It is dif-
ideological remolding goes, it is a long-term task. But each
ficult to believe that the basic principles of Marxist eco-
ideological campaign reaches its conclusion, that is to say,
nomics are suddenly without effect, that in a world where
has a boundary. On the ideological front, when we will have
capitalist institutions still exist war can be fully eliminated.
come through uninterrupted quantitative changes and partial
Can it be said that the possibility of eliminating war for
qualitative changes, the day will arrive when we will be com-
good has now arisen? Can it be said that the possibility of
pletely free of the influence of capitalist ideology. At that time
plying all the world's wealth and resources to the serviceof
the qualitative changes of ideological remolding will have
mankind has arisen? This view is not Marxism, it has no
ended, but only to be followed by the quantitative changes of
class analysis, and it has not distinguished clearly between
a new quality.
conditions under bourgeois and proletarian rule. If you do not
The construction of socialism also has its boundary. We
eliminate classes, how can you eliminate war?
have to keep tabs: for example, what is to be the ratio of in-
We will not be the ones to determine whether a world war
dustrial goods to total production, how much steel is to be
will be waged or not. Even if a nonbelligerency agreement is
produced, how high can the people's living standard be
signed, the possibility of war will still exist. When imperial-
raised, etc.? But to say that socialist construction has a
ism wants to fight no agreement is going to be taken into ac-
boundary hardly means that we do not want to take the next
count. And, if it comes, whether atomic or hydrogen weapons
step, to make the transition to communism. It is possible to
will be used is yet another question. Even though chemical
divide the transition from capitalism to communism into two
weapons exist, they have not been used in time of war; con-
stages: one from capitalism to socialism, which could be
ventional weapons were used after all. Even if there is no war
called underdeveloped socialism; and one from socialism to
between the two camps, there is no guarantee war will not be
communism, that is, from comparatively underdeveloped so-
waged within the capitalist world. Imperialism may make
cialism to comparatively developed socialism, namely, com-
war on imperialism. The bourgeoisie of one imperialist
munism. This latter stage may take even longer than the
country may make war on its proletariat. Imperialism is even
first. But once it has been passed through, material produc-
now waging war against colony and semicolony. War is one
tion and spiritual prosperity will be most ample. People's
form of class conflict. But classes will not be eliminated ex-
communist consciousness will be greatly raised, and they will
cept through war. And war cannot be eliminated for good ex-
be ready to enter the highest stage of communism.
cept through the elimination of classes. If revolutionary war
On page 409 it says that after the forms of socialist pro-
is not carried on, classes cannot be eliminated. We do not
duction have been firmly established, production will steadily
believe that the weapons of war can be eliminated without
and rapidly expand. The rate of productivity will climb stead-
destroying classes. It is not possible. In the history of class
=====第30页=====
09
Mao Tsetung
61
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
societies any class or state is concerned with its "position of
through movement. In the era of socialism, contradictions
strength." Gaining such positions has been history's inevita-
remain the motive force of social development. Precisely be-
ble tendency. Armed force is the concrete manifestation of
cause there is no unanimity there is the responsibility for
the real strength of a class. And as long as there is class an-
unity, the necessity to fight for it. If there were 100 percent
tagonism there will be armed forces. Naturally, we are not
unanimity always, then what explains the necessity for per-
wishing for war. We wish for peace. We favor making the ut-
severing in working for unity?
most effort to stop nuclear war and to strive for a mutual
24. Rights of Labor Under Socialism
nonaggression pact between the two camps. To strive to gain
even ten or twenty years' peace was what we advocated long
ago. If we can realize this wish, it would be most beneficial
On page 414 we find a discussion of the rights labor enjoys
for the entire socialist camp and for China's socialist con-
but no discussion of labor's right to run the state, the various
struction as well
enterprises, education, and culture. Actually, this is labor's
On page 409 it says that at this time the Soviet Union is
greatest right under socialism, the most fundamental right,
no longer encircled by capitalism. This manner of speaking
without which there is no right to work, to an education, to
runs the risk of lulling people to sleep. Of course the present
vacation, etc.
situation has changed greatly from when there was only one
The paramount issue for socialist democracy is:Does
socialist country. West of the Soviet Union there are now the
labor have the right to subdue the various antagonistic forces
various socialist countries of Eastern Europe. East of the So-
and their influences? For example, who controls things like
viet Union are the socialist countries of China, Korea,
the newspapers, journals, broadcast stations, the cinema?
Mongolia, and Vietnam. But the guided missiles have no eyes
Who criticizes? These are a part of the question of rights. If
and can strike targets thousands or tens of thousands of kilo-
these things are in the hands of right opportunists (who are a
meters away. All around the socialist camp American military
minority) then the vast nationwide majority that urgently
bases are deployed, pointed toward the Soviet Union and the
needs a great leap forward will find itself deprived of these
other socialist countries. Can it be said that the Soviet Union
rights. If the cinema is in the hands of people like Chung
is no longer inside the ring of missiles?
Tien-p'ei,1 how are the people supposed to realize their own
rights in that sector? There is a variety of factions among the
23.Is Unanimity the Motive Force of
people. Who is in control of the organs and enterprises bears
Social Development?
tremendously on the issue of guaranteeing the people's
rights. If Marxist-Leninists are in control, the rights of the
On page 413 and 417 it says that socialism makes for the
vast majority will be guaranteed. If rightists or right oppor-
"solidarity of unanimity' and is "hard as a rock." It says that
tunists are in control, these organs and enterprises may
unanimity is the "motive force of social development."
change qualitatively, and the people's rights with respect to
This recognizes only the unanimity of solidarity but not
them cannot be guaranteed. In sum, the people must have
the contradictions within a socialist society, nor that contra-
the right to manage the superstructure. We must not take
the rights of the people to mean that the state is to be man-
diction is the motive force of social development. Once it is
aged by only a section of the people, that the people can
put this way, the law of the universality of contradiction is
enjoy labor rights, education rights, social insurance, etc.,
denied, the laws of dialectics are suspended. Without contra-
only under the management of certain people.
dictions there is no movement, and society always develops
=====第31页=====
62
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
63
problems with "vested interest groups" which have grown
25. Is the Transition to Communism a
content with existing institutions and unwilling to change
Revolution?
them. For example, if the rule of distribution according to
labor is in effect they benefit from higher pay for more work,
On page 417 it says, "Under socialism there will be no class
and when it came time to change over to "distribution ac-
or social group whose interests conflict with communism and
cording to need' they could very well be uncomfortable with
therefore the transition to communism will come about with-
the new situation. Building any new system always necessi-
out social revolution.
1
tates some destruction of old ones. Creation never comes
The transition to communism certainly is not a mater of
without destruction. If destruction is necessary it is bound to
one class overthrowing another. But that does not mean
arouse some opposition. The human animal is queer indeed.
there will be no social revolution, because the superseding of
No sooner do people gain some superiority than they assume
one kind of production relations by another is a qualitative
airs . . . it would be dangerous to ignore this.
leap, i.e., a revolution. The two transformations—of individual
26. The Claim That"for China There Is
economy to collective, and collective economy to public—in
China are bothrevolutions in the production relations. Soto
No Necessity to Adopt Acute Forms of
go from socialism's "distribution according to labor" to com-
Class Struggle"
nunism's "distribution according to need" has to be called a
evolution in the production relations. Of course, "distribu-
There is an error on page 419. After the October Revolution
ion according to need' has to be brought about gradually.
Russia's bourgeoisie saw that the country's economy had suf-
fered severe damage, and so they decided that the proletariat
erhaps when the principal material goods can be adequately
could not change the situation and lacked the strength to
upplied we can begin to carry out such distribution with
maintain its political power. They judged that they only had
hose goods, extending the practice to other goods on the
to make the move and proletarian political power could be
asis of further development of the productive forces.
overthrown. At this point they carried out armed resistance,
Consider the development of our people's communes.
thus compelling the Russian proletariat to take drastic steps
Vhenwechanged from basic ownership by the team to basic
to expropriate their property. At that time neither class had
wnership by the commune, was a section of the people
ikely to raise objections or not? This is a question well worth
much experience.
To say that China's class struggle is not acute is unrealis-
ur study. A determinative condition for realizing this
tic. It was fierce enough! We fought for twenty-two years
hangeover was that the commune-owned economy's income
straight. By waging war we overthrew the rule of the
vasmore than half of thewhole commune's total income. To
bourgeoisie's Nationalist Party, and expropriated bureau-
ealize the basic commune-ownership system is generally of
cratic capital, which amounted to 80 percent of our entire
enefit to the members of the commune. Thus we estimate
capitalist economy. Only thus was it possible for us to use
hat there should be no objection on the part of the vast ma-
peaceful methods to remold the remaining 20 percent of
ority. But atthe time of changeover the original team cadres
national capital. In the remolding process we still had to go
ould no longer be relatively reduced under the circum-
through such fierce struggles as the "three-antis' and the
tances. Would they object to the changeover?
"five-antis" campaigns.16
Although classes may be eliminated in a socialist society,
Page 420 incorrectly describes the remolding of bourgeois
n the course of its development there are bound to be certain
=====第32页=====
64
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
65
industrial and commercial enterprises. After Liberation the
national bourgeoisie was forced to take the road of social-
27. The Time Period for Building Socialism
ist remolding. We brought down Chiang Kai-shek, ex-
propriated bureaucratic capital, concluded the land reform,
On page 423 it says that we "concluded" the socialist revolu-
carried out the "three-antis" and "five-antis" campaigns, and
tion on the political andideological fronts in 1957.19 We
made the cooperatives a working reality. We controlled the
would rather say that we won a decisive victory.
markets from the beginning. This series of transformations
On the same page it says that we want to turn China into
forced the national bourgeoisie to accept remolding step by
a strong socialist country within ten to fifteen years. Now this
step. From yet another point of view, the Common Program
is something we agree on! This means that after the second
stipulated that various kinds of economic interests were to be
five-year plan we will have to go through another two five-
given scope. This enabled the capitalists to try for what
year plans until 1972 (or 1969 if we strive to beat the sched-
profits they could. In addition, the constitution gave them the
ule by two or three years). In addition to modernizing in-
right to a ballot and a living. These things helped the
dustry and agriculture, science and culture, we have to mod-
bourgeoisie to realize that by accepting remolding they could
ernize national defense. In a country such as ours bringing
hold onto a social position and also play a certain role in the
the building of socialism to its conclusion is a tremendously
culture and in the economy.
difficult task. In socialist construction we must not speak of
In joint state-private enterprises the capitalists have no
"early."
real managerial rights over the enterprise. Production is cer-
tainly not jointly managed by the capitalists and represen-
28. Further Discussion of the Relationship
tatives of the public. Nor can it be said that "Capital's exploi-
Between Industrialization and Socialist
tation of labor has been limited. It has been virtually
Transformation
curtailed. The text seems to have missed the idea that the
jointly operated enterprises we are speaking of were 75 per-
On page 423 it says that reform of the system of ownership
cent socialist. Of course at present they are 90 percent social-
long before the realization of industrialization was a circum-
ist or more.
stance created by special conditions in China. This is an
The remolding of capitalist industry and commerce has
error. Eastern Europe, like China, "benefited from the exis-
been basically concluded. But if the capitalists had the
tence of the mighty socialist camp and the help of an indus-
chance they would attack us without restraint. In 1957 we
trialized country as developed as the Soviet Union." The
pushed back the onslaught of the right.17 In 1959, through
question is, what was the reason Eastern European countries
their representatives in the party, they again set in motion an
could not complete the socialist transformation in the owner-
attack against us.18 Our policy toward the national capitalists
ship system (including agriculture) before industrialization
is to take them along with us and then to encompass them.
became a reality?* Turning to the relationship between in-
The text uses Lenin's statement that state capitalism
"continues the class struggle in another form." This is cor-
*Cf. Chapter 28, paragraph 1, of the 1967 edition:
rect. (p. 421)
Page 423 says, "Given the special conditions in China, before socialist in-
dustrialization became a reality, it was thanks to the existence of the mighty
socialist camp and the help of a powerful, highly developed industrial nation
like the Soviet Union that the reform of the ownership system (including ag-
riculture) achieved victory." This is an error. The countries of Eastern
=====第33页=====
66
Mao Tsetung
67
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
dustrialization and socialist transformation,the truth is that
revolution and the proletarian revolution there are certain dif-
in the Soviet Union itself the problem of ownership was set-
ferences (before the proletarian revolution socialist produc-
tled before industrialization became a reality.
tion relations did not exist, while capitalist production rela-
Similarly, from the standpoint of world history, the
tions were already beginning to grow in feudal society),
bourgeois revolutions and the establishment of the bourgeois
basically they are alike.
nations came before, not after, the Industrial Revolution. The
bourgeoisie first changed the superstructure and took posses-
sion of the machinery of state before carrying on propaganda
PART II: CHAPTERS 24-29
to gather real strength. Only then did they push forward
29. Contradictions Between Socialist
great changes in the production relations. When the produc-
tion relations had been taken care of and they were on the
Production Relations and Productive Forces
right track they then opened the way for the development of
the productive forces. To be sure, the revolution in the pro-
Page 433 discusses only the "mutual function" of the produc-
duction relations is brought on by a certain degree of devel-
tion relations and the productive forces under socialism but
opment of the productive forces, but the major development
not the contradictions between them. The production rela-
of the productive forces always comes after changes in the
tions include ownership of the means of production, the rela-
production relations. Consider the history of the development
tions among people in the course of production, and the dis-
of capitalism. First came simple coordination, which sub-
tribution system. The revolution in the system of ownership
sequently developed into workshop handicrafts. At this time
is the base, so to speak. For example, after the entire national
capitalist production relations were already taking shape, but
economy has become indivisibly owned by the whole people
the workshops produced without machines. This type of capi-
through the transition from collective to people's ownership,
talist production relations gave rise to the need for technolog-
although people's ownership will certainly be in effect for a
ical advance, creating the conditions for the use of ma-
relatively long time, for all enterprises so owned important
chinery. In England the Industrial Revolution late
problems will remain. Should a central-local division of au-
eighteenth-early nineteenth centuries) was carried through
thority be in effect? Which enterprises should be managed by
only after the bourgeois revolution, that is, after the seven-
whom? In 1958 in some basic construction units a system of
teenth century. All in their respective ways, Germany,
fixed responsibility for capital investment was put into effect.
France, America, and Japan underwent change in super-
The result was a tremendous release of enthusiasm in these
structure and production relations before the vast develop-
units. When the center cannot depend on its own initiative it
must release the enthusiasm of the enterprise or the locality.
ment of capitalist industry.
If such enthusiasm is frustrated it hurts production.
It is a general rule that you cannot solve the problem of
We see then that contradictions to be resolved remain in
ownership and go on to expand development of the produc-
the production relations under people's ownership. As far as
tive forces until you have first prepared public opinion for the
relations among people in the course of labor and the dis-
seizure of political power. Although between the bourgeois
tribution relations go, it is all the more necessary to improve
them unremittingly. For these areas it is rather difficult to
Europe no less than China "had the existence of the powerful socialist camp
say what the base is. Much remains to be written about
and the help of as highly developed an industrial nation as the Soviet
human relations in the course of labor, e.g., concerning the
Union." Why could they not complete socialist transformation in the owner-
leadership's adopting egalitarian attitudes, the changing of
ship system (including agriculture) before industrialization became a reality?
=====第34页=====
68
69
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
certain regulations and established practices, "the two partic-
communes has changed into ownership by the whole people,
ipations" [worker participation in management and manage-
the whole nation will become an indivisible system of owner-
ment participation in productive labor], "the three combina-
ship by the whole people. This will greatly spur the develop-
tions”[combining efforts of cadres, workers, and techni-
ment of the productive forces. For a period of time this will
cians], etc. Public ownership of primitive communes lasted
remain a socialist system of ownership by the whole people,
a long time, but during that time people's relations to each
and only after another period will it be a communist system
other underwent a good many changes, all the same, in the
of ownership by the whole people. Thus, people's ownership
course of labor.
itself will have to progress from distribution according to
labor to distribution according to need.
30. The Transition from Collective to
People's Ownership Is Inevitable
31. Individual Property
On page 435 the text says only that the existence of two
On page 439 it says, "Another part is consumer goods. .
forms of public ownership is objectively inevitable, but not
which make up the personal property of the workers." This
that the transition from collective to people's ownership is
manner of expression tends to make people think that goods
also objectively inevitable. This is an inescapable objective
classified as "consumer" are to be distributed to the workers
process, one presently in evidence in certain areas of our
as their individual property. This is incorrect. One part of
country. According to data from Cheng An county in Hopei
consumer goods is individual property, another is public
province, communes growing industrial crops are thriving,
property, e.g., cultural and educational facilities, hospitals,
accumulation levels have been raised to 45 percent,20 and the
athletic facilities, parks, etc. Moreover, this part is increasing.
peasants' living standard is high. Should this situation con-
Of course they are for each worker to enjoy, but they are not
tinue to develop, if we do not let collective ownership become
individual property.
people's ownership and resolve the contradiction, peasant liv-
On page 440 we find lumped together work income and
ing standards will surpass those of the workers to the detri-
savings, housing, household goods, goods for individual con-
ment of both industrial and agricultural development.
sumption, and other ordinary equipment. This is unsatisfac-
On page 438 it says that "state-managed enterprises are
tory because savings, housing, etc. are all derived from work-
not fundamentally different from cooperatives. ... there
ing people's incomes.
exist two forms of public ownership. ... sacred and in-
In too many places this book speaks only of individual
violable." There is no difference between collective and peo-
consumption and not of social consumption, such as public
ple's ownership with reference to capitalism, but the dif-
welfare, culture, health, etc. This is onesided. Housing in our
rural areas is far from what it should be. We must improve
ference becomes fundamental within the socialist economy.
rural dwelling conditions in an orderly fashion.* Residential
The text speaks of the two forms of ownership as "sacred and
inviolable." This is allowable when speaking of hostile forces,
construction, particularly in cities, should in the main use
collective social forces, not individual ones. If a socialist soci-
but when speaking of the process of development of public
ety does not undertake collective efforts what kind of social-
ownership it becomes wrong. Nothing can be regarded as
ism is there in the end? Some say that socialism is more con-
unchanging. Ownership by the whole people itself also has a
process of change.
After a good many years, after ownership by the people's
*Only in the 1969 text.
=====第35页=====
70
Mao Tsetung
71
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
cerned with material incentives than capitalism. Such talk is
Most dubious is the viewpoint in the next paragrah. It
simply outrageous.
says, "The contradictions under socialism are not irrecon-
Here the text says that the wealth produced by collective
cilable." This does not agree with the laws of dialectics,
farms includes individual property as well as subsidiary oc-
which hold that all contradictions are irreconcilable. Where
cupations. If we fail to propose transforming these subsidiary
has there ever been a reconcilable contradiction? Some are
occupations into public ownership, the peasants will be peas-
antagonistic, some are nonantagonistic, but it must not be
ants forever. A given social system must be consolidated in a
thought that there are irreconcilable and reconcilable contra-
given period of time. But consolidation must have a limit. If it
dictions.
goes on and on, the ideology reflecting the system is bound to
Under socialism* there may be no war but there is stil
become rigidified, causing the people to be unable to adjust
struggle, struggle among sections of the people; there may be
their thinking to new developments.
no revolution of one class overthrowing another, but there is
On the same page there is mention of integrating individ-
still revolution. The transition from socialism to communism
ual and collective interests. It says, "Integration is realized by
is revolutionary. The transition from one stage of commu-
the following method: a member of society is compensated
nism to another is also. Then there is technological revolu-
according to the quantity and quality of his labor so as to sat-
tion and cultural revolution. Communism will surely have to
isfy the principle of individual material interest." Here, with-
pass through many stages and many revolutions.
out discussion of the necessary reservations, the text places
Here the text speaks of relying on the "positive action" of
individual interest first. This is onesided treatment of the
the masses to overcome contradictions at the proper time.
principle of individual material interest.
"Positive action' should include complicated struggles.
According to page 441, "Public and individual interests
"Under socialism there is no class energetically plotting to
are not at odds and can be gradually resolved." This is spoken
preserve outmoded economic relations." Correct, but in a so-
in vain and solves nothing. In a country like ours, if the con-
cialist society there are still conservative strata and some-
tradictions among the people are not put to rights every few
thing like "vested interest groups." There still remain dif-
years, they will never get resolved.
ferences between mental and manual labor, city and
countryside, worker and peasant. Although these are not an-
32.Contradiction Is the Motive Force of
tagonistic contradictions they cannot be resolved without
Development in a Socialist Society
struggle.
The children of our cadres are a cause of discouragement.
Page 443, paragraph 5, admits that in a socialist society con-
They lack experience of life and of society, yet their airs are
tradictions between the productive forces and the production
considerable and they have a great sense of superiority. They
relations exist and speaks of overcoming such contradictions.
have to be educated not to rely on their parents or martyrs of
But by no means does the text recognize that contradictions
the past but entirely on themselves.
are the motive force.
In a socialist society there are always advanced and back-
The succeeding paragraph is acceptable; however, under
ward persons, those who are steadfastly loyal to the collective
socialism it is not only certain aspects of human relations and
effort, diligent and sincere, fresh of spirit and lively, and
certain forms of leading the economy, but also problems of
the ownership system itself (e.g., the two types of ownership)
*The transcriber of the 1967 text comments that Mao may have meant
that may hinder the development of the productive forces.
"under communism."
=====第36页=====
72
Mao Tsetung
73
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
those who are acting for fame and fortune, for the personal
It is not easy "to possess and apply these laws fully and
end, for the self, or who are apathetic and dejected. In the
consciously." On page 446 the text quotes Engels. "Only at
course of socialist development each and every period is
this time does the fully conscious self begin to create history.
bound to have a group that is more than willing to preserve
For the first time to a great extent and to an ever greater ex-
backward production relations and social institutions. On
tent people can create the effects they aspire after." "Begin
many many questions the prosperous middle peasants have
to" and "to an ever greater extent" are relatively accurate.
their own point of view. They cannot adapt to new develop-
The text does not recognize the contradictions between
ments, and some of them resist such developments, as
appearances and essences. Essences always lie behind ap-
proved by the debate over the Eight-Word Constitution21
pearances and cannot be disclosed except through appear-
with the prosperous peasants of the Kuangtung rural areas.
ances. The text does not express the idea that for a person to
Page 453, the last paragraph, says, "Criticism and self-
know the laws it is necessary to go through a process. The
criticism are powerful motive forces for the development of
vanguard is no exception.
socialist society." This is not the point. Contradictions are the
motive forces, criticism and self-criticism are the methods for
34. Unions and the Single Leadership System
resolving contradictions.
On page 452 when speaking of the mission of trade unions,
33. The Dialectical Process of Knowledge
the text does not say that the primary task of the unions is to
develop production; it does not discuss ways to strengthen
Page 446, paragraph 2, says that as ownership becomes pub-
political education; it merely overemphasizes welfare.
lic "people become the masters of the economic relations of
Throughout, the text speaks of "managing production ac-
their own society,"and are "able to take hold of and apply
cording to the principle of the single-leader system." All en-
these laws fully and consciously." It should be observed that
terprises in capitalist countries put this principle into effect.
this requires going through a process. The understanding of
There should be a basic distinction between the principles
laws always begins with the understanding of a minority be-
governing management of socialist and capitalist enterprises.
fore it becomes the knowledge of the majority. It is necessary
We in China have been able to distinguish our methods
to go through a process of practice and study to go from igno-
strictly from capitalist management by putting into effect fac-
rance to knowledge. At the beginning no one has knowledge.
tory leader responsibility under the guidance of the party.
Foreknowledge has never existed. People must go through
35. Starting from Fundamental Principles
practice to gain results, meet with failure as problems arise;
only through such a process can knowledge gradually ad-
and Rules Is Not the Marxist Method
vance. If you want to know the objective laws of the develop-
ment of things and events you must go through the process
From the second chapter on a great many rules are set up.
of practice, adopt a Marxist-Leninist attitude, compare suc-
The analysis of capitalist economy in Das Kapital com-
cesses and failures, continually practicing and studying,
mences with appearances, searches out essences, and only
then uses the essence to explain the appearance, making
going through multiple successes and failures; moreover, me-
ticulous research must be performed. There is no other way
through this method effective summaries and outlines. But
the text does not pursue an analysis. Its composition lacks
to make one's own knowledge gradually conform to the laws.
order. It always proceeds from rules, principles, laws, defini-
For those who see only victory but not defeat it will not be
tions, a methodology Marxism-Leninism has always opposed.
possible to know these laws.
=====第37页=====
74
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
75
The effects of principles and laws must be subjected to analy-
sis and thorough study; only then can principles and laws be
37. Planning
derived. Human knowledge always encounters appearances
first. Proceeding from there, one searches out principles and
Page 465 quotes Engels as saying, "Under socialism it will
laws. The text does the opposite. Its methodology is deduc-
become possible to carry out social production according to a
tive, not analytical. According to formal logic, "People all will
predetermined plan." This is correct. In capitalist society
die. Mr. Chang is a person. Therefore Mr. Chang will die."
equilibrium of the national economy is achieved through eco-
This is a conclusion derived from the premise that all human
nomic crises. In socialist society there is the possibility of
beings die. This is the deductive method. For every question
making equilibrium a reality through planning. But let us not
the text first gives definitions, which it then takes as a major
deny, because of this possibility, that knowledge of the
premise and reasons from there, failing to understand that
required proportions must come through a process. Here the
the major premise should be the result of researching a ques-
text says, "Spontaneity and laissez faire are incompatible
tion. Not until one has gone through the concrete research
with public ownership of the means of production." It should
can principles and laws be discovered and proved.
not be thought, however, that spontaneity and laissez faire
do not exist in a socialist society. Our knowledge of the laws
36. Can Advanced Experience Be Popularized
is not perfect all at once. Actual work tells us that in a given
Effortlessly?
period of time there is such and such a plan by such and
such people, or by a different group. No one can say that one
Page 461, paragraph 2, says, "In a socialist national economy
particular group's plan conforms to the laws. Surely, some
science's latest achievements, technical inventions, and ad-
plans will accord or basically accord, while others will not or
vanced experience can be popularized in all enterprises with-
basically will not.
out the slightest diffi culty." This is far from necessarily so. In
To think that knowledge of the proportions does not
a socialist society there are still "academic overlords" who
require a process—comparison between successes and fail-
control the organs of scientific research and repress new for-
ures, a tortuous course of development—is a metaphysical
ces. This is why science's latest achievements are not simply
point of view. Freedom is the recognition of necessity, but
popularized without the slightest diffi culty. Such a manner of
necessity is not perceived in a glance. The world has no natu-
speaking essentially fails to recognize that there are contra-
ral sages, nor upon attaining a socialist society does everyone
dictions within a socialist society. Whenever something new
become prescient. Why was not this text on political econ-
appears it is bound to meet with obstacles, perhaps because
omy published at some earlier time? Why has it been revised
people are unaccustomed to it or do not understand it, or
time and again after its publication? And after all, is not the
because it confl icts with the interests of a particular group.
reason for this that knowledge was imperfect in the past and
For example, our practices of close planting and deep furrow-
even now remains so? Take our own experiences—at the
ing have no class nature in and of themselves, yet they have
beginning we did not understand how to make socialism
been opposed and resisted by a particular group. Of course,
work; gradually, through practice, we came to understand a
little, but not enough. If we think it is enough then nothing
in a socialist society such inhibiting conditions are fun-
damentally different from those in a capitalist society.
willbelefttodo!
On page 466 it says that an outstanding feature of social-
ism is "the conscious regular maintaining of due proportion."
=====第38页=====
76
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
77
This is both a responsibility and a demand, and a diffi cult one
societies. If there are no priorities in producing the means of
to fulfill. Even Stalin said that the plans of the Soviet Union
production in capitalist society there can be no expanded
could not be regarded as already fully reflecting what the
reproduction. In Stalin's time, due to special emphasis on pri-
laws demanded.
ority development of heavy industry, agriculture was ne-
The "regular maintaining of due proportion” is at the
glected in the plans. Eastern Europe has had similar prob-
same time the regular appearance of imbalances. For when
lems in the past few years. Our approach has been to make
due proportion is not achieved then the task of keeing
priority development of heavy industry the condition for put-
things in proportion arises. In the course of the development
ting into effect concurrent promotion of industry and agricul-
of a socialist economy the regular appearance of imbalances
ture, as well as some other concurrent programs, each of
requires us to balance things by holding to proportionality
which again has within it a leading aspect. If agriculture
and comprehensiveness. For example, .as the economy de-
does not make gains few problems can be resolved. It has
velops, shortages of technical personnel and cadres are felt
been four years now since we proposed concurrent promotion
all over, and a contradiction between needs and supply ap-
of industry and agriculture, though it was truly put into ef-
pears. This in turn spurs us to operate more schools and train
fect in 1960. How highly we regard agriculture is expressed
more cadres to resolve this contradiction. It is after the ap-
by the quantity of steel materials we are allocating to agricul-
pearance of imbalances and disproportion that people further
ture. In 1959 we allocated only 590,000 tons but this year
understand the objective laws.
(including water conservancy construction) we allocated 1.3
In planning, if no accounting is made, if we let things run
million tons. This is truly concurrent promotion of industry
their course, or are overly cautious insisting on everything
and agriculture.
being foolproof, then our methods will not succeed, and as a
Here the text mentions that between 1925 and 1958 pro-
result proportionality will be destroyed.
duction of the means of production in the Soviet Union in-
A plan is an ideological form. Ideology is a refection of
creased 103 times, while consumer goods increased 15.6
realities, but it also acts upon realities. Our past plans stipu-
times. The question is, does a ratio of 103:15.6 benefit the
lated that no new industry would be built on our coasts, and
development of heavy* industry or not? If we want heavy in-
up to 1957 there was no construction there. We wasted seven
dustry to develop quickly everyone has to show initiative and
years. Only after 1958 did major construction begin. These
maintain high spirits. And if we want that then we must en-
past two years have seen great developments. Thus, ideologi-
able industry and agriculture to be concurrently promoted,
cal forms such as plans have a great effect on economic de-
and the same for light and heavy industry.
velopment and its rate.
Provided that we enable agriculture, light industry, and
heavy industry to develop at the same time and at a high rate,
38. Priority Growth in Producing the
we may guarantee that the people's livelihood can be suitably
Means of Production; Concurrent Promotion
improved together with the development of heavy industry.
of Industry and Agriculture
The experience of the Soviet Union, no less than our own,
proves that if agriculture does not develop, if light industry
On page 466 the problem of priority growth in producing the
does not develop, it hurts the development of heavy industry.
means of production is addressed.
Priority growth in producing the means of production is
an economic rule for expanded reproduction common to all
*Only in 1967 text.
=====第39页=====
78
Mao Tsetung
79
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
39."Distribution Is Determinative"—An
40. Politics in Command and Material
Erroneous View
Incentive
In chapter 20 it says, "The precondition for the high tide in
Page 452, paragraph 2, places party organization after local
state-managed industry was utilizing the workers'concern
economic organs; these latter become the heads under the
for their individual material interest in the development of so-
direct administration of the central government. Local party
cialist production." In chapter 21 it says, "Fully carry out eco-
organizations cannot take the political lead in those areas,
nomic accounting using the economic law of distribution ac-
making it virtually impossible for them to mobilize all positive
cording to labor(a law which combines workers'individual
forces sufficiently. The text on page 457, although conceding
material interest with the interests of socialist production)to
the creative activities of the masses, nonetheless says, "One
serve an important function in the struggle for national in-
of the most important conditions for accelerating communist
dustrialization." In chapter 25 it says, "The goals of socialist
construction is the participation of the masses in the struggle
production cause workers to be keenly concerned to make
to fulfill and overfulfill plans for national economic develop-
vigorous efforts to raise production and project personnel to
ment." Page 447 also says, "Initiative of farm personnel is
be concerned with the fruits of their own labor, out of mate-
one decisive factor in developing agriculture. To regard the
rial interest. This is a powerful motive force for the develop-
mass struggle as "one important factor'flies in the face of
ment of socialist production." To make an absolute out of
the principle that the masses are the creators of history.
"concern for individual material interest' in this fashion is
Under no circumstances can history be regarded as some-
bound to entail the danger of increasing individualism.
thing the planners rather than the masses create.
Page 452 says that the law of distribution according to
Immediately afterward the text raises this point: "To
labor "is one of the determining motive forces for socialist
begin with, we must utilize material incentives." This makes
production in that it causes all workers out of material inter-
it seem as if the masses' creative activity has to be inspired by
est to be concerned for the carrying out of plans to raise pro-
material interest. At every opportunity the text discusses indi-
ductivity." One cannot help asking, "If the fundamental eco-
vidual material interest as if it were an attractive means for
nomic laws of socialism determine the direction of
luring people into pleasant prospects. This is a reflection of
development of socialist production, then how does it follow
the spiritual state of a good number of economic workers and
that individual material interest is alleged to be a determining
leading personnel and of the failure to emphasize political-
motive force of production?  To treat distribution of con-
ideological work. Under such circumstances there is no alter-
sumer goods as a determining motive force is the erroneous
native to relying on material incentives. "From each accord-
view of distribution as determinative. Marx said, in his Cri-
ing to his ability, to each according to his labor." The first
tique of the Gotha Programme, "Distribution in the first place
half of the slogan means that the very greatest effort must be
should be distribution of the means of production: in whose
expended in production. Why separate the two halves of the
hands are the means of production? This is the determinative
slogan and always speak onesidedly of material incentive?
question. Distribution of the means of production is what de-
This kind of propoganda for material interest will make capi
termines distribution of consumer goods." To regard distribu-
talism unbeatable!
tion of consumer goods as the determining motive force is a
distortion of Marx's correct view and a serious theoretical
error.
=====第40页=====
80
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
81
That is why there is a demand for balance. Contradiction be-
41. Balance and Imbalance
tween balance and imbalance exists in all parts of the various
areas and departments, forever arising, forever being re-
Page 432, paragraph 1, is mistaken. The development of cap-
solved. When there is a plan for the first year there has to be
italist technology is balanced in certain respects, unbalanced
one for the next year as well. An annual plan requires a quar-
in others. The point is that balance and imbalance in techno-
terly plan, which in turn requires a monthly plan. In every
logical development is essentially different under capitalism
one of the twelve months contradictions between balance
and under socialism. Under socialism there is balance and
and imbalance have to be resolved. Plans constantly have to
imbalance; for example, in the first period of Liberation we
be revised precisely because new imbalances recur.
had barely over 20o geological project workers, and prospect-
But the text has not adequately applied the dialectical
ing was altogether out of phase with the needs of the devel-
method to research the various problems. The chapter de-
opment of the national economy. After several years' intense
voted to the laws of planned proportional development of the
efforts the situation was practically rectified when fresh im-
national economy is quite long, yet no mention is made of the
balances arose. At present there is in China an overwhelming
contradiction between balance and imbalance.
preponderance of manual labor, a situation quite out of phase
with our needs for developing production and raising labor
The national economy of a socialist society can have
productivity. This is why we have to launch a broad techno-
planned proportional development which enables imbalances
logical revolution and resolve this imbalance. With the ap-
to be regulated. However, imbalance does not go away. "Un-
pearance of every new technical department imbalance of
eveness is in the nature of things." Because private owner-
technological development is bound to become noticeable
ship was eliminated it was possible to have planned organiza-
again. For example, we are now tackling higher technology
tion of the economy. Therefore, it was possible to control and
so we are conscious of the incompatibility of many things.
utilize consciously the objective laws of imbalance to create
But this Soviet text not only denies a degree of balance under
many relative temporary * balances.
capitalism but also a degree of imbalance under socialism.
If the productive forces run ahead, the production rela-
Technology and the economy both develop in this way.
tions will not accord with the productive forces; the super-
The text seems to be unacquainted with the wavelike ad-
structure will not accord with the production relations. At
vances of the development of socialist production and speaks
that point the superstructure and the production relations
of the development of socialist economy as perfectly linear,
will have to be changed to accord with the productive forces.
free of dips. This is unthinkable. No line of development is
Between superstructure and production relations, between
straight; it is wave or spiral shaped. Even our studying has
production relations and productive forces—some say bal-
this pattern. Before studying we do something else. Af-
ance is only relatively attainable, for the productive forces are
terward we have to rest for a few hours. We cannot continue
always advancing, therefore there is always imbalance. Bal-
studying as if there were neither day nor night. We study
ance and imbalance are two sides of a contradiction within
more one day, less the next. Moreover in our daily study
which imbalance is absolute and balance relative. If this were
sometimes we find more to comment upon, sometimes less.
not so, neither the superstructure nor the production rela-
These are all wavelike patterns, rising and falling. Balance is
tions, nor the productive forces, could further develop; they
relative to imbalance. Without imbalance there is no balance.
The development of all things is characterized by imbalance.
* Only in the 1969 text.
=====第41页=====
82
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
83
would become petrified. Balance is relative, imbalance abso-
ciety, and therefore material incentives to labor have the
lute. This is a universal law which I am convinced applies to
greatest significance." Here "all members" is too general.
socialist society. Contradiction and struggle are absolutes;
Lenin was a member of the society. Had his labor not be-
unity, unanimity, and solidarity are transitional, hence rela-
come a "primary necessity" of his life?
tive. The various balances attained in planning are tempo-
Page 486 raises this point: there are two kinds of individ-
rary, transitional, and conditional, hence relative. Who can
uals in socialist society, the great majority who faithfully dis-
imagine a state of equilibrium that is unconditional, eternal?
charge their duties and the few who are dishonest about their
We need to use balance and imbalance among the pro-
duties. This is correctly analyzed. But if we want to bring
ductive forces, the production relations, and the superstruc-
around this latter group we can not rely exclusively on mate-
ture as a guideline for researching the economic problems of
rial incentives. We still have to criticize and educate them to
socialism.
raise their consciousness.
The main object of study in political economy is the pro-
This section of the text speaks of workers who are com-
duction relations. But to study clearly the production rela-
paratively diligent and positive. Conditions being equal, these
tions it is necessary to study concomitantly the productive
are the ones who will produce more. Plainly, whether a
forces and also the positive and negative effects of the super-
worker is diligent and enthusiastic or not is determined by
structure on the production relations. The text refers to the
political consciousness, not by the level of technical or cul-
state but never studies it in depth. This is one omission. Of
tural expertise. Some whose technical and cultural level is
course, in the process of studying political economy, the
high are nonetheless neither diligent nor enthusiastic; others
whose level is lower are quite diligent and enthusiastic. The
study of the productive forces and the superstructure should
reason lies in the lower political consciousness of the former,
not become overdeveloped. If the study of the productive
the higher political consciousness of the latter.
forces goes too far it becomes technology and natural
The book says that material incentive to labor "spurs in-
science. If the study of the superstructure goes too far it
creases in production" and "is one of the decisive factors in
becomes nation-state theory, class struggle theory. Under the
heading of socialism (one of Marxism's three component
stimulating the development of production." But material in-
parts) what we study are: theories of class struggle, theories
centive does not necessarily change every year. People may
of the state, theories of revolution and the party, as well as
not require such incentive daily, monthly, or yearly. In times
of difficulty when incentives are reduced people must stil
military strategies and tactics, etc.
carry on, and that satisfactorily. By making material incentive
There is nothing in the world that cannot be analyzed.
a onesided absolute the text fails to give due importance to
But circumstances differ and so do essences. Many fun-
raising consciousness, and cannot explain why there are dif-
damental categories and laws—e.g., unity of contra-
ferences among the labor of people in the same pay scale. For
diction—are applicable. If we study problems in this way, if
example, in scale no. 5,2² one group may carry on very well,
we observe problems in this way, we will then have a solid,
another rather poorly, and a third tolerably well on the whole.
integral worldview and methodology.
Why, with similar material incentive, such differences occur
is inexplicable according to their way of reasoning.
42. "MaterialIncentives"
Even if the importance of material incentive is recog-
nized, it is never the sole principle. There is always another
Page 486 says, "In the socialist stage labor has not yet be-
principle, namely, spiritual inspiration from political ideology.
come the primary necessity in the lives of all members of so-
=====第42页=====
84
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
85
And, while we are on the subject, material incentive can not
letup. For a long time we made a nonmarket supply system
simply be discussed as individual interest. There is also the
work. Of course at that time the entire society of the base
collective interest to which individual interest should be sub-
areas was not practicing the system. But those who made the
ordinated, long-term interests to which temporary interests
system work in the civil war period reached a high of several
should be subordinated, and the interests of the whole to
hundred thousand, and at the lowest still numbered in the
which partial interests should be subordinated.
tens of thousands. In the War of Resistance Against Japan
the number shot up again from over a million to several mil-
In the section "Material Incentives to Labor, Socialist
lions. Right up to the first stage of Liberation our people lived
Emulation," there are some fairly well written passages con-
an egalitarian life, working hard and fighting bravely, with-
cerning emulation. What is missing is the discussion of poli-
out the least dependence on material incentives, only the in-
tics!
spiration of revolutionary spirit. At the end of the second
First, don't work people to death. Second, don't ruin their
period of the civil war we suffered a defeat, although we had
victories before and after. This course of events had nothing
health, but even bring about gradual strengthening. These
at all to do with whether we had material incentives or not. It
two points are basic. As for other things, if we can have
had to do with whether or not our political line and our mili-
them, fine, if not, well and good! We want the people to have
tary line were correct. These historical experiences have the
some consciousness. The text seems to lay almost no empha-
greatest significance for solving our problems of socialist con-
sis on the future, the generations to come, only emphasizing
material interest, constantly taking the road of material inter-
struction.
est and rashly turning it into the principle of individual inter-
Chapter 26 says, "Workers in socialist enterprises who,
est, as if it were a magic wand.
What they do not say is that individual interest will be sat-
out of material interest, are concerned with the results of
isfied when the interests of the whole people are satisfied.
their own work are the motive forces developing socialist
The individual material interest they emphasize is in reality
production."(p. 482)
myopic individualism, an economistic tendency from the
Chapter 27 says, "Compensation for skilled labor is com-
period of proletarian class struggle against capitalism mani-
paratively high. ... And this stimulates workers to raise
festing itself in the period of socialist construction. During
their cultural and technical level, causing the essential dif-
the era of bourgeois revolutions a number of bourgeois revo-
ference between manual and mental labor to diminish."(pp.
501-03)
lutionaries made heroic sacrifices for the interests of their
The point here is that higher compensation for skilled
class and future generations of their class, but certainly not
labor has spurred unskilled workers to upgrade themselves
for immediate individual interest.
When we were in the base areas we had a free [non-
continuously so they can enter the ranks of skilled work-
ers. This means that they studied culture and technology in
market] supply system.2³ People were tougher then, and
order to earn more money. In a socialist society every person
there was no wrangling at all on account of seeking preferen-
entering school to study culture and technology should rec-
tial treatment. After liberation we had a wage system, and
ognize before anything else that they are studying for social-
agreed upon scales, but our problems only multiplied. Many
ist construction, for industrialization, to serve the people, for
people wrangled frequently in a struggle for status, and we
the collective interest, and not above all for a higher wage.
had to do a lot of persuading.
Chapter 28 says, "Distribution according to labor is the
Our party has waged war for over twenty years without
=====第43页=====
86
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
87
greatest force propelling the development of production. (p.
526) And at the end of this page, after explaining that wages
44. Crash Programs, Accelerated Work
rise steadily under socialism, the unrevised third edition of
this textbook even goes so far as to say, "Socialism is fun-
Page 505 says, "Do away with the phenomenon of acceler-
damentally superior to capitalism precisely in this." Now to
ated work. Carry on production in a well-balanced way ac-
say that socialism is fundamentally superior to capitalism
cording to the blueprints." In the unrevised third edition this
because wages steadily rise is very wrong. Wages are dis-
sentence reads, "We must fight against 'crash programs' and
tribution of consumer goods. If there is no distribution of the
work in a well-balanced way according to predetermined
means of production, there can be no distribution of the
schedules." This utter repudiation of crash programs and
goods produced, of consumer goods. The latter is predicated
accelerated work is too absolute.
on the former.
We can not completely repudiate crash programs. Their
use or nonuse constitutes a unity of opposites. In nature
43. Interpersonal Relations in Socialist
there are gentle breezes and light rains, and there are high
Enterprises
winds and violent rains. Use of crash programs appears and
disappears, wavelike. In the technological revolution in pro-
Page 500 says, "Under socialism the prestige of economic
duction the need for them continually arises. In agriculture
leaders is contingent upon the trust the masses have in
we must grapple with the seasons. The drama must have its
them." This is well said indeed. But to reach this goal it will
climax. To gainsay crash programs is in reality to deny the
take work. In our experience, if cadres do not set aside their
climax. The Soviet Union wants to overtake the United
States. We expect to reach the Soviet's level in less time than
pretensions and identify with the workers, the workers will
it took the Soviets. That is a kind of crash program.
never look on the factory as their own but as the cadres'.
Socialist emulation means that the backward overtakes
"Master-of-the-house" attitudes make the workers reluctant
the advanced. This is possible only through crash programs.
to observe labor discipline in a self-conscious way. Do not
think that under socialism creative cooperation between the
Relations between individuals, between units, between en-
workers and the leadership of the enterprises will emerge all
terprises, as well as between nations, are all competitive. If
one wants to overtake the advanced, one cannot help having
by itself without the need to work at it.
crash programs. If construction or revolution is attacked with
If manual workers and enterprise leaders are both
executive orders (e.g., carrying out land reform or organizing
members of a unified production collective then "why do so-
cooperatives by administrative order) there is bound to be a
cialist enterprises have to put single leadership' into effect
reduction in production because the masses will not have
rather than leadership under collective guidance" i.e., the
been mobilized, and not because of crash programs.
system of factory head responsibility under party committee
guidance?
45. The Law of Value and Planning
It is when politics is weakened that there is no choice but
to talk about material incentive. That is why the text follows
On page 521 there is a small print passage that is correct; it
right up with "fully putting into effect the principle of having
is critical, it joins the issues.
workers deeply concerned with the results of their own labor
The law of value serves as an instrument of planning.
out of individual material interest is the mainspring for pro-
Good. But the law of value should not be made the main
gressively grasping and raising socialist production."
=====第44页=====
88
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
89
basis of planning. We did not carry through the Great Leap
percent of the peasantry, that there is any discontent. They
on the basis of the demands of the law of value but on the
oppose the whole concept of the Great Leap and the people's
basis of the fundamental economic laws of socialism and the
communes.
need to expand production. If things are narrowly regarded
In sum, we put plans ahead of prices. Of course we can-
from the point of view of the law of value the Great Leap
not ignore prices. A few years ago we raised the purchase
would have to be judged not worth the losses and last year's
price for live pigs, and this had a positive effect on pigbreed-
all-out effort to produce steel and iron as wasted labor. The
ing. But for the kind of large-scale, nationwide breeding we
local steel produced was low in quantity and quality, and the
have today, planning remains the main thing we rely on.
state had to make good many losses. The economic results
Page 521 refers to the problem of pricing in the markets
were not signifi cant, etc. The partial short-term view is that
of collective farms. Their collective farm markets have too
the campaign was a loss, but the overall long-term view is
much freedom. It is not enough to use only state economic
that there was great value to the campaign because it opened
power to adjust prices in such markets. Leadership and con-
wide a whole economic construction phase. Throughout the
trol are also necessary. In our markets, during the first stage,
country many new starts in steel and iron were made, and
prices were kept within certain bounds by the government.
many industrial centers were built. This enabled us to step
Thus small liberties were kept from becoming big ones.
up our pace greatly.
Page 522 says, "Thanks to our command of the law of
In the winter of 1959 over 75 million people were working
value, the kind of anarchy in production or waste of social
on water conservancy nationwide. The method of organizing
labor power the law entails under capitalism is not found in a
two large-scale campaigns could be used to solve our basic
socialist economy." This makes too much of the effects of the
water conservancy problems. From the standpoint of one,
law of value. In socialist society crises do not occur, mainly
two, or three years the value of the grain to pay for so much
because of the ownership system: the basic laws of socialism,
labor was naturally quite high. But in the longer view the
national planning of production and distribution, the lack of
campaign could considerably increase grain production and
free competition or anarchy, etc., and not because we com-
accelerate it too, and stabilize agricultural production, and so
mand the law of value. The economic crises of capitalism, it
the value of commodities per unit gains. All this then goes
goes without saying, are determined by the ownership sys-
toward satisfying the people's need for grain.
tem too.
The continuing development of agriculture and light in-
46. Forms of Wages
dustry creates further accumulation for heavy industry. This
too benefits people in the long run. So long as the peasants
and the people of the entire country understand what the
Page 530, in its discussion of wage forms, advocates taking
state is doing, whether money is gained or lost, they are
piecework wages as primary and the time-rate as supplemen-
bound to approve and not oppose. From among the peasants
tary. We do the reverse. Onesided emphasis on piece rates is
themselves the slogan of supporting industry has been put
bound to create contradictions between older and younger,
forward. There is the proof! Stalin as well as Lenin said, "In
stronger and weaker laborers, and will foster among the
workers a psychology of "going for the big ones." This makes
the period of socialist construction the peasantry must pay
tribute to the state." The vast majority of China's peasants is
the primary concern not the collective cause but the individ-
ual income. There is even evidence that the piece-rate wage
"sending tribute” with a positive attitude. It is only among
system impedes technological innovation and mechanization.
the prosperous peasants and the middle peasants, some 15
=====第45页=====
90
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
91
The book concedes that with automation, piece-rate
be undertaken at one time lest none can be completed on
wages are unsuitable. On the one hand they say they want
schedule, then of course we agree. But if the conclusion is to
automation widely developed; on the other they say they
be that during major construction small- and medium-scale
want piece-rate wages used widely. This involves a contra-
projects should be opposed, then we disagree. The principal
diction.
new industrial centers in China were established on the basis
We have put into effect the time-rate system, plus re-
of medium- and small-scale enterprises developed in large
wards. The year-end "leap forward' bonuses of the last two
numbers in 1958. According to initial arrangements in the
years are an example. With the exception of governmental
steel and iron industry, construction of twenty-nine large,
and educational workers, all staff and workers have had year-
nearly a hundred medium, and several hundred small-scale
end leap forward bonuses in varying amounts determined by
centers will be completed over the next eight years. The me-
the staff and workers themselves in the particular units.
dium- and small-scale ones have already had a major effect
on the steel and iron industry. Speaking from the standpoint
47. Two Questions About Prices
of 1959, raw iron production nationwide has exceeded 20
million tons, half of which was produced by medium- and
There are two questions that deserve study.
small-scale enterprises. In the future the medium- and the
The first is the pricing of consumer goods. The text says,
small-scale enterprise will continue to have major importance
"Socialism has all along been putting into practice a policy of
for the development of the steel and iron industry. Many
lowering the prices of consumer goods for the people." Our
small ones will become medium, many medium, large; back-
ward ones will become advanced, local models will become
approach is to stabilize prices, generally neither letting them
rise nor lowering them. Although our wage levels are com-
like foreign ones—this is the objective law of development.
We will adopt advanced technology, but this cannot gain-
paratively low, universal employment and low prices and
say the necessity and the inevitability of backward technol-
rents have kept the living standard of staff and workers de-
cent enough. In the last analysis whether it is preferable to
ogy for a period of time. Since history began, revolutionary
keep lowering prices or neither to raise nor lower them is a
wars have always been won by those whose weapons were
problem deserving study.
deficient, lost by those with the advantage in weapons. Dur-
The other question concerns pricing of products of heavy
ing our civil war, our War of Resistance Against Japan, and
our War of Liberation, we lacked nationwide political power
and light industry. Relatively speaking, they have low prices
and modernized arsenals. If one cannot fight unless one has
forthe former, and higher ones for the latter. We do the re-
the most modern weapons, that is the same as disarming
verse. Why? Which is the better way in the last analysis is
one's self.
another problem deserving study.
Our desire to make all-around mechanization such as the
text describes a reality (p. 420) in our second decade appears
still short of fulfillment; probably it will be in our third de-
PART III:CHAPTERS 30-34
cade. In a future time, because of inadequate machinery, we
48. Concurrent Promotion of the Foreign
will be calling for partial mechanization and improvement of
our tools. For now we are holding off on general automation.
and the Native, the Large, Medium, and Small
Mechanization has to be discussed, but with a sense of pro-
portion. If mechanization and automation are made too much
Page 547 expresses opposition to dispersing construction
of it is bound to make people despise partial mechanization
funds. If they mean that not too many major projects should
=====第46页=====
92
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
93
and production by native methods. In the past we had such
tion that "tractors must precede cooperatives." On the same
diversions, when everybody was demanding new technology,
page we find, "Socialist production relations cleared a wide
new machinery, the large scale, high standards; the native,
field for the development of agricultural productive forces
the medium, or small in scale were held in contempt. We did
and progress in agricultural technology." That is true.
not overcome this tendency until we promoted concurrently
First the production relations have to be changed, then
native and foreign, large and medium and smalll
and only then the productive forces can be broadly devel-
At the present time we have not proposed chemicalization
oped. This rule is universal. In some countries of Eastern
of agriculture. One reason is that we do not expect to be able
Europe the cooperatives were not organized very energeti-
to produce much fertilizer in the next however many years.
cally, and even today they remain uncompleted. The main
(And the little we have is concentrated on our industrial
reason is not that they lacked tractors (they had many more
crops.) Another reason is that if the turn to chemicals is
than we, comparatively speaking) but that their land reform
proposed everybody will focus on that and neglect pigbreed-
was a top-down royal favor. Land was expropriated by quota
ing. Inorganic fertilizers are also needed but they have to be
(in some countries no expropriation was carried out on farms
combined with organic; alone they harden the soil.
under 100 hectares); the work of expropriation was carried
The text speaks of adopting new techniques in every de-
out by executive order; and after the land reform instead of
partment. But this is not so easy to do. There must always be
striking while the iron was hot they let a full five or six years
a process of gradual development. Moreover, even as some
go by without doing much. We did quite the reverse. We put
new machine is being adopted many old ones remain. The
a mass line24 into effect, roused the poor and lower-middle
text is correct when it says that as you build new enterprises
peasants to launch class struggle and seize all the land of the
and renew equipment in existing factories, you should put
landlord class and distribute the surplus land of rich peas-
existing machinery and mechanical equipment to use ra-
ants, apportioning land on a per-capita basis. (This was a
tionally and to the fullest extent. (p. 427) Things will be no
tremendous revolution in the rural areas.) Immediately af-
different in the future.
terward, we followed up with the mutual aid and cooperative
As to the "large" and the "foreign," we must work on
movements. And from that point, steadily advancing step by
these in a spirit of "self reliance for new growth." In 1958 we
step, we led the peasants on to the road to socialism. We had
proposed slogans on ridding ourselves of superstition and
a massive party and army. When our forces went south a full
working with our own hands. The facts show that working
complement of cadre squads had been set in place in every
on our own is quite feasible. In the past backward capitalist
province to do local work at provincial, regional, county, and
countries relied on the application of new techniques to catch
district levels. As soon as our forces would arrive they would
up with advanced capitalist countries in production. The So-
penetrate deeply into the agricultural villages, "paying call on
viet Union likewise relies on the application of advanced
the poor to learn of their grievances,," "striking roots and
technology to catch up with the capitalist countries. We too
pulling things together," and getting the active elements of
must do the same, and we can.
the poor and lower middle peasants organized.
49. Which First, Tractors or Cooperatives?
50. Two Goals: Large and Public
The collective farms of the Soviet Union have undergone
Page 563 says, "In 1928 on the even of overall collectivization,
merger twice. Over 250,000 farms were merged into over
spring crop areas were tilled 99 percent with wood or horse-
93,000, then these were again merged into about 70,0. In
drawn ploughs." This fact refutes the text's repeated asser-
=====第47页=====
94
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
95
the future they will surely expand again. The text says
"Public" is in relation to "private," and vice-versa, a unity
(p. 568), "We must strengthen and develop the produc-
of opposites. One without the other is impossible. We have
tion relations of the various collective farms and organize
always spoken of joint consideration of public and private and
publicly used production enterprises among the colective
long ago made the point that there is no such thing as all the
farms." Here, actually, there are many similarities to our own
one or the other, but that the public takes precedence over
methods, they simply express things differently. In the fu-
the private. The individual is a part of the collective. If the
ture, even if their approach is like ours, it appears doubtful
collective interest advances, the individual's lot will improve
they will use the term commune. Differences in expression
in consequence.
and terminology do include a substantive issue, namely,
Duality is an attribute of all things,and for all time. Of
whether or not a mass line is being put into effect.
course, duality is manifested through different concrete
To be sure, the large scale of the Soviet Union's collective
forms, and so the character of things varies. Heredity and
farms may never approach ours in terms of households and
mutation are a duality of opposites in unity. If there were
population because their rural population is sparse and their
only the later without the former the succeeding generation
land area great. But who can say that for this reason their
would be utterly unlike the prior. Rice would no longer be
collective farms now need no further expansion? In places
that which makes it rice, nor dogs, nor people. The conserva-
like Sinkiang and Ch'inghai the communes still need to en-
tive side can have a good, a positive function. It can give liv-
large even though there are few people for much land. Some
ing things in the midst of uninterrupted change a provisional
counties in our southern provinces (e.g., northern Fukien)
constancy or stability. So, improved rice is still rice. But he-
got large communes together under like conditions.
redity without mutation would mean no advance, and devel-
Enlarging the communes is a major issue. Changes in
opment would come to a halt.
quantity are bound to bring on changes in quality, to stimu-
late such changes. Our people's communes are a good ex-
52.It Is for the People to Act
ample-"Large! and Public! First comes "Large!"—it will
raise the level of "Public." This means that quantitative
Page 577 says, "Collective farms offer the natural and eco-
changes bring on partial qualitative changes.
nomic conditions for allowing differential rent to be
arranged." Differential rent is not altogether determined by
51. What Is the Fundamental Reason for
objective conditions. Actually the matter rests with the peo-
the Special Emphasis on Material Interest
ple's doing. For example, in Hopei province there are many
mechanized wells along the Peking-Hankow Railway, but
In the chapter on the collective farm system there is contin-
very few along the Tientsin-Pukow. The natural conditions
ual discussion of individual material interest.(pp. 565, 571,
are similar, the communications equally convenient, but land
etc.) The present special emphasis on material interest is for
improvements are never the same from place to place. There
a reason. In the time of Stalin there was excessive emphasis
may have been reasons why the one locale was receptive (or
on collective interest; individual gain was neglected. The
unreceptive) to improvement, or there might have been vary-
public was overemphasized, the private underemphasized.
ing historical reasons. But after all, the main thing is that it is
Now they have gone to the opposite extreme, overempha-
for people to act.
sizing material incentive, neglecting collective interest. And
While we are on the subject, some of the outlying dis-
if they persist in this course it will surely go to the opposite
tricts of Shanghai are able to breed pigs properly, others not.
side again.
In Ch'ung Ming county it was originally thought that certain
=====第48页=====
96
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
97
natural conditions, e.g., the large number of lakes, would not
duction cannot culminate in consumption (including pro-
be favorable for pigbreeding. But after getting rid of people's
ductive consumption and individual consumption).
fears of difficulties, and after people adopted a positive atti-
tude toward the business of breeding, it was realized that far
54. Concurrent Promotion of Industry and
from presenting an obstacle, these very natural conditions of-
Agriculture
fered advantages. Actually, whether it is a matter of deep
ploughing, fine horticulture, mechanization, or collectiviza-
Page 623 discusses the rule of giving priority to increasing
tion, it is for people to act.
the means of production. The unrevised third edition men-
Ch'ang P'ing county, Peking, has always been plagued by
tions particularly here, "giving priority to increasing the
flood and drought. But things changed after the construction
means of production means that industry will develop at a
of the reservoir at the Ming Tombs. Does not this again illus-
faster rate than agriculture."
trate that it is for people to act? In Honan they are planning
"Industry developing faster than agriculture” has to be
after 1959 and 1960 to spend another three years to tame
posed in an appropriate way. One cannot emphasize in-
the Yellow River by completing construction of several
dustry to an inappropriate degree or trouble is sure to occur.
large-scale conduits. All this shows again that it is for people
Take our Liaoning: with its many industries, this province
to act.
has an urban population that is one-third the total. In the
past they had always put industry in first place, without at-
53. Transport and Commerce
tending at the same time to the vigorous development of agri-
culture. The result was that the province's agriculture could
Transport and packaging do not increase use value, but they
not guarantee supplies of grain, meats, and vegetables for the
do increase value. The labor they use is a part of socially nec-
urban markets, and they always had to ship these items in
essary labor. For without transportation and packaging the
from other provinces. The key issue is that agricultural labor
process of production would remain incomplete, would not
is under great strain and is short of needed machinery. This
enter the stage of consumption, and the use value produced
limits the development of production; growth is compara-
could not be said to have been realized. Take coal. After the
tively slow. What we had failed to understand was that it was
ore is mined, if it is left around the site and not delivered to
precisely in such places as the Northeast, particularly Liao-
the consumer by rail, steamer, or truck, its use value is com-
ning, where we should have taken firm hold of agriculture. So
pletely unrealizable.
one cannot emphasize only taking firm hold of industry.
Page 585 says that they have two systems of commerce,
Our position is that industry and agriculture should be
state-operated and cooperative. In addition, they have "un-
developed together with priority given to developing heavy in-
organized markets, i.e., the collective farm markets. We
dustry. The phrase "concurrent promotion" in no way denies
have only one system. We merged the cooperative trade into
priority in growth or faster development of industry than agri-
the state-operated trade, and the system now seems easy
culture. At the same time, "concurrent promotion" is not
enough to run. There are lots of economies on all sides.
equal utilization of our strength. For example, this year we
Page 587 refers to public supervision of commerce. For
estimate we can produce about 14 million tons of steel mate-
this we rely on party guidance in the main; with politics in
rials, of which 10 percent is to be applied to agricultural tech-
command there is supervision by the masses. The labor of
nological transformation and water conservancy construc-
commercial workers is socially necessary and without it pro-
tion. The remaining 90 percent is to be used mainly in heavy
=====第49页=====
98
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
99
industry and communications and transportation construc-
ers and peasants want to cash in and find they cannot, the
tion. Under this year's conditions this is concurrent promo-
pressure to go to the "spiritual' is no surprise.
tion of industry and agriculture. This should not be detrimen-
According to what is described on page 631, in the Soviet
tal to priority growth of heavy industry or accelerating
Union accumulated capital amounts to one-fourth of the na-
development of industry.
*
tional income. In China the figures were as follows: 27 per-
Poland has 30 million people, but only 450,000 pigs. Now
cent in 1957, 36 percent in 1958, 42 percent in 1959, and it
meat supplies are badly strained. Even today it would seem
appears that in the future it will be possible to maintain regu-
that Poland has not placed agricultural development on its
larly a figure of over thirty percent. The main problem lies in
agenda.
the vast development of production. Only if production in-
Page 624 says, "At different times it is necessary to accel-
creases and the percentages of accumulation go up a bit can
erate the development of backward agriculture, light indus-
people's livelihoods be finally improved.
try, and the food industry." Well and good, but imbalances
It is our regular responsibility to practice economies and
and maladjustments created by backwardness in agriculture
to accumulate large amounts of materials and wealth. It
and light industry cannot be alleged to be merely "partial
would be wrong to think that this should be done only in ad-
imbalances and maladjustments." These are questions of the
verse conditions. It is difficult to believe that when hardships
totality.
ease economies and accumulation are not needed.
Page 625 says, "Rational allocation of capital is necessary
to maintain, at whatever time, correct proportions between
heavy and light industry. This paragraph speaks only of
PART IV: CHAPTER 35 TO THE
heavy and light industry, not of industry and agriculture.
CONCLUSION
55. Standards for Accumulation
56. The Communist State
This has become a major issue in Poland. At the start Go-
Page 639 says, "In the higher stages of communism the
mulka emphasized material incentive. He raised workers'
state will become unnecessary and gradually diminish."
wages but neglected to raise their consciousness, with the
Nonetheless this will require certain international conditions.
result that workers thought only of making more money but
If someone else has state machinery and you do not, it is dan-
did not take the right spirit to their tasks. Increases of wages
gerous. Page 640 says that even after communism is es-
outstripped increases in productivity, and wages were eating
tablished, as long as imperialist countries exist, the state will
up capital. The pressure has now forced them to come out in
continue to be necessary. This position is correct. Immedi-
ately after, the book says, "But the nature andthe form of
opposition to material incentive and to champion spiritual in-
such a state will be determined by the particular featuresof
spiration. Gomulka has even said, "Money cannot buy peo-
ple's minds."
the communist system." This sentence is hard to understand.
The nature of the state is that it is a machinery for suppres-
Overemphasis on material incentive always seems to lead
sing the opposed forces. Even if such a function is no longer
to the opposite. Writing lots of checks naturally keeps the
needed internally, the coercive nature of the state will not
high-salary strata happy, but when the broad masses of work-
have changed with respect to external opposing forces. The
so-called form of the state means nothing more than armed
* Agriculture in the 1967 text.
=====第50页=====
100
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
101
forces, prisons, arrests, executions, etc. As long as imperial-
with the present level and the present needs of the produc-
ism still exists, what differences in form will there be when
tive forces in the rural areas." I wonder if this is indeed true.
communism is reached?
Introducing the Red October collective farm, a Soviet ar-
ticle says, "Before merger, some farms were diffi cult to man-
57. Transition to Communism
age in a good many respects. Afterward the problems cleared
up." The article says that the farm has a population of ten
Page 64l says, "In a socialist society there are no antagonis-
thousand and that a housing project for three thousand resi-
tic classes," but "there are still vestiges of antagonistic
dents is planned. This suggests that the present form of the
classes."  The transition from socialism to communism need
farm is no longer fully compatible with the development of
not be made a reality through social revolution. All that can
the productive forces.
be said is that there is no need for a social revolution in
The same passage says, "We must bend every effort to
which one class overthrows another, but there will be a social
strengthening and further developing the cooperatives and
revolution in which new production relations and social insti-
the collective farm ownership system.” If development is
tutions supersede old ones.
needed, a process has to be gone through, so why "bend
Here the text goes on to declare, "This certainly does not
every effort to strengthen?" Socialist production relations,
mean that society, as it develops along the road to commu-
social systems—of course one must speak in terms of consoli-
nism, will not need to conquer internal contradictions." This
dating them, but not to the point of ruining them. The text
declaration is merely incidental. Though there are places
speaks vaguely of the road ahead, but the moment it comes
where this text recognizes contradictions, it does so only in-
to concrete measures it loses all clarity. In many ways
cidentally. One thing missing from this text is that it does not
(mainly production) the Soviets continue to progress, but
proceed from the analysis of contradictions in explaining is-
with respect to the production relations fundamentally they
sues. As a branch of science, political economy should begin
have ceased to progress.
its analysis with contradictions.
The text says that it is necessary to make a transition
When a communist society is attained, labor discipline is
from collective ownership to indivisible ownership by the
bound to be even more strict than it is presently because the
whole people. But from our point of view it is first necessary
high level of automation will require ever higher exactitude
to turn collective ownership into socialist ownership by the
of people's labor and conduct.
whole people, i.e., to make the agricultural means of produc-
For now we are speaking of communist society as divided
tion entirely state owned, and to turn the peasants entirely
into two stages, a lower and a higher. This is what Marx and
into workers under uniform contract to the state for wages.
his circle foresaw based on conditions of social development
At present, nationwide, each Chinese peasant has an average
at that time. After entering the higher stage communist soci-
annual income of 85* yuan. In the future, when this amount
ety will develop into a new stage, and new goals and tasks
will reach 150 yuan and the majority of workers are paid by
will assuredly present themselves.
the commune, it will be possible to make a commune owner-
ship system basically work. In this way taking the next step
58. The Future Development of Collective
to state ownership should be easy.
Ownership
Page 650 says, "The production relations of the collective
farms and the cooperatives have forms which accord fully
*65 in the 1967 text.
=====第51页=====
102
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
103
59. Eliminating the Difference Between
uation is completely different. Within the unity we want to
work toward, the various provinces will also have indepen-
Urban and Rural
dence. This is relative unity and it is relative independence.
The provinces resolve their own problems independently
The last paragraph on page 651 has a good position on rural
while submitting to the resolutions of the central authorities
construction.
and accepting their control. On the other hand, the center's
Since they want to eliminate the difference (the book says
resolutions on major issues are all made in common, through
"basic difference") between urban and rural, why does the
consultation between the center and the provinces. The reso-
text make a point of saying that it is not "to reduce the func-
lutions of the Lushan Conference were like this, for ex-
tions of the big cities?" The cities of the future need not be so
ample.25 Not only did they accord with the needs of the
large. Residents of large cities should be dispersed into the
whole country, they accorded with the needs of the various
rural areas. Building many smaller cities is a relative advan-
provinces. Who could take the position that only the center,
tage in case of nuclear war.
not the localities, needs to oppose right opportunism? We
champion having the provinces devote themselves fully to a
60. The Problem of the Various Socialist
set of activities under a unified plan for the whole country.
Countries Setting Up an Economic System
Provided there are raw materials and markets, provided mate-
rials can be obtained and sales made locally, whatever can be
Page 659 says, "Each country could concentrate its own
done should be done to the fullest possible extent. Previously,
manpower and material resources to develop its own most ad-
our concern was that after the provinces had developed, a va-
vantageous natural and economic conditions and depart-
riety of industry, industrial goods (e.g., from a place like
ments with production experience and cadre. The respective
Shanghai) would in all likelihood not be wanted. Now it ap-
countries would not need to produce goods which other
pears this is not the case. Shanghai has already proposed de-
countries could supply."
veloping toward higher, larger scale, finer, and more ex-
This is not a good idea. We do not suggest this even with
cellent production. They still have things to do!
respect to our own provinces. We advocate all-round develop-
I wonder why the text fails to advocate each country's
ment and do not think that each province need not produce
doing the utmost for itself rather than not producing goods
goods which other provinces could supply. We want the
which other countries could supply? The correct method is
various provinces to develop a variety of production to the
each doing the utmost for itself as a means toward self-
fullest extent, provided there is no adverse effect on the
reliance for new growth, working independently to the great-
whole. One of the advantages Europe enjoys is the indepen-
est possible extent, making a principle out of not relying on
dence of the various countries. Each is devoted to a set of ac-
others, and not doing something only when it really and truly
tivities, causing the European economy to develop compara-
cannot be done. Above all, agriculture must be done well as
tively quickly. Since the time of the Chin, China has taken
far as possible. Reliance on other countries or provinces for
shape as a major power, preserving its unity on the whole
food is most dangerous.
over a long period of time. One of the defects was bureau-
Some countries are so small that, exactly as the text says,
cratism, under the stifling control of which local regions
"To develop all industrial departments would be economically
could not develop independently, and with everyone tem-
irrational, a task to which their strength is unequal." In that
porizing, economic development was very slow. Now the sit-
case of course a country should not force it through. It would
=====第52页=====
104
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
105
be very difficult for some of our own provinces with low pop-
ulation-Ch'inghai or Ninghsiato have comprehensive de-
63. Relations Between the Two Economic
velopment.
Systems in the World
61. Can the Development of the Various
Page 658 speaks of "competition between the two world
Socialist Countries Be Euened Up?
systems." In Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR,
Stalin offered arguments about the two world markets.
Paragraph 3 on page 660 says, "... to have the overall level
The text here emphasizes peaceful competition between the
of economic and cultural development of the various socialist
two systems and building up "peacefully developing"eco-
countries gradually draw parallel." The populations, resource
nomic relations. This turns the actually existing two world
bases, and historic conditions of these countries are not the
markets into two economic systems within a unified world
same. Some of their revolutions were more backward, others
market—a step back from Stalin's view.
more advanced. How can they be evened up? If a father has
Between the two economic systems there is in fact not
some dozen children, some tall, some short, some big some
only competition but also fierce, broad-ranging struggle, a
small, some bright, some slow, how can they be evened up?
struggle the text has kept its distance from.
This is Bukharin's theory of balance. The economic develop-
ment of the various socialist countries is not in balance, nor
64. Criticism of Stalin
is that of the provinces within a country, or the counties
within a province. Take public health in Kuangtung prov-
Stalin's Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR, like his
ince. Fo Shan city and Chihlo commune have done a good
other works, contains erroneous arguments. But the two ac-
job. Consequently Fo Shan is not in balance with the whole
cusations referred to on page 681 are not convincing.
province. Chihlo is not in balance with Shaokuan. To op-
One accusation is that Stalin held that "circulation of
pose imbalances is wrong.
commodities seems to have already become an obstacle to the
development of the productive forces. The necessity for grad-
62. The Ultimate Question Is One of System
ually making the transition to direct exchanges of production
between industry and agriculture is fully formed."
Page 668 says that socialist loans are different from imperial-
In this book Stalin said that when there are two kinds of
ist loans. This tallies with the facts. Socialist countries are
ownership system then there is commodity production. He
always preferable to capitalist ones. We understand this prin-
said that in the enterprises of the collective farms, although
the means of production (land, tools, etc.) belong to the state,
ciple. The ultimate question is systemic, institutional. Sys-
tems determine the direction a country will take. Socialist
the goods produced are all the property of the separate collec-
systems determine that socialist countries will always stand
tives. The reason is that the labor on the collectives (like the
opposed to imperialist countries and that their compromises
seeds)is owned by the collectives, while the land that the
are always provisional.
state has given them for permanent use is in fact controlled
by the collectives as if it were their own property. Under such
conditions "the collective farms are willing to release into
circulation what they produce only in the commodity form, in
expectation of obtaining the commodities they need in
=====第53页=====
106
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
107
exchange. At the present time the collective farms will not
the other hand, do not think it is entirely Marxist-Leninist,
enter into any economic relations other than exchange
for it contains a good many views that deviate. We are not,
through purchase and sales."
however, ready to conclude that this text is basically nega-
Stalin criticized the current view in the Soviet Union that
tive.
advocated doing away with commodity production, holding
The text emphasizes that a socialist economy serves the
that commodity production was no less necessary than it was
whole people, not the profit calculations of a minority of ex-
thirty years earlier when Lenin declared the need for bending
ploiters. The basic economic laws of socialism discussed in
every effort to develop commodity circulation.
the text cannot be regarded as wholly in error. And these
The text says that Stalin seemed to be advocating instant
laws are the fundamental subject of the book. Also, the text
elimination of commodities. This accusation is diffi cult to
explains planning, proportionality, high rate of development,
make good. As to the question of commodity exchange, for
etc., and in these respects is still socialist and Marxist. But
Stalin it was only a hypothesis. For he had even said, "There
once planning and proportionality are acknowledged, how
is no need to promote this system with urgency; it must be
these things are done is quite another matter. Each of us has
decided according to the degree of accumulation of goods
his own approach.
manufactured in the cities."
Notwithstanding, this text has certain fundamental argu-
Another accusation is that Stalin underestimated the
ments that are in error. "Politics in command" and the"mass
workings of the law of value in the sphere of production and
line" are not stressed. There is no discussion of "walking on
especially with reference to the means of production. "In the
two legs,," and individual material interest is onesidedly em-
sphere of socialist production the law of value plays no regu-
phasized. Material incentives are proclaimed and individ-
lating role. This role is played by the law of planned propor-
ualism is far too prominent.
tional development and state planned economy." This argu-
In studying socialist economy the text does not proceed
ment offered by the text is in reality Stalin's own argument.
from contradictions. In truth, it does not acknowledge the
Even though the text says that the means of production are
universality of contradiction nor that social contradictions are
commodities, nonetheless, in the first place, it must say that
the motive force of social development. The truth is that in
they are in the category of ownership by the whole people.
their own society* there is still class struggle, that is, strug-
Purchase and sale of the means of production in no way
gle between socialism and capitalist remnants. But this they
changes ownership. In the second place, the text ought to
do not concede. Their society * has three types of ownership:
concede that the law of value functions differently in the
by the whole people, by the collective, and by the individual.
Of course, such individual ownership is unlike individual
sphere of production and in the process of circulation. All
ownership before collectivization, when the peasants'liveli-
these arguments are consistent with Stalin's. One real dif-
hood was entirely based on individual ownership. Now they
ference between Stalin and Khrushchev is that Stalin op-
have one foot on the boat and one still on shore, mainly rely-
posed selling such means of production as tractors, etc. to the
ing on the collective but on the individual at the same time.
collective farms while Khrushchev sold them.
If there are three types of ownership, there will be contra-
65. The Text's General Point of View
diction and struggle. But the text has no discussion of this.
There is no encouraging of the mass movement. There is no
Do not think there is no Marxism-Leninism in this text, for it
*Socialist society in the 1967 text.
contains a good many views that are Marxist-Leninist. On
=====第54页=====
108
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
109
acknowledgment of having collective ownership under social-
When writing the result will be exciting only if there is a
ism make the transition to public ownership under socialism,
target of criticism. Although this text has some correct things
of turning the whole society into the indivisible possession of
to say, it does not unfold a critique of views considered
the whole people as a precondition for the transition to com-
wrong. This makes the reading tedious.
munism.
In many places one feels as if a scholastic is speaking, not
The text uses such vague terms as "rapprochement" and
a revolutionary. The economist who does not understand eco-
"concord" to take the place of the conception that one owner-
nomic practice is not a true expert. The book seems to reflect
ship system becomes another, one kind of production rela-
the following kind of situation: there are those who do prac-
tions becomes another. In these respects the book has
tical work but lack the ability to generalize, as they lack con-
serious faults and serious errors and has partially deviated
cepts and laws; on the other hand, those who do theoretical
from Marxism-Leninism.
work lack practical experience. These two types have not
The text is very poorly written, neither persuasive nor in-
been integrated; that is, theory and practice have not been
teresting to read. It does not proceed from concrete analysis
integrated.
of the contradictions between the productive forces and the
The book shows that its authors do not have a dialectical
production relations nor the contradiction between the eco-
method. One has to think philosophically to write an eco-
nomic base and the superstructure. In posing questions, in
nomics text. Philosophers should participate in the writing,
researching problems, it always proceeds from general con-
otherwise it will not be possible to produce a satisfactory
cepts or definitions. It gives definitions without making rea-
text.
soned explanations. In fact, a definition should be the result,
The first edition of this text appeared in early 1955. But
not the starting point, of an analysis. Quite without founda-
the basic framework seems to have been set even before
tion the book offers a series of laws, laws which are not dis-
then. And it looks as if the model Stalin set at that time was
covered and verified through analysis of concrete historical
not very enlightening.
development. Laws cannot be self-explanatory. If one does
In the Soviet Union there are presently those who dis-
not work from the concrete processes, the concrete historical
agree with how the book was done. G. Kozlov wrote an article
development, laws will not be clearly explained.
called "A Scientific Course of Study of Socialist Political
The book does not deal with problems masterfully, with
Economy" which criticized this book. His views go to the root
overall control of its subject. Issues do not stand forth clearly.
of the matter. He points out methodological faults of the book
The composition is not persuasive but is dull and ilogical,
and calls for explanations of laws that proceed from an analy-
lacking even formal logic. It appears as if written by different
sis of the process of socialist production. He also makes
authors, each taking a chapter—a division of labor without
suggestions as to structure.
unity. It lacks the systemic order a textbook should have. On
In view of the criticism of Kozlov and others it is possible
top of this, its method is to proceed from definitions, and it
that another textbook with an opposite approach will be pro-
reads like an economics dictionary. The authors are passive,
duced in the Soviet Union. Opposition is always to the good.
contradicting one another in many places, later chapters at
From a first reading of this text one comes to realize its
odds with earlier ones. Cooperative division of labor and col-
method and viewpoint. But that is not yet thorough study.
lective authorship is one method. But the best method is to
What would be best in the future is to take the issues and
have one leader writing alongside of several assistants. This
arguments as the core, do some meticulous research, bring
is the way Marx and his circle wrote, and their works were
together some materials, and look over other available ar-
integral, and strictly, systematically scientific.
ticles, books, reports, etc., with views that differ from those in
=====第55页=====
110
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
111
this text. One should get an idea of the different opinions on
the distribution of commodities. In writing a political econ-
controversial issues. To clarify issues the views of at least two
omy of our own we could also begin with the ownership sys-
sides have to be understood.
tem. First, we describe the conversion of ownership of the
We must criticize and oppose wrong opinions, but we
means of production from private to public: how we con-
must also protect all correct things. Both courage and caution
verted private ownership of bureaucratic capital and the capi-
are needed.
talist ownership system into socialist ownership by the whole
No matter what, for them to have written a socialist politi-
people; how private ownership of the land by the landlords
cal economy is a great task on the whole. Regardless how
was turned first into private ownership by individual peasants
many problems it contains, this book at the least furnishes us
and then into collective ownership under socialism; only then
with material for debate, and thanks to this has led to further
could we describe the contradiction between the two forms of
study.
public ownership under socialism and how collective owner-
ship under socialism could make the transition to people's
66. How to Write a Text on Political
ownership under communism. At the same time, we must
Economy
describe how people's ownership itself changes: the system
of transferring cadres to lower levels, administration by dif-
In principle it is permissible for the text to proceed from the
ferent levels, right of autonomy of enterprises, etc. Although
ownership system. But there is an even better way. In re-
alike in being owned by the whole people, our enterprises are
searching the capitalist economy Marx, too, studied mainly
variously administered, some by departments of the center,
ownership of the means of production under capitalism, ex-
others through provinces, municipalities, or autonomous
amining how distribution of the means of production deter-
regions, yet others through local special districts or counties.
mined the distribution of commodities. In capitalist society
Some commune-run enterprises are semiowned by the whole
the social nature of production and the private nature of own-
people, semiowned by the collective. But whether centrally or
ership is a fundamental contradiction. Marx began with the
locally administered, the enterprises are all under unified
commodity and went on to reveal the relations among people
leadership and possess specific autonomous rights.
hidden behind commodities (the relations among things).
Turning to the problem of the relations among people
Commodities in socialist society still have duality; nonethe-
during productive labor, the text, aside from such comments
less, thanks to the establishment of public ownership of the
as "relations of comradely cooperation and mutual assis-
means of production and the fact that labor power is no
tance,," has completely failed to come to grips with the sub-
longer a commodity, duality of commodities under socialism
stantive issues, having conducted no research or analysis into
this area. After the question of the ownership system is
is not the same as their duality under capitalism. The rela-
tions among people are no longer hidden behind commodity
solved, the most important question is administration—how
relations. Thus, if socialist economy is studied beginning
enterprises owned either by the whole people or the collective
with the duality of commodities, copying Marx's method, it
are administered. This is the same as the question of the rela-
may well have the opposite effect of confusing the issues,
tions among people under a given ownership system, a sub-
ject that could use many articles. Changes in the ownership
making things harder for people to understand.
Political economy aims to study the production relations.
system in a given period of time always have their limits, but
the relations among people in productive labor may well, on
As Stalin saw it, the production relations include three
the contrary, be in ceaseless change. With respect to ad-
things: ownership, relations among people during labor, and
=====第56页=====
112
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
113
ministration of enterprises owned by the whole people,we
thrusts in certain areas. Take the civil war period, when the
have adopted a set of approaches: a combination of concen-
enemy had several hundred thousand men, we had several
trated leadership and mass movement; combinations of party
tens of thousands. Strategically, the enemy was strong and
leaders, working masses, and technical personnel; cadres
on the offensive, we were weak and on the defensive. But to
participating in production; workers participating in adminis-
attack us they had to divide their forces into columns, and
tration; steadily changing unreasonable regulations and insti-
the columns again into detachments. Typically, one company
tutional practices.
would attack a strong point while the others were still man-
As to the distribution of commodities, the text has to be
euvering. We would then concentrate several tens of thou-
rewritten, changing its present approach altogether. Hard,
sands to attack one column, even concentrating the majority
bitter struggle, expanding reproduction, the future prospects
of our forces to take a single point of the enemy column, as
of communism—these are what have to be emphasized, not
another group would divert those enemy troops still maneu-
individual material interest. The goal to lead people toward is
vering. In this way we achieved superiority at the particular
not "one spouse, one country house, one automobile, one
point. The enemy had become small and weak, and we large
piano, one television." This is the road of serving the sel, not
and strong. Another thing is that when they would arrive at a
the society. A "ten-thousand-league journey begins where
place conditions would be unfamiliar to them, the masses
you are standing." But if one looks only at the feet without
would not support them, and so we would be able to wipe out
giving thought to the future, then the question is: What is
an enemy group completely.
left of revolutionary excitement and ardor? *
Ideology becomes systematic, generally speaking, in the
67.How to Study Appearances to Reach
wake of the movements of phenomena. The reason is that
Essences
thought and understanding are reflections of material move-
ments. Laws are things which appear over and over, not ac-
In studying a problem one must begin with the appearances
cidentally, in the movements of phenomena. It is only after
that people can see and feel, in order to research the es-
the repeated appearance of something that it becomes a law
sences that lie behind them, and then go on from there to
and thus an object to be understood. For example, crises of
reveal the substance and contradiction of objective things
capitalism occurred about every ten years. When this had
and events.
happened over and over it then became possible for us to un-
At the time of the civil war and the War of Resistance
derstand the laws of economic crisis in capitalist society. In
Against Japan our study of the problems of war proceeded
land reform we had to distribute land according to population
from appearances. The enemy was big and strong, we were
rather than labor power. But we did not understand this
small and weak. This was the most obvious appearance at
clearly until we had done it many times. In the late period of
that time, one which all could see. We were the ones who
the second civil war "left" adventurist comrades called for
studied and resolved problems, proceeding from appearances
distribution of land according to labor power and disapproved
to study how the side which was small and weak might de-
of distribution of land per capita. In their view even distribu-
feat an enemy which was big and strong. We pointed out that
tion of land according to population was not rigorous as to
although we were small and weak we had mass support, and
class outlook and not sufficiently from the outlook of the
that the enemy, though big and strong, was vulnerable to
masses. Their slogan was: no land to the landlord, poor land
to the rich peasant; to all others land according to labor
power. Facts proved this approach to be wrong. How land
*"What energy is left for traveling?" in the 1967 text.
=====第57页=====
114
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
115
should be distributed was made clear only after we had gone
not make French bourgeois materialism unnecessary, nor did
through experiences repeated over and over again
the existence of English and French bourgeois materialism
make the German or the Russian unnecessary.
Marxism requires that logic be consistent with history.
The Marxist philosophy of the proletarian class is even
Thought is the reflex of objective existence. Logic comes
more vitally concerned to serve contemporary political tasks.
from history. Though this textbook has an abundance of ma-
For China, Marx, Lenin, and Stalin* are necessary reading.
terials, there is no analysis, there is no logic, the laws are not
That comes first. But communists of any country and the
discernible, and it is not satisfactory. But a lack of materials
proletarian philosophical circles of any country must create
is also unsatisfactory. Then people will see only logic and not
new theory, write new works, produce their own theoreti-
history. Moreover, it will be only subjective logic. Here ex-
cians to serve the political tasks facing them.
actly are the faults of this text.
No nation can at any time rely only on what is old. Hav-
ing Marx and Engels without Lenin's Two Tactics and other
It is vital to produce a history of the development of
works could not have solved the new problems of 1905 and
Chinese capitalism. If those who study history do not study
afterward. Having only Materialism and Empirico-Criticism
he different societies, the different historical eras, they will
of 1907 would not have sufficed to cope with the new issues
surely be unable to produce good comprehensive histories.
that arose before and after the October Revolution. To meet
Studying the different societies means having to find the par-
the needs of this time Lenin wrote Imperialism, State and
icular laws governing those societies. Once the particular
Revolution and other works. After Lenin, Stalin was needed
aws have been studied and made clear, it will be easy to
to write Foundations of Leninism and Problems of Leninism
now the general laws of society. It is necessary to discern
to deal with reactionaries and preserve Leninism. At the end
he general from the study of many particularities. If the par-
of our second civil war and the beginning of the War of Re-
icular lawsare not understood clearly, the general cannot be
sistance Against Japan we wrote On Practice and On
ither. For example, in studying the general laws governing
Contradiction. They had to be written to meet the needs of
nimals it is necessary to study separately those governing
the times.
ertebrates, invertebrates,etc.
Now that we have entered the period of socialism a whole
new series of problems has appeared. If we do not meet the
68. Philosophy Must Serve the Political
new needs, write the new works, give form to new theory, it
Tasks Facing Us
will not do!
Any philosophy is in the service of its contemporary tasks.
SUPPLEMENT
Capitalist philosophy has this function. And every nation,
every era has new theoreticians producing new theory for the
1. China's Industrialization Problems
political tasks of the day. In England such bourgeois materi-
alists as Bacon and Hobbes appeared; materialists likethe
After the Soviet Union's first five-year plan had been com-
Encyclopediststhenappeared in eighteenth-century France;
pleted, when the value of all large industrial production was
the German and Russian bourgeoisie also had their material-
70 percent of the value of all industrial and agricultural pro-
ists. All of these were bourgeois materialists, all of whom
served the political tasks of the bourgeois class. Thus the
*Omitted in the 1967 text.
existence of English or bourgeois materialism certainly did
=====第58页=====
116
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
117
duction, they promptly declared that industrialization had
In 1949 we had 90,000 or more sets of machine tools. By
been made a reality. We too could quickly reach such a stan-
1959 the number had increased to 490,000. In 1957 Japan
dard, but even if we did, we still would not claim that indus-
had 600,00o. The number of machine tools is an important
trialization had become a reality, because we have over 500
index of the level of industrial development.
million peasants devoting themselves to agriculture. If indus-
Our level of mechanization still is quite low, as one can
trialization is claimed when industrial production is 70 per-
tell simply from Shanghai, where, according to the most re-
cent, not only would we be unable to reflect accurately the
cent survey mechanized labor, semimechanized labor, and
actual conditions of our national economy, but we could even
manual labor each constituted one-third.
create a mood of laxity.
Labor productivity in Soviet industry has not as yet sur-
At the first plenary session of the Eighth National Peo-
passed that of the United States. We are even further behind.
ple's Congress we spoke of the necessity to establish a firm
Though our population is very large our labor productivity is
foundation for socialist industrialization in the second five-
a long way from comparing with that of others. From 1960
year plan. We also said that within fifteen years or so we
on we will still have to work intensively for thirteen years.
would build an integrated industrial system. These two state-
2. Social Position and Individual Capacity
ments are somewhat contradictory, for without a fully
equipped industrial system how can we speak of having a
On page 488 it says that in a socialist society a person's posi-
"firm foundation"for socialist industrialization? As things
tion is determined only by labor and individual capacity. This
now stand, in another three years we may surpass England in
is not necessarily so. Keen-minded people are always coming
output of primary industrial products. In another five years
from among those in a lower position. They are looked down
we can fulfill our task of establishing the industrial system as
on by others, they have suffered indignities, and they are
apractical reality.
young. Socialist society is no exception. In the old society it
In the long term, we expect to be known as an industrial-
was always the case that the oppressed had scant culture but
agricultural nation.* Even if we make over 100 million tons
were a bit keener; the oppressors had higher culture but
of steel it will still be so. If our per capita output were to
were a little on the slow side. There is some danger of this
surpass Great Britain's we would need to be producing 350
today. The higher salaried strata of a socialist society have a
million tons of steel at least!
bit more cultural knowledge but tend to be a trifle slow when
There is a special significance to picking out a country
compared to the lower strata. Thus our cadres' sons and
and competing with it. We are always talking about catching
daughters do not quite compare with the children of non-
up with England. Our first step is to catch up in terms of
cadres.
primary product output, next in terms of per capita output. In
From small plants have come many creations and discov-
shipbuilding and motor vehicle manufacture we are still far
eries. Larger factories may have superior facilities, newer
behind that country. We must strive to overtake it in all re-
technology,and for that very reason the staf all too often
spects. Even so small a country as Japan has 4 million tons'
assume airs of self-importance, are satisfied with things as
capacity of commercial shipping. It is inexcusable for a
they are and do not seek to advance and reach out ambiti-
country as large as ours to lack the shipping to move our own
ously. All too often their creativity does not compare at all
goods.
with that of the staff of the smaller factory. Recently in
Ch'angchou there was a textile mill in which the workers
*". . . we will not be known as an industrial nation" in the 1967 text.
=====第59页=====
118
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
119
created devices that raised the effi ciency of the looms. This
down on the smaller, poorer ones. The Western nations
will help cotton spinning, textile weaving, and printing and
looked down on Russia, historically. China is still in a similar
dyeing achieve a balanced capability. The new technique did
position. There is reason for this, for we are still nothing
not come from Shanghai or Tientsin but from a small place
much; such a large country, so little steel. So much illiteracy.
called Ch'angchou.
It can do us good to have people look down on us! It will
Knowledge is gained by coming through adversity. If Ch'u
drive us to exert ourselves, to push forward.
Yuan had remained in office his writings would not exist.1
Only because he lost his position and was "transferred down-
3. Relying on the Masses
ward to perform labor" was it possible for him to get close to
the life of society and produce so fine a work of literature as
Lenin put it well when he said, "Socialism is vigorous, spir-
the Li Sao. And it was not until he had been rebuffed in
ited, creative—the creation of the masses of the people them-
many states that Confucius also turned around and devoted
selves." Our mass line is like this. Does it not agree with
himself to his studies. He rallied a group of the unemployed
Leninism? After quoting this statement the text says, "The
who expected to go from place to place to sell their labor
broad laboring masses increasingly participate in a direct ac-
power: But no one would have them. Frustrated at every
tive way in the management of production, in the work of
turn, he had no alternative but to collect the folk songs now
state bodies, in the leadership of all departments in the coun-
known as the Book of Odes and put in order the historical
try's social life." (p. 332) This is also well put. But saying is
materials known as the Spring and Autumn.
one thing and doing another. And to do this is by no means
Historically, many advanced things came not from ad-
easy.
vanced countries but from comparatively backward ones.
In 1928 the Central Committee of the CPSU passed a res-
Marxism did not come from the comparatively developed cap-
olution which said: "We will be able to solve the task of over-
italist countries of the time—England, France—but from Ger-
taking and surpassing the capitalist countries technically and
many, whose level of capitalist development was in between.
economically only when the party and the worker and peas-
There is a reason for this.
ant masses get mobilized to the limit." (p. 337) This is very
Scientific inventions likewise do not necessarily come
well put. And this is exactly what we are now doing. At that
from those with a high level of culture and education. At
time Stalin had nothing else to rely on except the masses, so
present there are many university professors who have not
he demanded all-out mobilization of the party and the
invented anything. Of course, this is not to deny the df-
masses. Afterward, when they had realized some gains this
ference between an engineer and a worker. It is not that we
way, they became less reliant on the masses.
do not want engineers. But there is a real question here. His-
Lenin said, "Truly democratic centralism requires that
torically it is usually a case of the culturally inferior defeating
the manifold paths, forms, and methods by which local crea-
the culturally superior. In our civil war our commanders at
tivity and spirit of initiative attain general goals have a suf-
various levels were culturally inferior to the Kuomintang of-
ficiently unhindered development."(p. 454). Well said. The
ficers, who came from military academies at home or abroad.
masses can create the paths. The masses created Russia's so-
But we defeated them.
viets. And they created our people's communes.
The human animal has this flaw: looking down on others.
Those who have accomplished some small thing look down
on those who have yet to. Great powers, rich nations look
=====第60页=====
120
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
121
4. The Soviet Union and China: A Few
after the whole country was liberated we speedily carried to
its completion the work of economic recovery. Immediately
Points to Compare in the Development
after that we raised the general line of the transition period,
Process
namely, putting our primary effort into socialist revolution
while beginning construction under the first five-year plan.
On page 422 the text quotes Lenin: "If state power is in the
As we carried out socialist transformation we worked
hands of the working class it is possible to make the transi-
together with the peasantry to deal with the capitalists. There
tion to communism through state capitalism." And so forth.
was, however, a time when Lenin said that he could bear to
This is well put. Lenin was a solid worker. Because he real-
negotiate even with the capitalists in hopes of turning capi-
ized that the proletariat after the October Revolution had no
talism into state capitalism as a means of coping with the
experience in managing the economy, he attempted to de-
spontaneity of the petty bourgeoisie. Different policies arise
velop the proletariat's competence in this area by using the
in different historical conditions.
ways and means of state capitalism. The Russian bourgeoisie
Inthe New Economic Policy (NEP) period the Soviet
underestimated the strength of the proletariat at that time.
Union had a restrained policy toward the rich peasants be-
Refusing Lenin's conditions, they carried out slowdowns and
cause they needed the grain. We had a similar policy toward
destructive activities, forcing the workers to confiscate their
the national bourgeoisie in the early stages after liberation.
properties. That is why state capitalism could not develop.
Not until the collective farms and the state farms had pro-
During the civil war period Russia's problems were truly
duced in all 400 million pood of grain did they move against
enormous. Agriculture was in ruins. Commercial linkswere
the rich peasants, putting forward the slogan of eliminating
disrupted. Communications and transport were hardly func-
the rich peasants and making overall collectivization a
ioning. Raw materials could not be obtained, and many fac-
reality.* What about us? We did things differently, act-
ories that had been expropriated could not commence opera-
ually eliminating the rich peasant economy as early as land
ions. Because they really had no answer to this they had no
reform.
choice but to turn to a system of requisitioning the peasants'
In the Soviet Union cooperative movement "agriculture
surplus grain. Actually, this was a means of taking the fruits
paid a heavy price at the beginning." (p. 397) This is what
ofthe peasants' labor without compensation, a method that
caused many of the East European countries to have plenty
meant ransacking the jars and boxes of the peasants—not a
of anxiety over the question of cooperativization and to be
sound practice. Only when the civil war ended was this sys-
tem replaced with a grain tax.
*In "Several Questions Concerning Soviet Land Policy" (December
Our civil war lasted much longer than theirs. For twenty-
1929) Stalin said, "In 1927 the rich peasants produced over 600 million pood
two years it was our practice in the base areas to collect
of grain, of which 130 million were sold through rural exchange. This is a
public grain and to purchase surplus grain. We had a correct
substantial force which we can not slight. Tell me, how much had our col-
strategy toward the peasanty and during the war we relied
lective and state farms produced at that time? About 80 million pood, of
heavily on them.
which 30 million were commodity grains." So Stalin decided, "Under these
For twenty-two years we developed our political power in
circumstances we can not resolutely attack the rich peasants." And Stalin
continued, "Now we have a suffi cient material basis to attack them." That
the base areas, and we accumulated experience in managing
was because in 1929 the collective and state farms produced no less than
the economy of the base areas. We trained cadres to manage
400 million pood, of which over 130 million were commodity grains. (Josef
the economy and built an alliance with the peasantry, so that
Stalin, Complete Works, vol 12, p. 142)
=====第61页=====
122
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
123
fearful of organizing big. When they did get started they
third plenary session of the Central Committee revived such
moved slowly. Our production was not reduced by the coop-
slogans as "More! Faster！ Better! More economically!" the
eratives. On the contrary, it increased enormously. At the
general program in forty articles, the society for the promot-
beginning many were dubious. Now the number of converts
ing of progress,* etc. In November in Moscow we revised a
is slowly increasing.
People's Daily editorial on "More! Faster! Better! More
economically!" Thus, in the winter we launched a nationwide
5. The Process of Forming and
mass movement for large-scale water conservancy.
Consolidating a General Line
In 1958 there were meetings, first in Nanning, then in
Ch'engtu. We tore into our problems, criticizing those op-
These past two years we have been conducting a great exper-
posed to daring advances. We decided not to allow further op-
iment.
position to daring advances. We proposed a general line for
In the early stages of Liberation we had no experience of
socialist construction. If there had been no Nanning meeting
managing the economy of the entire nation. So in the period
we could not have come up with a general line. In May a
of the first five-year plan we could do no more than copy the
representativet of the Central Committee reported to the
Soviet Union's methods, although we never felt altogether
Eighth National People's Congress, second session. And the
satisfied about it. In 1955, when we had basically
assembly officially passed the general line. But the line was
completed the "three transformations"2 (at the end of the
not consolidated, so we followed with concrete measures,
year and in the spring of the following year), we sought out
mainly concerning division of authority between the center
over thirty cadres for consultation. As a result of those discus-
and the local areas. In Peitaiho we proposed doubling steel
sions we proposed the "ten great relationships" and "More!
output and got a mass movement in steel and iron un-
Faster! Better! More economically!" At that time we had read
derway—what the Western papers called backyard steel. At
Stalin's 1949 election speech, which stated that tsarist Russia
the same time we launched the people's communes. Right
was producing 4 million tons of steel annually. The figure
after came the shelling of Quemoy. These things perturbed
increases to 18 million by 1940. If one reckons from 1921,
some and offended others. Errors appeared in our work. By
there is an increase of only 14 million tons in twenty years.
not paying for food we ate ourselves into a crisis in grains and
And to think they were socialist the whole time! Could we
nonstaple foods. The ultracommunist wind was blowing. A
not do a little better, faster? After that we put forward the
certain percent of daily necessities could not be supplied.
question of "two methods" and at the same time we worked
Steel output for 1959 was set at 30 million tons at Peitaiho.
out a forty-article program for agricultural development.3 No
The Wuchang meeting lowered this to 20 million. The
other measures were proposed at the time.
Shanghai meeting lowered it to 16.5 million tons. Sometime
After the forward leap of 1956, opposition to * adventurous
in June 1959 it was cut again to 13 million. All this was
advances appeared. Bourgeois rightists took us by our pigtails
seized upon by those who disagreed with us. But when the
and attacked savagely in an attempt to negate the accomp-
Central Committee was opposing the "left' they did not raise
lishment of socialist construction. In June 1957, at the Na-
their objections, nor did they do so at the two Ch'engchou
tional People's Congress, Premier Chou En-lai's report struck
back at the rightists. In September the same year the party's
*"Great Leap Forward' in the 1967 text.
† Liu Shao-Ch'i in the 1967 text.
*Only in the 1967 text.
12 percent in the 1967 text.
=====第62页=====
124
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
125
conferences, the Wuchang Conference, the Peking Confer-
very bad if we had not beaten down the right opportunist line
ence, or the Shanghai Conference. They waited until the
at Lushan.
"left" had been opposed out of existence and goals had been
confirmed. Further opposition to the "left" made opposition to
6.Contradictions Among the Imperialist
the right necessary. At the Lushan Conference, when we
Nations and Other Matters
needed opposition to the right, they came out against the
"left.
"4
Struggles among the respective imperialisms should be seen
All this goes to show that things were far from peaceful in
as a major thing. That is how Lenin saw them and Stalin too,
our world, and the general line was certainly not consoli-
something they called the indirect reserve force of the revolu-
dated. Now that we have come through a period of difficult
tion. In getting the revolutionary base areas going China en-
zigzags and the Lushan Conference, the general line is com-
joyed this advantageous circumstance. In the past we had
paratively consolidated. But "things come in threes," so per-
contradictions among various factions of the landlord and
haps we have to prepare for a third period of zigzags. If so,
compradore classes. Behind these domestic contradictions lay
we can expect that the line will be consolidated even further.
contradictions among the imperialists. It was because of
According to Chekiang Provincial Committee information
these contradictions among the imperialists that only a part
"equalization" and "indiscriminate transfers of property"
of the enemy rather than all of them would do battle with us
have reappeared very recently in certain communes. The
directly in a particular time, so long as we utilized the contra-
ultracommunist wind may yet appear again!
dictions properly. In addition, we usually had time to rest and
The incidents in Poland and Hungary occured in 1956,
reorganize.
the time of the zigzags of the campaign against "daring ad-
Contradictions among the imperialists was one important
vances." Then the world turned against the Soviet Union.
reason why the October Revolution could be consolidated.
During the zigzags of 1959 the world turned against us.
Fourteen nations sent intervention forces at the time. But
The two rectification and antirightist campaigns, one in
none alone sent much. Moreover, their purposes were not co-
1957, one at Lushan, subjected the effects of bourgeois ide-
ordinated. They were engaged in intrigues. During the
ology and remaining bourgeois influences to comparatively
Korean war American purposes were not coordinated with
throughgoing criticism, enabling the masses to be liberated
those of their allies. The war was not fought on the largest
from the danger. At that time we also struck down many
scale. Not only could America not determine its own course,
superstitions, including the so-called Ma Anshan Iron and
France and England were not so eager.
Steel Constitution.
*5
Internationally the bourgeoisie are now extremely uneasy,
In the past we did not know how to get a socialist revolu-
afraid of any wind that might stir the grass. Their level of
tion going. We thought that after the cooperatives, after joint
alertness is high, but they are in disarray.
public-private management, the problem would be solved.
Since the Second World War the economic crises in capi-
The savage attacks of the bourgeois rightists caused us to put
talist society are different from those of Marx's day. Generally
forward socialist revolution as a political and an ideological
speaking, they used to come every seven, eight or ten years.
line. Actually, the Lushan Conference carried forward this
During the fourteen years between the end of the Second
revolution, and it was a sharp revolution. It would have been
World War and 1959 there were three.
At present the international scene is far more tense than
*"An authoritarian refining method at a major Soviet mill"note in the
after the First World War, when capitalism still had a period
of relative stability, the revolution having failed everywhere
1967 text.
=====第63页=====
126
Mao Tsetung
Reading Notes on the Soviet Text
127
except Russia. England and France were full of high spirits
not eat their fill, although they toil year in year out. This is
and the various national bourgeoisies were not all that afraid
most unreasonable. In America the agricultural population is
of the Soviet Union. Aside from the taking away of Ger-
only 13 percent and on the average each person has 2,000
many's colonies the entire imperialist colonial system was
catties6 of grain. We do not have so much. What shall we do
still in tact. After the Second World War three of the defeated
to reduce the rural population? If we do not want them
imperialisms collapsed. England and France were weakened
crowding into the cities we will have to have a great deal of
and in decline. Socialist revolution had triumped in over ten
industry in the countryside so that the peasants can become
countries. The colonial system was breaking apart. The capi
workers right where they are. This brings us to a major pol-
talist world would never again enjoy the relative stability it
icy issue: do we want to keep rural living conditions from
had after the First World War.
falling below that in the cities, keep the two roughly the
same, or keep the rural slightly higher than the urban? Every
7. Why China's Industrial Revolution
commune has to have its own economic center, its own
Can Be Very Rapid
upper-level schools to train its own intellectuals. There is no
other way to solve the problem of excess rural population
In Western bourgeois public opinion there are now those
really and truly.
who acknowledge that "China is one of the countries having
the most rapid industrial development."(The U.S. Conlon
report on United States diplomatic policy mentions this.)
There are many countries that have carried through an
ndustrialrevolution. Compared to all previous national in-
ustrial revolutions China promises to have one of the most
apid.
The question is, why? One of the main reasons is that our
ocialist revolution was carried through fairly thoroughly. We
carried through the revolution against the bourgeoisie
horoughly, doing our utmost to eradicate all bourgeois influ-
ences. We struck down superstitions and energetically
sought to enable the masses to win thoroughgoing liberation
n all areas.
8. Population
*
In eliminating the problem of excess population, rural popu-
ation is the major problem, the solution of which calls for
vastdevelopmentofproduction.InChinaover500million
people are devoting themselves to agriculture. But they do
* This section is found in the 1969 text only.
=====第64页=====
Concerning
Economic Problems of
Socialism in the USSR
(November 1958)'
Provincial and regional committees must study this book. In
the past everyone read it without gaining a deep impression.
It should be studied in conjunction with China's actual cir-
cumstances. The first three chapters contain much that is
worth paying attention to, much that is correct, although
there are places where perhaps Stalin himself did not make
things clear enough. For example, in chapter 1 he says only a
few things about objective laws and how to go about plan-
ning the economy, without unfolding his ideas; or, it may be
that to his mind Soviet planning of the economy already re-
flected objective governing principles. On the question of
heavy industry, light industry, and agriculture, the Soviet
Union did not lay enough emphasis on the latter two and had
losses as a result. In addition, they did not do a good job of
combining the immediate and the long-term interests of the
people. In the main they walked on one leg. Comparing the
planning, which of us after all had the better adapted
"planned proportionate development?"  Another point: Stalin
emphasized only technology, technical cadre. He wanted
nothing but technology, nothing but cadre; no politics, no
masses. This too is walking on one leg! And in industry they
walk on one leg when they pay attention to heavy industry
but not to light industry. Furthermore, they did not point out
the main aspects of the contradictions in the relationships
among departments of heavy industry. They exaggerated the
importance of heavy industry, claiming that steel was the
129
=====第65页=====
130
Mao Tsetung
Economic Problems of Socialism
131
foundation, machinery the heart and soul. Our position is
labor, but in reality even an extra hour's labor is begrudged.
that grain is the mainstay of agriculture, steel of industry,
There is no selflessness at all. The role of people, the role of
and that if steel is taken as the mainstay, then once we have
the laborerthese are not mentioned. If there were no com-
the raw material the machine industry will follow along. Sta-
munist movement it is hard to imagine making the transition
lin raised questions in chapter l: he suggested the objective
to communism. "All people are for me, I for all people." This
does not belong. It ends up with everything being connected
governing principles, but he failed to provide satisfactory
to the self. Some say Marx said it. If he did let's not make
answers.
In chapter 2 he discusses commodities, in chapter 3 the
propaganda out of it. "All people for me," means everybody
law of value. Relatively speaking, I favor many of the views
for me, the individual. '"I am for all." Well, how many can you
be for?
expressed. To divide production into two major departments
and to say that the means of production are not commodi-
Bourgeois right is manifested as bourgeois law and educa-
ties—these points deserve study. In Chinese agriculture
tion. We want to destroy a part of the ideology of bourgeois
there are still many means of production that should be com-
right, the lordly pose, the three styles [the bureaucratic, the
modities. My view is that the last of the three appended let-
sectarian, and the subjective] and the five airs[the officious,
ters* is entirely wrong. It expresses a deep uneasiness, a
the arrogant, the apathetic, the extravagant, and the pre-
belief that the peasantry cannot be trusted to release agricul-
cious]. But commodity circulation, the commodity form, the
law of value, these, on the other hand, cannot be destroyed
tural machinery but would hang on to it. On the one hand
Stalin says that the means of production belong to state own-
summarily, despite the fact that they are bourgeois cate-
gories. If we now carry on propaganda for the total elimina-
ership. On the other, he says that the peasants cannot afford
tion of the ideology of bourgeois right it would not be a rea-
them. The fact is that he is deceiving himself. The state con-
trolled the peasantry very, very tightly, infexibly. For the two
sonable position, bear in mind.
There are a few in socialist society-landlords, rich peas-
transitions Stalin failed to find the proper ways and means, a
ants, right-wingers—who are partial to capitalism and ad-
vexing matter for him.
vocate it. But the vast majority are thinking of crossing over
Capitalism leaves behind it the commodity form, which
to communism. This, however, has to be done by steps. You
we must still retain for the time being. Commodity exchange
cannot get to heaven in one step. Take the people's com-
laws governing value play no regulating role in our produc-
munes: on the one hand, they have to develop self-sufficient
tion. This role is played by planning, by the great leap for-
production, on the other, commodity exchange. We use com-
ward under planning, by politics-in-command. Stalin speaks
modity exchange and the law of value as tools for the benefi
only of the production relations, not of the superstructure,
of developing production and facilitating the transition. We
nor of the relationship between superstructure and economic
are a nation whose commodity production is very underde-
base. Chinese cadres participate in production; workers par-
veloped. Last year we produced 3.7 trillion catties of food-
ticipate in management. Sending cadres down to lower levels
grains. Of that number, commodity grains amounted to about
to be tempered, discarding old rules and regulations—all
800 or 900 billion catties. Apart from grain, industrial crops
these pertain to the superstructure, to ideology. Stalin men-
like cotton and hemp are also underdeveloped. Therefore we
tions economics only, not politics. He may speak of selfless
have to have this [commodity] stage of development. At
present there are still a good many counties where there is no
*Reply to Comrades A. V. Sanina and V. G. Venzher, included in Eco-
charge for food but they cannot pay wages. In Hopei there
nomic Problems.
=====第66页=====
132
Mao Tsetung
Economic Problems of Socialism
133
are three such counties, and another that can pay wages, but
(1) The concentrated manifestation of constructing socialism
not much: three or five yuan. So we still have to develop pro-
is making socialist, all-embracing public ownership* a reality.
duction, to develop things that can be sold other than
(2) Constructing socialism means turning commune collec-
foodgrains. At the Sian Agricultural Conference this point
tive ownership into public ownership. Some comrades disap-
was insufficiently considered. In sum, we are a nation whose
prove of drawing the line between these two types of owner-
commerce is underdeveloped, and yet in many respects we
ship system, as if the communes were completely publicly
have entered socialism. We must eliminate a part of
owned. In reality there are two systems. One type is public
bourgeois right, but commodity production and exchange
ownership, as in the Anshan Iron and Steel Works, the other
must still be kept. Now there is a tendency to feel that the
is commune-large collective ownership. If we do not raise
sooner communism comes the better. Some suggest that in
this, what is the use of socialist construction? Stalin drew the
only three or five years we will be making the transition. In
line when he spoke of three conditions. These three basic
Fan county, Shantung, it was suggested that four years
conditions make sense and may be summarized as follows:
might be a little slow!
increase social output; raise collective ownership to public
At present there are some economists who do not enjoy
ownership; go from exchange of commodities to exchange of
economics—Yaroshenko* for one. For now and until some
products, from exchange value to use value.
time in the future we will have to expand allocation and
On these two abovementioned points we Chinese are (1)
expanding and striving to increase output, concurrently pro-
delivery to the communes. And we will have to ex-
moting industry and agriculture with preference given to de-
pand commodity production. Otherwise we will not be able
veloping heavy industry; and (2) raising small collective own-
to pay wages or improve life. Some of our comrades are
ership to public ownership, and then further to all-embracing
guilty of a misapprehension when, coming upon commodities
public ownership. Those who would not draw these distinc-
and commodity production, they want to destroy bourgeois
tions [among types of ownership] would seem to hold the
rule every single day, e.g., they say wages, grades, etc., are
view that we have already arrived at public ownership. This
detrimental to the free supply system. In 1953 we changed
is wrong. Stalin was speaking of culture when he proposed
the free supply system into a wage system.2 This approach
the three conditions, the physical development and education
was basically correct. We had to take one step backward. But
of the whole people. For this he proposed four conditions: (a)
there was a problem: we also took a step backward in the
six hours' work per day; (b) combining technical education
matter of grades. As a result there was a furor over this mat-
with work;(c) improving residential conditions;(d)raising
ter. After a period of rectification grades were scaled down.
wages. Raising wages and lowering prices are particularly
The grade system is a father-son relation, a cat-and-mouse
helpful here, but the political conditions are missing.
relation. It has to be attacked day after day. Sending down
All these conditions are basically to increase production.
the cadres to lower levels, running the experimental fields3
Once output is plentiful it will be easier to solve the problem
these are ways of changing the grade system; otherwise, no
of raising collective to public ownership. To increase produc-
great leaps!
tion we need "More! Faster! Better! More economically!" And
In urban people's communes capitalists can enter and
for this we need politics-in-command, the four concurrent
serve as personnel. But the capitalist label should stay on
promotions, the rectification campaigns, the smashing of the
them. With respect to socialism and communism, what is
ideology of bourgeois right. Add to this the people's com-
meant by constructing socialism? We raise two points:
*This is identical, in Chinese, to ownership by the whole people.
* Recipient of Stalin's second letter, included in Economic Problems.
=====第67页=====
134
Mao Tsetung
munes and it becomes all the easier to achieve "More!
Faster! Better! More economically!"
What are the implications of all-embracing public owner-
ship? There are two:(1) the society's means of production
are owned by the whole people; and (2) the society's output
Critique of Stalin's
is owned by the whole people.
Economic Problems
The characteristic of the people's commune is that it is
the basic level at which industry, agriculture, the military,
of Socialism in the
education, and commerce are to be integrated in our social
USSR
structure. At the present time it is the basic-level administra-
tive organization. The militia deals with foreign threats, espe-
cially from the imperialists. The commune is the best
organizational form for carrying out the two transitions,
Stalin's book from first to last says nothing about the super-
from socialist (the present) to all-embracing public, and from
structure. It is not concerned with people; it considers
all-embracing public to communist ownership. In future,
things, not people. Does the kind of supply system for con-
when the transitions have been completed, the commune
sumer goods help spur economic development or not? He
will be the basic mechanism of communist society.
should have touched on this at the least. Is it better to have
commodity production or is it better not to? Everyone has to
study this. Stalin's point of view in his last letter* is almost
altogether wrong. The basic error is mistrust of the peasants.
Parts of the first, second, and third chapters are correct;
other parts could have been clearer. For example, the discus-
sion on planned economy is not complete. The rate of devel-
opment of the Soviet economy is not high enough, although
it is faster than the capitalists'rate. Relations between agri-
culture and industry, as well as between light and heavy in-
dustry, are not clearly explained.
It looks as if they have had serious losses. The rela-
tionship between long- and short-term interests has not seen
any spectacular developments. They walk on one leg, we
walk on two. They believe that technology decides every-
thing, that cadres decide everything, speaking only of "ex-
pert," never of "red," only of the cadres, never of the masses.
This is walking on one leg. As far as heavy industry goes,
they have failed to find the primary contradiction, calling
steel the foundation, machinery the heart and innards, coal
*Reply to comrades A. V. Sanina and V. G. Venzher.
135
=====第68页=====
136
Mao Tsetung
Critique of Stalin
137
the food. . .. For us steel is the mainstay, the primary con-
2. This argument is wrong. Human knowledge and the
tradiction in industry, while foodgrains are the mainstay in
capability to transform nature have no limit. Stalin did not
agriculture. Other things develop proportionally.
consider these matters developmentally. What cannot now be
In the first chapter he discusses grasping the laws, but
done, may be done in the future.
without proposing a method. On commodity production and
3. The same must be said of the laws of economic develop-
the law of value he has a number of views that we approve of
ment, the laws of political economy—whether in the period of
ourselves, but there are problems as well. Limiting commod-
capitalism or in the period of socialism. Here, too, the laws of
ity production to the means of subsistence is really rather
economic development, as in the case of natural science, are
doubtful. Mistrust of the peasants is the basic viewpoint of
objective laws, refecting processes of economic development
the third letter. Essentially, Stalin did not discover a way to
which take place independently of the will of man.
make the transition from collective to public ownership.
3. How do we go about planning the economy? There is
Commodity production and exchange are forms we have
not enough attention given to light industry, to agriculture.
kept, while in connection with the law of value we must
speak of planning and at the same time politics-in-command.
4. That is why Engels says in the same book: "The laws of his
They speak only of the production relations, not of the super-
own social action, hitherto standing face to face with man as
structure nor politics, nor the role of the people. Communism
laws of nature foreign to, and dominating, him, will then be
used with full understanding, and so mastered by him.(Anti-
cannot be reached unless there is a communist movement.
*
Dühring)
1. These comrades . . . it is evident . .. confuse laws of
4. Freedom is necessary objective law understood by peo-
science, which refect objective processes in nature or society,
processes which take place independently of the will of man,
ple. Such law confronts people, is independent of them. But
with the laws which are issued by governments, which are
once people understand it, they can control it.
made by the will of man, and which have only juridical validity.
5. The specific role of Soviet government was due to two cir-
But they must not be confused.
cumstances: first, that what Soviet government had to do was
1. This principle is basically correct, but two things are
not to replace one form of exploitation by another, as was the
wrong: first, the conscious activity of the party and the
case in earlier revolutions, but to abolish exploitation altogether;
masses is not suffi ciently brought out; second, it is not com-
second, that in view of the absence in the country of any ready-
made rudiments of a socialist economy, it had to create new, so-
prehensive enough in that it fails to explain that what makes
cialist forms of economy, "starting from scratch,," so to speak.
government decrees correct is not only that they emerge
from the will of the working class but also the fact that they
5. The inevitability of socialist economic laws—that is
faithfully reflect the imperatives of objective economic laws.
something that needsto be studied.AttheCh'engtuConfer-
2. Leaving aside astronomical, geological, and other simlar
ence I said that we would have to see whether or not our
processes, which man really is powerless to infuence, even if
general program ("More! Faster! Better! More economically!"
he has come to know the laws of their development. ...
the three concurrent promotions, and the mass line) would
f  op; 1 or if it could succeed. This can not be demonstrated for
* These first four paragraphs comment critically on the entire text. There
several or even as many as ten years. The laws of the revolu-
ollows a series of comments criticizing specific sections. Before each com-
tion, which used to be doubted by some, have now been
nent Stalin's original text is given, as translated for Jen min ch'u pan she,
proved correct because the enemy has been overthrown. Can
Brded., January 1938.(We use the English edition of Foreign Languages
socialist construction work? People still have doubts. Does
Press,Peking,1972).
=====第69页=====
138
Mao Tsetung
Critique of Stalin
139
our Chinese practice conform to the economic laws of China?
terns, everyone racking their brains to think of answers, did
This has to be studied. My view is that if the practice con-
we hit upon the forty-article agricultural program which we
forms generally, things will be all right.
are now putting into effect. And we are in the midst of devis-
ing a new forty articles. After another three years' bitter
6. This [creating new, socialist forms of economy "from
struggle we will develop further; after full and suffi cient dis-
scratch"] was undoubtedly a diffi cult, complex, and unprece-
cussions we will again proceed. Can we make it a reality? It
dented task.
remains to be proved in objective practice. We worked on in-
6. With respect to the creating of socialist economic
dustry for eight years but did not realize that we had to take
forms we have the precedent of the Soviet Union and for this
steel as the mainstay. This was the principal aspect ofthe
reason should do a bit better than they. If we ruin things it
contradiction in industry. It was monism. Among the large,
will show that Chinese Marxism does not work. As to the dif-
the medium, and the small, we take the large as the main-
ficulty and complexity of the tasks, things are no different
stay; between the center and the regions, the center. Of the
from what the Soviet Union faced.
two sides of any contradiction one is the principal side. As
important as eight years'achievements are, we were feeling
7. It is said that the necessity for balanced (proportionate) de-
our way along, nonetheless. It cannot be said that our plan-
velopment of the national economy in our country enables the
ning of production was entirely correct, that it entirely re-
Soviet government to abolish existing economic laws and to
flected the objective laws. Planning is done by the whole
create new ones. That is absolutely untrue. Our yearly and five-
party, not simply the planning committee or the economics
yearly plans must not be confused with the objective economic
committee, but by all levels; everyone is involved. In this pas-
law of balanced, proportionate development of the national
sage Stalin is theoretically correct. But there is not yet a
economy.
finely detailed analysis, nor even the beginnings of a clear ex-
7. This is the crux of the matter.
planation. The Soviets did not distinguish among the large,
the medium, and the small, the region and the center; nor
8. That means that the law of balanced development of the na-
did they promote concurrently industry and agriculture. They
tional economy makes it possible for our planning bodies to plan
have not walked on two legs at all. Their rules and regula-
social production correctly. But possibility must not be con-
tions hamstrung people. But we have not adequately studied
fused with actuality. They are two different things. In order to
and grasped our situation, and as a result our plans have not
turn the possibility into actuality, it is necessary to study this
fully reflected objective laws either.
economic law, to master it, to learn to apply it with full under-
standing, and to compile such plans as fully reflect the require-
9. Let us examine Engels' formula. Engels' formula cannot be
ments of this law. It cannot be said that the requirements of
considered fully clear and precise, because it does not indicate
this economic law are fully reflected by our yearly and five-
whether it is referring to the seizure by society of all or only
yearly plans.
part of the means of production; that is, whether all or only part
8. The central point of this passage is that we must not
of the means of production are converted into public property.
confuse the objective law of planned proportionate develop-
Hence, this formula of Engels' may be understood either way.
ment with planning. In the past we too devised plans, but
9. This analysis touches the essentials! The problem is
they frequently caused a storm. Too much! Too little! Blindly
dividing the means of production into two parts. To say the
we bumped into things, never sure of the best way. Only
means of production are not commodities deserves study.
after suffering tortuous lessons, moving in U-shaped pat-
=====第70页=====
140
Mao Tsetung
Critique of Stalin
141
10. In this section, Commodity Production Under Social-
the decision to make this 83 billion catties of grain. I cannot
ism, Stalin has not comprehensively set forth the conditions
understand why people have forgotten these things so
for the existence of commodities. The existence of two kinds
promptly.
of ownership is the main premise for commodity production.
12. I leave aside in this instance the question of the importance
But ultimately commodity production is also related to the
of foreign trade to Britain and the vast part it plays in her na-
productive forces. For this reason, even under completely so-
tional economy. I think that only after an investigation of this
cialized public ownership, commodity exchange will still have
question can it be finally decided what would be the future
tobeoperative in some areas.
[fate] of commodity production in Britain after the proletariat
had assumed power and all the means of production had been
11. It follows from this that Engels has in mind countries
nationalized.
where capitalism and the concentration of production have ad-
vanced far enough both in industry and agriculture to permit
12. Fate depends on whether or not commodity produc-
the expropriation of all the means of production in the country
tion is abolished.
and their conversion into public property. Engels, consequently,
considers that in such countries, parallel with the socialization
13. But here is a question: What are the proletariat and its
of all the means of production, commodity production should be
party to do in countries, ours being a case in point, where the
conditions are favorable for the assumption of power by the pro-
put an end to. And that, of course, is correct.
letariat and the overthrow of capitalism [where capitalism has
so concentrated the means of production in industry that they
11. Stalin's analysis of Engels' formula is correct. At
may be expropriated and made the property of society, but
resent there is a strong tendency to do away with commod-
where agriculture, notwithstanding the growth of capitalism, is
y production. People get upset the minute they see com-
divided up among numerous small and medium owner-
nodity production, taking it for capitalism itself. But it looks
producers to such an extent as to make it impossible to consider
as if commodity production will have to be greatly developed
the expropriation of these producers?] *... [This] would throw
and the money supply increased for the sake of the solidarity
the peasantry into the camp of the enemies of the proletariat for
of several hundred million peasants. This poses a problem for
a long time.
the ideology of several hundred thousand cadres as well as
13.In sum, the principle governing commodity
for the solidarity of several hundred million peasants. We
production was not grasped. Chinese economists are
now possess only a part of the means of production. But it ap-
Marxist-Leninist as far as book learning goes. But when
pears that there are those who wish to declare at once owner-
they encounter economic practice Marxism-Leninism gets
shipbythe whole people, divesting thesmall and medium
shortchanged. Their thinking is confused. If we make mis-
producers. But they fail to declare the category of ownership!
takes we will lead the peasantry to the enemy side.
Is it to be commune-owned or county-owned? To abolish
14. Lenin's answer may be briefly summed up as follows:
commodities and commodity production in this way, merely
(a). Favorable conditions for the assumption of power should
by declaring public ownership, is to strip the peasantry. At
not be missed—the proletariat should assume power without
the end of 1955, procurement and purchase got us almost 90
waiting until capitalism has succeeded in ruining the millions
billion catties of grain, causing us no litle trouble. Everyone
of small and medium individual producers;
was talking about food, and household after household was
talking about unified purchase. But it was purchase, after all,
* Material in brackets added from Stalin's text to clarify the point.
not allocation. Only later did the crisis ease when we made
=====第71页=====
142
Mao Tsetung
Critique of Stalin
143
15(b). The means of production in industry should be expro-
merce. We would rather say, devote the fullest energies to
priated and converted into public property;
developing industry, agriculture, and commerce. The es-
16(c). As to the small and medium individual producers, they
sence of the problem is the peasant question. There are those
should be gradually united in producers' cooperatives, i.e., in
who regard the peasant as even more conscious than the
large agricultural enterprises, collective farms;
workers. We have carried through or are in the process of
carrying through on these five items. Some areas still have to
17(d). Industry should be developed to the utmost and the col-
be developed, such as commune-run industry or concurrent
lective farms should be placed on the modern technical basis of
large-scale production, not expropriating them, but on the con-
promotion of industry and agriculture.
trary generously supplying them with first-class tractors and
19. Lenin said the same thing.
other machines;
20. Commodity production must not be regarded as something
18(e). In order to ensure an economic bond between town and
suficient unto itself, something independent of the surround-
country, between industry and agriculture, commodity produc-
ing economic conditions. Commodity production is older than
tion (exchange through purchase and sale) should be preserved
capitalist production. It existed in slave-owning society, and
for a certain period, it being the form of economic tie with the
served it, but did not lead to capitalism. It existed in feudal soci-
town which is alone acceptable to the peasants, and Soviet
ety and served it, yet, although it prepared some of the condi-
trade—state, cooperative, and collective-farm—should be devel-
tions for capitalist production, it did not lead to capitalism.
oped to the full and the capitalists of all types and descriptions
21. Bearing in mind that in our country commodity production
ousted from trading activity.
is not so boundless and all-embracing as it is under capitalist
The history of socialist construction in our country has
22. conditions, being confined within strict bounds thanks
shown that this path of development, mapped out by Lenin, has
to such decisive economic conditions as social owner-
fully justified itself.
ship of the means of production, the abolition of the system of
19. There can be no doubt that in the case of all capitalist
wage labor, and the elimination of the
countries with a more or less numerous class of small and me-
23. system of exploitation, why then, one asks, cannot com-
dium producers, this path of development is the only possible
modity production similarly serve our socialist society for a cer-
and expedient one for the victory of socialism.
tain period without leading to capitalism?
14. This passage has a correct analysis. Take conditions
20. This statement is a little exaggerated. But it is true
that commodity production was not a capitalist institution ex-
in China. There is development. These five points are all cor-
clusively.
rect.
21. The second plenary session of the Central Committee
15. Our policy toward the national bourgeoisie has been
to redeem their property.
suggested policies of utilizing, restricting, and transforming
16. We are developing the people's communes on an ever
(commodity production.)
larger scale.
22. This condition is fully operative in China.
23. This point is entirely correct. We no longer have such
17. This is precisely what we are doing now.
18. There are those who want no commodity production,
circumstances and conditions. There are those who fear com-
modities. Without exception they fear capitalism, not realiz-
but they are wrong. On commodity production we still have
ing that with the elimination of capitalists it is allowable to
to take it from Stalin, who, in turn, got it from Lenin. Lenin
expandcommodity production vastly. Wearestillbackward
had said to devote the fullest energies to developing com-
=====第72页=====
144
Mao Tsetung
Critique of Stalin
145
in commodity production, behind Brazil and India. Commod-
so owned. But don't think the Chinese peasants are so won-
ity production is not an isolated thing. Look at the context:
derfully advanced. In Hsiuwu county, Honan, the party secre-
capitalism or socialism. In a capitalist context it is capitalist
tary was concerned whether or not, in the event of food or
commodity production. In a socialist context it is socialist
famine, the state would pay wages after public ownership
commodity production. Commodity production has existed
was declared and the free supply system instituted. He was
since ancient times. Buying and selling began in what his-
also concerned that in times of bumper harvest the state
tory calls the Shang ["commerce"] dynasty. The last king of
would transfer away public grain but not pay wages either,
the Shang dynasty, Chou, was competent in civil and military
leaving the peasants to suffer whether the harvest succeeds
matters, but he was turned into a villain along with the first
or fails. This represents the concerns of the peasants. Marx-
emperor of the Ch'in2 and Ts'ao Ts'ao.3 This is wrong. "Better
ists should be concerned with these problems. Our commod-
to have no books than complete faith in them."* In capitalist
ity production should be developed to the fullest, but it is
society there are no socialist institutions considered as social
going to take fi fteen years or more and patience as well. We
institutions, but the working class and socialist ideologydo
have waged war for decades. Now we still have to have pa-
exist in capitalist society. Thething that determines com-
tience, to wait for Taiwan's liberation, to wait for socialist
modity production is the surrounding economic conditions.
construction to be going well. Don't hope for early victories!
The question is, can commodity production be regarded as a
26. [How the two basic,forms of ownership will ultimately be-
useful instrument for furthering socialist production? I think
come one] is a special question which requires separate discus-
commodity production will serve socialism quite tamely. This
sion.
an be discussed among the cadres.
26. Stalin is avoiding the issue, having failed to find a
24. It is said that, since the domination of social ownership of
method or suitable formulation [on the transition from collec-
the means of production has been established in our country,
tive to public ownership.]
and the system of wage labor and exploitation has been abol-
ished, commodity production has lost all meaning and should
27. Consequently, our commodity production is not of the ordi-
nary type, but is a special kind of commodity production, com-
therefore be done away with.
modity production without capitalists, which is concerned
24. Change "our country' to "China’and it becomes
mainly with the goods of associated socialist producers (the
ost intriguing.
state, the collective farms, the cooperatives), the sphere of ac-
tion of which is confined to items of personal consumption,
25. Today there are two basic forms of socialist production in
which obviously cannot possibly develop into capitalist produc-
our country: state, or publicly owned production, and collective-
tion, and which, together with its "money economy,," is de-
farm production, which cannot be said to be publicly owned.
signed to serve the development and consolidation of socialist
25. "Today"refers to 1952, thirty-five years after their
production.
volution. We stand but nine years from ours.
27. The "sphere of action" is not limited to items of indi-
He refers to two basic forms. In the communes not only
vidual consumption. Some means of production have to be
nd and machinery but labor, seeds, and other means of
classed as commodities. If agricultural output consists of
roduction as well are commune-owned. Thus the output is
commodities but industrial output does not, then how is ex-
change going to be carried out? If "our country" is changed
* Mencius. Mao seems to mean "Let's not make a stock villain out of
to "China," the paragraph becomes all the more interesting to
ommodity production pedantically."
=====第73页=====
146
Mao Tsetung
Critique of Stalin
147
read. In China not only consumer goods but agricultural
29. In particular, the means of production in the indus-
means of production have to be supplied. Stalin never sold
trial sector.
means of production to the peasants. Khrushchev changed
30. Commodity production has to be vastly developed,
that.
not for profits but for the peasantry, the agricultural-indus-
28. (Chairman Mao commented on page 13 of the origi-
trial alliance, and the development of production.
nal text): Let us not confuse the problem of the dividing line
31. Especially after rectification. After the rectifi cation
between socialism and communism with the problem of the
and anti-rightist campaigns labor power was no longer a
dividing line between collective and public ownership. The
commodity. It was in the service of the people, not the dollar.
collective ownership system leaves us with the problem of
The labor power question is not resolved until labor power is
commodity production, the goal of which is consolidating the
no longer a commodity.
worker-peasant alliance and developing production. Today
32. It is sometimes asked whether the law of value exists and
there are those who say that the communism of the peasants
operates in our country, under the socialist system.
is glorious. After one trip to the rural areas they think the
32. The law of value does not have a regulative function.
peasantry is simply wonderful, that they are about to enter
Planning and politics-in-command play that role.
paradise, that they are better than the workers. This is the
surface phenomenon. We shall have to see if the peasants re-
33. True, the law of value has no regulating function in our so-
ally have a communist spirit, and morethan that, we shall
cialist production.
haveto examinethecommune ownership system,including
33. In our society the law of value has no regulative func-
the extent to which the means of production and subsistence
tion, that is, has no determinative function. Planning deter-
belong to communal collective ownership. As the county
mines production, e.g., for hogs or steel we do not use the
party committee secretary of Hsiuwu, Honan, said, we still
law of value; we rely on planning.
have to develop commodity production, and not charge
blindlyahead.
29. Further, I think that we must also discard certain other
concepts taken from Marx's Capital—where Marx was con-
cerned with an analysis of capitalism—and artificially applied to
our socialist relations. ...It is natural that Marx used con-
cepts (categories) which fully corresponded to capitalist rela-
tions. But it is strange, to say the
30. least, to use these concepts now, when the working class is
not only not bereft of power and means of production, but, on
the contrary, is in possession of the power
31. and controls the means of production. Talk of labor power
being a commodity, and of "hiring" of workers sounds rather
absurd now, under our system, as though the working class,
which possesses means of production, hires itself and sells its
labor power to itself.
=====第74页=====
Notes
Reading Notes
1. There are three levels of collective ownership in the Chinese
countryside. The smallest unit, the production team, usually
consists of between fifteen and thirty-five families. The team is
the basic ownership and production unit, owning the land it
works, a number of draught animals, and small agricultural
tools such as threshers and crushers. The next unit, the pro-
duction brigade, is made up of from five to fifteen teams. The
brigade owns larger means of production too expensive for the
team to buy and too large for them to use effectively, such as
tractors and irrigation equipment. The brigade also takes care of
tasks, such as hill terracing, for which the team is too small.
The commune, with a population from several thousand to
some fifty thousand, is composed of ten to thirty brigades. In
addition to providing overall coordination among the brigades,
the communes own and run large industrial enterprises and
projects too large for the brigade to handle, such as large water
conservancy projects.
2. The various forms of collective ownership, taken as a whole, are
distinct from ownership by the whole people. Collective owner-
ship signifies that the means of production are owned by a sec-
tor of the total population. This sector, be it a team, brigade, or
commune, basically organizes and runs production. The prod-
uct of a collectively owned unit, aside from taxes, belongs to the
units which produced it. The unit uses part of the product for
reproduction and investment and the remainder for worker in-
come.
Ownership by the whole people, on the other hand, signifies
149
=====第75页=====
150
Notes
Notes
151
ownership by the whole society, not a sector of it. Such en-
dominated National People's Congress. Lo proposed a set of
terprises are subject to direct central planning and organization.
"rehabilitation committees" to examine the treatment of demo-
Their products are owned by the whole society and can be dis-
cratic persons who he argued were unfairly treated in the anti-
tributed according to need within the whole system of units
counter-revolutionary campaigns of the early 1950s.
under ownership by the whole people. Since these various pro-
7. Fixed interest was a specific part of the CCP's strategy of "buy-
duction units are treated as a unified accounting unit, the
ing out" the national bourgeoisie. After Liberation, policy to-
profits or losses of an individual production unit do not affect
ward them went through several stages. The first stage was the
either investment in the unit or the income of its workers.
placing of orders by the state with private enterprises for manu-
In 1973, industry under the ownership of the whole people
facturing and processing and the unified purchase and distribu-
accounted for 97 percent of total fixed assets, 63 percent of the
tion of products produced by these enterprises. After the rec-
people engaged in industry, and 86 percent of total industrial
tification campaign in private industry in 1952, a second phase
output. Industry under collective ownership covered 3 percent
of "dividing the profits into four shares" was implemented. The
of fixed assets, 36.2 percent of the industrial workforce, and 14
four relatively equal shares were: (1) taxes paid to the state; (2)
percent of total output. Individual handicrafts made up the
contributions to the worker welfare fund; (3) enterprise devel-
other 8 percent. In commerce, 92.5 percent of retail sales were
opment funds; and (4) profits for the capitalists.
under ownership of the whole people with collectively owned
The third stage was the implementation of joint state-private
units accounting for 7.3 percent of total retail sales. In agricul-
ownership, first of individual enterprises and then of entire
ture, on the other hand, 80 to 9o percent of the means of pro-
trades. In this "highest phase of state capitalism,," the income of
duction were still under collective ownership.
the capitalists would come from the income they received for
3. The land reform movement refers specifi cally to the post-
the work they did within the units and from "fixed interest."
Liberation land reform campaign of 1949-1952. The agricul-
Fixed interest was to be paid for twenty years at the annual rate
tural producers' cooperatives were established for the most part
of 5 percent of the value of the assets of the enterprises regard-
during the high tide of collectivization in 1955 and early 1956.
less of the annual profits or losses of the individual firms. Fixed
The people's communes were organized throughout China in
interest payments were terminated during the Cultural Revolu-
the fall of 1958 during the initial stages of the Great Leap For-
tion.
ward.
8. The policy of unified purchase and supply meant that the gov-
4. Compradore capitalism refers to foreign commercial establish-
ernment would buy certain products at fixed prices, thus elim-
ments in China staffed by Chinese who served these foreign in-
inating the private market and conditions for speculation in
these goods. Unified purchase and supply of grain, edible oils,
terests.
5. For Mao's discussions of the importance of bureaucratic capital
and oilseeds was instituted in March 1954, and in September
and policy toward it at that time, see "The Present Situation and
1954 the policy was instituted for cotton and cotton cloth.
Our Tasks,," December 25, 1947, and "Report to the Second
Under the system of unified purchase and supply, there are
Session of the Seventh Central Committee,," March 5, 1949, in
three categories of goods. Goods in the first category (which, as
Selected Works of Mao Tsetung,vol. 4(Peking: Foreign Lan-
of April 1959, included 38 products) are sold to state companies
guages Press, 1961), pp. 167–68 and 32–75.
at fixed prices. Second category goods (293 products as of April
Here Mao is referring to the activities of Chang Po-chün
1959) are sold to the state according to quotas reached on a con-
6.
(Zhang Po-jun) and Lo Lung-chi (Luo Long-ji). In the summer
tractual basis. Above-quota production can, but need not, be
of 1957 Chang suggested giving more power to the Chinese
sold to the state. Third category goods(those not included in
People's Political Consultative Conference, which consisted
the first or second categories) may still be sold on the market.
largely of members of the various democratic parties. This unit
9. "Red and expert" describes a unity of opposites in building
would serve as an "upper house" with veto power over the CCP-
a socialist society. Redness suggests political and ideological
=====第76页=====
152
Notes
153
Notes
aspects of work; expertness the technical aspects. Both are nec-
By June 1956, however, 63 percent of the peasant house-
essary aspects of all work. But in line with his reasoning that
holds had progressed to larger, advanced APCs in which land,
every contradiction must have a primary aspect, Mao has long
labor, and the means of production were pooled.
held that "ideological and political work is the guarantee..
15. Chang Tien-p'ei (Zhung Dian-pei) was a film critic in the mid-
the 'soul' " of economic and technical work. On the other hand,
1950s who later took part in the antiparty, antisocialist current
if redness is emphasized to the exclusion of expertness, then
of 1957.
the unity of opposites will be destroyed and the task of building
16. The "three-antis"(Sanfan)campaign, begun in the northeast
socialism will become impossible.
in August 1951 and nationally in January 1952, was directed
10.
In March 1949 the CCP began to organize a People's Political
against corruption, waste, and bureaucratism among govern-
Consultative Conference representing twenty-three parties and
ment employees, many of whom were still carryovers from the
groups. In September 1949 the Preparatory Committee of the
Nationalist regime. The "five-antis" (Wufan) campaign was
People's Political Consultative Conference met and passed the
directed at the national bourgeoisie. Its specific foci were the
Common Program, a general statement of the aims of the new
elimination of bribery, theft of state property, tax evasion, theft
government, and the Organic Law of the Central People's Re-
of state economic secrets, and embezzlement in carrying out
public which made the working class the leaders of the Repub-
government contracts.
lic. Subsequently, the National People's Congress, first con-
17. Here Mao is referring to the rightist criticisms of the CCP dur-
vened in 1954, was established as the dominant long-term na-
ing the "blooming and contending" period in the spring of 1957,
tional legislative body in China.
shortly after he had delivered his talk, "On the Correct Han-
11. One Chinese dollar(yuan) has a value of U.S. $.53(April
dling of Contradictions Among the People,," in February 1957.
1977). The value of the yuan has been stable at approximately
18. In July 1959, at the Lushan Conference, a group of party
U.S. $.50 for over twenty years, the variations coming mainly
leaders headed by then Defense Minister P'eng Teh-huai (Peng
as a result of devaluations of the U.S. dollar.
De-huai) criticized the Great Leap Forward and its leadership
12. Here Mao is probably referring to his own experiences during
as "petty bourgeois fanaticism." They argued that it had created
the Great Leap Forward. At Wuchang (Wuzhang) in November
far more damage than good. After a major struggle at the ple-
1958, Mao admitted that at the Peitaiho(Beitaihe) Conference
num conference, P'eng and other rightists were removed from
in August 1958, during the height of enthusiasm for the Great
their positions of responsibility in the party and the government.
Leap, he had made a similar error of considering only need and
19. The argument presented by the textbook that the socialist revo-
not capacity.
lution in the ideological and political fronts was concluded in
13. This formulation of these crucial contradictions is contained in
1957 is similar to the argument in the Resolution of the Eighth
Mao's April 1956 speech, "On the Ten Major Relationships."
Party Congress in 1956. That is to say, the main contradiction
14. Mutual aid teams were an early form of collective agricultural
in China was no longer that between the bourgeoisie and the
organization. Based on traditional peasant seasonal labor-
proletariat, but between the advanced relations of production
sharing practices in parts of China, they were extensively im-
(the ideological and political fronts on which the revolution was
plemented in the early 1950s. In 1955, nearly 60 percent of
"concluded") and the backward forces of production.
China's peasant households were in mutual aid teams.
20. The 45 percent rate of accumulation noted here by Mao is an
These teams were supplanted in 1955 by elementary agri-
exceptionally high one used to demonstrate an exemplary ad
cultural producers'cooperatives(APCs). Each APC contained
vanced situation. During the Great Leap Forward, Mao had
several mutual aid teams; land and other capital goods con-
consistently argued against excessive rates of accumulation
tinued to be privately owned, but other resources were pooled
which would reduce the peasants' incentives to produce. As a
and used according to annual plans prepared by cooperative
general rule, he prescribed the following breakdown for agricul-
decision-making.
tural production: taxes(7 percent); production expenses(20
=====第77页=====
154
Notes
155
Notes
percent); accumulation (18 percent); distribution to the masses
cal, fanciful search for an understanding ruler. He subsequently
(55 percent).
drowned himself out of despair.
21. The Eight-Character Charter for Agriculture, propagated during
2. The "three transformations"refers to the transformation of agri-
the Great Leap Forward, called for paying attention to water,
culture, private industry, and handicrafts production.
fertilizer, soil (conservation),seeds (selection),closeness (in
3. The forty-articles program represented a plan for agricultural de-
planting), protection (of plants), implements, and (field) man-
velopment supported by Mao. The forty articles advocated relying
agement.
on agricultural production and the domestic agricultural market,
22. Here Mao is referring to the fifth grade in China's present eight-
rather than foreign markets, to provide the primary accumulation
grade wage system.
needed to finance China's industrialization. The articles also ad-
23. During the War of Liberation, cadres received goods according
vocated changing the relations of production as a condition for
to need, not according to work done. These goods were distributed
further developing the forces of production and increasing coop
directly for use, not through any market mechanism based on
erativization. The vast majority of the peasants were to increase
exchange value. Under these circumstances, however, needs
their income through this process. Although the forty articles
were defined quite spartanly.
were shelved during 1956 and most of 1957, they became an in-
24. The mass line is the method of leadership which the CCP
tegral part of the Great Leap Forward.
strives to achieve. Its classic formulation by Mao is as follows:
4. As Mao here indicates, a series of meetings were held from No-
vember 1958 through early 1959. At these meetings the errors of
In all the practical work of our Party, all correct leadership
the Great Leap were criticized and efforts made to correct them.
is necessarily "from the masses, to the masses." This
However, it was only after these errors had been criticized and
means:take the ideas of the masses(scattered and unsys-
corrections made that, in July 1959, the rightists launched what
tematic ideas) and concentrate them(through study turn
Mao saw as an opportunist attack on the Great Leap and the
them into concentrated and systematic ideas), then go to
leadership who had supported it. This perception of the rightist
the masses and propagate and explain these ideas until the
criticisms is reflected in the titles of the two talks Mao gave at
masses embrace them as their own, hold fast to them, and
the LushanConference "Why Do the Right Opportunists Now
translate them into action, and test the correctness of these
Launch an Offensive?" and "Machine Guns, Mortars, and Other
ideas in such action. Then once again concentrate ideas
Things" (reflecting the antagonistic nature of the attack.)
from the masses and once again go to the masses so that
5.
.The Ma Anshan Iron and Steel Constitution refers to the authori-
the ideas are persevered in and carried through. And so on,
tarian constitution of the Soviet Magnitogorsk Iron and Steel
over and over again in an endless spiral, with the ideas be-
Works, which the Anshan Works, China's most advanced iron
coming more correct, more vital, and richer each time.
and steel works, had adopted in the 1950s. This constitution
From: "Some Questions Concerning Methods of Leadership,"
remained unchallenged until 1958. During the Great Leap For-
June1, 1943, Selected Works, vol. 3, p. 119.
ward, the "Ma-An"principles of one person in command and
25. Mao is referring again to the July-August 1959 Lushan Confer-
technology in command were challenged in a report to the cen-
ence at which the conflict with P'eng Teh-huai came to the
tral leadership.
fore.
By March 1960, with Mao's participation, a new Anshan Con-
stitution had been written. It combined the five principles of (1)
Supplement
politics in command;(2) strengthening party leadership;(3)
launching vigorous mass movements;(4) instituting the "two
1. Ch'u Yuan(Qu Yuan) was an aristocrat of the Chou period who
participations, one reform, and three combinations"(cadre par-
lived during the beginning of the third century B.c. After being
ticipation in productive labor and worker participation in man-
dismissedfromthe royal court, he wrote the Li Sao, an allegori-
agement; reform of irrational and outdated rules; cooperation be-
=====第78页=====
156
Notes
Notes
157
tween workers, cadres, and technicians); and (5) go full speed
ahead with technical innovations and the technical revolution.
quered the neighboring states and unified China. Under his rule,
Although Mao authorized the issue, publication, and implemen-
a feudal system was established, weights and measures and coin-
tation of the new Anshan Constitution in March 1960, it was not
age were standardized. The legalist philosophy was the philo-
until the Cultural Revolution that it was publicized in a big way.
sophical basis of the Ch'in. The first emperor is remembered for
his burning of all nonutilitarian, "subversive" literature in 213
6. A catty is 1.1 pounds.
B.C.
3. Ts'ao Ts'ao (Cao Cao) was a famous general and chancellor of the
latter Han dynasty (25–220 A.D.) who played a significant role in
Concerning Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR
the wars which finally toppled the Han and led to the epoch of
1. The date for this document in the 1967 edition is 1959. The 1969
divided empire called the three kingdoms.
edition dates it in 1958. There was no Ch'engchou (Chengzhou)
Conference in November 1959, but there was one in November
1958. The docu ment almost certainly dates from this earlier time.
The wage system established in 1953 emphasized predominately
short-term individual material incentives. It established an eight-
grade wage point system ranging from 139 to 390 wage points
per month. Similar work in different regions would receive an
equal number of work points, but the value of work points varied
according to regional costs of living. By 1956, the wage point sys-
tem had been replaced by a wage system, but the eight-grade
structure was retained.
Experimental fields sought to develop new and advanced tech-
niques, such as close planting, early planting, deep ploughing,
etc. If successful in increasing output, the techniques would be
popularized throughout China. By increasing production and
thus the total wage fund, the experimental field concept could
help undermine the ideological base of the graded wage system
by demonstrating that specialists could learn from the peasants.
Critique of Stalin's Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR
1. Mao is here talking about the excessive purchase of grain at the
end of 1954 and the consequent rural grain shortages in the
spring of 1955. Subsequently, the quota for state purchases was
reduced by 7 billion catties and tension in the countryside eased.
These occurrences, however, took place in the spring of 1955, not
at the end of that year, which was characterized by the continu-
ing high tide of collectivization in China's countryside.
2. Ch'in Shih Huang Ti(Qin Shi Huangdi), the first emperor, was a
king of the state of Ch'in who, between 230 and 221 B.c., con-
=====第79页=====