COLLECTED
WORKS
OF
THE
COMMUNIST
PARTY
PERU
OF
VOLUME 1 - 1968-1987
=====第1页=====
Published by : Christophe Kistler & Josef Hallqvist
Contact : chris@kistler.red
First Edition
2016, Utrecht
1st printing (EU) : 90 exemplaries
1st printing (US) : 20 exemplaries
cc
BY
SA
This
book
under
license
is
Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0
International (CC BY-SA 4.0)
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
=====第2页=====
Proletarians of all countries, unite!
CHAIRMAN GONZALO
=====第3页=====

=====第4页=====
PAGE
CONTENTS
7
Publisher's Preface
9
1968 - To Understand Mariategui
32
1970- LatinAmerica :People'sWargreatvictorieandbrilliant
perspectives
43
1973 - Marxism, Mariategui and the women movement
96
1974 - On the National Question
115
1975- Let us retake Mariategui and reconstitute his Party
159
1976 - On the construction of the Party
181
1976 - The peasant problem and the Revolution
1976-EternalGloryto PresidentMaoTe-Tung!Thegreat leader
of the InterationalPoletaiat,theOppresed Peopleand the
198
World Revolution
1976 - Eternal Glory to Chairman Mao Tsetung!
203
206
1977 - To be a Marxist is to adhere to Marxism-Leninism-Mao
Tsetung Thought
1978 - Against constitutional illusions,for the state of the New
220
Democracy
1979 - For the New Flag
244
1979 - Develop the growing people's protes!
251
1979- Concerning three chapters of our history
279
1980 - We begin to topple the walls and unfold a new dawn
287
1980 - We are the initiators
301
1980 - Towards guerrilla warfare!
321
1981 - To our heroic fighting people!
325
1981 - Long live the armed struggle of our people! Down with
328
the reactionary hoax!
1982 - Let us develop guerrilla warfare!
330
1982 - Maoism. On Marxism-Leninism-Maoism
360
1985-ontIxpdulao
365
conquer power for the people!
1986-Single Document.Demandsof the prisonersof war of the
380
Shiningocolao
5
=====第5页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
383
1986 - Nothing and nobody can defeat us!
386
1986 - Day of Heroism
388
1986 - Develop the people's war, serving the world revolution
448
1987 - Hoist, defend and apply Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
principally Maoism!
452
1987 - Agreements between PCP and PCE
1987 - To give our lives for the Party and the Revolution
454
1987 - Glory to the Day of Heroism!
456
=====第6页=====
PUBLISHER'S PREFACE
Dear Comrades,
From the verybeginningof thehistoryof the Communist Party
of Peru(PCP), an effort was being done byour Peruvian
comradesliving abroad to translate and spread words ofthe
Chairman Gonzalo. Butthose works,being usuallyavailablein
hard to get small pamphlets,have neverbeenfully collected and
printed in volumesof full works.Luis Arce Borja from El Diario
Internacional published in 1989 and 1994 two volumes in Spanish
underthe name"GuerraPopularenelPeru,ElPensamiento
Gonzalo",thattriedto collectedthe moreimportant worksof
PCP. But a lotof crucial  documents， like theInterview of
Chairman Gonzalo, were missing from those volumes.
Thisis whythepublicationofthisfirsteditionofcollected(and
not"full" as we are awareof theshortcomingsof this publication)
worksof PCP isa specialoccasion.It's thefirsttimein history
thatan edition,as complete as possible,was compiled,translated
where it was necessary,and was published in a series of four
volumes,going from the beginning of PCP(1968)to the capture
of Comrade Feliciano (1999).
Thispublicationof theCollected Worksof thePCPshows the
necessity forall the communistsand revolutionaries in the world
to put Marxism-Leninism-Maoisminto practice, andto study
Gonzalo Thought,thatisthe creativeapplicationofMarxism-
Leninism-Maoism in Peru,and is,sofar,the greatest attempt to
develop the fourth stage of Marxism.
We don't pretend that thisedition incorporatesall the documents
of PCP,even if it wasour goal.Itisobvious thatsomeof the
7
=====第7页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
statements,leafetsorbooks couldhavebeenlost in thetumult of
the people's war.It is also hard to trust some documents released
by fractions of the old PCPthat areknown forforging fake letters
and statments for their own benefit.
We decided to conserve the small modification that we've done to
some texts in the compilation "CPP and Mao Tsetung" in 1987.
But if some of the comrades possess some documents that we
don't, we would be glad to print them in another edition of these
collected works.
THE PUBLISHERS,
CHRISTOPHE KISTLER
JOSEF HALLQVIST
=====第8页=====
TO UNDERSTAND MARIÁTeGUI
CONFERENCE AT THE UniversiTY Of SaN CRisToBaL DE HuaMANGA
IN AYACUCHO, PERU, 1968
It has been a lttle more thanthree years since we had the
occasion to talk from this place. At the time,we spoke about the
problem of education and shared our thoughts on this important
issue. It was a wonderful opportunityto talk with you. Today,
once again,we have the opportunity to speak with you,but the
circumstances are somewhat different.
WearegoingtospeakaboutJoséCarlosMariateguiofthe
actuality of his thought,and this task which I have been assigned
to address, is not in itself an easy task, at least not to me. First of
all, we believe that Mariategui must beapproached with respect,
and secondly,we must approach him from a clear and precise
position,becauseotherwiseit is notpossiblein any way to
understand the actuality and richness of his thought.
Of course,Mariátegui has beenphysically deadfor many years,
but histhought is still profoundlyalive,just as it was inthe1930s.
Itis still vibrant,stillcurrentand still a perspectivefor Perú, while
other thoughtsof people who are still aliveare truly dead.
It is difficultinanhour moreorless,totalkonallMariateguis
thought,so for this reason we want tofocus on a few concrete
problemsand emphasizeon whatshould do facing the image of
this great Peruvian.First,weupholdthefgurof Mariategui as a
proletarianintellectual.Wewillnotgetintodetaileddatesor
othermatterswhicharenotofinterestnow. Wewillgetinto
centralolmbtulitofuoé
Carlos Mariátegui.
9
=====第9页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
(1968-1987)
TO UNDERSTAND MARIÁTEGUI
After having tried to bury him in silence, much has been written
about Mariátegui. Of course, we also see Mariátegui as very highly
spoken of, so as to mystify him, to systematically try to twist him,
to try to"better"him withsenseless pedantry.It has beensaid in
the first place about Mariátegui that he was not a convicted and
confessed Marxist and whose thought  was not sustained
by
Marxism-Leninism.
Mariátegui saidit himself. He was a convicted and confessed
Marxist, fearless, neat and precise. What does that mean? It means
that Mariátegui had a proletarian class position. He was plainly
and simply on the side of the exploited. Mariátegui felt in his own
flesh what the exploited massesof our country felt and during his
time, unfortunatelyforus,a very short life,hetranslated into
deeds what hefelt and put in practice written word. Mariátegui
had a conceptionof the world. He had an ideology,and he said
many  times that his
ideology
Marxism-Leninism.He
was
conceivedand upheldit, and hebasedhisthesis on the
contemporary world. It is not possible to understand things, and it
is not possible to understand society and the world,unless we
view them from the ideological conception of the proletariat.
Mariátegui was a Marxist-Leninist. If we review his works,
Mariátegui tells us that in the current century (he spoke around
the 1920's) Leninism was the newform,thehighest Marxism
acquiredatthetime. Mariáteguithenfoundhisaffiliation with
Marx and Lenin and that is why he called himself a convicted and
confessed Marxist-Leninist. In the thirdplace,Mariátegui had a
working method,methodof analysis,anrelaceable method o
understandanything. Mariateguibasedhimselfondialectical
materialism,andhis worksare convincing proofof that.Thefirst
10
=====第10页=====
To UnDeRSTaND MaRiaTeGUI
question,we said,which must be very clear,is the proletarian
positionof Mariátegui,the Marxist-Leninist ideology nourishing
him and the dialectical materialistic method guiding him.
On these three bases it is feasible to understand the figure of José
Carlos Mariátegui,butwhoever cannotunderstand Marxism-
Leninism, will not be able to understand Mariátegui,and it is not
for a lack of enlightening or of intelligence that she or he cannot
understand him, but because he is not on the same side, nor has
the same light in the brain, nor uses the same method. That must
be very clear.
We must base ourselvesonfacts,startfrom theclass position of
Mariátegui,start from his Marxist-Leninist ideology and one must
also start, therefore,from his dialectical
materialist method.
Whoever does notfocus on Mariategui withthose three
viewpoints indicatedabove,cannot understand histhought and
will twist it in many cases in good faithor in the majority of cases,
like the feathery hacks, in very bad faith.
Mariategui was a great Latin American Marxist-Leninist and we
must bevery proudofthatfact. There is notinall of Latin
America another Marxist-Leninist comparable to him in any way;
truly JoséCarlos Mariátegui is a summitofLatin-American
Marxism thought and a greater summit as time goes on.
José Carlos Mariátegui is better appreciatedoutside our borders.
Here in our country he is less wanted, less respected,and even
very littleknown,whichis a shame. Mariategui then is a great
Marxist-Leninist, who honors our country and the exploited
gour people,butnotothers,fortheothersheis a kne
among
sunk in theirhearts,whichthey cannot manage totake it out
neither will they are able to take it out.
11
=====第11页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
Mariátegui was not a mere repeater, who simply knew four or five
formulas, but he is much more,something more profound, more
Marxist. He takes Marxism-Leninism and introducesand fuses it
withourreality,hegetsitintoourcountry,incarnatesitin our
soil,and upon incarnating it, introducing it, penetrating it in our
country with Marxism-Leninism, he Illuminates us with a thought
which isstill current.The interpretation Mariátegui wrote of our
country,in hisfamous "Seven Interpretative Essays on Peruvian
Reality," (Siete Ensayos de Interpretacion de la Realidad Peruana)
is still an unshakable document.
In Mariátegui we see the grip he had, the Marxist and genial grip
of beingabletofusetheuniversalrealityofMarxism-Leninism
with the concreteactualityofourrevolutionary prophet.Very few
persons havethisqualityand Mariáteguihad it in excss and
grandeur,  and
must recognize it. Whoever does not
we1
understand the developmentof Marxistideas in our country;
cannot understand what is happening in Peru,and evens less, of
course,canhe call himself a revolutionary? Unfortunately there
manyrevolutionaries outthere whoknow Mariategui's thought
and still fear it, a justified fear, because it is a good touching stone
to find out who are genuine revolutionaries and who are not.
That's the reason why theyfear Mariátegui. Mariategui's Seven
Essays are still a fundamental part of Peruvian thought.
Mariategui developed seven masterful interpretations for us from
the Marxist viewpoint, andfrom the one andonly correct
viewpoint of our Peruvian reality. Many talented and wel-versed
scholars with a contrary viewpoint have tried to discredit that little
book, from thereactionary position of DonVictor Andres
Belaunde(TNF: Bourgeois Peruvian Historian), buttheir efforts
have failed.
THE IMMORTAL BOOK
12
=====第12页=====
To UNDERSTAND MARIATEGUI
Mariategui'slittlebook"SevenInterpretativeEssaysonPeruvian
Reality"isstllverymuchalive,whilethatofDonVictor Andres
Belaundehasbeenreadonlybyveryfew(mostlyforhistorical
curiosity.) We muststartfrom this,what Mariategui istelling us
in that little book, in this small volume which constitutes a vision
of the People's War in our country.Mariategui does an analysis of
our economy, whichis a vital andfundamental issue. It is
impossibleto understand a societyif we don't understandits
economic structure, unless we understand the social relations of
exploitation which are the social economy,the political economy.
All elseare fabrications(TNF: Spanish word "engendros"). What
does he tell usabout Perú? He characterized it very concretely;
Peru is a semi-feudal andsemi-colonial country. Heshowsand
proves it in his scheme of the economic process of our country.
Mariátegui also develops an outline of social classes in Perú and
their historical development,and hestates,withother words,of
what today is the Marxist thought in Perú being developed under
Mao Tsetung's thought.
Mariategui not only develops an outline oftherelations of
exploitation in our country,not just an outlineofthe social
classes, he also makes a schematic that describes the evolution of
ideas in Perú. Hespeaks,forinstance,ofthe literaryproblm,
something we must study sufficiently to realize how literature has
evolvedin Perú, and howit has had a clear class character.
Mariátegui makes a fusion of Marxism-Leninism with the concrete
reality of our country,and as a result, the best, the most profound
meaning of thatreality emerges. This analysisofthe Peruvian
realityisthebasisto continueadvancingtheoretically whathe
masterfullybegan.No one wasableto seriously refute the
theoreticalthesis of Mariátegui,the mostthey coulddo,is to
come up withsuperficialoutlines,butthey couldnot make the
buildingthathedesignedandbuiltsoquicklyandat such a
13
=====第13页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
young age.
Much hasbeen saidthatthe"Seven Essays,"
wassimply
journalistic work,putting them down as only the work of a
newspaperman. There is even a certainindividual --the mere
sayingof hisname,RavinesTNF: usurpedtheParty's leadership
after Mariátegui'sdead],pollutestheairaroundus-heclaiming
things likethis:"whatcanonethinkaboutMariategui,whyso
much noise about Mariáteguiif he was only afrivolous
journalist."  That person
did
not
understand a bit about
Mariategui;of course,how couldheunderstand anythingabout
Mariátegui, when he was one ofthose who deviatedfrom
Mariátegui'sroad(justlikeaplayerof a team whotakesoff his
shirt and goesover to help theotherside.)Because they lack the
proletarian conceptionand themethodof Mariategui,thatshirt
willnothelpthem. Withtimeandexposuretothesunligh,
things lose their color and become yellowish.
Forthisreason,theproblmisotextral,butthitlethings,
three basicthingsabout Mariátegui:hisclass position,his
ideology and his method. Whoever is on the side of the
proletariat,of thepeasantry andof theexploitedclasses in our
country is in a position to understand Mariátegui; whoever does
not assume thisattitude, this class position, whoever has one foot
on the side of the exploited, and the other foot on the side of the
exploiters,whoever cautiously sides withthe exploited,but at
heart is withtheexploiters,is notabletounderstand Mariátegui;
that's why we see so manysalivating varmintsout there. However,
their spitwillneverreachtheheightofthestepreachedby
Mariategui more than 30 years ago.
 MARIATEGUI WAS A FIGHTER FOR THE PROLETARIAT
We wouldliketo goon to anotherpointwhich cannot be
14
=====第14页=====
To UnDERSTAND MARIATEGUI
asheetof apablinkd.ImeitoMaiategui
as a proletarianfighter,a greatfigure,anextraordinarythinker
andalso anextraordarorganier,andtheirstmilitant Marxist
fighter of our country. We must also put that out very clearly.
José Carlos Mariategui came to our country from Europe. He
brought new ideas and a new task, a mission: to build socialism in
Peru. That was his mission and he fulfilled it. He worked tirelessly
for socialism,he livedfor socialism,he outstretched himself_for
socialism,andhe diedfor socialism. Atall times heremained
unbeatable, with  an erect  spinal  cord, without  twisting
accommodations. When one studies a bit, one finds in Mariategui
a workplan,some kindof organizational developmentof the
proletariat in our country.In the first place, he works to prepare
the work of workers unions, he shows up as one of the creators of
classic trade unionism. Before him there already were union
struggles in the country,but Mariátegui sets the bases for
proletarian industrial unionism. Mariátegui is the founder of the
General Confederation of Peruvian Workers (CGTP). The CGTP
is Mariátegui's work. He was its ideologist,its mentor, who built
it
organically  and
who
conceived
its
foundations
and
organizational characters.
Oneofthefirstorganizationstheproletariatneeds isthe
structuring of an industrialand trade CentralUnion. Mariategui
understood that very well,but he not only understood it, since
Mariátegui was not the type of person who upon understanding
something, just laid back relaxing on the enjoymentof hisown
lucidity,butquitethecontrary,hefelttheneedtofulll thetask
thisunderstandingdemandedofhim.Hedidalthepreparatory
workof the CGTP constitution and platform. Any constitution,
no matter what it is, has two consecutive parts, two elemens
which togetherform anyorganization orinstitution. First,the
15
=====第15页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
ideof
a programme,the constitutionofits pointsof agreement,the
importancofttutc.andcond athecostiionof
the organization apparatusstrictlyspeaking.That was understood
byMariateguiprofoundlyandmasterfullyandfollowin
his
Marxist analysis, Mariategui was the creator of the CGTP.
THE
GENERAL
CONFEDERATION
OF
PERUVIAN
WORKERS (CGTP)
There is a very interesting thing: in developingthe statues,
Mariategui made a class conscientious, proletarian workers' union
statutewhichis_stillawaitingtofulfillitsrealization.Thatis
ironic, but more than ironic, it is proof of the disorientation and
confusion thatafter him have imposed certain individuals in the
workers'union movement in our country. If you read the CGTP
statutes, in the first place you'd find some sort of introduction, an
orientation says Mariategui,and it setforthhow the proletariat
sees the world of today, how there is a struggle which cannot be
disguised, a struggle which cannot be swept under the rag, a
struggle between the bourgeoisieand the proletariat,and in turn
he setsforth,thatthere is a classideology one mustfollow to
create a unionorganization,hesetsitforthclearlyand in a very
precise language. Then, what does Mariátegui do?
Mariátegui sets forth the general basesof the organic constitution
of that union organization, but he does not do it so meticulously
as to suffocateit,butin generallines,andbasic points which
allow for the development and initiative of the people. We cannot
tell the people,"when you get down a ladder,do it first with the
rightfoot."Wmusallowothiititive,thativty
them think with theirown heads so they can understand the
issues,so theylearninsteadofbeingforever"underae"He
thoughtaboutthe popethatteydidotedatall timesasrt
16
=====第16页=====
To UnDERSTAND MARIaTEGUI
of guiding dog,because the pople
blind. Mariátegui
aren't
understood that very well and
that's why he drew the general
bases for theorganization.Also,whenMariateguiaddressed the
problemof the unions he referred to formidable ideas not found
in any statute. Theonlyfavorabledifferenceof today'sstatutes is
that they are printed in a better quality paper.
Mariátegui sets forth the means of the struggle and speaks to us
about the strike. Why does Mariátegui set forth things that way?
Because in the organization one mustalso speak to them of the
means and tactics to wage a struggle, in accordance with what we
want to achieve, there is a form of the struggle.
It is important to say this, because it one reads the newspapers of
today in our country,LaPrensa,forinstance,itclaims thatthe
strike is a poor method, inadequate,a method justfor extremist
agitators. La Prensa wants to domesticate the proletariat wishing it
strike, but  rather
goes
on
appeal
Congress
never
(parliamentarism), to compromise,it pretends that the victim of
theft discusses aboutthestolen goods withthethief. Inany
struggle, it is important, it is fundamental, to see what the means
of the struggle is,the ways in whichstruggle is conducted, and
what isthebasic andfundamental demandthatallows the
mobilization  ofthe masses, and
mobilizing them for one
−
sacrosanct reason: because throughactive mobilization the people
open their eyes and understand and free themselves from apathy
andatavism and go on to generate those who will conductthe
struggles (their leaders). For this reason, a mass movement is very
important,forthatreason it'sgood tohighlightthisfundamental
point in thestatutesof the CGTP. Mariategui alsoaddresses the
problem of propaganda and agitation. The people need their own
voice to say their own words.They don't need forothers to say it
insteadof them.The people may not talk in a florid language,
they may not have a plished language, they might make mistakes
17
=====第17页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
on diction,but it does not mater.Whatcounts is that the peopl
say whattheyfel,whattheysee,whattheyneedand srggl
consistently and to theendfor whatthey want,regardessof
defeats, becauseany defeats the people may sufferare temporary,
all of them, each and every one of them; Mariategui takes care of
that too and when we read the statutes he speaksof propaganda
and agitation.
If we studyat this long historical periodfrom Mariategui's death,
we see how this entire problem has not been understood and how
reaction may shout at us every day. However,we cannotfind a
daily press expressing the voice of the workers, we can't find such
a thing because the problem,how Mariátegui setitforth,has
never been well understood. If we do this small summary of what
was proposed right in the statutes of the CGTP,then we see the
extraordinary capacity Mariateguipossessedandthe meansof
solution. Mariategui understood perfectly well thisproblem: "As
long as they are organized,the people areinvincible." Lenin,
extraordinary inevery sense,said:"the people are invincible, but
only whentheyare organizedlikesteel,unitedonits own
principles."
THE ORGANIZATION OF THE PEASANTRY
Mariáteguiproposesthatthepeoplefirstandforemost, must
define their ideologicaland political position,second,they must
forge their organic structure.
But Mariátegui not only takes care of organizing the workers, the
gigantic workofMariáteguidoesnotendthere,but he sees
somethingelse:heunderstandsour countrytoitsveryentrails
and discovers that in our country there are peasants. Mariátegui
notonlystudiethembutunderstandtheirole,understands
their historicmision,andwhatit is thatoppresses them.
18
=====第18页=====
To UnDERSTAND MaRIATEGUI
MariateguisaythinPr,thearepasawharecrushed
bythefeudalismoppressingthem. Thisfeudalism has two
expressions: Latifundia and serfdom that damned urge to exploit,
to liveoff somebodyelse'slabor.Mariáteguiunderstandsall that
and pinpoints thefundamental cause,the malady,theorigin, the
historic souceisfeudalismwhichstill prvailsinourcounryH
says our country is semi-feudal and, that is a mountain yielding is
weight over and crushing the Peruvian peasant. The problem of
the Peruvian peasant is the problem of the land, and the problem
of the land is summarized by how to conquer that land. How can
the land be conquered? Mariategui proposes that the peasantry be
organized and heisthefirstto sow it undercorrect conept,to
fightforitfromaproletarianviewpoint,indefatigableinthe
organization of peasants. Mariátegui has a profound work that is
seldom read, because many consider it simple political work rather
than a scientific one. Some people have monumental blindness.
Mariátegui begins to address the peasants' problem and proposes
organic forms, and he does an analysis in his work "Sketch of the
IndigenousProblem,"whichwas presentedat an international
meeting.
Mariátegui analyzes the situation of the peasantry in our country,
of interest to us is thatright there he proposes forms to organize
the peasantry. Mariátegui calls for organizing unions of peasants,
to form peasantleagues,to setforthorganizations capableof
mobilizing of the peasantry. Mariátegui understands that without
organization the people are very weak and cannot fight. However,
he does not stop there, he proposes the need to create a workers-
peasantsalliance,thatis,oneofthemostfundamentalprincipals
of any revolutionary process.
Mariátegui pointthisoutand goefurther. Heproposes two
extraordinary things;withrespecttoPower,Lenin said:"he
19
=====第19页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
fundamental,everything pointsto conquering power,toretain it
or to maintain it. Some believe that Mariátegui was a deformed
humanist or a humanistic bourgeois liberal. Mariátegui goes much
further and says that there is something else to do in the problem
oforganizingthepeasantry:tofind outthe weaponryofthe
peasants,to organize therevolutionary
armedforces ofthe
peasantry. Now,don't tell me I am promoting this: I am merely
speakingofMariategui,and Mariátegui proposes armingthe
peasantry asoneof thenecessaryformsoforganizing them;he
not only proposed that,but proposed thatSoviets needed to be
formed, andthat is most correctandapplicablefrom A to Z,
whollyandlul,elearwete.hat was
how Mariategui proposed things.
THE PARTY
Mariátegui resolvesthepoliticalproblem inour country. He
knows perfectly well that the proletariat hasorganic forms such as
workersunions,workers'alliances,and workersweaponry.Well,
Mariategui knew thatthese thre things we just mentiond
amount to nothingifthere is nobrain guidingit. Sothen
Mariategui proposes founding a proletarian partyand creates the
party of the proletariat in our country.
Anyone  studying  the
problem of theideas in Peru mustrecognize thatfact. But out
there we see some oftheilk of Carlos Tapia [TNF:the same
individual who nowadays -199O's- is a well-paid Senderologist, an
agent of reaction] saying that Mariátegui was not thefounder of
the Communist Party of Perú, that what Mariategui founded was
the Socialist Partyof Perú,"because Mariátegui was a manof
ample concepts, and an ample spirit, Mariategui was not sectarian.
He was not narrow minded,and he was very gentlemanly in his
ideas."ThaemslikedefofMitu,ilityitis
20
=====第20页=====
To UnDERSTAND MaRiaTEGUI
wereabad m,attheend,oubrokedowwhenyu wereonl
35."
Thereare some"defenders"whom warebtteofftlintm,
do notdefend me,bcaueyoaesinking meandthat is what
weneed totelltothese"defendersofMariátegui,"whospeak
about a non-sectarian Mariategui, and ample and democratic one,
so ample as to confuse the exploiters for the exploited. Mariátegui
founded the Communist Party of Peru, which at first was not thus
named: it wasnamedtheSocialistParty. There arises the
aforementioned Mr. Ravines saying,
"we can prove it with
documents and everything else," he says with trembling voice that
he[Mariátegui]
founded the Socialist Party
and
the
not
CommunistParty.
"Ifounded the CommunistParty,
states the
miserable Ravines.
But that isfalse.It is truethat Mariáteguifoundedthe Socialist
Party,butaffiliatedtotheIIIInternationalandsubjecttothe
principles stipulatedbyLenin in 1919. How isthat about?
Mariategui creating a Socialist Partyinsteadof a Communist
Party,howeveroneaffiliatedtotheCommunistInternational?
Were thosereally ignorant people who thought that this party was
not the Communist Party, yet in reality it was? Mariateui wrote
its constitutive charter, its birth certificate. Mariategui was present
there. Mariategui also wrote the party programme. We must refer
tothe documentsfound inthe works of Martinez de la Torre
[TNF: a biographerand close comradeof Mariategui.],there we
find theprogramme written by Mariategui himself,the program
of the Communist Party of Peru (PCP). How is that? He does not
create the Party,yet creates that document? Does that mean that
those in theInternational were not aware? They say he did not
it,yet writeitconstitutiecharter.Simplwhaweeeia
21
=====第21页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Mariátegui.
Mariátegui dedicated his life and tireless work to accomplish what
hethoughtwashisduty,toparticipatein thestrugglefor
Peruvian socialism.Buthewasn'tonlymere paticipant but the
one who generated it. Since then,socialism in our country has a
filiation, an ideal. We are in the process of rediscovering the figure
of Mariategui.
WE ARE THE LEGITIMATE HEIRS OF MARIATEGUI
We want to speakabout theactualityof Mariátegui. Butfirst we
must speak of theenemiesof Mariátegui.You already know that
he died young,at age35;hisworkremainedlargelytobe done
and he set the basesforhispractical work. His work has had
and downs: open
many
ups
felonies,
u 
betrayals,
opportunists attempting to cover themselves under his shade. It
also has,naturally, individuals who have defended it consistently
and some who today want to go back to his figure,to his source.
With Mariateguiphysicallydead,certainelements,certain
individuals,certain weasels whose name I do noteven want to
mention here, arise as the ones carrying the banner of Mariategui,
for the express purposeof systematicallyrenege and distort his
thoughtandbetrayindeedsthelegacythey claim to have
received. How do these self-proclaimed heirs of Mariátegui behave
politically?,What is their practice? By their deeds you will know
them. The way they act today they will act tomorrow and with
still more reason in 1969.In words,they cover Mariátegui with
praise,theyfllcolumnaftercolumn in newspapers to pay him
homage. Theycall formassiveand popular picnics,ostensiblyto
heightnteuoMaitudMuame,they
pretend tohietmarobtliurcoury,more
heightentheimage of Mariategui,
recognize him, without
22
=====第22页=====
To UNDERSTAND MARIATEGUI
have beenfollowersofMariateguiwhen,unlikethe Amauta
[TNF:El AmautareferintoMaritegui,theteacherwhoheld
that thecoutryisemiualandsem-coloia,theyhold, with
very loose bones and shamelessly, that Peru is a dependent
These
nation? How can they be followers of Mariátegui?
gentlemen say,and it is on their posters,in their documents
around everywhere,theyclaimthat Mariátegui'sthoughtisstil
current,isstill real,concrete,that Mariategui'seconomicanalysis
is still reality in our country,but that Peruvian society is semi-
feudal
anddependent. Let's repeat what Mariateguisays?
Mariategui says thatPerú is a semi-feudaland semi-colonial
country, and that its semi-colonial character will go on worsening
andestablishingitselfmorewiththeincreasedpenetrationof
imperialism.
Let's ask  ourselves
simple
question: Has
imperialism
penetration increased or not since the time of
Mariátegui? The clear answer is obviously yes.It has pnetrated
more. If imperialism has penetrated more, has what Mariategui
said beenfulfilledor not? Hetold usthat withthefurther
penetration of imperialism, and of semi-colony we would be even
more atrisk of becoming a totalcolony,that is,definitely losing
our sovereignty. Mariategui proposed, for instance, a workers and
peasantsfront and to make Soviets. Andwhat do these self-
proclaimed followers of Mariátegui preach? They preach to make
a front with the bourgeoisie. How about the workers and
peasants? They are not in their plans, except for the very few they
bring inpullingthemfromtheirears,tofalselyrepresentthe
genuine workers. But what do these supposed followers say? That
we should participate inelectionsthatthroughelections we will
conquer power.Whatkindoffollowers are these?I refer myself to
Mariátegui's documents. Can these gentlemen be called followers
of Mariátegui? No. They are smokers of Mariátegui,arsonistsof
Mariátegui's work. They burn a lotoffrank incenseforthe
purposeofcoveithantwitahtothimooe will
23
=====第23页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
beabletoseehowhereallywasandstillis.Muchpicnicking,
much phrasemongering,elevatingthefigureof the manwhile
prostitutinghisthought.Theymention Mariateguia lotwhile
denying
his revolutionary vision. Are thesefollowers of
Mariátegui?No.TheyreafickersemiesofMaiteui.They
want to reduce thecelebration ofMariátegui to merely
commemorate hisdeath(TNF: Las Romeriasal Amauta. Yearly
deliveryofflowersandcandlelightto_Mariategui'stombby
revisionist groups in Peru). Very symptomatic. They celebrate his
death because they celebrate that he is dead,understand? When
should we be much happier of the fact that he was born, lke for
the greatfiguresoftheworld,nobody celebratestheday Lenin
died, but all celebrate the day on which Lenin was alive. We know
them betterfor their deeds. We must not accept that. We must
fight all those who oppose Mariátegui, who denies he. But it is not
only Mariátegui who has those kinds of enemies.
THOSE "SUPERSEDING" MARIATEGUI'S WORK
He also has hidden enemies. Those individuals whokeep on
saying: "On what year was it that Mariátegui wrote? In 1928? Ah!
"
'They say,"that wasforty years ago!In 40 years historical
science has progressed much in the world. The methodsof
investigation have progressed much,studies on Peruvian history
have advanced both on the archeology,on history of the republic,
on history of theInca empire,"these things have advanced so
much asto"exceedthereachof_Mariátegui."Theaffiliationof
these superseders is the same of the improvers of Marx. These
"petty superseders"have otevenbeenabletosupersedetheir own
narrow minds. Theyareliars,false,traffickers.What dothese
individualsdo?Theyhavethehabitofaccumulatingdata:that
24
=====第24页=====
To UNDERSTaND MARIATEGUI
national situation; whichof course it is absurd.That is not where
the problem lies, it is not a matterof accumulating data,because
we simply are not mere counting machines; the problem lies on
h
Mariátegui calledit "SevenEssaysof
Interpretation,"notsevenessaysof dataaccumulation. And the
problemofinterpretation is a problemofclass position,of
proletarianideologyandof dialectical materialistmethod. What
happens is thathis supersedershave yet to grasp the problemof
knowledgeinthebourgeoisieand intheproletarian. What
happens is thatthese superseders want to make a Marxist
interpretation of Perú,with a bourgeois concept in their heads,
that is whatreallyhappens. Whatis theend result?A chili pot
which not even they themselves are able to digest and that is how
ambiguousthings get:"Perú is semi-capitalist, Perú is a semi-
colony, Perú is a neo-colony, but Perú is the same time semi-
feudal,atthesametimethatit is capitalist." Butwhatthehell is
Perú? The problem with these individuals is that they lack unity
of thought, not because they are less intelligent. They may have a
great intelligence,great wit,buttheylacka base. It is alike
building a house that has a roof but lackof a foundation. They
lack class position and that is why they cannot go further. They
digress, make grandiose interpretative schemes, lucid and brilliant
schemes about a stage of the country or of today's Peruvian
society, but they are unable to get to the crux of the problem and
therefore,end up talkingabout Perú having curious situations of
class or curious alliances. There is nothing curious in Perú, society
is not curious at all.
Society is governed by laws, but those who do not follow Marxism
cannot understandthose laws. To thesefriends, to these
gentlemen who pretend to overcome Mariategui,we must tell
them to understand what the problem is, show them what a gross
mistakes they make when they try to understand Mariátegui while
keepingtheboueoi systemintheirheadsThey willnever
25
=====第25页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
succeed.
Oneof themostdebatedproblemsisthe capitalistcharacterof
Peru, because Mariategui held that Perú is semi-feudal and that is
correct. They claim Mariátegui made a mistake because he said we
are semi-feudal when we are capitalist; what happens is that at the
bottom of the thoughtof those individuals there is no dialectic
mechanism, they believe that revolution is not feasible unless the
forces of production are largely developed. That concept was
supersededalready: Lenin madeof these ideas "mashed potatoes,'
1
but some still revive it.
Some people claim to have superseded Mariategui.In what does
this betterment consist? Where is the well-thought document
showing us thatthe country isthisorthat way,or that the
revolution must have this or that character? That is another
problem, because Mariategui says thatthefirst stage ofthe
Peruvian revolution is national democratic,people's democratic,
butthesupersedersofMariáteguisay,no,therevolutionis
socialist. Finally,there is another setof twisters,they extract or
cut littlesentencesof_Mariátegui's work,thenbegin to make
weird mental elaborations,somewhere Mariátegui says something
about religion, he has an opinion about religion,about the myth,
but then somerub their hands with glee,theirsoft hands which
have never done any field work, and say: deep down Mariátegui
was a mystic and not a Marxist, he was a humanist that suffered
and pained for Peru.
Mariátegui setforth clearly that Marxism-Leninism is universal.
The superseders take hold for one sentence of his in which he said
that therevolutionin Perú willnotbetraced nor copied.
Mariátegui setforth Marxism as a universaltruth and that
26
=====第26页=====
To UnDERSTanD MARiaTEGUI
Marxistscheme thatis what Mr.Victor Andres Belaundesaid.
No. Mariategui has not done that. Mariátegui was not a senseless
man. Mariátegui was a Marxist man and he understood things as
a scientist,althoughhe hadan anti universityfeelings,this was
because he wasagainst therigid,obsoleteand afeudal university
we had in our country,not againstthe people's university which
he shone with his thought.
Reactionaries pretended to showa bourgeois or petty-bourgeois
Mariátegui,and some have even said Mariátegui was a populist
[laughter],apopulistinthesensethatit was Mariátegui who
developed the pro-peasantry thought in Perú,a Mariátegui who
did not developa proletarian conception,butconception from
the viewpoint of the peasantry.That is a lie and a gross distortion.
Mariátegui is a Marxist, he does not have the peasantry viewpoint,
because if he had it, he would be a petty bourgeois revolutionary
and nothing else.
TO STUDY AND TO DIFFUSE
What conclusions must we the revolutionaries draw
about
Mariátegui'sthought? First,tostudyanddiffuseJosé Carlos
Mariátegui. Why study Mariátegui? Because much is spoken
about him inourcountry,buterylitlebyhim isread.Let's do a
retrospective analysis and see if we have read the 10 little volumes
written by Mariategui? Strictly speaking, do we know his political
proposals? Are we familiar with his anti-imperialism viewpoint?
How many times have we think about the problem of an anti-
imperialist viewpoint? How much have we meditated aout the
problems of Mariátegui? Not much.
Mariátegui is a man who shines in our country: there is no one
else of this magnitude. Whatfigure do they pretend to
27
=====第27页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
never even became a consistent one? Neither did Don Victor
Andres Belaunde managedtoputfortha consistentthought.
Belaunde is a superficial man, who today is taken fora thinker.
His work on St. Agustine does not go beyond pure quackery, it is
shell without substance. We must spread Mariategui's thought.
What have wedoneforthefortiethanniversaryof Mariategui?
Have we studied him in depth? Have we held discussions at the
baselevel, organize seminars and conferences on the Seven
Essays? Have we attempted to try to apply what Mariátegui said
and tofollowhis linetounderstandinthatlight,the current
situation in the country? Have we picked up the lantern to be able
to see where we are going? We have not done so. Concretely, here
is what I propose. I think we must setforth activities to
commemorate the fortieth anniversaryof the Seven Essays. How
do we dothat? Fornow,at leastby discussingit. Secondly,it
seems to me that we have another task: the problem of defending
Mariategui, who is being attacked openly, and covertly.
Mariátegui is a source of light which we cannot allow to be turned
off,to beslander,we cannotallowforit to be seemed through
colored lenses,so we would be forced to see black what is red, so
his fundamental ideaswould gettwisted.We cannotallow that,
we haveto defendMariátegui,because if we do not,then
Mariátegui willbe continued to be castaside. We'd thenbe
following thesame policyof the reactionaries: what reaction did,
was to take Mariátegui,chained and threw him in jail,and then
tried to silence his ideas.
We must free Mariátegui, because if we do not,then neither can
we liberate ourselves. Of course,thisis not a personal problem
butaproblemofliberatingallpople.Inthirdplace,I think we
must furtherthe study of Mariátegui,I do not pretendto
supersede or overcome Mariategui, I do no want to be classified in
28
=====第28页=====
To UNDERSTAND MARIATEGUI
Mariategiurthrtakehidology,hmthodiourcesa a
base, and develop these problems. For example,how we analyze
thePeruvianeconomyof1968,inthelightofthe1928 essay?It
wouldbe magnificent thing to dothesame withliterature,with
the problem of the land, women and other problems. I think that
this is a dutyandwetheintellectuals,mustfulfillit,andthe
workers as well as the peasants because we find many portions of
his work whichreferto themin plain and clear language. In
conclusion, Mariategui is a great example,united with other
figures in our history, such as, for example, Tupac Amaru.
THE EXAMPLE OF MARIATEGUI
Mariátegui is a historic figure of our country. Even if a recent one,
he already has a perfect historical dimension that excels. He is the
country's ideologist. There is no other one. The reactionary
ideologists are dwarfed and defeated by Mariátegui.
We must do it. How wonderful it would be if there were a few
more people like him！ Because I am quite convinced that
individuals like Mariátegui are not born and forge every day, but
every once in a while. Hisfamily name canbe canned and
assumed by his relatives or not. What matters here is the example.
We must raise hisfigure as an example tofollow,as guideofthe
revolution in our country, and our country is deeply changing and
will change even more.It has been said, nobody can stop history,
it may be deviated a bitfor a short while,but not more.
Mariátegui,therefore,is an example to us, but an example of
what? Mariátegui is an example of proletarian revolutionary, not
more, not less. We do not make him bigger. Mariategui doesn't
want that we exalt him nor he wants that we take away his merits.
If we say he is an exampleof a revolutionary,then we would be
strippinghimofhisproletarianfamily name;if wetakethe
proletahiu lute
29
=====第29页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
more among many.
AN ITTY BITTY THEORETICIAN
[TNF: InSpanish"UnTeoriquitoPequeñito"
little
1
or
theoretician] Andwhat doesit mean?IstudyMariategui to
understand what is about,I see his work,hislife,andI find in
Mariátegui's work a theoretical development,a Marxist-Leninist
analysis of our problems,a great theoreticianof Perú and of Latin
America.
We must follow thatexample;I am not proposing that we must
be equal to him,butonly that wefollow his road. For instance I
could makealitle prologue. Forinstance,I could dosomething
followinghislightonthislevel,andbydoing soIwouldbean
ittybittytheoretician,butI am onhisroad,andif we join
togetheralltheittybittytruthsthatwe may bereachingatwhile
following the road of Mariategui,then it becomesa huge river of
truth. Who is moreresponsiblefor doing this? Theintellctual.
But notthe plainintellectuals because our country andits
development
only
demand intellectuals:
It
demands
not
revolutionary intellectuals. What does it mean? Mao Tsetung
answer is luminous and precise and very realistic when he says we
mustfuse ourselves with the exploited massesof workers and
peasants. He says thatvery concretely.Ifone wants to be
revolutionary intellectualthenone mustfusehimselfwith the
masses,work with them,feel like they do and think like they do.
But this is a process,because we must leaveaside our status, our
business suits, we must become revolutionary intellectuals. That is
areflection propertoallofus,whichcarriesustothesecond part.
In Mariategui,we seethe manof action,a doer,evenwhen he
confronted some personal problems,likehisfamily,hishealth, he
always put those problems behind his main task.
30
=====第30页=====
To UNDERSTAND MARIATEGUI
Mariátegui wasveryconsistent.Hesacrificedallforhis work
because he understood the importance of it,because he was a
fighter, whoever is not a fighter, is not a Marxist-Leninist.
We mustfollowhisroad,truly,letterby letter,itwill bedificult
to follow his road, but we must follow it.
I think some ideas havebeen clarified,so try to takeoutall the
embellishment and multitude of florid words,and retain what is
essential,the synthesis,the schematic, theoutline,there remain,
thus, a few ideas, especially the need of enthroning the thought of
Mariategui,ofdefending it andfollowinghis example. The
destiny of our people is at stake. Either we enthrone the thought
of Mariategui, or the country does not go forward.
=====第31页=====
COLLECTED
 WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
LATIN
AMERICA：PEOPLE'S
WAR
GREAT
VICTORIES
AND
BRILLIANT
PERSPECTIVES
BANDERA RoJA No. 42, MaY 1970
"The revolutionary war is the warof the masses,and it can only
berealizedby mobilizingthe masses and being supported by
them."
"Our principle is: TheParty commands the gun,and we will ot
allowthe gun tocommand the Party." Mao Tse Tung
The world political situation has entered a new era: That of Mao
Tse-tung thought (today Maoism-TNF) Under this sign, we have
witnessedevents in the pastfew years that have changed the
world considerably.
7.TheNationalLiberation struggles have
advanced unstoppably,the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution
in China  has  achieved
great victories, the  International
Communist Movement has been strengthened,and the masses
throughout the world,(eveninside the imperialist and social-
imperialist
countries) have unleashed furious revolutionary
storms, shaking up the entire obsolete androtten system of
exploitation of man by man.
THE FOUR CORNERSOF
THE
WORLDARE ON FIRE
TODAY.
The sparksofthePeoples'War settheprairiesonfire. The
violent conflagrationoftherevolution is extending,
,forever
devouringtheoldworld,sinkingallthereactionariesin
desperation and opening new and nearer hopes for all mankind.
32
=====第32页=====
LATIn AMERIcA : PeopLe's WaR GreAT viCTORIES
LATIN
IS
THE
"BACKYARD"
OF
NORTH
AMERICA
AMERICAN IMPERIALISM
Bywayof itssemicolonialpolicy,imperialismhaspenetrated
more ferociously in theatin American countries,acclerating the
exploitationand plunderingofthenaturalresources,oppressing
and ruiningthe massesof the people,mainly the workers and
peasants.
By
oftheir
global counterrevolutionary
strategy,
the
way
imperialists have as a priority to"strengthening"their puppet and
lackey regimes. Thus, strengthening thepositionoffeudal
landlords and bureaucraticcapitalists,by the centralizationof the
economy, the media, and the use of political chicanery by making
themadopt"nationalist"andpseudo-anti-imperialistposes,
by
funding, training and developing thereactionary
the
army,
modernization ofits weaponry andrepressive apparatus,
the
perfectingof itsmethodsof assassinations,andtheincreaseof its
material reserves.
Alltheabove isbeing done inordertounleash a bloody
counterrevolutionary war, in which they attempt to use the
"masses against the masses." Their goal is to keep in power not
1
only weak andvenalreactionary politicians, but military
commanders and chiefs who are much more corrupt and savage
and ready to massacre the people without blinking an eye.
In the eyesof the imperialists,fascistregimesand police staes
offergreater"stability"and"efficiency"insafeguarding
their
interests as well as in the violent repressionof the Peoples'War.
Inthelastdecade,themilitary"corps"hasbeen directly
controlledbtheimpeialistandtheirCIAagentssubjecting
mostof the Latin American countries underfascistboots. Our
Communist Party (PCP)has pointed out the prventive nature of
33
=====第33页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
these imperialistplansmanytimes. Therealobjectiveof
modifyingcertaistructuresistoadaptthemtotheir semicolonial
plans,assumingthattheywillbe more"productive"tothem
beforetheexplosionandproliferationofguerrllagroups,and
therefore,aimingat "preventingarmedstruggles,tocontanhe
stormy advance of the Peoples' War."
Violent repression has always been the main weapon used by the
imperialistsand reactionaries. Attheleast signof guerrlla
activity,tclll
them as soon as possible.
"Burnalltnlthlnt
massesand
patriotic sectors, andagainst the wounded and
captured
guerrillas  they
apply the policyof"war without
Their barbaric proofsofferociousness toward the
prisoners."
unarmed population and captured fighters are constant, including
their methodsof mass murder andrefinedCIAtechniquesof
torture and physical annihilation.
Thereactionarieshave promotedand maintain,mainlyinthe
cities,secret groups of criminals and degenerates,who with the
open support of reactionary authorities have caused the violent
death of thousands of patriots and progressives.
Inthe Peoples'WarthatthepeoplesofLatin Americawill
eventually have to confront, they will face extremely harsh
conditions in its development. It will have to overcome the most
difficult conditions everinhistory. Buttheimperialistsand
reactionaries are notinvincible.(Ourpeople will contribute to
bury definitively all the exploiters.)
The SovietSocialImperialistsandotherrevisionists,showing
their treachouandcountrvolutionarfaceapincipal
34
=====第34页=====
LATIn AMERICA : PEOPLE's WAR GREAT vicToRiES
accomplicesofYankeeimperialism, deceitfullyproclaim and
agitatetheir"peacefultransitiontosocialism."Inreality,it means
submission,servilityand worship to theimperialists. Because
whilecollaboratingpoliticallyandeconomicallywiththeold
rottendyinglandlord-bureaucratistates,theycallfortheviolent
repressionof themasses.Thus,underthebatonoftheirrepulsive
chieftains,therevisionistsofLatin_America have carried out
eand permanentcounterrevolutionary activities, of
successive
shameless treachery andsabotage to therevolution andthe
Peoples' War.
Intheirdesperateatemptstogetthe"benefitoflegality,they
havenot hesitatedto launch the mostrapidattacksagainst the
Marxist-Leninist
parties and revolutionary violence.
The
revisionists have rendered "services," infavorof the enemy,and
in the measures in which armed actions prosper. And when they
are incapableofobstructingthe growthof
revolutionary
movement from the outside, they introduce themselves or
infiltrate their ranks,afterhypocritical demonstrationsof support,
in order to capture the leadership and use the guerrilla groups in
their political negotiations for "legality.'
The
experience  of Latin
America
has
confirmed
the
counterrevolutionary actionsof Trotskyism and the damaging
effectsofitsfallaciousthesisof"decisivelyanticapitalist"struggle.
Manyrevolutionary [cadresand leaders] were murdered bythe
police"thanks"totheinformation provided byrevisionistsand
Trotskyists. Onlythe people will judgethemforthebloodof
these fighters.
With the victoryof thearmedstruggl in Cuba in1959,and the
"tercerismo.
1
35
=====第35页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
Tercerismo is aenwed versionof thevaiattemptsof the petty-
bourgeoisietosubstitutthpoltaiaastheladnfactorin
the revolution and wrest away its hegemony. The terceristas and
their"ideologues"
spreadtheirso-called"particularity"ofthe
revolution in Latin-America,fiercely attacking Marxism-Leninism-
MaoTse-tung
Thought
[today
Maoism],
preaching
its
obsolescence, as well as the universal laws of the People's War.
Petty-bourgeoisterceristassubstitutetheproletarian politics by
bourgeois poltics.They negatetheleadershipofthe workin lass
and theirpoliticalparty,andtrusttheactionofthegroupof
petty-bouoihoanthbougoisliarlin.Tyay
homage to weapons andrejectthe protracted and systematic
political workamong the masses(especially the
peasantry),
favoringguerrll"focos"fortheauctioningofwanderingarmed
bands.Theycultivatespontaneity,initiating themilitaryactivities
without consideringthepolitical conditions andthesubjective
desire of the masses (acting above the conscience of the masses.)
All attemptsbytercerismo haveendedindefeat,as itwas
inevitable. Their vanguard endeavors, which pushedthemto
adventurism, have led them from failure tofailure,and to suffer
painfull losses.
Allrevolutionarieshavetheobligationandneedtostudyand
systematizethe experiences accumulatedbyour people] upto
now.Thecotiuatooftheruglemandsit.Thetci
to murdertherevolution is to collude withrevisionism and
Trotskyism. The best recipe to lead the revolution tofailure is to
lead it on theroadof petty-bourgeois tercerismo. These are the
lessons drawn at the cost of the blood of so many fighters.
36
=====第36页=====
LATIn AMERICA : PEOpLe's WaR GREAT vicTORIES
analyzingthonditionposedatfrt)oftakintheoadof
surrounding the cities from the countryside limited themselves to
mobilizesmallpety-bourgeoissectors.Theywentaheadwith
urban guerllctions,practicingspontaneityandrelyingon the
Theiri
incapacitytolink the
struggleof isolatedelements.
revolutionary work to the workers and peasants movement, and
theviolentrepressionunfoldedbyreaction inthe cities,forced
them to abandon the cities. Later,some decomposed themselves
goingoverto"legality"andacceptingconcessions,andothers
climbed the mountains to continue the fight in rural areas.
The revisionists,forced by the circumstances to join such groups,
became agentsofpoliticalcorosiontothefightrsandended up,
as in other cases in Latin America,offering the guerrillas in their
negotiations as bargain chips in exchangefortheir"legal"
recognition.Intheendthewrorlrygi
themselves inthetail ofreaction, and shouting their stupid
slogans of"democratic and peaceful development,"
"electoral
participation," and so on.
Castro's support for terceristas,as has happened in other cases in
Latin America, was conditioned to their being subject to his
orientations, or those of the pseudo organizations formed for that
purpose,that is,external"leading centers," violating the Marxist-
Leninist principle thatthe revolution is done by the peoplesof
each country, led by their majorstaff,the"Communist Parties."
1
Another example is the case ofColombia. Armed struggles
emerged there inresponse tooneof the mostbrutalrepressions
personifiedby"violence"thatsystematiclly
murdered
were
thousands of patriots and covered Colombia with blood.
37
=====第37页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
in Venezuelathefirstonesbyshamelesslysabotagingand
betrayingtheevolutionandtheltebyleadintheilla
the reactionaryarmy,thegroup disintegrated.Some degneraed
in banditry,whileothersattempted toorganize what it became to
beknown as the "independentrepublicsof MarquetaliaandEl
Pato." They wereisolatedfrom thelarge popularsectors,unale
to extendtheirinfl uenceto anylarge degree,andunableto
strengthenthemselves through the mobilizationofthe masses.
Thus, they were an easy prey of the counterrevolution.
Inthelastfewyears,theguerrillastrugglehasrevivedin
Colombia,butthis timeshowing a greater tendency toorient the
struggle tothe proletarian conceptionof thePeople's War. As
long as this position advances and leads the struggle in Colombia,
it willachievevictoriesfortheirpeople.Itwillbe a great
contribution to the Latin-American revolutionary movement.
In Perú,theguerrillagroupsthatinitiatedtheiractivity in1965,
under the noxious influence of tercerismo,spread away their
forces,undertheillusion thatbyso doing,they will disperse the
forces of the enemy. They became into wandering bands, almost
with no linksto the peasants'masses,they made useof the golden
rules of tercerismo: "constant distrust,constant security,constant
vigilance," which in essence means: mistrust and contempt for the
peasants'masses.
Meanwhile,theCuzco guerrllasadoptedthetacticof pasive
defense,of defending their territory inch by inch, rejecting active
defense,which is a consistent Marxist-Leninist concept, and the
onlycorrectguidingthoughtforthepeoplestobevictorious in
Theyalsobuilttheir"camps"in
their revolutionary
wars.
isolated from  the
mountain
regions,
centers  of
large
concentrationsofpeasantnaively tinkig
gthemselvestobe
38
=====第38页=====
LATIN AMERIcA : PeopLE's WaR GReAT vicTORIES
impregnable [to enemy fire ]
The caseof Bolivian guerrllasconstitutesa typical exampleof the
activityof petty-bourgeois terceristasin Latin America,and one of
the most important acts of adventurism perpetrated by Castroism.
As worshiperofspontaeity,theytrusted"prestigemoehan
thework of politicalmoblzatioofthemassestwistinte
genuineconcepofproltriaintenationlismandintting
theiractivities withtheirhopesinthebasesoflogisticsuport
external totheguerrillas,neglectingthe Marxist-Leninist lineof
only relying on their own efforts.
Thefailureof theNationalLiberationArmy(initialsin Spanish
ELN)inBolivia andthedeathof Che Guevaraandthe Peredo
brothers, meant  the  total bankruptcy of petty-bourgeois
tercerismo in Latin America. It was,besides,a clear exampleof
the treacheryofrevisionists,and thefalsesupportpreached by
Castro.
The erroneous
political orientation, andconsequently, the
erroneous militaryline,theisolation of the masses,the lackof
revolutionary perspectives, and the abandonment of revolutionary
work,led to some of the terceristas to terrorist activities in the
cities, reducing themselves to suchfalse methods. Others are
getting closer,however,atthecostofpainfulandbloody
experiences, to theroadofthe People's War, of_Marxism-
Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought [today Maoism].
The proletarians "neednotonlya justMarxistpoliticalline but
alsoa justMarxistmilitaryline."Withouttheguidanceofa
correct politicalline,itisimpossibletodevelopcorrectmlitary
line,andwithoutacorrectmilitaryline,itisalsoimpossible to
applyandimplmtorct olicl.
39
=====第39页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
This truthhasbeenunderstoodbytheMarxist-Leninist[Maois]
partiesofLatin America,which have made efforts to prepare
themselves for the People's War and dare to carry on the People's
War, following the proletarian military lineof Comrade Mao Tse-
tung.
Thanks to the correct orientation of the Marxist-Leninist[Maoist]
parties andthepowerfulinfluenceoftheInternational
Communist Movement,theidea that"power grows fromthe
barrelof the gun," a priceless teachingof Mao Tse-tung, that has
taken deep roots in the masses,there is a greater and more
profound understandingofthebasic ideasof thePeople's War
and the People's Army: the War of the People,and the Army of
the People.
UnderstandingtheroadofthePeople's War,andunderthe
LeadershipoftheirCommunistParties,the Marxist-Leninists
[Maoists] ofLatin Americahave consistentlygone to therural
areas to do political work among the peasants'masses, and to lay
down the bases for revolutionary wars.
The leadership of the Communist Parties, the Marxist-Leninists is
averyimportant and essentialfactorforthe triumph ofthe
People's War in Latin America. Only such Parties, armed with the
invincible Mao Tse-tung Thought [Maoism], will beable to carry
on assuredly and victoriously the revolutionary struggles until the
end.
Our
glorious
Communist Party is a firm Marxist-Leninist
[Maoist]party.WithinourPartyhavebeenalwaystrugglesat
historical stage ofthe development ofthe revolution,
every
between two diametricallyopposedmilitarylines.Our party has
known howtosucessfulldefend thproletaiamilitaryline,
40
=====第40页=====
LATIn AMERicA : PEopLe's WaR GReaT viCTORIES
revisionism and petty-bourgeois tercerismo.
In particular, the present internalstruggle, againstthe liquidators,
has leftourParty inthebestconditionsand has gottenuscloser
to the brilliant realityof thePeople's War.Our Communist Party
is committed to contribute to the struggle of the peoples of Latin
America with the developmentof the struggle of the Peruvian
people, maintainingitselffirmly onthe side ofthefraternal
parties in Latin America, and envisioning that the People's War in
Perú will provide greater contributions to the total victory of the
world communist movement.
Onlybfrmlstulingagainsisionismtotskyism,all
revisionistsincludingthepetty-bourgeoisterceristas,andby
discrediting them thoroughlyand completely,will we beableto
fight truthfully and resolutely against imperialism and feudalism.
Wemustenergeticallydestroythebourgeoismilitarylineand
eradicateits venomous influence inLatin America. We must
prioritize the politicsof the proletariat,which is to say Marxism-
Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought [Maoism],andthethoughtof
Jose Carlos Mariategui,and our Party's line. We must insiston
arming our cadres, militants, andthe masses, with Marxism-
Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought. The decade of the 1960's was a
stage of victory for Marxism-Leninism in Latin America and the
entire worldand the new decadeof the1970'swill bringabout
even greater victories for world revolution.
We have achieved great victories. Let us warmly welcome the new
decade. The perspectives are brilliant.
LONG LIVE THE TRiUMPH OF THE PEOPLE'S WAR!
LONG LIVE MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO TSE-TUNG
41
=====第41页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
THOUGHT!
DOWN WITH PETTY-BOURGEOIS MILITARISM!
42
=====第42页=====
MARXISM,
MARIATEGUI
AND
THE
WOMEN MOVEMENT
PCP - CENTRaL CoMMitee - ApRiL, 1975
I. THE WOMAN QUESTION AND MARXISM
The womanquestiois aimportanquestioforthepoulr
struggle and itsimportance is greatertoday because actions are
intensifying which tend to mobilize women; a necessary and
fruitful mobilization from the working class viewpoint and in the
service of the massesof the people,but which promoted by and
for the benefitoftheexploiting classes,acts as anelement which
divides and fetters the people's struggle.
In this new periodof politicizationof the massesof women in
which we now evolve, withits base in a greater economic
participation by women in the country, it is indispensable to pay
serious attention to the woman question as regards study and
research,political incorporationand consistentorganizing work.
A task which demands keeping in mind Mariátegui's thesis which
teachesthat: "WOMEN,LIKE_MEN,ARE_REACTIONARIES,
CENTRISTSORREVOLUTIONARIES,
THEY
CANNOT
THEREFORE ALL FIGHT THE SAME BATTLE SiDE BY SIDE.
IN
TODAY'S
HUMAN
PANORAMA
CLASS
DIFFERENTIATES_ THEINDIVIDUAL_ MORE THAN SEX."
That way, from the beginning, the need to understand the woman
question scientifically doubtlessly demands that we start from the
Marxist concept of the working class
1. The theory of women as "deficient feminine nature"
Through thecenturiestheexploitingclasseshavesustained and
43
=====第43页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
imposedthepseudo-theoryof the"deficientfeminine nature,
1
that has served to justify the oppression which up to now women
experience in societies in which exploitation continues to prevail.
That way,theJewish men's prayer: "Blessed be God,our Lord
and Lord ofall the worlds,for not having made me a woman"
I
and conformity by the Jewish womenwho pray "Blessed be the
Lord whohas created me according tohiswill,"clearly exress
the contempt the ancient world had for the woman's condition.
These ideas also predominated in Greek slave society; the famous
Pythagorassaid"There is a good principle whichhas created
order, lightand manandthere is a bad principle which as
created chaos, darkness and woman;" and even the
great
philosopher Aristotle pronounced: "the female is female by virtue
of certainqualitativefault,"and"thecharacterof womensufers
from a natural defect."
These proposals passedon to thefinal periodof Roman slave
society and to t
he Middle Ages, the contemptfor woman
intensifying in Christian thinkers by imputing her with being the
sourceof_sin andthe waiting room ofhell. Tertulian claimed
"Woman you are the doorof the devil.You have persuaded him
whom the devil did not dare toattackfrontally.By your fault the
son of God had to die; you should always go dressed in mourning
and rags"; and Augustine of Hipona "The woman is a beast who
is neither firm nor stable." While these condemned, others passed
sentence onfeminine inferiority andobedience;thus Paulof
Tarsus,the apostle, preached "Man was not takenfrom woman
but woman from man;"and"Just as the church is subject to
Christ,letwomanbesubmittedinallthingstoherhusband."
And hundreds ofyearslater, inthe 13th century,
Thomas
Aquinas followed with similar preaching:"Man is the head of the
woman, just as Christis the headof man"and"Itis a fact that
woman is destined to live under the authority of man and that she
has no authority by herself."
44
=====第44页=====
MARXiSM, MARiATeGui AND THE WoMEN MOVeMENT
Theunderstandingof thefeminineconditiondidnotprogress
much with the development of capitalism,since while Candorcet
pointedoutitssocialrootwhenhesaid:"Ithasbeensaidthat
women … lack a senseof  justice, andthattheyobeyed their
feelingsraththathconciencthtdifencehasben
caused byeducationandsocialexistence,notby nature," and the
great materialist Diderot wrote: "I feel sorry for you women" and
"inallcustomsthecrueltyofcivillaws joinedthecrueltyof
nature against women. They have been treated as imbeciles";
Rousseau,advanced ideologistof the French Revolution insisted:
"Alleducation of women must be relative to thatof men .……
Woman is made to yield to man and endure his injustices." This
bourgeois position is carried on to the age ofimperialism,
becoming more reactionary as time goes on;which,joined to
Christian positions,and reiteratingold theses sanctioned through
John 23: "Godand nature have given women various chores
which perfect and complement the chores entrusted to men."
That way we see how throughout time the exploiting classes have
preached the "deficient feminine nature." Sustaining themselves in
idealist concepts they have reiterated the existence of a "feminine
nature"independentof _social conditions, whichis part ofthe
anti-scientific "human nature"thesis; but this so-called "feminine
nature," eternal and invariable essence, isalso called "deficient" to
show that the condition of women and their oppression and
patronage istheresultoftheir"naturalinferioritycomparedto
man." Withthispseudo-theoryitisintendedto maintainand
"justify" the submission of women.
Finally,it is convenient to pointoutthateven anoutstanding
materialistthinkerlike Democritushad prejudices withrespect to
women("A womanfamiliarwith logic: a fearful thing";"Woman
is much more prone thanthe male to think evil").And that the
45
=====第45页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
defense of women is based in metaphysical or religious arguments
(Eve means life and Adam means land; created after man, woman
was finished better than him). Even the bourgeoisie, when it was
a revolutionary class,only conceived of women inreferenceto
men, not as independent beings.
2. The development of capitalism and the women's movement.
The development of capitalism will incorporate women into labor,
providing thebasis and conditionsforherto develop;that way,
with their incorporation into the productive process,women will
have thechanceof moredirectly joiningtheclassstruggle and
combative action. Capitalism carried out the bourgeois revolutions
and in this forge, the feminine masses, especially working women,
advanced.
The French Revolution: the mostadvanced oneof those led by
the bourgeoisie, was a great nourishmentforfeminist action.
Women got mobilized together with the masses, and participating
in the civic clubs,they developed revolutionaryactions. In these
strugglesthey organizeda "Society
 ofRevolutionary
and
Republican women,"andthroughOlimpia de Gouges,in1789
they demanded a "Declaration of theRightsof Woman"and
created
newspapers
Impatient"
todemand
improvements in their condition. In the development ofthe
revolutionary process women won the suppression of the rights of
the firstborn maleand theabolitionof the masculine privileges,
and they also obtained equal rights of succession with males and
achieved divorce. Their militant participation rendered some
fruits.
Butonce thegreat revolutionary push washalted,women were
46
=====第46页=====
MARXISM, MARiATEGuI AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
to the home,they were told:"Sincewhenhave women been
allowed to renounce their sex and become men? Nature has told
woman: be a woman.Your chores are to tend to infants,the
details of the home and the diverse challengesof motherhood."
Even more,withbourgeoisreorganizationinitiated by Napoleon,
with the Civil Code, a married womanreturned to be subject to
patronage,falling underherhusband's domain inher person and
goods; she is denied the questioning of paternity. Married women,
like prostitutes, lose their civil rights, and they are denied divorce
and the right to transfer their properties.
In the French Revolution we canalready see clearly howthe
advance of women and their setbacks are linked to the advances
and setbacks ofthe people and the revolution. This is an
important lesson: Theidentity of
interests ofthefeminist
movement and the people's struggle, how the former is part of the
latter.
Also this bourgeois revolution shows how the ideas about women
follow a process similar to the politicalprocess; once the
revolutionary upsurge was fought and halted, reactionary ideas re-
emerged about women. Bonald maintained: "Man is to woman as
woman is to child"; Comte,consideredthe"fatherofsociology,"
proposed thatfemininity is a sort of continued infancy and that
thisbiologicalinancyisexpssdasintlctulwakss;Bla
wrote: "The destiny of women and their only glory is to make the
hearts of men beat. The woman is a property acquired by
contract,a mobile personal property,because the possession is
worth a title; in all, speaking properly, woman is but an annex to
man." All this reactionary ideology is synthesized in the following
words by Napoleon: "Nature wanted for women to be our slaves
.They are our property …; woman is but a machine to produce
children"; acharacterfor whomfemininelifeshouldbeoriented
by"Kitchen,Church,Childre,sloganendorsedby Hitler in
47
=====第47页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
this century.
The FrenchRevolutionraiseditsthree principlesof liberty,
equalityandfraternity and promised justice andto meet the
demandsofthe people.Very soonit showeditslimitsand that its
principleddeclarations were butformal declarations,at thesame
time its class interests were counterpoised to thoseof the masses;
misery, hunger and injustice kept on prevailing, except under new
forms. Against such an order of things the utopians launched
themselves with a sharp and demolishing criticism although, due
to historic conditions,they could not reach the root of the evil.
Utopian socialists also condemned the conditionof women under
capitalism.Fourier,representingthisposition,pointedout:"The
change ofanhistoricalage canalways be determinedbythe
progress of women .. the degree of emancipation of woman
constitutes the natural path for general emancipation.'
1
Confronted with this great assertion it's worth counterpoising the
thoughtof theanarchistProudhonabout women,and keep in
mind hisideas when there are attempts today to propagate
anarchism to thefour winds,presenting them as examplesof
revolutionary vision and consequence. Proudhon maintained that
woman was inferior to man physically, intellectuallyand morally,
and that represented together numerically, women have a value of
8/27 the value of man. So for this hero a woman represents less
than a third of the value of a man; which is but an expression of
the petty-bourgeois thoughtof itsauthor,a root common toall
anarchists.
Throughout the19thcentury,withtheirincreasing incorporation
into the productive process,women continued to develop their
struggle for theirown demands joining the workers'unions and
revolutionary movementsof the proletariat. Anexample of this
particif
48
=====第48页=====
MARXiSM, MARiATeGui AND THE WoMEN MOVEMENT
general orienteditself
1871. Butthefeminist movementin
struggle to gettheright tovotefor
towards suffragism,toth
women,in pursuitof thefaleideathat in getting thevoteand
parliamentarypositiontheiihtswouldbespcted;thatway
feminist actions were channeled towards parliamentary cretinism.
However it is good to remember that the vote was not achieved
forfreebutthat duringthe last century andthe start of this
century womenfoughtopenlyand determinedlyto getit. The
strugglefor thefeminine vote and its achievement show once
more that,while this indeed was a conquest,it is not the means
allowing a genuine transformation of the condition of women.
The 20th century implies a greaterdevelopmentof thefeminist
economic action,women workers increase massively,as well as
women employees,to whom are addedstrong contingentsof
professionals;womenenterinto allfieldsofactivity. Inthis
process world wars
have
great importance because
they
incorporated millionsof women into theeconomy to substitute
forthemnr
mobilizedtothefront. Allthispushed the
mobilization, organization andpoliticization ofwomen;a
and
startingfromthe1950sthefeminist struggle starts againwith
greaterforce,amplified in the1960swith great perspectivesfor
the future.
In conclusion,through theeconomic incorporation of women,
capitalism set the basisfor their economic autonomy; but
capitalismbyitslisnotcapableofgiving ormallegalequlityo
women; in no way can it emancipate them; this has been proven
throughout the history of the bourgeoisie,a class which even in
its most advancedrevolution,the French Revolution of the 18th
century,could not go furtherthan a merelyformal declaration of
. Further on, the later development ofthe bourgeois
rights.
revolutionaryprocesseand the20thcenturyshownotonly that
the bourgeoisie is incapableemancipating the masseof women,
49
=====第49页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
but with the development of imperialism the bourgeois concet as
regards the feminine condition becomes more reactionary as time
goes on and infactconfirmsthesocial,economic,political and
ideologicaloppressionof women,even if it disguises and paints it
in myriad ways.
3. Marxism and the emancipation of women.
Marxism, the ideology of the working class,conceives the human
being as a setof socialrelations thatchange as a function of the
social process.Thus,Marxism is absolutely opposed to the thesis
of"human nature" as an eternal,immutable realityoutside the
frameofsocialconditionsthisthesisbelongstoidealismand
reaction. The Marxist positionalsoimpliestheovercomingof
mechanical materialism (of theold materialists,before Marx and
Engels) who were incapableof understanding the historical social
character of the human being as a transformer of reality, so
irrationally it had to rely on metaphysical or spiritual conditions,
such as the case of Feuerbach.
Just as Marxism considers the human being as a concrete reality
historicallygeneratedbysociety,itdoes notaccepteitherthe
thesis of "feminine nature," which is but a complement of the so-
called "human nature" and therefore a reiteration that woman has
an eternal and unchanging nature; aggravated, as we saw, because
what idealismand reaction understand by "feminine nature" is a
"deficient and inferior nature" compared to man.
For Marxism,women,as much as men,are but a set of social
relations, historicallyadaptedand changing as a function of the
changes of society in its development process. Woman then is a
her
transformation
demands
the
social
product,and
transformation of society.
50
=====第50页=====
MARXISM, MARiATEGuI AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
When Marxism focuses on the woman question, therefore, it does
so from a materialistand dialectical viewpoint,from a scientific
conception which indeed allows a complete understanding. In the
study, research and understanding of women and their condition,
Marxism treats the woman question with respect to property,
family andState,sincethroughouthistory the condition and
historicalplaceof women is intimately
linkedtothosethree
factors.
An extraordinary exampleof concrete analysis ofthe woman
question,from this viewpoint,is seen in Originofthe Family,
Private Propertyand the State,by F.Engels, who,pointing to the
substitutionof motherrightbyfatherrightasthestartofthe
submission of women, wrote:
"Thus,theriches,as they wentonincreasing,on one hand
provided man with a more important position than woman in the
family, andontheotherplantedin himtheideaof taking
advantageof this importance to modify the established orderof
inheritance for the benefit of his children ... That revolution--one
of the most profound humanity has known--had no need to touch
even one of the living members of the gens. All its members could
go on being what they had been up to then. It merely sufficed to
saythat in thefuture the descendants ofthe male line would
remain in the gens,but thoseof thefemale line would leaveit,
goingtothegensoftheirfather. That way maternal affiliation
and inheritance by motherright were abolished,replacedby
masculineaffiliationandinheritancebyfatherright.We_know
nothing of how this revolution took place in the cultured peoples,
since it took placein prehistorictimes… Theoverthrowingof
mother right was THE GREAT HISTORIC DEFEAT OF THE
FEMALE SEX THROUGHOUT THE WORLD. Man also
grabbed thereignofthehousewomasawherseled,
51
=====第51页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
mere instrument of reproduction." (Our emphasis.)
ThisparagrapbEnlststhundametalthisofMarxism
about the woman question: the condition of women is sustained
in property relations, in the form of ownership exercised over the
means of production and in the productive relations arising from
them. This thesisof Marxism is extremely important becauseit
establishesthattheoppressionattached to thefemale condition
has as its roots the formation, appearance and development of the
right to ownership over the means of production,and therefore
that its emancipation is linked to the destruction of saidright. It
is indispensable, inorder to have a Marxist understanding of the
woman question,tostartfromthisgreatthesis,and more than
today  when
supposed
revolutionariesandevenself-
ever
proclaimed Marxists pretend to have feminine oppression arising
not from theformation and appearance of private property but
from the simple division of labor as a function of sex which had
attributed less important chores to women than those of men,
reducing her to the sphere of the home. This proposal, despite all
the propagandaandefortstopresent itasrevolutionary,is but
the substitutionfor the Marxist positionon the emancipation of
women, with bourgeois proposals which in essence
earebut
variations of the supposed immutable "feminine nature.'
1
Developingthis materialist dialectical starting point,
Engels
teaches how on this basis the monogamous family was instituted,
about which he says: "It was the first form of family not based on
naturalbut on economic conditions, and concretely on the
triumph
ofprivate property over spontaneously originated,
common primitive property." And: "Therefore,monogamy in no
way appears in history as a reconciliation between man and
woman,andeven less as a higherformof marriage. Quite the
one sex by theother,as the proclamationof a war between the
52
=====第52页=====
MARXiSM, MARiaTEGui AND THE WOMEN MOvEMENT
(Origin….Our
sexes,up to then unknown in prehistory."
emphasis.)
After establishing that private property sustains the monogamous
family form,which sanctions theoppressionof women, Engels
establishes the correspondenceof the three fundamental forms of
marriage withthethreegreat stagesofhumanevolution: savagery
barbarism  and pairing
and
marriage by groups;
marriage;
civilization and monogamy,"with its complements,adultery and
prostitution."That way theMarxistclassicsdevelopedthe thesis
about the historically variable social condition of woman and her
place in society;pointingouthow thefeminine conditionis
intimately linked with private property,thefamilyand the State,
which is theapparatus that legalizes suchrelations and imposes
and sustains them by force.
This scientific propositionsystematized by Engels is a product of
the Marxist analysis ofthe condition of women throughout
history,andthemostelementarystudyfullycorroboaeshe
actuality
yoftheseproposals,whichare the
accuracyand
foundation and startingpoint of
theworkingclass for the
understanding of the woman question. Let's make an historical
recountallowing us to illustrate what Engelsand the classics set
forth.
In the primitive community,withanatural divisionoflabor based
on age and sex, men and women developed their lives on a
spontaneous equality and participation of women in the social
group decisions; later on women were surrounded with respect
and consideration,a deferential and even privileged treatment.
Once riches began to grow, which heightened the position of men
in thefamily,pushingorward thesubtituiooftherright for
mother right, women began to move to the background and their
53
=====第53页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Greek tragicAeschilu,whoinhiswork Eumenida,wrote"Itis
not mother who engenders thatwhich is called her son;sheis
only the nurse of the embryo deposited in her womb. Who
engenders is the father. The woman receives the seed as a foreign
depository, and she preserves it if so pleases the gods."
Thus,in Greek slave society the condition of women is thatof
submission,social inferiority and object of contempt. Of them it
is said:"The slave absolutelylacksof thefreedom todeliberate;
woman has it but in a weak and inefficient manner" (Aristotle);
"The best woman is that of whom men speak the least" (Pericles);
and theanswerbythehusbandwhoinvestigatespublicaffairs
"it's not yourthing.Shutup lestI hit you.… Keep on weaving"
(Aristophanes, Lysistrata) What reality is entailed by these words?
Women in Greece were kept as perpetual minor; under the power
of their tutor, whether the father, the husband, the husband's heir
or the State, their lives passed under constant tutelage. They were
provided a marriage dowry so they had something on which to
live and did not go hungry,and in some cases they were
authorized to divorce; for the rest, they were reduced to
misogynism in the home andin society underthe controlof
specialized authorities. Women could inherit when there was no
direct male heir, in which case she had to marry the oldest relative
within the paternal gens;that way she would not inherit directly
but was merely a transferorofinheritance;allto preservethe
family property.
The condition of women in Rome,also a slave society,allows a
better understanding of it as derivedfrom property,thefamily
and the State. After the reignof Tarquinius and once patriarchal
rightwasttlen)
became thebasis ofsociety: women will remain subject to
54
=====第54页=====
MARXiSM, MARIATEGuI AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
directlydeniedinheritancebutissubjecttotutelage.Onthis
point said Gaius,the Roman jurist: "Tutelage was established in
the interestof the tutors themselves, so the woman of whom they
aresupposedheirscannotwresttheirwilledinheritancefrom
them,nor impoverishitbyalienationordebts."Thepatrimonial
rootof the tutelage imposed upon women wastherefore clearly
exposed and established.
Afterthe Twelve Tables,thefactthat womenbelongedtothe
paternal gens and to the conjugal gens (also strictly for reasons of
safeguardingproperty)generated conflicts which werethe basis
fortheadvancementoftheRoman"legalemancipation."The
"sine manu" marriage appears: hergoods remain dependent on
her tutors and her husband only acquires rights over her person,
and atthatsharedwith the"paterfamilias," whoretains an
absolute authorityover his daughter. And the domestic tribunal
appears, to resolve discrepancies which may arise between father
and husband;that way the woman can appeal to herfather for
disagreements with her husband,and vice versa: "it no longer is
the matter of the individual."
On this economic basis (her participation in the inheritance even
if tutored), and the conflict between the rightsof the paternal and
conjugal gens for the woman and her goods, a major participation
of Roman women intheir society develops,despite the legal
restrictions: the "atrium" is set up, the center of the house, which
governs workby the slaves,conducts education of the children
and influences them until a ratheradvanced age.She shares the
works and problemsof her spouse and is considered co-proprietor
ofhis ood.Sheatendsartieandonthteetsheis iven
preferentialrsingenbyconsulsand maisrt.The wght
of Roman women in their society is reflectedbythefigureof
Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi.
55
=====第55页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP- VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
With  Roman  social
development, the State
displaces the
contention among the gens and assumesthe disputes about
women,divorce,aulty,c,whichwettobehrdinpublic
tribunals, abolishingthe domestictribunal. Later on, under
imperialrule,tutlageonwomewillabolihdanswering to
economic demands. Women get a fixed dowry
social  and
patrimony)which does notreturn to the agnates
(individual
(parentalrelatives)norbelongs to thehusband;thatway she is
given an economic base for her independenceand development.
By theendof theRepublicmothershad been givenrecognized
rights overtheir children,receiving custodyof them due to the
father's misconduct or his being placed under tutelage.
Under emperor Marcus Aurelius, in the year 178, a great step is
taken in the process of property and family: children are declared
heir to their mother in preference to agnates; that way the family
is based on a link of consanguinity and the mother emerges as
equal to thefatherbefore the children, the children also are
recognized as children of the wife and,derived from the above,
the daughter inherits just as her male siblings.
ButwhiletheState "emancipates"womenfromthefamily,it
submits them toitstutelage andrestrictstheiracts. And
simultaneously tothe social rise of women, an anti-feminist
campaign wasinitiatedinRome invokingtheir inferiority and
invokingtheir"imbecilityandfragilityofthesex"tolegally
reduce them.
In Rome then,socially women had it better than in Greece and
acquired respectand even great influence in social life,as shown
by the words of Cato: "Everywhere men govern women, and we,
who govern ll men,are governed by our women." Roman history
has outstanding exalted women,
i,from theSabnes,through
56
=====第56页=====
women butas contemporaries,developed by theendof the First
and Second centuriesof our era; in this way Juvenal reproaches
them: lasciviunessgluttony,todedicatethemslvesto maly
occupations and their passion for hunting and sports.
Roman societyrecognized somerightsofwomen,especiallythe
right toproperty,butdidnotopen tothemcivilactivities and
muchlesspublirtiviswichteyvlopd"lleally"
and in a restricted way; for that reason Roman matrons ("having
lost their ancient virtues") tended to seek other fields in which to
employ their energies.
In the declineofslaveryand the developmentoffeudalism,to
considerthefeminine situationone mustkeep in mind he
infl uence ofChristianity and the Germanic contribution.
Christianity contributed quitea bit to theoppression of women;
among the fathersof the church there is a definite demeaning of
women, whom they consider inferior, servants of men and sources
of evil.To what has been said let'sadd the condemnation by St.
John Chrisostomus,a saintof the Catholic Church: "No savage
beastis as damaging as woman." Underthisinfl uence the
advancesreached under Roman legislation are atfirst mitigated
and later on denied.
Germanic societies based on war
gave women a secondary
situation dueto their smallerphysical strength;however they
were respected and hadrights which made them an associate of
their spouse.Let's rememberthatonthissubject Tacitus wrote:
"in peace and in war she shares his luck;she lives with him and
dies with him."
Christianityand Germaicisminfuenced theconditionof women
under feudalism. Women were in a situation of absolue
57
=====第57页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
ofkingClovi"heuiumwghvhrdlherlife."
Women developedtheir livescompletelysubmitted to thefeudal
lord,althoughprotected by
the laws "as property of man and
motherof children"; hervalueincreases withfertility,being worth
triple the value of a free man, a value she loses when she can no
longer bear offspring: woman is a reproductive womb.
As happened in Rome, also under feudalism we see an evolution
in the condition of women, infunctionof the curbing of feudal
powers and theincrease ofroyal powers:the mundium is
transferred from the lords to the king; the mundium becomes a
burden for the tutor, yet the submission by tutelage is kept.
At the convulsive times when feudalism was formed the condition
of women was uncertain;since therights to sovereignty and
property, public and private, were not well specified, the condition
of women was changing and heightened or lowered according to
social contingencies.
First they were denied privaterights,because women had no
public rights. Until the 11th century force and arms impose order
andsustain property
directly:to jurists,a fiefdom"isaland
possessed with charge of military service" and women could not
have feudalrightsincetheycouldnotdefend itwitharms nor
render military service. When fiefdoms turn into patrimonies and
are inheritable (according to Germanic norms women could also
inherit), feminine succession is admitted;but this does not
improve their condition: woman is just an instrument through
whom dominion is transferred, as in Greece.
Feudalproprtis notamililas inRome,butofthesovereign,
ofthe lord,and women toobelong to the lord; it is himwho
chooses her husband.As it was written,"an heiress is a land and a
castle:suitorcontndedtodisputthprzeandoftenthe
58
=====第58页=====
MARXISM, MARiaTEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
young woman is only12 yearsold,or younger,when her father
or lord givesheras prize to any baron."The womanneeds alord
who"protects"her andherrights;thusa Duchessof Burgundy
proclaimedtotheking:"My husbandhas justdied,butwhat
good is mourning …? Find me a husband who is powerful,
because I much need him to defend my lands." In this form her
spouse had great marital power over the woman, whom he treated
without consideration, mistreating her, beating her, etc. and
whose onlyobligation was to "punishherreasonably,"the same
some codes required today to correct children.
The prevailing warlikeconception madethemedievalknight pay
more attention to hishorsesthanto his wife,andthe lords
preached: "damned be the knight that seeks advice from a woman
when he should participate in a tourney". While women were
commanded: "get into your apartments, painted and gilded; sit in
the shade,drink,eat,weave,tint the silk, but bother not of our
affairs. Ouraffairs aretofightwith swordandsteel.Silence!"
That is how the medieval worldof the lords demeaned and cast
their women away.
The13th century saw the developmentof a movementof literary
women, which travelingfrom south to northincreased their
prestige; the same one which was linked to chivalry, love and the
intense Marianism of that era. It did not modify it deeply, as S. de
Beauvoir saidinTheSecondSex,a bookinwhich abundant
information about the history of women is found; useful data, of
course,aside from the existentialist concepts of its author, since it
is not ideas which fundamentally change the condition of women,
but the economic basis sustaining it.When the fiefdom goes from
a right based on military service to an economic obligation, we see
an improvement in the condition of women,sincethey are
perfectlycapabloffullinmotabligto;tat waythe
seignorialighttomrrhvassalsissuppessedand women's
59
=====第59页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
tutelage is extinguished.
In this way,whether single orwidowed,women have the same
rightsas men; in possessing afiefdom she governs itand fulfills
its administrative duties and even commands its defense,
participatinginbattles.Butudalsocitylikeallthosebasedon
exploitation, requires the submission of women in marriage, and
marital power survives:"thehusband isthetutorof thewife"is
preached;or as Beauvoir said: "As soon as marriage
was
consummated,the goodsofone and theotherare common by
virtueof the marriage," justifying marital tutelage.
Infeudalsociety,as inothersruledbyexploiters,slaveryor
capitalism, what has been describedaboutthe condition of
women has governedand governs;but we must highlight that
only in the conditionof poor women can we seea different and
softer conditionin thefaceof maritalpower;therootofthis
situation must be seen in the economic participation by women of
the popular classes and in the absence of great riches.
The
development ofcapitalism
takes  feudalism  to  its
decomposition, a situation whichimpresses its marks onthe
condition of women, as we have seen already. It suffices to
emphasize that in thebeginningand developmentof the burgs,
women took part in the election of deputies to the General States;
which showsfeminine political participation, as well as the
existence of rights over family goods, since the husband could not
alienate real properties without the consentof the wife. However,
absolutistlegislationwillsoonfetterthesenormstofightoffthe
diffusion of the bad bourgeois example.
Thishistoricalexpositioexemlifiesthethesisby Enelsand the
classicson thesocialrootsoftheconditionof women and its
relationshiptoproperty,familyandState,ithelps
susto
60
=====第60页=====
MaRXiSm, MaRiAtEGui AND THe WOMEN MOvEMeNT
understanditctandeeitactulitmorecaly.Allthis
eneedtofirmlyadhere tothe
carries us to a conclusion, the
working class positions and apply them to understand the woman
question,participateinitsolution,andrejectconstantlyand
decisively,thditortionofMarxistthseon thubjctand the
superior developments_whichare butattempts to
so-called
substitutebourgeoisideasforproletarianconceptsonthisfront,
to disorient the women's movement on the march.
Having exposed the social conditionof women and the historical
outlineofitsdevelopmentlinkedtoproperty,familyandState,
what remains istotreatthequestionoftheemancipationof
women from a Marxist viewpoint.
Marxism fundamentally holds that the development of machinery
incorporates women, as well as children,into the productive
process, thereby multiplying the numberof hands to be exploited,
destroying the working classfamily, physically degenerating
women and materially and morally sinking them into the miseris
of exploitation.
Analyzing women and children at work Karl Marx wrote: "In so
far as machinery dispenses with muscular power,it becomes a
meansofemployinglaborers of slight muscular strength,and
those whose bodily development is incomplete, but whose limbs
areall the more supple. The laborof womenand children was,
therefore,thefirst cryof the capitalistapplicationof machinery.
That mighty substituteforlabour and labourers wasforthwith
changed into a meansforincreasing the number of wage-
labourersbyenrolling,underthedirectswayofcapital,every
member of the woman's family,without distinctionof age or sex.
Compulsory workorthecapialisturpedtheplace,ot onlyof
the children'splay,butalsooffree labourathomewithin
moderate limits for the support of the family."
61
=====第61页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
"The valueof labour-power was determined, notonly by labour-
time necessary to maintaintheindividualadult laborer, butalso
by thatnecessarytmaitaihisamly.Machery,bythrwing
every memberofthat amilyon tothe labour-market,sprads the
values of the man's labour-powerover his wholefamily. It thus
depreciateshis labour-power…" Thus we see,that machinery,
whileaugmenting thehumanmaterialthatformstheprincpal
object of capital's exploiting power,at the same time raises the
degree of exploitation.'
"Byopeningthefactorydoors to womenandchildren,making
them flock in great numbers to the combinedranks ofthe
working class, machinery finally breaks down the resistance of the
male workertothis,despite the despotismofcapitalwithin
manufacturing."(Capital,VolumeI,pp.
394-395.
5.Economic
Culture Fund, 1966. Emphasis in original.)
Continuing his masterfulanalysis,Marx himself describes tous
how capitalism useseven the virtuesandobligationsof women
forits advantage: "Mr. E., manufacturer,told mehow inhis
textile mills he employed exclusively women,preferably married
ones, and above all those who had at home a family living from or
depending on her salary,since these were much more active and
zealous than single women; besides, the need to procure
sustenance to theirfamiliesforced them to work harder. In this
way,the virtues characterizing women are turned against them:
all thepurityandsweetnessoftheircharacterare turned into
instruments of torture and slavery."(Note57ofabovequoted
volume and edition of Capital, p. 331.)
But justas byincorporating women into production capitalism
increased exploitation, simultaneously with  this
processit
provides thematerialbasisforwomen to struggleand demand
62
=====第62页=====
MARXism, MARiAteGui AND THE WoMEN MoVEMENT
theirrihtsanitstrtnpontothstrugeorr
emancipation;sinceas EngelstaughtinOrigin.…:"Thefreeingof
women demands as a first condition thereincorporation of the
entire female sex into social industry,which in turn requires that
the individual family no longer be society's economic unite" (our
emphasis). And evidently capitalism, with itsown future interests,
set the basisforthefuture emancipationof women,as well as
creating theclass that will destroy it as it develops: the proletariat.
Onthe other hand,
their
participation and the
economic
development ofthe
class
struggle
pushes
forward
the
POLITICIZATION OF WOMEN. Wealready highlightedhow
the French
Revolution
pushed
forward the
political
and
organizational development of women and how, by uniting them,
mobilizing them andforcing them tofightitsetthebasis forthe
feminist movement;we also saw howfeminist demands were
reached through the riseof revolution, and how theirrights were
abolished and their conquests swept away when the revolutionary
process wasfetteredandthrown back. However,with all the
positive aspects that the incorporation of women into the French
Revolution had,the resulting politicizationof women was but
elementary,restricted andvery small compared to the major
advance
representedby the politicization of women by the
working classes. Whatdoesthispoliticizationimply?
When
capitalism massively incorporates women into the economic
process,it wrest them away from insideof the home,to attract
them mostly tofactory exploitation,makingindustrial workers
out of them;that way women are forged and developed as an
integral partofthemostadvancedandlatestclassinhistory;
women initiate theirradical processof politicization through ther
incorporationintotheworkers'union struggle(thegreat change
implied bythisisobservedconcretelyinourcountrybhe
transformation seen in women workers, peasants and teachers of
63
=====第63页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
advancedformsoforganization,whichgoesonbuilding herup
andshapingherideologicallyfortheproletaianconcesand
finally she arrives at superiorformsof struggleand political
incorporating
herself, through her best
organization
representatives,intotheanksofthe Partyof the workinglass, to
serve the people in all forms and fronts of struggle organized and
ledbytheworkingclassthroughitspoliticalvanguardThis
politicization process whichonly theproletariatis capableof
producing and the new typeof women fighters it generates has
materialized in the many glorious women fighters whose names
are recorded in history: Luisa Michel, N. Krupskaya, Rosa
Luxemburg, Liu Ju-lan and others whose memory the people and
the proletariat keep.
For Marxism yesterday like today the politicizationof women is
thekeyissueinheremancipation,andtheclassics dedicated
special  attention to
it. Marxtaught: "Anyone who knows
something of history knows thatthe great social changes are
impossible without thefeministferment. Social progress can be
measured exactly by the social positionof the weak sex."Letter
to Kugelmann, 1888.) And to Lenin the participation of women
was more much urgent and important to the revolution:
"The experienceof all the liberation movements confirms that the
success of the revolution depends on the degree in which women
participate." (Our emphasis.)
Thus the developmentof the class struggleand itsever greater
sharpening,
within  the  specific
social conditions of the
revolutionary struggle under conditions of imperialism,sets forth
and demands more decisively the politicization of women; that is
why Leninhimsel,inthe middleof World WarIandfoeeeing
futurebattlesfortheworkingclasswhichrequiredprepardness,
calledtofightfor:"17.Abolitionofanyandalllimitations
64
=====第64页=====
MARXiSM, MaRiaTEGUi AND THE WOMEN MOvEMENT
without exceptiontothepoliticalrightsof womenincomparison
to men. Explainingto themassesthespecialurgency of this
transformation at moments in which the war and scarcity disquiet
the massesofpeopleandawakeninterestinandattentionto
"itis
politics particularlyamong women."Andheproposed,
necessary thawfullydevelopsystematicwork among
these
feminine masses. We musteducate those women we
have
managed to wrest away from passivity, we must recruit them and
arm them for the struggle,not just the proletarian women who
work in thefactoriesortoilin thehome,butalsothe peasant
women, the women in the various layersof the petty-bourgeoisie.
Theytoo arevictimsofcapitalism."Withthose words Lenin
demanded the politicization of  women, the struggle for
demanding their political rights, the need to explain to the masses
the urgency ofpoliticallyincorporating women,the needof
working together with them, to educate them, organize them and
preparethemforallformofstruggle;finally,heemphasized
orienting themselves towards working women; but without
forgetting the importance of peasant women and remembering
the various classes or layers of women being exploited, since all of
them could and should be mobilized for the people's struggle.
From the above we see how the politicization of women was
proposed by Marxism from its beginnings,considering women's
struggles as being insolidarity with the strugglesof the working
class; thatiswhylastcenturyBebelsaidthat"womanandthe
worker have in common their condition as oppressed," and why
the Socialist Congress of 1879 proclaimed the equality of the sexes
and the needtostruggleforit,reiteratingthesolidarity of the
revolutionary feminist women and the working class struggle. Or
as China proclaims today,following Mao Tse-tung's thesis: "The
emancipation of women is an integral part of the liberation of the
proletariat." (Peking Review, No. 10, 1972.)
65
=====第65页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
This brings us to consider HOW CAN THE EMANCIPATION
OF WOMENBECHIVD?Investitingcaitalistciety and
societies ingeneralwhereexploitationandoppressionprevail,
Engels
verifiedthatmisery,inequalityand submission exist
among men,and emphasizing the woman question he pointed
out,"Thestateof affairs with respect to the equality of men and
women is nobetterthantheir legalinequality,whichwe have
inheritedfrom prior social conditions,is not the cause but the
effect of the economic oppression of women." And he continued
"Women cannotbe emancipatedunlesstheyassume a large
socially
measurable role in production and are only
tied
insignificantly by domestic work. And this has only been possible
with modern industry, which not only admits feminine labor in a
large scale but fatally demands it."
This assertionby Engels,taken outof contextand unrelated to
similarones from Origin.…. helps some people,pseudo-Marxists
and distortersof Marxism,stretching his ideas,to claim that the
mere participation of women in the economic process is sufficient
for their emancipation. Engels proposed that the incorporation of
women into production was a condition,that it is a base upon
which women actinfavorof their emancipation,and that this
demands to socially end domestic work whichabsorbs and
annihilates women, which to Engels implies destroying private
ownership of the means of production and developing large-scale
production based on the social ownership of the productive
means. We repeat that it is good to be very clear about this thesis
by Engels, because today some attempt to hide themselves in this
classic to distort the Marxist position on the woman question and
preach,forthe sakeof the exploiting classes,on the plainand
simple participationof women in the economic process,hiding
the root of women's oppression which is private ownership and
sidesteppinlarge-scalesocialproductionbasedondestroying
private property of the means of production.
66
=====第66页=====
MaRXiSM, MaRiaTEGui AND THE WoMEN MoveMeNT
Foreseeintihcaly
the problem of whether the incorporation of women to the
productiveprocess,whichcapitalism began, was capableof
making menand womentrulyequal.Theconciseand powerful
given once more by Mao Tse-tung in the 1950s:
answer
was
EQUALITY BETWEEN_MEN_AND_ WOMEN
JCAN
"TRUE
ONLY BE ACHIEVED IN THE PROCESS OF THE SOCIALIST
TRANSFORMATiON OF THE WHOLE OF SOCIETY."
Lenin researched the situation of women in bourgeois society and
compared it with how it was under the dictatorship of the
proletariat; an analysiswhich ledhim toestablish: "From remote
times,therepresentativesofall the movements of liberationin
western Europe,notfor decades, but during centuries,proposed
the abolitionoftheseantiquated lawsand demandedthe legal
equalityof womenand men, but no democratic European State,
not even the most advanced republics,have managed to achieve
this, because wherever capitalism exists, wherever
private
ownership of thefactories is maintained,wherever the powerof
capital is maintained, men go on enjoying privileges."
"From thefirst monthsof its existence, Soviet power, as the
power of workers, realized the most decisive and radical legislative
change with respect to women. In the Soviet Republic no stone
was left unturned which kept women in a position of dependence.
I am referring precisely to those laws which used the dependent
situation of women in a special way,making her victim of the
inequalityofrightsandoftenevenofhumiliations,thatis tosay
laws on divorce, on natural children and on the right of women to
suethefatherin courtto supportthe child."(Tasks ofthe
Women Workers in the Soviet Republic.)
From thiscomparativeanalysistheconclusionis takenthatonly
67
=====第67页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
E1(1968-1987)
therevolutionwhichplacestheworkinclasin powernalliance
with the peasantry is capableof sanctioning the true judicial legal
equality between men and women,andeven further,of enforcing
it. HoweveraLeninhimselftaughtthistruelegalequlity
initiatedbytherevolutionisbutthebeginningofa protracted
struggleforthefullandcompleteequalityinlifeofmenand
women: "However, the more we rid ourselves of the burden of old
bourgeois laws and institutions,the more clearly we see that we
have barely cleared the terrainfor construction,yet constrution
itself has not begun.'
"The woman continues to be a slave of the home,despite all the
liberating laws, because she isoverburdened,oppressed, stupefied,
humiliated by the menial domestic tasks, which make her a cook
and a nurse, which waste her activity in an absurdly unproductive,
menial, irritating,
stupefying andtedious labor. The phrase
emancipation of women will only begin for real in the country at
the time the mass struggle begins(ledby the proletariat already
owning the power of the State) against this petty home economy,
or more precisely,when their mass transformation begins in a
large-scale socialisteconomy."(AGreatInitiative;emphasisin
original.)
Thus Lenin andMao Tse-tung
answeredtheanticipated
opportunist distortions and pseudo-developments of_Marxism
which today atempts to distort the thesesof Engels and confuse
the working class position on the woman question.
Marxism conceives the struggle for the emancipation of women as
a protractedbutvictoriousstruggle:"Thisisaprotractedsrugge,
whichrequiresaradicaltransformationofthesocialtechnique
andof customs. Butthisstruggle will end with thefull victory of
Women's Day.)
68
=====第68页=====
MARXISM, MARiaTEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
Theabove,inessence,showsthereis anidentityofstruggle
between therevolutionaryfeministmovementandtheworking
class strgofw;e,i
helps to understand thesenseof Lenin's wordscalling women
workers to developtheinstitutions and means which the
revolutionlacedatthdisoal:"Weaythatthemancipation
of workers must be the work of the workersthemselves and
likewise
THE
EMANCIPATIONOFWOMEN
WORKERS
MUST
BE
THE
WORK
OF
WOMEN
WORKERS
THEMSELVES." (The Tasks …)
These are the central theses of Marxism on the emancipation,
politicizationand the conditionof women;positions which we
prefer to transcribe for the most by quotationsfrom the classics,
because these positions are not sufficiently known,and besides
that because they were masterfully and concisely expressed by the
authors themselves, which relieves us from the task of pretending
to give them newediting, more so after seeingtheirfull and
complete actuality. On the other hand, the distortions ofthe
Marxist positions attempted today on the woman question also
demand the dissemination of the words of the classics themselves.
Finally, it is indispensable,even if only in passing,to make note
that Marx, Engels, Lenin and Mao Tse-tung set forth the thesis of
the emancipation of women and not that of women's liberation,
as can be appreciated from the cited quotations. On this
particular,itsufficesto saythattheanalysisof the conditionof
woman through history shows her as subject to tutelage and in a
situation of submission with respect to the male, which makes
woman a being who,while belonging to thesame class as her
husband or the man she has a relationship with, finds herself in a
situation of inferiority with respect to him,an inferiority which
the lawsbless,sanctifyand impose.Consistent with this situation
69
=====第69页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
of undervaluing throughout history we seethe need to demand
her rights to achieve a formal equality with man under capitalism,
and how only the revolutionary struggleunderthe leadershipof
theproletariatiscapableofsettingupandfulfllinga genuine
legal equalityof men and women,though,as we saw,plentiful
equalityinlifeaLeninsadwilldvloalacalscalist
production develops. These simple observations show the
certainty of the thesis on women's emancipation conceived as part
of the liberation of the proletariat. While the thesisof women's
liberation historicallysurfaces asa bourgeois thesis,hidden at the
bottom of which is the counterpoising of men and women due to
sex and camouflaging the rootof the oppressionof women; today
we see how women's liberation is exposed more each day as
bourgeoisfeminism, which aims at dividing the people's
movement by separating the feminine mases from it and seeking
mainly to oppose the development of the women's movement
under the leadership and guide of the working class.
II. MARIATEGUI AND THE WOMAN QUESTION
50years ago
Mariategui,withhis sharphistoricalforesight,
perceived the importance of the woman question in the country
and its perspective ("Thefirst feminist quivers are latent in Peru
…"); he devoted twoof his works to this question,Woman and
Politics and Feminist Demands, besides many other contributions
found in his writings.It is indispensable to go back ourselves to
this source, because in it we will find the position of the Peruvian
working class withrespect to the Woman question;even more,
because thisproblem is a littleknownand researchedaspectof
Mariátegui's work.
José CarlosMariteguitaughtus:"Inourtimeslifein sociy
cannot bestudiedwithoutinvestigatingandanalyzing itscauses:
theorganizatiooftheamily,theconditionofthewoman;"and
70
=====第70页=====
MARXISM, MARriATEGUI AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
researchingthenascentPeruvianfeminist movementhe said:
"Men who are sensible to the greatemotionsofourtimes cannot
and should notfeelthemselvesoutof placeorindifferent to this
movement. The woman question is part of the human question.'
Solet's keepinmindthatfromthebeginningofitspolitical
emergence theworkingclassofthiscountrypaid attention to the
situationof women,establishing throughits great representative
their positionwithrespectto women,as well asofering fighting
support tofeminist struggles,as shown by thesolidarity of textile
workers and drivers with the women workers of A. Field Co.in
1926.
What was the feminist development which attracted such accurate
attention? The conditionof women in the country suffered a
noticeable change especially in this centuryand more specifically
after the two world wars. While the condition of peasant women
changed more slowly,that of her sisters turned workers and
professionals experienced more rapid and profound changes.
Evidently the presence of women in our society has een
conquering positions ever more widely.
Last centurytheactionand literary workofClorinda_Matto de
Turner,Mercedes Cabello de Carboneraand Margarita Praxedes
Muñoz,highlighted the feminine presenceover a background of
millions of peasants, workers andother women who,while
anonymous,were subjectto harsh socialrepressionoffeudal
roots. ThePeruvian womanofthe19thCenturyhad minimal
access to education, and when she was allowed to attend
secondaryeducation,theeducationalnormsfollowed would
establish forhera watered down curriculum comparable tothe
last primarygradefor maleplusomeof thesecondaryschool
71
=====第71页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
privateinstitutionwhichtendedopreparedstudentstoenter
the university,it was not until 1928 that the National Women's
School of Lima opened its doors in Lima; up to then there was no
such schoolof itskind in thecapitalcity.It's good to notice how
by the end of last century some women educators worried about
the educationof women,proposing its renewal:it demands
overcoming the erroneous conceptof "educating them only for
marriage,which leads one to think such is theironly purpose in
life," that their education must not be in the hands of nuns, who
having abandoned the world are not in a positionofforming
good women, and that we need toend the misconception that the
single
or married woman who works outside the home
degeneratessocially;atthesametimetheydemandand create
new educational centers.
Teresa Gonzalez de Fanning
was
outstanding in this aspect.
Similarly college education wasclosed to them,their presence at
the University is not noticed until the_1890s,and it wasn't until
1908 that women were authorized to enterand seek a degreeat
the Universityandexercisetheprofessions. Thedemeaningof
women andtheirsocialoutcasting isthus clearly
yseenin
education. However with the 20th century transformations,
women see an increase in their possibilities to pursue studies and
work as professionals,mostofthemfinding work as teachers.
Onlyafter World WarII is a diversification of women's careers
seen. University graduates,whom early in the century could be
counted with thefingers of the hand, almostreach the current
30% of college graduates of the country.
But what really wouldimplya profound, radicaland far reaching
change is the incorporation of women into factory production.
The proletaianizationof thePeruvian womanbegan this century
hand in hand withtheintroductionofmachinery
andthe
development ofbureaucraticc
capitalism. We
see
in
our
72
=====第72页=====
MARXISM, MAriATEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
environmentwithitsspecificconditions,thesituationdescried
by Marx andwhich wequotedabove,withtheproductie
incorporationof women as workers,the process of proletarian
politicization opensup to thefeminine massesof Peru. The
participationof women in worker's unions begins,women join
the struggleforsalaries,theeighthour workdayand working
conditions;they participate in people's strugglestogether with
other workers in actions against the high costof living and price
increases,which developstheirideologicalunderstanding, and
finally the womenof the countryamidstrevolutionary combat,
become political militants of the working class.
The processof the political development of the Peruvian woman,
paralleltotheirincorporationintolabor, providedsignificant
gainstothe country's classstruggle inthefirstthirdof this
century,among which milestones we must highlight the struggle
for theeight hour workday by agricultural workers at Huaral,
Barranca, Pativilca and Huacho,in whichfivefemale workers
offered theirlivesin1916, sealing withtheir blood teir
adherence to theirclass.Just as wehighlighttheir participation in
momentous actions againstrising pricesand thehigh costof
living in May of 1919, actions in which women workers organized
a Women's Committee so as to channel their supportive actions
and agreed "To makea call toall women,without distinctionof
classes,to cooperate withtheiraction to the defenseoftherights
of Peruvian women";in this great struggle womenfaced police
forces at their meeting on the 25th, during which, after
overcoming thebloody police repression,they proclaimedthe
following conclusions:
"The women of Lima,surrounding towns and peasants met in
great publicmeeting on Sunday 25 May1919 at Neptune Park,
having considered:
73
=====第73页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
"Thatit isnotpossibletofurthertoleratethesituationof
miseryto whichthhghcostofsubsistencegoodandidential
rents andalloflife's necessitieshavereducedthepeople;that
Peruvian women, as well as women in all civilized countries, have
understoodtheir mission tointervene intheresolution ofthe
economic and social problems affecting them;
Have agreed:
1. To make as their own the conclusionsof the people's
meeting at the Alameda de los Descalzos on May 4th.
2.In case those conclusions are notaccepted,to declare a
generalwomen'sstrikeinallbranchesofindustry,leavingthe
date to the discretionof the Men's Committee for Diminishing
the Costof Subsistence" (Martinezdela_Torre, Notesforthe
MarxistInterpretationof theSocial Historyof Peru,Volume I,
Lima 1947. Our emphasis.)
Another chapter in this historyof women's struggle was waged by
Socorro Rojoagainstthe persecution, repression,imprisonment
andbloodpolitics unleashedbythe dictatorship of_Sanchez
Cerror defending therightsandlibertiesof the people,especially
the proletariat.
In thestrugglesreferred to,besidesthe politicizationof women,
or more strictly,as index of a correct perspective,it must be
highlighted that in them the feminine masses waged theractions
intimately unitedtothepeople'sinterests,whicharetheirown,
andin directunitywithandsupportforthestrugglesofthe
working class, which is their class.
74
=====第74页=====
MARXISM, MaRIATEGUI AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
incorporation into productionand under bureaucratic capitalism
pushedforwardby North Americanimperialism andby their
especially at the university. These
increased access to educatio
are thebasesonwhichthefirsteministimpetusesofthecountry
will hatch, a phenomenon which Mariategui described asfollows:
"Feminism has not madeits appearance inPeruartifically
Jor
y.It hasappeared as resultofthenewforms of
arbitrarily.
intellectual and manual laborof women. The women withtrue
feminist affiliations are those women who work, the women who
study. Thefeminist idea prospers among women in intellectual
jobs and in manual jobs: professors, university students, workers.
It finds a propitious environmentforits development in the
university classrooms,whichattractmore Peruvianwomen every
day; and in the workers' unions, where factory women enroll and
organize withthesamerightsand thesame dutiesas the mn.
Besides this, we have the feminism of dilettantes, a little pedantic
and a little mundane. Forfeministsof thiskind,feminism is a
mereliterary exercise, merely afashionable sport." (Feminist
Demands; our emphasis.)
It is onthisbasisthatMariáteguielaboratedthepositionof the
Peruvian proletariaton the woman question,byestablishing the
general line tofollow on this matterfor whomever wants to
developfroma Marxistviewpoint. Let's see the basic problems
from this position:
1. The Situation of Women.
The starting point of the study of the woman question from the
viewpointof the Peruvian proletariat,demands to keep in mind
that Mariáteguirepresentsinthe countrytheapplicationof the
universal truth of Marxism-Leninism to the material conditions of
a backwardsand oppressed country,anapplicationwhich leads
himtoscientificallypresenthesemiudaansemi-colonl
75
=====第75页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP -VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
characterofoursocietyin themidstof whichanational-
democraticrevolutionhasdevelopedsince1928througha long
and sinuous proceswhosehigher stage is stll pending.This is
the substance and guidanceof Mariátegui's thought;and starting
from these considerations we must treatall theproblems and
policies he established, amongthem what is relevant to the
woman question.
Thus Mariátegui startsfromthe semi-feudal and semi-colonial
characterof Peruvian society to judgethesituationof women.
Thisinitselfrejectsfromtheoutsettheobsoletetheoryof
"feminine nature," conceiving of women in a situation or
condition derivedfrom the structure of society in which they
functionandemphasizingthe dynamic,changingcharacterof
women's situation,he points out the transforming role work has
on the condition of women with respect to social status and ideas
about them. Thefollowing paragraph expressesthis andoher
points well:
"But if bourgeois democracy has notrealizedfeminism,it has
involuntarily createdthe conditions and moral and material
premises for its realization. It has valued women as a productive
element,as an economic factor,by making more intensive and
extensive use of their work each day. Work radically changes the
mind and the spirit of women. Women acquire, by virtue of their
work a new concept of themselves. In ancient times society
destined women to marriage and idleness or menial work. Today
it fates them,above all,to work. Thisfacthas changedand
elevated the positionof women in life."So it remains clear,for
the Peruvian proletariat,that it is society whichimparts women
their condition and not some mischievous nature; that the
feminine condition is a changing one and that it is work which is
imparting a great leap in the position and concept of women. This
is the Mariteuistartinpoitathamtimeitcharges
76
=====第76页=====
MARXiSm, MaRiaTEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVeMENT
against thebiologicaldeterministreductionofwomen tosimple
reproducers,andgoesagainsttherosecoloredmyths which
treacherouslyhelptomaintaintheiroppression:"thedefenseof
the poetryofthehomeiralityisadefnseofthseomof
women. Far from ennobling and dignifying the role of women, it
diminishes and reduces it. The woman is more than a mother and
afemale, just as man is more than a male."(The last two
paragraphs belong to Feminist Demands, our emphasis.)
Developing the thesisof the socialrootof thefemininecondition,
Mariáteguisetsoutthe difference betweenLatin and Saxon
establishing the causal connection between feudal
women,
background and temperament and differences ineach woman:
"The Latin woman lives more prudently,with less passion.She
does not have that urge for truth. Especially the Spanish woman
is very cautious and practical. Waldo Frank, precisely,defined her
with admirable accuracy: "TheSpanish woman--he wrote--is a
pragmatistin love.She considers loveas a meansof creatig
childrenfor heaven. Nowhere in Europe is there a less sensual,
less amorous woman. As a girl she is pretty; fresh hope colors her
cheeks andenlargesherblack eyes.Toher,marriage is the highest
state to which she can aspire. Once married, this innate
coquettishnessofspring disappears like a season in her: in a
moment she turns judicious, fat and maternal." (Signs and Works,
Waldo Frank's Rahab.)
What was saidaboutthe Spanish woman naturallyextends to
Latin American women and among them those in this country,
and it shows that the feminine mentality generated by the ancient
and presentfeudalbackground isstll notovercome. Butbesides
relations betweenimperialism andthe
this,
analyzingthe
ofAmerica, Mariáteguihighlights
the
oppressed
countries
mentality
which
Yankee
domination
alienating
impresses on
1
mentality:
"The
limeña
[nativeofLima--Trans.]
feminine
77
=====第77页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
bourgeoswteneetnvwi
their loweremployeesat theCountryClub,attenniandonthe
streets.TheYankeecamarry,without any inconvenienceof race
or religion,the creole señorita,and shefeels no scruplesof
nationality or culture by preferring marriage with an individual of
the invading race. And neither does the middle class girl feel any
scruples in this respect. Thehuachafitawho is able to trap a
Yankeeemployed bythe Grace Corporation ortheFoundation
does it withthe satisfaction ofhaving elevated her social
condition." (Imperialist Viewpoint.)
Thus typifying the feminine condition in our society as serfdom
of women, the semi-feudal and semi-colonial background which is
itsrootisestablished,discardingallinterpretationsustained by
the supposed "deficient feminine nature."
Onthis basis Mariáteguigoesontothe materialanalysisof
Peruvian women belonging to the different classes; he masterfully
depicts working women: "if the masses of youth are so cruelly
exploited, proletarian women suffer equal or worse exploitation.
Up to very recently the proletarian woman had her labor limited
to domestic activitiesat home. With advancing industrialization,
she enters the competition in the factory,shop, enterprise, etc. …
Thus we see her in textilefactories,cracker factories,laundries,
container and cardboard box factories, soaps, etc., where she
performs the same work as the male worker,from operating the
machinery,to the most menial job,always earning 40% to 60%
less than the male. At the same time that women train themselves
to do industrial jobs,they penetratealso into theactivities of the
office,commercial houses,etc., always competing with men and
tothegreabenefitofthndustralenterriseswhchta
noticeable reduction in salariesand immediate incrase in profits.
In agricultureand mining we find proletarian women in frank
78
=====第78页=====
MaRXiSM, MaRIATeGuI AND THE WOMEN MoVEMENT
numbersofexploited women,enderingtheir services inall sorts
ofactivitiesIntheprocessof our socialstruggles,the
proletariat has had to set forth specific demands for their defense.
Textile unions,whichup to now haveshown thegreatst interest
in thisquestion,though notexclusivelyso,have gononsrike
more than once withtheobjectofforcing compliance with
regulations which,specified by law,thecapitalistssimply refuse to
implement;wehave some capitalists (suchasthe"friend" ofthe
worker Mr. Tizon y Bueno) who have not hesitated to consider as
an "offense" thefactthat a woman worker was pregnant,for
which "offense"shehasbeenterminatedsoastoavoidcomplying
with what thelaw stipulates. At the crackerfactory, the
exploitation of women is vile." (Manifesto ofthe General
Confederation of Peruvian Workers [CGTP] to the working class
of the country. The Woman Question; a document edited under
Mariategui's leadership.)
Is this a valid description?Yes; in essence the workers'situation
remains the same: the widest exploitation in ever more branches
of industry, which in someof them is truly horrifying; the useof
female labor so as to lower salaries,based on their salaries being
lower than those paid to men; non-fulfillment of laws protecting
womenand hiddenanti-workerpositionsbythefalse"friend" of
the proletariat. Alsovery current isthe need to supportthe
achievements of the women workers.
Similarly
Mariátegui
goes on to review the  condition of
indigenous peasant women,of whom he says that together with
their children theyareobligated "torender gratuitous services to
the proprietorsand theirfamilies,aswellas toauthorities";their
miserable conditionandsocialplacementhas a root:latifundia
and serfdom.
As regards the petty-bourgeoisie,
,besides
pointing
the
out
79
=====第79页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
tribulationsof the womenof thisclass,theanalysisof primary
school teachers helps Mariátegui to establish how the social mean,
the nearness to thepeople and their dedication tofulltime
teaching modifies their attitude and spiritsopening them up so in
within can beshown "easily theidealsof theforgersof a new
socialState,"since:"Noneoftheirinterestshasanything
gin
commonwiththecapitalistregime. Her life,herpoverty,her
work, fuses her to the proletarian masses.'
1
He
proposes
addressingthemsince"intheirranksthevanguardwillrecruit
more and better elements."
2.Historicalbackgroundoftheeminist struggle.
As we saw,for Mariátegui industrialization incorporates woman
into work and through this it transforms her condition and her
spirit. He points out,liketheclassics,the double situation
implied:
"When
nwoman
advances on  the road of  her
emancipation over a bourgeois democratic terrain,in exchange
this fact provides the capitalist with cheap laborand at thesame
time a serious competitor to the male worker." (Above cited
Manifesto.)Onthe otherhand,pointing outthatthe French
Revolution included some elements of the feminist movement, he
vindicatesthefigureof Babeuf,leaderof theegalitarians,whom
he considers "an asserter of feminist demands"and of whom he
quotes the following lucid words: "do not impose silence on this
sex which does not deserve to be disdained .…. If you do not count
on women for anything in your republic, you will make lovers of
monarchy out of them" and "this sex that the tyranny of men has
always wanted to annul, this sex which has never been useless in
the revolutions."
And balancing the contribution made by the French Revolution to
the emancipation of women he said in Women and Politics:
80
=====第80页=====
MARXiSM, MaRiaTeGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
"The FrenchRevolution,however,inauguratedaregimeof
politicalequalityformennotforwomen. TheRightsof Man
couldhave beencalledrather,theRightsof_Males. Withe
bourgeoisie women ended up much morealienated from politics
than with thistacy.ouoisdemocacy waaexclusive
male democracy.Itsdevelopmenthad to end up,
however,
Capitalist
intenselyfavorable to the emancipation of women.
civilization provided women with the meansof increasing their
capacity and improving their position in life."
Therefore, what the bourgeois class doesfor women was set
accurately:whileit
is capable of providing conditionsfor her
development,it is incapable of emancipatingher. Mariategui
knew thisverywell:how despitethislimitation capitalism, as it
develops,opens upfor women the doors to various actvitis,
including politics, very especially so in the20th century,so much
thatit becomes a symbolof this. Developing this statement,
Mariátegui himself vindicates many notable women and points
out and demonstrates the contributions many women have made
to poetry,to the novel,to the arts in general to thestruggle and
politics. Thus he teaches us how to judge women of the various
classesandcelbrities,pointingout theirmeritsandshortcomigs
and showing what is principal in each individual case and, what is
more important,
highlightingtheir contributions  to women's
advancement.
3. Feminist Movement.
A central pointand greatly important todayis the Mariáteguist
proposal on the general problemsof women,withhis theses on
the feminist movement, on which subjectthree parts are
noteworthy: feminism;politicizationof women andorganization.
81
=====第81页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
"neitherartificllrabtraily"amongubutitcorrsponds
with theincorporationofwomeninto manualandintellectual
work; in this viewpoint he highlights mainly that feminism thrives
among women who work outside the home, and points out that
theproperenvironmentsforthedevelopmentof thefeminist
movement are the university classrooms and the labor unions. He
then sets forth the directive of orienting ourselves towards those
fronts so as to push forward the mobilization of women. Although
it must be decidedthat such orientation in no way implies
discounting  peasant
twomen; since we must rememberthat
Mariátegui considered the peasant women as the most important
class in our process,no doubt peasant women too are a front of
mobilization and even more,the main source which the entire
feminist movement as well as the proletariat want to reach.
In Feminist Demands Mariáteguiproposesthe essence ofthe
feminist movement: "No one should be surprised if all women do
not get together in a singlefeminist movement. Feminism has,
necessarily,several colors, various tendencies. In feminism three
fundamentaltendencies canbe distinguished,three substantive
colors; bourgeois feminism,
petty-bourgeois feminism and
proletarian feminism. Each one of these feminisms formulates its
own demands in a different way. The bourgeois woman unites
feminism with the interests of the conservative class. The
proletarian woman unifies herfeminism with thefaith of the
revolutionary multitudes in the societyof thefuture. The class
struggle--an historical fact and not merely a theoretical assertion--
is reflected on thefeminist stage. Women,
lie
men, are
reactionaries,
centrists  or
revolutionaries.
They
cannot,
consequently,allfightthesamebattlesidebyside.In thecurrent
human panorama,class dferentiates individuals more than sex."
?
This is theessenceofourwomanquestion,thclasschacof
82
=====第82页=====
MARXiSM, MARiaTEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
in mind, today more than ever, since once more the organization
of women is pushed forward; many groups arise, which in general
aresilentor hide theclasscharactersustaining them,thats, he
class whichtheyserve,and preach a unificationof womento
demand their rights inoppositionto men,as if toserveall women
united, without distinction ofclass, for a supposed
dsocial
social
transformation"humanist,Christianandinsolidarity"
transformation,going through a fewintermediate modalities of
unclear or confused class positions. Substantially the problem is to
ascertain the  class  root  entailed
byeachwomen's
group,
organism,frontor movement,to delimit positionsand establish
whom theyserve,whichclasstheyserve,andiftheyare tulor
are not on the side of the people.
These questions take us to a crucial problem: according to whose
principles,whichclass criteriaand orientation are we to build a
feminist movement serving the people? Here Mariátegui's position
is brilliantand concise "Feminism,as a pure idea,is essentially
revolutionary." Andto him, revolutionary essentialy
meant
proletarian; that way the entire people's feminist movement which
truly wants to serve the people and therevolution,has to be a
feminist movementadhered to the proletariat,and today in our
country adherence to theproletariat means adherence to the
thinking of Mariátegui.
With respect to thePOLITICIZATION_OF_ WOMEN. The
Marxist classics have always attached greatimportance tothis
point, since without i, it is impossibleto develop the mobilization
and organization of women, and without these women we cannot
fight side byside with the proletariat for theirown emancipation.
Following hisgreatexample,the Peruvian working class like
Mariátegui has pointed out the importanceofthe politicization of
womenahtteclcktrves
reaction.
83
=====第83页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
"Women,forthemostpart,duetotheirlttleornopolitical
education,arenotarenovatingforcein contemporarystuggles
butareactionaryforce."(FiguresandAspectsofLifeinthe
World.)
This issufentlyla,whatwmustaskurliss:Wat
does this politicization mean? For the founder of the Communist
Party it meantthedeterminedandmilitantincorporationof
women intotheclass struggle,their mobilizationtogether with
the people'sinterests,theirintegrationinto theorganizations,
individually earning themselvesthe ideologyof the working class,
and all this is part of, assessed by and under the leadership of the
proletariat. In synthesis,to incorporate women into politics, into
class struggle, under the leadership of the working class.
With respect to the ORGANIZATION OF WOMEN. Marxism
teaches that in orderto face their enemiesand struggle for their
class interests the proletariat has no other recourse than to
organizeitself;thisprinciple isappliedtothepeople,whoare
strong only if organizedand therefore also to women,who can
only fight successfully when they are organized.
As a "convicted and confessed Marxist" Mariátegui applied these
principles creatively. He paid very special attention to organizing
the women workers,as is seen in the proposals in the Manifesto
of the CGTP referred to above:
"All thisaccumulation of 'calamities'weighingontheexploited
woman cannot be resolved except by immediate organization. In
the same way thatunions have to buildtheir youth cadres, they
must create their women's sections,where ourfuture women
militants will be educated."
84
=====第84页=====
MARXiSM, MARiATEGUI AND THE WOMEN MOvEMENT
Mariátegui showedthesame concernwhenunderhis guidance
the statuteof the mentioned Confederation was getting ready to
form a Permanent Women's Commission at the Executive
Committee level.Unfortunately,theseorientationshave not been
correctlyputintopractice; ithasremainedapurelybureaucratic
unionpositioncalled"eminineafairs"orsomesimilame,
when itexitsatall,withoutorganicallyaccommodatingthe
women's sections of the unions, thus it remains as a pending task.
Lateron,in March1930,theCommunist Partyapprovedthe
following motion:
"First. CreatinaProvisionalSecretariattoorganize scilist
youth, under immediate control of the Party.
Second. Creating a Provisional Secretariat to organize the working
women, under the leadership and control of the Party.
Third.  Both secretariats  will
struggle
for the
immediate
organization ofyouth ofboth sexes,fortheir politicaland
ideological education, as a preparatory stage for their admission to
the Party" (Martinez de la Torre, op. cit., Vol. II; our emphasis.)
Here Mariategui'sthesis is materializedbytheneed topay
attention to the women's organizations, even at the most
advanced political levels;andhispositionisexpressed that the
organizationof women is,ultimately,thequestionoforganizing
them under the leadership and control of the working class and
the Party. Such proposals lead us to ask ourselves,abouteach
women's group,organism,frontormovement:Forwhichclass,
how and for what are women organized? And keep in mind that
thesepointcaonlybesatisactorilyesolved,thaiso
classand thpope,byadheinourlvetotheworkinclass
positions.
85
=====第85页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
These threquestions:feminism,politicizationofwomen and
women, and thetheses which Mariategui
organization
establishedmusbstudiedandappleonistntly,nceonly
that
way
authentic
popular
feminist
can
an
movement
be
developed.
4. The emancipation of women.
Inthispointtoo,likeintheclassics,Mariateguialsoholds that
under capitalism and industrialization "women make advances on
the road to their emancipation." However under thissystem she
does noteven reachfulllegalequality. Forthat reason a
consistentfeministmovement seeksto gofurther,andonthis
roadit necessailhatjoitheruggleoftheprltaria.Ths
understanding led the great proletarian thinker of our country to
state: "The feminist movement appears solidly identified with the
revolutionary movement;"and thatalthoughbornof liberalism,
only with the revolution could feminism be fulfilled:
"Born of a liberal womb,feminism has not yetbeen able to
operate in the capitalist process. It is only now, when the historic
path of democracy reachesits end,that woman acquires the
politicaland legalrightsofthe male. Andit wasthe Russian
revolution which explicitly and categorically conferred on women
the equality and the liberty which for more than a century,from
Babeuf and the egalitarians of the French Revolution,she had in
vain clamored for." (Feminist Demands)
And so it is that in parallel with the construction of a new society
thenew woman willbeemerging whowillbe"substantially
different from theone formed by the now declining civilization"
These new women will be forged in the revolutionary crucible and
will placetheoldtypof womandeformedbytheoldexploitative
86
=====第86页=====
MARXISM, MARIATEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
system in the back room of history, a system which now sinks for
the genuine dignifying of women.
the
"In the same measure as the socialist system replaces
individualssystmemnnluxuioueandlegancwill
decay.…. Humanity will lose some luxurious mammals;butwill
gain instead many women. The clothingof the women of the
future will be less ostentatious and expensive; but the condition of
this new woman will be dignified.And theaxisof feminine life
willprogressfromtheindividultothescial…Awoman,in
sum, will be less expensive but will be worth more." (Women and
Politics.)
Besides these basic ideas Mariátegui takes care of other problems
intimately linked to women in particular: divorce,marriage, love,
withfineirony andtakessharply critical
etc.;hetreatsthem
positions on them. However, as a good Marxist he does not center
his attention on them until taking them as the principal issue. To
dosois toforgettheprincipal struggleandfundamentalgoal,
while spreading confusionanddisorientingtherevolutionary
struggle.
Up to this point we have presented and expositionof the central
theses of Mariátegui's thought on the women question, in which
we haveusedplentiful quotationsforthe same reasons we had
when dealing with the Marxist positions on the subject.
III.
DEVELOPING
THE
FEMINIST
MOVEMENT
FOLLOWING MARIATEGUI
1. Current Relevance of Mariátegui.
A conclusion is obviousfrom whathas been said:the theses
Mariátegui heldon the woman questionresultedfrom the
87
=====第87页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
application of Marxism-Leninism to the specific
consistent
conditions in a semi-feudalandsemi-colonialsocietylikeours.
On this,generally, there is no disagreement and even when there
is no openadherence,at least bysilence an acceptance of such
conclusions is shown. However the question is not whether
Mariátegui's thought was a correct application of Marxism to the
country,the centralissue is: how relevant ishisthought tothe
present?This is asubjecton which,whileexpressing an apparent
recognition of Mariátegui and so as not to attack his immense and
still
growing prestige, some questionits currentrelevance by
mentioning thatmorethan40 yearshaveelapsedandrising,
erroneously and treacherously, the need to take into account "the
creative development of Marxism in order to surpass it."
Analyzing this point leads us to review, if only in passing, some of
the positions thathave been sustainedin this country onthe
woman question. Thus,the notable and contentious thinker don
Manuel GonzalesPrada handled thisquestion in his1904 work
"SlavesoftheChurch," a work now includedin Hoursof
Struggle. There,while expressing important concepts such as:
"We can't knowthe people well until we havestudiedthesocial
andlegal conditionof women," "the moralelevationof manis
measured by the concept he has on women: for the ignorat and
brutal man,the woman is just afemale;forthethinkerand
cultured man,she is a brain and a heart," "Just as we carry the
family name of ourfather,we carry the moral making of our
mother.…." " The motiveforce,thegreatpropellantof societies,
does notfunction noisily at the plaza nor at the revolutonary
circle; it works in the home," which help to center our attention
on the importance of the woman; on the other hand, he expresses
ideas such as "The emancipation of woman, like the freedom of
the slave,is notdueto ChristianitybuttoPhilosophy.""In
Protestant nationemininacension is takingplaceso assurely
thatomodlv
88
=====第88页=====
MARXiSM, MARiaTEGui AnD THE WOMEN MOvEMENt
owe theirpersonaldignitytotheffortsofnobleanddelicate
persons,theCatholic womanwillonlygetemancipatedbythe
energeticactionofmen"and"inthebatteofideanoallys
 more powerful than love."
Thus we seethatthe contributionof Gonzales Prada tothe
emancipationof women overall positive. He pointedout and
denounce the oppression of women, the important role they fulfill
and the necessity toresolve the problem and setforth the
emancipation of women. Althoughfor him the root ofthe
problem is Catholicism which prevails in women, he believes that
it is possible to reach emancipation under capitalism and he
centers the problem in theindividual;yethisideas overall
represent,a positive contribution,inthis andothertopics,in
studying the problems of women in the country.
And these ideas turn out to be more outstanding when we see
nearly 30 years later Jorge Basadre proposing: "Gregorio Marañon
demandedthatthe essentialrole of women is love," while the
essentialrole of men is work... That is why little boys prefer to
playwithsoldiers,symbolofstruggle,ofefort,an urgeto
supremacy;whilelitlegirlsprefertoplaywithdolls,precociously
motherly. By virtue of a command of nature, the charm of the
Creole woman, even when not a mestiza, is diferent from women
ofotherlatitudesbya properflavorlikeafruitorvegetable
While,ontheotherhand thehighestsuperiorityof menisin
their minds and sincethe_American mindisstill determinedly
influenced by Europe, the American glory is lost or lessened … A
notoriously beautiful women in America can, on the other hand,
anywhere."(Peru: Problems and Possibilities,
raise
interesta
Chapter XI. Here theposition is so clearlyreactionary that
comments are unnecessary.)
If in Basadrethrulinclassespaktouof"emininenatue"
89
=====第89页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
whoseessenceislovetheyalsoin1940expressthemelves
through Carlos Miro Quesada Laos as follows:
"The role of woman in modern life is manifold. These are no
longer the times--forever gone--when work was forbidden to her.
Quite the contrary. Today woman works in diverse activities.….
Because she has shown she can act as efficiently as man.. She,
therefore, has the duty to study, to prepare herself for the future.
Andif in these chores women share the duties with men,in
others they are,and will always be, betterthan men. And what
happens is that woman contributes to life many things which are
innate to her. She has the handsof mother and nurse.…. That is
femininity which, thanks to God, they will never lose,despite the
20th century, of wars andrevolutionarytheories. The word
"consolation" evokes women … After making man,the Creator….
put herat hissideto behis mate,to give stimulusand sweeten
his life.. Firstshe mustobey her parents,then her teacher, later
onher husbandandalways duty."(ThreeConferences, Lima
1941.)
With Basadretheexploiting classes postponedthe work of
women; with Miro Quesada, having new requirements, they exalt
and demand the work of women. But deep down both are based
on"femininenature."Butnotonlyin thisfielddotheseideas
appear; incorrect positions are also found in writings and
magazines which claim to be revolutionary and even Marxist; we
read in them concepts like thefollowing: Speaking of the "sense
oflife,"thattheyparticipatein "socialchange,"willenable,we
understand it's meant women,"to undo their existential problem,
since thesenseoflife wouldthenresideintheprofit each
individualisabletoofferher/hisneighborsbywayof willand
effort." Consideringthesubject"WomenandSociety" after
attemptingtooutlineEngels'thesisonthedevelopmentofthe
familythellowinisad:"waessdofthemtofte
90
=====第90页=====
MARXISM, MARiaATEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
inferiorityof wom.Andomtharisethedofliberating
women.… her liberation can only occur when the socio-economic
structure changes with the developmentof a new society." Thus
liberationishighlightedbunotitsocialbackgroundwchs
kept ambiguous and imprecise,ending up centered on how to
regulate"the relationship between sexes in answer to the new
ideology.If the women is equal or must be equal to man,the
bases of such relationship would be:
a) To liberate the women from religious alienation.…
b) Toexercisetherighttochoosehermate withoutobeying
prejudices about masculine initiative..
c) Not to understand women's liberation as a synonym for free
love...  and (fortunately!)
d) The woman being equal to man, she must not remain separate
frompolitics byallegingherfeminine condition. love, as a
starting pointfor a social change,should be the stimulusfor
youth (men and women) to struggle to build an egalitarian world
without oppression or injustice."
And in publishing thestory,"The Tombof theUnemployed," a
Christmas story which handily spreads the "generosity of women"
and the "selfishness of men," a treacherous version of"feminine
nature": "Later on the two ghosts became silent, each with its own
thoughts. The woman in her past;the man in hisfuture. The
woman on what must be done; the man on what needs to be done
for him. Onewithgenerosityandonewithselfishness,always
nailed to theirforeheads,always wrestling in thedepthsof their
consciences."(Magazine Mujer number1 and 2;whilehaving no
dates they were printed in the_1960's).Evidentlythe ideas
contained
Mujer,despite
their
apparent
Marxist
and
91
=====第91页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
revolutiorttlubcoud,in
no way do they express a proletarian position on the woman
question.
What does this summary show us? The hard, cold truth that the
question is by no means the timeframe when the positions are
presented,nor is the problem "to take into account the creative
developments of_Marxism," but what is central isthe class
position on which a proposal is based. We have seen a position
prior to Mariátegui,thatofGonzalez Prada, which despie
preceding Mariátegui by some 30 years entails many positie
elements; as well as a position contemporaneous with Mariátegui,
thatof Basadre,whichisopenlyreactionary;finallytwo later
positions, 30 years after Mariátegui, thatof Miro Quesada, which
renovatessome criteriabutis stll reactionary,andthatofthe
magazine Mujer, under Marxist colors, which definitely adheres to
bourgeois
positions despite it being presented to
us
as
revolutionary and in the service of women's emancipation.
What is the conclusion?As we said,the question is the class
character on which a position is based, in this case the position on
the woman question. With Mariategui,the greatestexponentof
our working class,theproletarian position on the woman
question is established. He set the basis of the proletarian political
lineonthisquestioandhispositionarecompltlcurrent,on
this topic as well as onothers dealing with the revolutionary
politics of theproletariatinour country.Therefore,develoinga
people's feminist movement demands, today more than ever,a
firm and consistent adherence to thethoughtof Mariategui,
starting from an acceptance of its current relevance.
2. Retaking Mariátegui's Road
The struggleofPeruvin womenandof proletarian women has a
92
=====第92页=====
MARXISM, MARiATEGui AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
Similarly,mingazationarelongtagnevertheless,
the process of organizing Peruvian women began to expand in the
1960's,forecastingabrillianperspctivethouglongand
twisting one.
At present we have a multitudeoforganizationsofvarying
extensionand levels,and what is more important,sprouting old
seeds, we already see signs pointing to a genuine people's feminist
movement. Today wehavea NationalCouncilof Womenwith
fifty yearsofexistence,nurturedbythe decrepitand obsolete
theory of"feminine nature", a "Women'sRightsMovement"
upholdinga feminismaimed at liberationfrom dependenceon
men; a gamutof organizations being formed which support the
current regimefor the benefitof its corporativistprocess,under
the orientation and controlof Sinamos and under its conceptof
"participation ofwomen," partoftheir"fully
participatory
democracy," whichobscures that the rootof women's oppression
is private property and the subjugation of women that began with
it; which,twisting ourhistory andusing a lowlyand"vulgar
propagandizesthat"in1968the revolutionry
materialism"
process began that seeks theauthentic liberation of women with
politicalequalityandactiveparticipation,"concluding:"Weare
the ones who must create the variousforms of women's
organizations," saturated with thesly and underhanded bourgois
feminism. And a National People's Union of Peruvian Women, a
right
opportunist organization
which
staged,
asusual,a
collaborationistapparatustotallydevotedtotheserviceofthe
regime.
This increaseand organizational strengtheningof the masesof
women demands a serious investigation of the woman question
and a classanalysisoftheorganizationsthaexistorarebeing
formed,so thecampcandefinethemlves iordetoestablish,
93
=====第93页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
as inotherfields,thetwolinesonthewomanquestion:The
counterrevolutionaryline commandedbyimperialism andthe
middle bourgeois, and the revolutionary line whose command and
center is theproletariat. Thatwillhelptheorganizational
developmentof
the people'sfeminist movement, which of
necessity requires its construction to be unleashed amidst the two-
linestruggle,theexpressionofthe class struggle andof the
similar and confl icting interestsof the contending classes. And of
course it must not beforgotten that within each line there are
variations and differences in operation accordingtothe classes
grouped around each line.From there theproblem consists of
establishingthetwo contrary lines and, within each onethe
variations and nuancesof the line;establishing which position is
in commandofeachline,and,depending onthe class each
represents,giveseachof the lines in struggle a revolutionary or
counterrevolutionary character.
All that's been exposedtakes usthereforetothe necessityof
"retaking Mariátegui's roadon the womanquestion,"inorder to
serve the formation and development of a PEOPLE'S FEMINIST
MOVEMENT conceived as a movement g
generatedbythe
proletariat amongthe
masses of women, with thefollowing

characteristics:
1. Adherence to the thought of Mariategui;
2. Class conscious organization of the masses;
3. Subject to democratic centralism.
The construction of such a MOVEMENT setsforthfor us two
problems:
Ideological-politicalconstruction,whichnecessarily
1.
implies
94
=====第94页=====
MARXISM, MARiATEGuI AND THE WOMEN MOVEMENT
providing it with Principles and Programme;
2.Organicconstruction,whichwecan servebyformingcoresor
groupsof activistsfor carrying thePrinciplesand Program to the
masses of women--workers, peasants, professionals, university and
secondary schoolstudents,etc.--They would work towardthe
politicization of women, mobilizing them through their struggles
andorganizingthem to adhere to thepolitical struggle,
，in
harmony with the orientation and politics of the proletariat.
To conclude thiscontribution to thestudyand understandingof
the woman question, it is pertinent to transcribe a Declaration of
Principles and Programme whichfor some time has been
circulating in our midst,documents which,while emphasizing
their characterasongoing projects,can serve as auseful basis for
discussionof the ideological-political constructionof the ongoing
PEOPLE'S FEMINIST MOVEMENT.
95
=====第95页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
THE NaTioNaL QuESTiON
SPEECH BY CHAIRMAN GONZALO AT THE CONFERENCE ORGANIZED
BY THe TEaCHer's Union of HumanGA, AyacucHo-PEru, 1974
Contemporary Peruvian Society
The character of our society.
The characterofthe revolutionary process of Peruvian
society.
Bureaucratic Capitalism
What do we mean by bureaucratic capitalism?
Three lines within bureaucratic capitalism.
The Contemporary Situation of the Country
The conditions under which the current regime grows.
The plans and characteristics of the regime.
Evidently,it is very importantand necessary to analyze the
characterof Peruvian society; because if we do not have a clear
understanding ofit, we cannot comprehend and explain
adequately the process we are living in today. Thus,it is not
possible to understand concrete problems of today and the current
political situation,such as the law of education or lawof mines,
without understanding whatthe character of contemporary
Peruvian societyis. Unfortunately,little isknownaboutthe
national question and this get worse with the gross disinformation
campaign launched by the state on this matter lately.
The Character of Contemporary Peruvian Society
Peru is a semifeudaland semicolonial society. Our country
became independent in thelastcentury.More than150years ago,
96
=====第96页=====
THE NATIONAL QUESTION
we werecolonyofSpa.We livedsubjugatedbythis metrooly
and hadnopolitical independenceatall.Ontheotherhandat
the beginningof the XIX century Peru wasafeudal country and
our society wasfundamentallybased onagriculture,which was
the economic base. Of course,there wastrade andincipient
industrial modalities,but the economic base wasfeudalism. The
society was based on the existence of big latifundios(TNF: large
farms or haciendas)thatbelonged to a handfulof people,and
upon this kind of property,servitude existed. The peasants were
cruelly exploited, and had to give personal services such as
working thelandofthefeudallordandothers,inclng
domestic services, in order to have a plot of land.
Our country was backward, where the norm was the practice of
old forms of production and modalities of government that were
totally decrepit. At the beginning of the XIX century, the country
had two problems,which with certain minor modifications still
persist today. First, thetheland question,the problem of
feudalism,oftheservitudeofthe peasantrybased onthe
latifundia property;and the second was the problem of national
sovereignty (our nation was a colony of Spain.)
The struggleforindependenceraisedthesetwoproblems. The
issue of sovereignty was present in parliamentary debates in
which it was proposed that independence couldonly beassured if
the land was handedover to the peasants,also this is proven by
the decrees of Bolivar on territorial
property.
However,
independenceonly meant breaking the chains with Spain. Soon
thereafterthecountryfounditself controlledand dominated by
England. This great capitalist power dominatedallofLatin
America. What is the importanceof the dominationof England in
our country? Up untilindependence, we were a feudal and
colonialcountry,butonce we bcameindependentalthouh we
maintained
97
=====第97页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
independence. Webecame a republic despiteof theproblems
inherents toemancipation.England introduceshighermodalities
development  in the
country,
capitalist
modalities,
fundamentally in trade which was tied to the world marketof the
fertilizerguano(TNF:seabirdexcrement). Asaresult,the
destruction offeudalismadvancedbecause England brought
merchandise and introduced capitalist method of production. On
the otherhand, Englandbegan to controlthe country and
introduced a processof colonialization. The British domination
resulted in the beginning of a change: a step toward the formation
of a semifeudal and semicolonial society.
In the XX centurytheUnited States(U.S.) displacedthe English
domination in the Americas and becomes the master,around the
1920's.Thusourcountryeeitslf dominatedbyanother world
power, an imperialist power. The U.S. came when it was already
an imperialist country,with a developed system of monopolies,
and big corporations that concentrate the U.S.'s economy. It was
already a power undergoing a colonial expansion in Latin
America and even in parts of Asia.
UndertheYankeeimperialist domination,our societyevolves
further its semifeudalcharacter. However, it is not totally
destroyed. It continues to survive. In the same manner that under
English domination(especially after the war with Chile), there
has been a major push toward the destruction of feudalism under
the development ofaform ofcapitalismtiedto thebig
monopolies and dependent uponimperialism. In addition to
maintaining its semifeudal character, our country continues to be
a semicolony; a dominated country that even though has declared
its politicalindependence is underthe domination of an
imperialistpower ineconomic,diplomatic,cutural,and military
affairs.
This domination  turns
Peru's
declared
political
independence into a formality.
98
=====第98页=====
THE NATIONAL QUESTION
In syntheis,incethe XXcentury,Pruviansocietyhasevolved
society into a semicolonial one. In this long process,three powers
have dominatedand exloited us: First Spain until1821(although
it continuedits dominattionfor many more decades.) Then
England dominatedus in a more subtle way. The British even
fabricatedforuspoliticalpartiesofabourgeois nature,and
organized a better state apparatus in order to subjugate us better
with its subbtle domination. It was a subtile domination but no
less exploitativethanthe previous one. Finally,the U.S., which
continues to oppress and exploit us,an imperialism that despite
all that is said (about "independence,") dominates us on all levels.
When we were a colonial country we had two problems: the land
problem and the national question. Under English domination we
were a semifeudal and semicolonial society (less developed than
the present time), and had two problems: the land and the nation.
Theland was concentratedin afew hands and servitude
continued to exist in the country. In the XX century under U.S.
dominattion,we continue to be a semifeudal and semicolonial
society(undoubtedly much more evolvedthanbefore) but the
basic problemsof the country continue to be the two mentioned
before: the land and the nation. The land question is because the
feudalmodalitiesofexploitationstillsurviveandgripour entire
society. Thus, our unscientific and superstitious mentality,our
ideology ingeneral,aswellasoursocialandpoliticalrelations,
still have manyfeudal aspects. The national question is because
we are an oppressed nation,apparentlyfree,but at the botton,
subjugated in many ways.
Therefore,the nation's historyfrom the XIX century to today is
the feudal and colonial class struggle that under the domination
of English capitalism and Yankee imperialism in succession, has
66
=====第99页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
evolved andtransformedinto a semifeudaland semicolonial
society with two basic problems still unresolved: the land question
and the national question.
The character of the revolutionary process of Peruvian society
In laying down the characterof Peruvian society a question arises:
whichisthepathofrevolutionary transformation? Concretely,
what is the character of the Peruvian revolution? We have
established that today there are two problems: the land question
and the national question,from whose resolution the solution of
the restof the nation's problems will derive. The entire national
question is tied to the semifeudal and semicolonial characterof
Peruvian society. Hence, in order for Peruvian society to change,
to be truly revolutionary, these two problems must be resolved:
The land question, whose solution demands that semifeudalism
be swept away,unlessthis is done,the land question cannot be
resolved;
The national question, whose solution demands sweeping away
Yankee imperialistoppression, because if thissemicolonial
domination is not swept away the national questionwill not be
resolved.
Therefore,
without
eliminating
semifeudalism
and
semicolonialism it is not possible to genuinely transform Peruvian
society(despiteallwhatthey'dbeentellingus.) Furthermore,
whatit(TNF:bytherulingclasses)beingproclaimedtodayis
nothing new.Forintance,in1919weheardsimilarsiren songs.
Consequently,thetwotasksthatmustberyoutintheprocess
oftransformationofPeruviansociety,scientificallycalledthe
Peruvian revolution,is to completely destroy semifeudalismand
100
=====第100页=====
THE NATIONAL QUESTION
revolutioniantiualanantiimpialist.Itmustdestroythe
feudal remnants and the imperialistdomination. For this reason,
the Peruvianrevolutionis necessarilydemocraticand national.
Scientificllskthchacrofthruvaevolution is
a national-democraticrevolution;democraticbecause it will
destroy thefeudalrelationsof the nation;and national because it
will destroytheYankeeimperialistoppression Thus,inthe
contemporary semi-feudal and semi-colonial Peruvian society,
there is only room for a national-democratic, anti-feudal and anti-
imperialist revolution.
Let us analyze the characterof the Peruvian revolution in relation
to the concrete historical conditions. The twoproblems ofthe
country(the landandthenation),duringthe XX century as
compared tothe XIX century,havebig differences. Inthe last
century there was no imperialism like there is today,and there
was nointernational working class capable ofleading
the
revolution, nor was there a developed working class in our
country, whereas today,we have a triumphant working class
(TNF: the October revolution, China, etc.) and in our country we
have a working class witha longhistoryof struggle. These are
differences in therevolutionary process of our
veryimportant
country.
Until the192O's,thebourgeoisiein our country was in the
capacityof leading the process of transformation towards the
solution of these two problems, but they didn't. Nevertheless, in
our country,before the 192O's, there were great struggles, heroic
struggles and continuous uprisings of peasants, mobilizations, and
student struggles,and powerful actions of the working class. All
of this generated a great process of political struggle in which the
ideologyof theproletariat began to bespreadout and beapplied
1
101
=====第101页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
markedamilestoihistory.I1928,Maiateguioundedthe
CommunitParty,thePartyof theworkinclass inPeru.This
period determined a fundamental change in ourrevolution
through
which the bourgeoisie,
under  the   conditions  of
imperialist domination and the existence of a working class forged
in struggle,could no longer lead the revolutionary processof our
nation.
Thus,the working class has sprung forward and developed, and
beyond disputing theleadership oftherevolution with the
bourgeosie,it is theonlyclasscapableofcarryingthePeruvian
revolution to its triumph. The bourgeois revolution in the country
has two periods:
The old bourgeois revolution that wasable to be completd
towards the beginning of this century, under bourgeois leadership;
and
The new bourgeois revolution or national-democratic
revolution,or bourgeois revolutionof a new type,underthe
leadership of the proletariatv
which isthe  only
historical
perspective for the country.
After 1928theproletariatachievedpoliticalorganization and
displacedthebourgeoisiefromthehistorical leadership ofthe
revolutionary process,as the only class that can completethe
national democratic revolution. Thus, after 1928 the revolution in
the country, the destruction offeudalism andimperialist
domination,canonlybecompletedunderthe leadershipof the
proletaratclasthaiotoulillollust
unite with the peasantry inasolidworker-peasantliance, since
the peasantry as a majorityalthoughitdoesnotlead the
revolution, is the principal force.
102
=====第102页=====
THE NATIONAL QUESTION
its party,mustlead themovementorelse there is no national-
democraticl.Ifooollcl
indirectly, we would be serving the enemies of the class.
To conclude,wemustpointoutthatthereareother theses
opposite to what we have explained. For example, there is a thesis
that statesthat Peruvian societyis capitalist. Thisisthe most
dangerous.Ifthe country is capitalist,therevolution must be
socialist,andtheproletariatand not the peasantrywouldbe the
principalforce.Thisthesisfundamentallychangestheexremely
important problem,which is the road of the revolution. As we
have seen here, there are two revolutionary paths:
The pathof the October revolution which is from the city to
the countryside,and this is the path of the capitalist countries by
way of a socialist revolution, the path that old Russia took or that
France would have to take today, for example; and
The path ofthe Chinese revolution, whichisfromthe
countryside to the city,and this is the path that semi-feudal and
semi-colonial countriesfollowby way ofa national-democratic
revolution,thepaththeVietnam,amongothers,isfollowing
today. As such, the question of whether the country is semi-feudal
or capitalist is not simply a Byzantine discussion, because if we err
about thecharacterof society we err on thecourse ofthe
revolution, and consequently it will not triumph.
The thesis of the capitalist characterof Peruvian society has been
and continues to be upheld by Trotskyism and positions close to
it, neverthelesssuchtypifications beginstobe upheld
by
revisionism in order to deepen its surrender to the regime.
Bureaucratic Capitalism
103
=====第103页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
society,andignoranceofitis therootof gravepoliticlrrors.
The thesis of bureaucratic capitalism isfound in the classics and
in Mariátegui, although he used another term.
What do we mean by bureaucratic capitalism?
This is the capitalism that imperialism promotes in a backwards
country; the type of capitalism, the special form of capitalism, that
is imposed by an imperialist countryonto a backwards country,
whetherit is semi-feudalorsemi-colonial.Letusanalyzethis
historic process.
How did capitalism developin theoldEuropean nations?
Consider France;toward the endof the XVIII centuryit was a
feudalcountry,with_20to_22millionpeasantswhile workers
numbered only around 600,000 (from which we can see the feudal
passage it had);it was based on servitudeofvarious forms.
Nevertheless,within the feudal entrails of France new productive
forms, of manufacturing, and capitalist forms were generated, and
a class, the bourgeoisie, was gaining ever moreforce, more
economic power,including political influence. We ask: Was
France a nation subjugated by another? No. France was an
absolute
monarchythat contestedwith Englandfor global

hegemony,it was not oppressed by anyone. Its socio-economic
and historical conditions hadmade it developthatway. Did
imperialism exist in that era? No.Imperialism isof this century.
What existed were countriesundergoing capitalist development,
like Englandfor example, and France was
independently
developincatlisity.Othountillowdthame
path, and whentheyreachedtheXIXcentury,France,Egland,
Belgium,Hollandetc.werecapitaliscountiethadevlod
independently.
What was thesituationofLatinAmericaintheXIXcentur?
104
=====第104页=====
THE NaTIoNAL QUESTION
When theemancipationofAmericabegan(1810),thenations of
Europe werealready powerful, whereas the Latin American ones
had only recently begun to structure their nationalities, a problem
that has not yet been concluded. Moreover,soon after becoming
independent these nations fall under the domination of a power,
namely England; thus their capitalism will develop under English
domination, a kind of dependent capitalism. Thus, there is a well-
known historicaleconomic,and politicaldifferencecompared o
the European process.
On another side, the bourgeoisies that develop in Latin America
begin to link themselves more and more to the dominant country,
in such a way that these weak bourgeoisies, instead of developing
independently likethe Eupopeans did, serving the national
interests, they evolve as subjugated bourgeoisies, dependent, given
overbody and soul to theimperialist powers(England orthe
U.S.) to the extent they even believe in converting themselves into
rich men and developed intermediate bourgeoisies, as our history
in this century shows.
This latter path is the one taken in Peru. As we have seen, in the
second decade of_this century Yankee imperialism surplanted
English domination.
Three lines within bureaucratic capitalism
Bureaucratic capitalism develops three lines within its process: a
landlord line in the countryside,a bureaucratic one in industry,
and a third,alsobureaucratic,intheideologicalsphere. Thisis
without pretending that that these are the only ones.
Itintroducesthelandlordlineinthecountrysideby wayof
expropiatory agrarian laws that do not aim to destroy the feudal
landlordclassandtheirproperty,butratherpogressivelyevolve
105
=====第105页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
them by meansof the purchaseand paymentof thelandforthe
peasantsTheuciliirtoli
centralizingindustrial production,commerce,etc.,putting them
ever more in the hands of monopoly with the goal of sponsoring a
rapidandsystematicaccumulation ofcapital,tothe
more
detrimentof the working class and other workers,naturally,to
the  benefit  of  the  biggest
monopolies  and
consequently
imperialism. In this process the forced saving which workers are
subjected to plays an important role, as we can see in the
industriallaw.Thebureaucraticlineinideologyconsistsofthe
process of molding the people, by means of the massive diffusion,
especially
in
political
conceptions and ideas, that serve
. The general lawofeducation is a
bureaucratic
capitalism.
concentrated expression of this line,and one of the constantsof
this line is its anti-communism,itsanti-Marxism,whether open
or concealed.
These three linesform partof the bureaucratic path which is
opposed by the DEMOCRATIC PATH, the revolutionary road of
the people. If _theformer defendsfeudalproperty,the later
proposes its destruction,and it opposes the buying of lands with
confiscation; if_theformer recognizes andfortifies imperialist
industrialproperty,thelatter deniesit andstruggles foris
confiscation;iftheformerfightstoideologicallysubjugatethe
people,thelatterstrivestoarm themideologically;if thefomer
attacks Marxism,the latter upholds that we must guide ourselves
by Marxism as the only scientificinstrument to understand
reality.Theyarethutwoabsolutelycontrarypaths.Thehistory
of the countryinthis century is a historyofstruggle between
these two paths: the bureaucratic path, that is capitalism
submitted to imperialism,andthedemocraticpath,the roadof
the workingclas,the pasantry,the pettybouoisie,and nder
understandbueaucraticapitalismitisveryusefultostudynd
106
=====第106页=====
THE NATIONAL QUESTION
analyzethedcadeofth160'sduriwhchthe cessof the
destructionof feudalism advanced more; in this period industry
and capitalistrelationsinagriculturearestrengthened. From
anotherside,thclasstruggledevelopedgreatl;thtradeunion
movement,the peasant movement,and thestudent movement
reached higher levels. Thus a strong trade union movement
developed that in a particular moment took localities and bosses
as hostages; the peasant movement also had a great apogee, in the
second halfof1963 it ranfrom the centerof the country to the
south like a trail of gunpowder; and the student movement rose
rapidly. In synthesis,the mass struggles have lived through great
experiences in this period of political struggles.
Thus,party politicshad a great apogee,on theone hand the
reactionarypoliticalpartiesenteredintogravedifficultiesand
struggles leading up tothe crisisof theso-called "representative
democracy" in 1967 and 1968, and on the other the left developed
a vigorous political life,withinwhichitunleashedthestruggle
between Marxism and revisionism, which later re-took the path of
Mariategui as a condition to develop the revolution.
Anothervery importantdeed whichisnotsufficientlystudied is
the questionof theguerrllas: in1965there wasa outbreak of
guerrilla warfare, including this zona. The guerrilla movement in
the country is partof the national process. It is a primary
question that must be highlighted because due to sectarianism,
sometimes it is considered as simply the experience of an
organization and it is not seen as the experience of the Peruvian
people.It is a movement intimatelylinkedtothe political process
ofthe country,
developed
according to
petty
bourgeois
conceptions;it is a greatexperience thatneeds to be analyzed
from the point of view of the proletariat in order to draw fruitful
lessons.
107
=====第107页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
It is impossible to understand oursituationand perspectiv since
1970 without understanding the concrete conditions of the 1960's.
There is a goodthing: in the lastfew years,the Peruvian
intelligentsiabegins tounderstandthenecessityofstudyingthe
decade of the1960's. Only by understanding this period will we
be betterarmed ideologically, in order to understand the current
situation.
The problemof bureaucratic capitalismis importantbecauseit
allows usto understand which isthe dominant path that
imperialism imposes on a backwards country,on a semi-feudal
and semi-colonial country; by understanding this problem we will
bearmedandequippedto combatthethesisofthe capitalist
character of the country and its politica derivations.
In order to conclude thistheme we will deal withthefollowing:
some maintain that to hold that bureaucratic capitalism is in the
countryis toignoreits semi-feudaland semi-colonial character;
they sayit proposesthatthe nation is capitalistin a hidden
manner. This is an error ignores the laws of social development of
our country and of the_backwards countries; precisely because
bureaucrat capitalism is no more than the path of imperialism in
a semi-feudalandsemi-colonialcountryandwithoutsem-feudal
and semi-colonial conditions there wouldbe no bureaucrat
capitalism. Thus, to propose the existence of bureaucrat capitalism
is to propose as a premise that the country is semi-feudal and
semi-colonial.
The Contemporary Situation of the Country
Underhaonditindothiu
back to the endof the1960's. What was happening? Economic
problems: in1967thecurrencydevaluation,freezingof credits,
108
=====第108页=====
THE NATIONAL QUESTION
saw daily thatchaacteisticssimilartothoseinthefrstyearof
thedecade tttml;tuee 
the movementof the masses was within sight. In politics,
confrontations andfractionalizing
between andwithin the
politicalorganizationoftherulingclassesthefamousdispute
between parliamentandtheexecutive.Furthermore,theelections
drew near,creating the juture for manyof thnation'sproblems
to beilluminated,venorthepartiesindispute,becausihr
eagerness to getvotesthe"draggedouttheirdirtylaundry".
Ideologicallyour country had passed through aprofound debate
ofideasandthisgreatlyclarifiedwhatis Marxismandwhatis
revisionism. Furthermore the pathofMariteguibegan tobe
retakenbyapplyingMarxism to theconcrete conditionsof the
country. Aside from the above we must highlight two situations:
1. The economic situation ofthe country, which isthe
developmentof bureaucratic capitalism could no longer continue
developing itself in th
the old way, urging its deepening. It needed to
open a wider path so that this process in the form of imperialism
would advance; with the previous forms it could not advance. We
must notforgetthatfor many years the agrarian problem was
discussed, there were even agrarian laws: the Beltran project, the
lawsof Perez Godoyand of Belaunde. Anotherquestion: in the
industrialproblemthe lawof thesecond governmentofPrado
was now insufficient and raisedagainthe necessityof making
industrial parks,givea priorityto thestaterole in planning,etc.
ThereistheplanofBelandeof_1967to1970thatstatedthe
necessity of changing the social condition of the country in order
to construct a "new society, national, democratic, and Christian".
In conclusion,the processofbureaucratic capitalism needed to
deepen itself.
2. In the country
there was
the so-called
"representative
109
=====第109页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
democracy"utlamismddtatifteedfthe
exploitersthepoplamasadvaced witltivase ptting
theexplotnlassiiltlhupayton.
Thu,tee
substitute the representative modality,
parliamentarism. Wasthisa typicalcasethatonlyhappened in
our country? No.The decadeof1960impliedthefragilityof the
so-called "regimeof representativedemocracy"inLatin America,
the crisis ofparliamentarism,and consequently the needto
substitute it for state modalities more efficient for reaction.
In synthesis,theeconomic necessitiesof deepeningbureaucratic
capitalismand thefagilityof parliamentarism,in theconditions
indicated,presentedtheexploiting classesand imperialism with
the necessityof a new politicalestablishmentforthe counry.
Thus, the current regime arisesfrom economic, social, and
political necessitiesof deepening bureaucratic capitalism.
The plans and characteristics of the regime
There nowexists a socio-economicplanwhichis littletalked
about. In synthesis it establishes: the need to reinvigorate
bureaucratic capitalism,by wayoftheefforts of workers and
peasants, the former brought about by means of the industrial law
and the others by means of the agrarian law. At the same time it
proposesthe directand primordialaction of thestate to open
conditionsofinvestmentforprivate capital;thefinancingof
which necessarily comes from imperialism andsince this
financing isinsuficient,it mustfundamentally takerootfrom its
ownresources. Thisplanclearlyillustratesits linkagewiththe
processof buaatiaitlismitheouty;dailythisply is
linked to Belaunde's, andwiththisthe entire
2
systemof
bureaucratic capitalism of the country.
110
=====第110页=====
THE NATIONAL QUESTION
sanctioningitsfundamentalmeasures(inagriculture,industry,
and education,haspassedtoanorgazationalstage.odayand
in the immediatefuture we develop within organization,
mobilizatondiioimme
social mobilization mustbe understood linkedtotheeconomic
the  same
that without  social
process;

government
says
mobilizationitwill notbeableto completeitssocio-economic
plan,and proposesthatthesocialmobilizationhasa basis,the
participation in property ownership. Lately the representativesof
the regime talk about social property: what does this serve? This
property serves,behindthe decoyofparticipation in property
ownership,to mobilize the masses to the benefitof bureaucratic
capitalism. For this reason the basis of social mobilization is social
participation.
What does this social mobilization serve? Social mobilization is a
political instrument in the handsof theregime tostrengthen its
conceptions and open a "neither capitalist nor communist road",
that is,to spreaditsideas. Upon spreadingitsideas it seeks to
"avoid that foreign, exotic ideas become embedded in the masses";
what ideas are they refering to? Marxism. This ideological process
is to avoid that the masses learn about Marxism and thus tie them
tothebureaucraticcapitalistroad. Thus,themobilizationis a
meansoforganizing,startingfrom theproperty modalities,the
masses and channel them into a vertical authority. This is what
they mean by social mobilization; it is a masterpiece of the system
at the service oftheireconomicand political plan. One of the
reasons why the economic plan doesen't advance like they hoped
it would is the lack of their so-called social mobilization.
From theabove,wederive: the current politicalsituation of the
country isceteredaroundthe problemof themobiliatioof the
111
=====第111页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP- VOLUME1(1968-1987)
juncture,whichis:who mobilizes andhow arethe masses
mobilized. The government pretends to move them according to
their conception;their actions prove it. Theregime aims to
organize the pasant masses.The law19400 seres thisend, and it
aims to organize the workers with the so-called CTRP.
"Nationalists, revolutionary participationists"; among the students
they create organizations that are born one day and disappear the
next. Allof this signifiestheintentionto organizethe worker,
peasant,and student masses,and it revealsthatthecontention is
happening on and organizational plane.
Nevertheless,despitethepropagandaandeffortsoftheregime
and theirfollowers,the struggle ofthe masses is alie and
develops; why? Because the living conditions ofthe masses
worsen as a consequence of the very system. For this reason, no
matter how much they scream that it is the "ultra-left" that moves
the masses and agitates them,what is certain is thatthe masses
are mobilizing around their own interests, and defend them to the
extent that they are conscious. Synthesizing, the social, economic,
andpoliticalconditionsleadtothe sharpening ofthe mass
struggle, and theorganizational question is one of confronting the
serious
difficulties before the
eorganizationaloffensiveofthe
regime,
,thesame onethatis incapableofimposingitstotal
control and will have to appeal more to systematic repression (of
which there are many and rapidly growing examples).
In conclusion: the ideology and politicsof the regime,including
organizationally,
measuresexsdbythaertylofaizing,
their attitudes towards the representative regime,their manner of
treating civilliberties,onlyshowonething: theabandonmentof
the demo-liberal andrepresentative system andadherence to
112
=====第112页=====
QUESTION
THE NATIONAL
become invalid in the new social conditions.
From anotherside,themeasuresappliedinpolitics,economics,
andorganizationally truly
that they are laying
the
prove
foundationsfor a CORPORATIST
system. Theessence  of this
question aretheorganizations ondifferent levels,inwhich the
bosses,the workers, and the state should participate. Three parts
in the organizations,which has been defined as a corporation
since the last century. This is the wayit has been proposed by
those who have upheld corporativism since 1920and this is the
way it is upheld today in Spain and Portugal.
Thus,the currentregime is a systemthathas anideological
orientationof a fascistbentandis layingthefoundationsfora
CORPORATIST system. It will be said that here is another thesis.
It is very clear. There is a thesis that says that this is not certain,
some maintaining that we are dealing with a revolutionary
bourgeois regime that is completing a stageof the revolution; if
we recall what we have seen this is a position without a political,
ideological, or economic basis. Another thesis maintains that it is
a bourgeoisreformistregime,thatit isapplyingreforms. What
are reforms? Reforms are the concessions that the people win with
their strugles,ortheyaretheby-productofrevolution, as Lenin
said. Are theagrarian, industrial,oreducational laws concessions
to the people? This is enough to show the inconsistencies of this
thesis.
Finally: when we emancipated ourselves we had two problems, of
the landandofthe nation,the problemoffeudalism and the
problemof domination by a foreign power. Many years have
passed, and our society has advanced.The people of today are not
the peopleof yesterday.Weconsider that today,after so many
113
=====第113页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
the national question. From this the process of transformation in
our country is scientifically called a NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC
REVOLUTiON, and this can only be lead by the proletariat.
"All debates are open for those who voice opinions, not those who
remain silent."
J.C. Mariátegui
"Polemics are useful when they are truly set out to clarify theories
andactions, and when only clearideas and motives are
introduced."
J.C. Mariátegui
114
=====第114页=====
LET
AND
US
RETAKE
MARIATEGUI
RECONSTITUTE HIS
PARTY
PCP - CENTRAL COMMITTeE - OcTOBER, 1975
Onthe80thanniversaryof thebirthof JoséCarlosMariáteui
and47 yearsfromitsfoundingtheCommunistParty pys
homage toits greatfounder and guideby calling
uponits
militants,upon the working class and the people of our country
to obey the call of our times and prepare ourselves to occupy our
place in history,
,LETUSRETAKE
MARIATEGUI
IAND
RECONSTITUTE HIS PARTY!
I. THE CLASS
STRUGGLE
GENERATED
MARIATEGUI'S

THOUGHT.
Mariátegui's_ Thought,thepolitical expressionof_the Peruvian
working class, was forged and developed amidst the class struggle
and not outside it; thus, to understand it well, it must necessarily
be linked to the struggles internationally and in our country.
Theglobalclassstruggle.Mariateguilivedat a timewhen
imperialism, according to his words, was experiencing
gthe
"capitalismof the monopolies,offinancecapitalof the imeralist
wars to control markets and sources of raw materials." He lived,
then,andfought,when capitalism was agonizing and the class
struggle was empowering the proletariat to conquer

power
through revolutionary violence.
From1914 to1918 the world wasshakenby World WarI,the
"imperialist predatory war" which,supported by the treacherous
old revisionism, launched the working classes and the peoples of
some powers againstthoseofothers,so astore-dividethe world
115
=====第115页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
for the imperialist powers and their monopolist bourgeoisie.
However as Lenin foresaw, the war hatched the revolution and in
1917theBolshevikarty,througharmedinsurction,orthrew
the powerof tsarism inold Russia. With the October Revolution
a new world era opened up,for the construction of socialism
underthedictatorshipof theproletariat ledbytheCommunist
Party. Fulfilling the scientific projectionsof Marx and Engels, the
October Road set the general norms for the emancipation of the
working class:theneedfora Communist Party leadingthe
revolution,the need for revolutionary violence to overthrow the
oldestablishedorderandtheneed toinstall thedictatorshipof
the proletariat to buildsocialism and march towards the classless
societyof thefuture. WhatMarxand Engels taught,ina word
Marxism, materialized into an undeniable reality.
The October Revolution impacted throughout the world. Europe
was shaken toitsfoundationsand the proletariat launched itself
to conquer power; the struggles in Germany,Italy and Hungary
are examples which Mariátegui himself popularized in his History
of the World Crisis, but while the masses were ripe for revolution
there was a lack of the necessary communist parties to lead them
and insteadfascism was generated. The October Revolution not
only changedthefaceof Europe,the colonial anti-imperialist
movement was inspiredbyit;the East was convulsed bythe
Chinese Revolution,"the most extensive and profound sign of the
awakening of _Asia",and our own America developed its anti-
imperialist maturity. The working class generatedits own
communist parties and acquired political weight.
Ideologically,thecrisisof bourgeois thought became more critical
while withintheglobalworkingclass movement, revisionist
revolutionary syndicalism was
opportunism was swept away,r
116
=====第116页=====
LET Us RETAKE MARIATEGUI
Marxism-Leninism.
Mariátegui lived through this process directly as a working class
fighter, hefollowedandanalyzedtheworldclassstruggleto
understand the revolution in our country. Hisaccurate foresight
isintewi"laeof
the world crisis";"the most relevant eventsof thelast quarter of a
century surpassed alllimits. Its stage has been the five
continents";"thedictatorshipoftheproletariat,bydefinitionis
not a dictatorship of a party but a dictatorship of the working
class"; "Marxism-Leninism is therevolutionary methodofthe
imperialist stage.'
a) Class developmentand struggle in Peruvian society. Modern
industry was developed in Peru from 1895 and completed in the
decade ofthe1920's,a decade demarcatingthe impetus of
capitalism  under
bureaucratic
Yankee domination.
This
industrializationtook placein a s
semi-feudal  society whose
economy developedincreasingly subjectedto North American
imperialism, which displaced English domination. That way
bureaucratic capitalism implies development of our semi-colonial
condition and underscores the entire developmentofPeruvian
society. This understanding is vital to interpret the Peruvian class
struggle in the 20th century.
In theformer context,the Peruvian proletariat grew not justin
numbers; the development of mining, textiles and other branches
of industry gave it a progressively more important place. In
synthesis, it implied the appearance of a new class and a precise
goal.Our proltaitoughtfom theonstoralary increases,to
reducethe work dayand forotherbetter living conditions,and
generated a workers' movement which under a trade unionist line
created unions in struggle againstanarcho-syndicalism until the
creationoftheGlConfdionofWorkeofP,ak
117
=====第117页=====
E1 (1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
preciselycarriedoutundertheleadershipofMariategui.Even
more,the struggleof the working class determined the founding
of its Party,along withtheacts and worksof Mariategui; in that
waythePeruvianproletariatmatured,conformingitselfasan
independent political party and havingasitsgoal the "economic
emancipationof the workingclass",initiating a new stage in the
country,thatofthedemocraticnationalrevolutionled bythe
proletariat through its Party.
The peasantry,continuing itsoldstruggles,alsofought hard for
"land to thetillers"; they defendedtheirlandsagainst usurpation
byfeudal landowners andmonopolistenterprises and their
struggle, continuing and persistent,faced the "armed response" by
the Peruvian Stateand itsrepressive bodies. We witnesstheir
fighting spiritin thegreatactionof thefirsttwodecadesofhis
century, particularly in Puno. The petty bourgeoisie,for instance
employees and students,alsofoughtagainsttheirenemies;this
just struggle and organization of employees for demands, such as
the university reform, are examples of the widespread struggle by
the people.
In theexploiterscampthelegalcivilauthorities,theexpression of
the "comprador bourgeoisie" at the service of Yankee imperialism,
assumed power and became the axisof the economical process,
displacing the "landowning aristocracy" which was more linked to
England. Legalism implied remodeling Peruvian society and
politics according to demo-liberal models,as can be seen in the
constitutionalorderingand legislation,e.g. the1920educational
law and other measures. That way the Peruvian bourgeoisie which
had emerged in the mid19th century became a comrador
bourgeoisie and axis of Peruvian social progress and leaders of the
exploiting classes in the country.
118
=====第118页=====
LeT Us ReTaKE MaRiaTEGUI
rulingbourgeoisiestruckatthesystemofideaofherling
landowners, oneof whose expressions was the Villaran-Deustua
dispute in the educational field early in the century; criticism was
always moderate and lukewarm,also as a propagationofthe
North American model. But while this happened in the exploiters'
camp,in themidstofthepeopleand mainlyas a resultof the
working class,a systemof democratic ideas was maturing which
slowly setitself as an understandingofoursocietyfromthe
proletariat's viewpoint,precisely through the theory and practice
ofJoséCarlos Mariátegui,whoreflectedandsystematizedall
thesethirtyoddyears in Peruvianlifeand wasable to doit
through his directand arduous participationintheclass struggle.
b) Mariátegui's Thoughtisthepoliticalexpressionof Peruvian
class  struggle.  The
of Mariátegui has a clear and precise
trajectory as a man
the new type, an "actor and thinker," of a
life which matured rather than changed, as he himself said,from
"a declaredandenergeticambition:thatofattendingtothe
creationof Peruvian socialism." In his 35 yearsof existence,in
1918"nauseatedbyCreolepolitics",hesaid,"I oriented myself
resolutelytowardssocialism"fightingfortheworkingclass; and
returning from Europe where,unlike many,hefeltand became
Peruvian,
working ceaselessly
more
to propagate Marxism-
Leninism, organizing the masses, especially workers and peasants,
and crowned his work by founding the Communist Party.
José Carlos Mariátegui was a fighter of the working class, a main
actor of the Peruvian proletariat who in theory and in practice,
with words andactions,grew and developed in the heat of the
class struggle,mainly in our country; a proletarian militant who
firmly adheredto Marxism andfusedit withthe concrete
conditionsofour revolutionary process,becoming the crowning
pointandtofirithc
119
=====第119页=====
COLLECTED WORKSOFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-1987)
than30yearsofclass strugglebyourworking classand our
people.
In short, Mariatgui is a productoftheclassstruggle,mainly that
waged bytheproletariatofwhichheis thehighestpolitical
expression.
II. MARIATEGUI
A
"CONVINCED
AND
CONFESSED"
MARXIST-LENINIST
More than 30 years ago enemies tried to denythe Marxist-
Leninist positionof Mariátegui and that campaign has increased
by the endofthe_1960'sand continuestobefueledopenlyor
covertly today. To denyhis Marxist condition is to deprive his
work and actions of any basis,for the purpose of undermining the
struggleoftheproletariatdestroyitsPartyandfetterthe
revolution. Thereforethe political question isimportant,to
reaffirm andclarify, again,theMarxist-Leninistposition
of
Mariáteguiwhom,letusrecall,declaredhimselftobeso
"convinced and confessed."
How to respond to those impugning him? There is only one road,
and it isknown: to seethe positionof Mariátegui in Marxist
philosophy,politicaleconomyandscientificsocialism;that is, to
remember his theses about the three parts of Marxism because, by
seeing clearly his position on these basic questions,the Marxist
basis of the founder of the Communist Party will be understood.
a) Mariátegui and Marxist philosophy. Hestarts out with each
society generatingits own philosophy;in his words: "each
civilization hasitwitutionoftheworld,iow phlosophy,
itsown mentalattitudewhich constitutesitsessence,itssoul
ideasorigiilityanltoinfunc,modfyinit."
Thus,philosophyis a socialproductit cannotbeunderstood
120
=====第120页=====
LeT Us ReTaKE MARIATEGUI
Marx and, that way,the materialist basis sustaining Marxism. But
thatistllitwtp
class character, it is an instrument of the class struggle to conquer
power or to defend what has been conquered. Even more, he
conceivesthatphilosophyfollowsthe directionof the class
generating it; that way bourgeois philosophy by necessityfollows
the road and developmentof the bourgeoisie.And,as result, to
him philosophy is product of social practice.
Heconsiders Marxistphilosophytobetheproductofa long
development,the culminationofclassicalGermanphilosophy,
mainly Hegel's; he accurately pointsout: "but thisaffiliation does
not imply any servitude by Marxism to Hegel or hisphilosophy
which, according to the well known sentence, Marx set right-side
up … Marx's materialist conceptionis born,dialectically, as the
antithesisofHegel'sidealist conception."Butevenreiterating
manytimesthedialecticalcharacterofMarxistphlosohy,
it
impinges uponthesntialofdialecticastheunityandstrgle
of
oppositeswithoutfallinginto mechanisticpitfalls, clearly
establishing,for example,the relationshipbetween base and
superstructure,that whether one or theother will be the main
aspect depends ofthe concrete conditions. The astute use of
dialectics is,precisely,oneof thehallmarksof the theory and
practice of Mariátegui.
Particularly
importantis his
position
regarding
historical
materialism which,bythescientific developmentitimplies,he
holds tobe"a methodofhistoricalinterpretationof today's
society";andhipropositionconceivingthebase,thesportof
allsociety,asa setofsocialrelationsof production,withe
121
=====第121页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
legal and statutoryorder,a superstructureculminating in a system
ofideas, is key.There we see the accurate descriptionof base and
superstructure whichis the same as Engels'. He considers man
not as an unvarying nature but as the productof social relations
and thereforehistoricallygeneratedinsocial practice,especially
moldedbytheclassstruggle,asheestablishesbyeferringtothe
working class. Healsoestablishes an indivisible unitybetween
determinism andfree will,a capacityto act as a trail blazer
fulfillingthenecessary lawsofhistory;therefromhisexpressie
words: "history wantsfor each one tofulfill,with maximum
action,hisown role. Sothere is novictoryexceptforthose
capableofearningit withtheirownresources,ininexorable
combat."
Finally,speakingofhuman beings,whom he considers as the
most valuablethingon Earthandthemainthing in every
economic process,and when grouped in multitudes, in masses,
are the greatforceof history; and thatthe masses reflected in the
working class,are mobilized towards a goal,towards a modern
myth,inhisown words:"Theproletariathas a myth: social
revolution. Towards that myth it moves with a warm and active
faith."
Aren't these basicproposals,perhaps,thesesproposedbythe
classics of Marxism? And aren't these thefoundation of
Mariátegui's
s philosophical position? Andisn't this dialectical
materialism,
thisMarxist
philosophy?In conclusion,
isn't
Mariátegui sustained himself in Marxist philosophy,to which he
arrived throughhis direct participation in theclass struggleand
we find his philosophicaltheses,as withall greatMarxists, when
we judgeandeolvthecomplx poblemsoftheclass struggle.
Whomever wants to see it as abstract meditation or academic
work will notfind phlosophyinMaritegui,but itwill befound
122
=====第122页=====
LET Us RETaKE MARIATEGUI
discoverthelawsofourrevolutionandpolitics guiding
our
people.
b）Mariáteguiandpoliticaleconomy.Hebeginsbyrelating
economyandpolitics,aiming to establishthe economic basis,
teaching: "it is not possible to understand Peruvian reality without
seeking andlookingattheeconomicfacts,""theeconomicfact
entails,equally,thekeytoallotherphasesofthehistoryofthe
Republic"and "economics does not explain, probably, the totality
of a phenomenon and its consequences. But it explains its roots.
1
He conceives economics,the socialrelations of exploitation, as
rootof thepoliticalprocesses;butheseestheeconomyofa
country withintheinternationaleconomic system,not as an
isolated thing. From that viewpoint, he analyzes economics in is
political function to find the laws governing theclass struggle in a
country; a task especially carried out in our country by analyzing
the direction historicallyfollowedbyour economy,the ararian
production relations, industrialization andothereconomic terms,
allwithonegoal:toestablishthegenerallawsofthePeruvian
revolution.
Imperialism merited special attention according to Mariátegui; but
aside from its economic character he emphasized its reactionary
political character, pointing out  that once
"thestageof
monopoliesandimperialismarrivestheentireliberalideology
corresponding to thefree competition stage is no longer valid."
Concerning imperialism,healsoemphasized thesharpeningof
the economic crises: "All this leads us tobelieve thatduring this
stageof monopoly,trustificationandfinancecapital,criseswill
show upwithgreaterviolence";crisesheconsideredasinherent
to the systemand notattributabletotransient problems,just as
today it wouldbean increase in thepriceofoil which at most
123
=====第123页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
imperialistclashorthexpanionofmarkesig;"Thereat
capitalist states have entered, fatally
nd inevitably, into the phase
of imperialism. The struggle for markets and raw materials does
not allow themany Christianfraternization.Inexorably, it impels
them to expansion"; and underscoring even more the contention
among powers:"besidesthe acting empires wehave,therefore,
embryonic empires. Side by side with theold empires,the young
imperialisms oppose world peace. These show more aggressive
and odious language than the former ones." Extraordinary words
whose importance is greater if we consider the current contention
between the superpowers,imperialist andsocial-imperialist, and
theirostensible policyof disarmamentanddetensioning in the
light of these other ones: "Limiting naval weaponry,discussed at
Geneva, may seem to more than one pacifist as a step towards
disarmament.
t.But historical experience shows us in
an
unforgettable manner how after many such steps the world would
still be closer than ever to war." These theses about imperialism
are, besides brilliant, very timely.
But economic matters do notendhere. He also analyzed the
economy of the underdeveloped nations; he astutely analyzed the
semi-feudal and semi-colonial condition oftheLatin America
countries, especially ours. He showed how industrialization in the
backwards nations is tied to and develops as a function of the
imperialist powers,in the caseof Peru Yankee imperialism. He
saw clearly how imperialism does not allow the backwards nations
to develop a national economy nor independent industrialization;
how on top oftheir semi-feudalbase monopoly capitalism is
installed, linkedtothefeudallandowners and
generatinga
"mercantilebourgeoisie,"abourgeoisiecontrolledbyimperialism
1
for which it is the intermediateplundererof national resources
andtheexploiterofthepeople.Andhestforththefollowing
124
=====第124页=====
LET Us ReTaKE MaRIATEGUI
a doubt,semi-colonial;andtothesamedegreethacapitalism
grows,andconsequentlyimperialistpenetration,thiaspectof
been
nfulfilled?Eventhemosts
superfluous look at  America
factually
corroboratesthesemi-colonial domination eertedby
Yankee
imperialism. For the rest, Mariátegui's
theses on
capitalism in the backward nations must be understood in relation
with thoseofMao Tse-tung,aboutbureaucraticcapitalismand
appreciatethemtakingintoaccountthespecificconditionsof
Latin America.
In treating
the economy ofthe backward nations, he also
emphasizedtheimperialistplansfollowing World WarIto
unload their problems upon them, promoting the development of
their backward economies to suit the economic and political needs
of the imperialist powers. The question arises, aren't we seeing
something similar todayafter World War II? Let's keep in mind,
however,thatthoseplanscrashedandwillcrashagainstthe
national movement,since as Mariáteguiobserved,they "try to
reorganize and expand the economic exploitation of the colonial
countries,of the incompletely evolved countries,of the primitive
countries of Africa, Asia, America, Oceania and Europe itself... So
that the less civilized part of humanity toil for the more civilized
part.… But their plan to scientifically reorganize the exploitation of
the colonial countries, to transform them into compliant providers
materialsand abiding consumers ofr
manufactured
products,stumbleagainsanhistoricaldiiculty.Thesecoloal
countries are agitated to conquer their nationalindependence."
Words which the yearsand realityconfirm, today more than ever.
Finally,
political
let's  recall his  thesis
on
economy,
on
syndicalism enters a country,so too enters the progress of
125
=====第125页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
competitionanvewitceainstaupporotpposed
to,ut"t's
ask then, can cooperativism  develop, as it is
pretended,
simultaneously with an anti-union offensive andeven more so
when a corporativistunionism is being promoted?In the ageof
imperialism, can cooperativism serve, within a regime like ours, as
anythingelsebuta complementto bureaucratic capitalism?In
lightof theideastranscribedtheanswerobviously is: No!And
let's bear in mind that cooperativism can beof_service to the
working class and the people only when the proletariat has power
intheir hands.Tofinish this point,let'srememberhis teaching
that imperialism develops the increasing state intervention in the
economic process and that,
representingand defending the
bourgeoisie,  it  sees  itself
compelled even
to carry  out
"nationalizations";sothequestionis toseewhohasbenefitted
fromthe nationalizations, andthatis decidedbywhich class
controls power. Inlightof this, who has benefittedfromthe
nationalizations of the current government?
b) Mariátegui and scientific socialism. Hestarts by distinguishing
betweenoldsocial-democratic reformism and militant socialism,
pointing outthatthe difference isthattheformer"wantsto
achieve socialismbycollaborating politicallywiththebourgeisi"
while thelatterones,Marxists,"wanttoachieve socialismby
wholly confiscating political power forthe proletariat." The matter
delimited, hefirmly takesthe position ofthe Commust
International, of the followers of Lenin, in whom he recognizes a
great leader of the international communist movement, declaring
himself Marxist-Leninist.
Anotherpointofscientificsocialismimportantto Mariátegui is
the crisis of bourgeois democracy whose symptoms could be
perceived before World WarI and whose causes he sees in "the
parallel
126
=====第126页=====
Let Us ReTake MaRiaTEGUI
proletariat";inthato
development of monopoly,
way
the
characteristicof imperialism, and the questioningof the bourgeois
order by theproletariatare whatcauses thebourgeois democratic
crisis. Deepening the problem he emphasizes that under the
bourgeois regime industry developed immensely with the power
of machinery,with"greatindustrialenterprises"having arisen,
and since thepolitical and socialforms are determined by the
base sustaining them he concludes: "The expansion of these new
productiveforces does not allow the subsistence of the old
political patterns.It has transformed the structureof nations and
demands the transformation of the structure ofthe regime.
Bourgeois
sdemocracy has  ceased to correspond  to the
organizationofeconomicforces tremendously transformed and
enlarged. That is why democracy is in crisis. The t
typical
institution  of democracyis the
parliament.  The  crisis  of
democracy is a crisis of parliament."
Here we have a thesis intimately
linkedto Lenin's on the
reactionary characterof imperialism,on which Mariátegui bases
his understanding  of fascism
political
as
 reaction,
, asan
internationalphenomenon notonlyItalian norexclusively in
imperialist countries butfeasible alsoinbackward nations like
Spain,fascismwhichtypicallyblames"allthemisfortunesofthe
fatherland
onpolitics and
parliamentarism"; fascism as an
expressionthattherulingclassdoesnotfeelitselfsufficiently
defended by its institutions. Universal suffrage and parliament are
obstaclesinits way,"how "reaction whichinall countriesis
organized to the tune ofa demagogic and subversive beat.
(Bavarianfascistscallthemselves'nationalsocialistsDuringits
tumultuous training,fascism made abundant use of an anti-
capitalistprose…)";as"nationlitandeactionarymysticism"
which"hastaughtthewayofdictatorshipand violence"with its
takingof powerand repression,theuseof theblackjack and
127
=====第127页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
destinedtoexcbthotmaii,tundrmiethe
basis of bourgeois society.'
To Mariátegui,ashe taughtin"TheBiologyof Fascism"ofhis
work The Contemporary Scene, fascism is a political process
which "for many years did not want to call itself or function as a
party," whose social composition isheterogeneousand in which
"the national flag covers upall the contraband and equivocations
in doctrine and program … They want to monopolize patriotism."
Butwithinthis"thecontradictionsunderminingfascistunty"
always develop,contradictionswhichfirstfaced"two antithetic
souls andtwo antithetic mentalities. One extremist or arch-
reactionary fraction proposing the integral insertionof the fascist
revolution in the Statuteof the Kingdom of Italy. The neoliberal
State had,initsview,tobereplaced bythefascistState. Whilea
revisionistfraction instead calledfor a more or less extensive
politicalrectification";acontradictionwhich,resolvingitself
favorably towardsthefirsttendency,did nottherefore ceaseto
exist but continued to develop under new forms: one tendency
proposing to sweep away "all opponentsof the fascist regime in a
Saint Bartholomew's Night,"whileothers "more intellectual, but
no less apocalyptical … invitedfascism to definitively liquidate the
parliamentaryregime,"meanwhile"thetheoreticiansofintegral
fascism sketchthe techniqueof the fascist State whichit conceives
almost as a vertical trust of workers'unions or corporations."
Thus,fascismimatefllpeendsstillyanalyzedeven
in its contradictions.
Furthermore,inhisanalysisoffascism Mariáteguiadvancesto
typify the"characteristicattitudeofareformist,ofademocrat,
however one tormented by a seriesof 'doubtsabout democracy'
andof unsettledfeelings respecttoreform"shownby English
writer H.G.Wlsnuoliii:"Facismappears
to him a cataclysm,more thana consequence and result of the
128
=====第128页=====
LeT Us ReTake MaRIATeGui
proletarianrevolutioninItaly.Aconfirmedevolutionist,Wells
cannot conceiveof fascism as a phenomenon possible within the
logic of history. He mustunderstand it as anexcetional
phenomenon." Toreformism,as we can see,fascism is notthe
consequenceofthe crisisofbourgeois democracy but"an
exception," "a cataclysm,"which is how some see it today in our
country, only and exclusively as terror on the march, not seeing it
is "a phenomenon possible within the logic of history" caused by:
The developmentof the monopoliesinto imperialism andthe
questioningof the bourgeoisie by the proletariat.Let that thesis
help us torejectthereformist concepts beingpropagated about
fascismand tohavea correctand necessary understandingof
history and the current situation in our country.
Other problems of scientific socialism set forth by Mariátegui are
the violent revolution, the role of the proletariat and of the Party.
On these he maintained: "The revolution is the painful gestation,
the bloodybirthofthepresent,""thatpoweris conquered
throughncn"itiodlthouashp"
thus pointingouttheroleofrevolutionary violence;which"the
proletariatdoes notenterhistory politicallyexcept as a social
class;at the instant it discovers its missionoferecting,withthe
elementsprocuredbyhumaneffort,moral or immoral,fairor
unfair,a superiorsocialorder," which pointsout therole of the
working class. Judging the political weakness of Spain: "in Russia
there existed,besides the profound agitation of the people,a
revolutionary Party,ledbya ingenious man of action, of clear
visionand goals. Thatis whattodayis lackinginSpain"The
Communist Party,too young,still does not constitute more than
a forceof agitationand propaganda,"thushighlighting the need
of the Party of the proletariat.
The theses on Marxist
philosophy, politicaleconomicsa
and
129
=====第129页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
scientificsocialism as shown,aretheyMarxistpositions?Can
anyone saythese do notsubstantially correspond to Marxist
proposals? Can anyone prove thatsuch positions are not theones
upheld
by the classics of
Marxism-Leninism?Evidently
Mariáteguitheseaefrmlanddefiitlybasedotheconcept
of the proletariat and this in no way can be distortedor denied.
What is the basis of those pretending to deny the Marxist position
of Mariátegui?Simplyandplainly a simplistic analysis which
lacks anyreality,and,aboveall,lacks a solidclass position,
alienated from our reality and the application of Marxism.
The positionof the founderof the Communist Party with respect
to Marxistphilosophy,topoliticaleconomyandto scientific
socialism reveals,a correctand just wayofthinkingfrom a
working class position. They are based on Marxism-Leninism,
showing the maturingof Mariátegui's thought in his theoretical
and practical participationintheclass struggle,and thathe
arrivedatthatunderstanding, while, strugglingagainstld
revisionism and its European representatives and similar elements
in our country.
III.
MARIÁTEGUI
ESTABLISHED
THE
GENERAL
POLITICAL LINE OF THE PERUVIAN REVOLUTION.
What does it mean to say that Mariátegui established the general
political line of the Peruvian revolution?Infact,he setforth the
general laws of the class struggle in the country,and established
the road of revolution in our country. Thatstatement implies its
validityand necessarilyentailstheRetaking Mariategui's Rod to
carry forwardtherevolutionarytransformationofour society
under the leadrhiofthe workingclass,thoughtheorganized
va
130
=====第130页=====
LeT Us ReTaKe MARIATEGUI
regard.
a) The characterof Peruvian Society.Let's start from the words of
the founder of the Communist Party:
"Capitalism develops withina semi-feudal country likeours;at
times inwhich,havingreachedthe monopoly and imperialist
stage, theentireliberalideology correspondingto thefree
competition stage has ceased to bevalid.Imperialism doesnot
tolerate
economic
nationalization
and
an
program
of
industrialization in anyof those semi-colonial nations it exploits
as markets for its commodities and capital, and as sources of raw
materials. Itforces them into specialization,to monoculture (in
Peru petroleum,copper,sugar,cotton),sufferinga permanent
crisis of manufactured products,a crisis derived from thisrigid
determinationof national production,byfactorsof the capitalist
world market."
Inthese words whichbelong to point IIof theParty Program,
the semi-feudaland semi-colonial characterofoursocietyis
established. Thefirstone,semi-feudalism,"surely must notbe
sought in thesubsistenceof institutionsand politicalor judicial
forms of thefeudalorder. Formally Peru is a republican and
democratic bourgeois State. Feudalism or semi-feudalism survives
in the structure of ouragrarian economy," said Mariátegui We
see it today, despite the years elapsed, because it persists and new
forms of semi-feudal roots are developed,forms of unpaid labor,
familyobligationandefeesalaies,personalprivilees,
maintenanceandfusionofoldlatifundiaand theprepondeance
gamonalismo,under coverof new conditions and high
of
has developedntolfvidnttrtsnctheclassstruggle
itself,with thualexlosiowhaveeesomanytimes,
131
=====第131页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
agrarianreformandthcountevolutionaractionae
seen since the 1960's,showthe semi-feudal base of Peruvian
society.
Withrespecttosemicolonialism,Mariateguimaintainedthata
country can be politically
independent while its  economy
continues tobe_dominatedbyimperialism;Furthermore,he
firmly maintained thatSouth American countries like ours are
"politicallyindependent,economicallycolonized."Andthat
situation continues todevlop;ouconomysufergrowingand
diversifiedimperialisandsocial-imperialistpenetration, dect
and indirect.Thesemi-colonialsituationhasbeenquestioned in
recent years, byaffirming without proof that Peru has become a
colony, sincethatis whatis affirmedwhen onetypifies the
country as a "neocolony"; and that affirmation reaches an extreme
when it is proposedthat wearea"neocolony,"butruledby"a
bourgeois reformist government."
The quoted paragraph proposed that capitalism develops in Peru,
but it is a capitalism subjected to the control mainlyof North
American imperialism,not a capitalism thatallows a national
economy and independent industrialization;
but
quite
the
opposite, a capitalism subservient tothe imperialist metropolis
which does not tolerate a true national economy serving our
nation, nor independent industrialization. Thus, Mariategui does
not deny capitalist development in the country, but specifies our
typeof capitalism;capitalism in a semi-feudalcountry living in
the ageof monopoliesandpoliticalreaction,a capitalism that
whileitdevelopitincreasesoursemi-colonialconditiona
capitalism engendering a compradorbourgeoisie linkedto U.S.
imperialism.In summary,a bureaucratic capitalismfromthe
viewpoint of Mao Tse-tung.
132
=====第132页=====
LET Us RETaKE MARIATEGUI
confirmed and specifiedtheaccuratetheses sustainedbyour
founder.
b) The twostagofthePuviaevolutioStrtinfromthe
country's semi-colonialand semi-feudal condition, Mariátegui
analyzed therevolutionaryforces concludingthat there are two
basic classes: the proletariat and the peasantry. Although the latter
is the main force, being the majority,and supports the weight of
semi-feudalism, the former, the working class, is the leading class;
further on, he notedthat only with the appearance ofthe
proletariatcanthepeasantryfulfillitsrole:"Socialistdoctrineis
the only one capable of giving a modern,constructive sense to the
indigenous cause,which, placed in the true social and economic
arena,andelevated tothe levelof a realisticand creative policy,
countsforthefulfillmentofthis enterprise withthe will and
disciplineof a class now making itsappearance in our historical
political process: The proletariat.'
Joining the peasantryand the proletariat is the petty-bourgeisie,
which "always played a very minor and disoriented role in Peru,"
1
put under pressure byforeign capitalism "itappearsdestined to
as its organization and orientation
assume,
prospers,
a
revolutionary nationalist attitude." These are the driving classes of
the revolution,who under certain conditions and circumstances
can be joined by the national bourgeoisie, which Mariátegui calls
the "left bourgeoisie." Those are the four classes who united aim
at the targets of the revolution: Semi-feudalism and imperialism.
In two well known paragraphs of the Communist Party Program,
written bythefounderhimself,thestagesofthePeruvian
revolution are defined and its character specified:
"Theemanciofemoftissible
133
=====第133页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1 (1968-1987)
throughthtiooftlaaaliitwhe
world's anti-imperialist struggle. Only the actionof the proletariat
canfirst stimulate and later on carry out the tasks ofthe
bourgeois-democraticevolution whichthebourgeois reimeielf
is incapable of fulfilling.'
"The bourgeois-democratic stage accomplished,therevolution
becomes, in itsobjectives and doctrine,a proletarian revolution.
The partyof theproletariat,qualified by thestruggle to exercise
power and develop its own program,fulfills in this stage the tasks
of organizing and defending the socialist order."
Here we see the problem of the Peruvian revolution and its stages
masterfully condensed: The national-democratic or bourgeois-
democratic of the new kind in the wording of Mao Tse-tung, and
the proletarian revolution. Two stages, the first one which we are
living in since1928,butwhich stillhas notbeenfulflledor
concluded,and thefuture, proletarian stage;two uninterrupted
stages of the same revolutionary process. Under no circumstances
should their character and contents be confused. This great thesis
by
Mariátegui became, afterbroaddebates andstruggles,a
fundamentaltruthof Marxist understandingof the lawsofour
revolution.
But if thisisfundamental,thenit is even more so that the
working class andonlythe working classthroughitspartyis
capableof leadingthe national-democraticrevolution.Thatonly
bypreparingando
organizing within the national-democratic
revolution
develop the second,
 proletarian stage.
can
it
Consequently,if thenational-democraticrevolutionis notld
the workingclass, in no way canit becompleted, much lssuild
socialism. This is the paramount question today,since counter-
revolutionandsocialcorporativismdenythisgreatruthand
134
=====第134页=====
Let Us ReTakE MARiaTeGuI
fulfillingtheirststageof therevolutionandeventheyclaim,
laying
the
foundations  for socialism. This key
 question
differentiatesrevolutionariesfrom counter-revolutionaries:The
firstones,withMarxism and Mariategui,maintainthatthe
proletariatandonlytheproletariat"canfirststimulateand later
on fulfill the tasksof the bourgeois-democraticrevolution which
the bourgeoisregime isincapableto developandfulfill."That is
our position. We must uphold and fight the counter-revolutionary
theses,aiming our spear against social-corporativistrevisionism
that preaches against the thesis of Mariátegui and is the
detachmentofsocial-imperialism in our country,whose efforts
serveonly itscollusionandcollisionwith the Yankeesuperpower
for world domination.
c) Theanti-feudal struggle. Thelandprogramisbasic to our
country and, in synthesis, it is the question of feudalism with its
two elements: Latifundia and servitude; that is why, as Mariátegui
said, the agrarian problem in Peru is the destruction of feudalism,
whose relations taint our societyfrom top to bottom,from the
base to the superstructure. The motor of rural struggles has been
and is the land question,and that the three agrarian laws of the
1960's did not destroyitsbase is clearly shown by todays
struggles by the peasantry.
Inanalyzingtheland
question, thefounder of the Party
highlightedthestruggleconfronting communityandlatifundia;
he showed its economic and social superiority,pointing out that
the community had given the peasant majorities strength to resist
the thievery by feudal landownersthroughout the centuries, and
that it entails
 the
living  yeast  which  will  help  socialist
development in the future. Reviewing the agrarian labor regime
hehighlightedtheexistenceoffeudalrelationsofexploitation
hidden behind seemingly capitalist forms. These questions do not
belong to the past,but to a presentwhich we must search well to
135
=====第135页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
discoveritsblurredsemi-feudale
hidden behind the
essence
apparent and purported "destruction of feudalism" of the so-called
agrarian reform.
Considering thestrugglesof the Peruvian and of Latin American
peasantry generally,Mariateguibrought forward thesloganof the
peasants: "Landforthose who till it,expropriatethem without
compensation"and thattheir mobilization demands the"arming
of workers and peasants to conquer and defend their gains." In
that way,feudalism must bedestroyedbyconfiscating the lands
and onlythe armed workers and peasantswillbe ableto
since there is no other way to break up
accomplish this,
feudalism,destroy latifundiaandabolish serfdom. We must not
forget that Peruvian laws have been ruling agrarian relations and
abolishingserfdomforoverl50years,butinrealitythey have
maintained the underlying feudalism.
Consequently,theanti-feudalstruggleisthe motiveof the class
strugglein the  countryside
andthe basis of our national-
democratic revolution itself.
c) Theanti-imperialiststruggle. Peru,liketherestoftheLatin
American countries,is a nation in a formative stage. "It is being
built overtheinert indigenousstrata,and thealluvialsediments
of western civilization."In that way,"the problem of the Indians
is the problem offour million Peruvians. It is the problemof
three fourthsof the population of Peru. It is the problem of the
majority.Itis theproblemof nationality,"Mariateguiobserved,
and headded:"A truly nationalpolicy cannotdowithoutthe
Indian, it cannot ignore the Indian. The Indian is thefoundation
of our nationality in formation. Oppression makes the Indian an
enemyofcivility.Itannulthem,practicallyasanelementof
Thosewhoimpoverishand depresstheIndian,
progress.
impoverishand depressthe nationWithout theIndian,the
136
=====第136页=====
LET Us RETaKE MARIATEGUI
conditont
valid,aboveall,to personsofmeredemo-liberalbourgeois and
nationalist ideology…
11
Thus, the problem of the Indian is thatof the majority ignored by
the policiesofthPeruvianStateoftherepublicgenerally,for
more than150years;it is theproblemof actingoutside the
interestoffour fifthsof the population. As ourfoundersaid,of
looking and acting witheyes aimed at the imperialistmetropolis
dominating us. Digging deeper into the problem,Mariátegui set
forth that theIndian problem is the problem ofthe land;
consequently,the national question is basedon the land question
and in no way can one be separatedfrom the other,a proposal
whichfollows strictlythethese;of_Marxism,proved bythe
practice of the class struggle of our own masses and expreessed,
incontrovertibly, in the character of our revolution.
On this basis,the founderof the Communist Partyanalyzed the
classesandtheanti-imperialist struggle inour country,and in
Latin America in general; he pointed out that the Latin American
bourgeoisie "feel sure enough of their ownership of power so as
not to care muchabout national sovereignty," as well as having
common interests with imperialism,
adding
that:
"While
imperialist policy … is not forced to resort to armed intervention,
in case of military occupation they will count on the absolute
collaborationofthebourgeoisie."Inthatwaytherelationshipof
the Peruvian "mercantilebourgeoisie"
andits position with
respecttoimperialismwasclarified.Referring toour country,
when treating the subject of the united front, Mariátegui proosed
thepossibilityofuniting"withtheleftliberalbourgeoisietruly
disposed ooindgainst
imperialistodfiithetioofwhatoa we
callthetl;nd  aw,
137
=====第137页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
nationalist position"astheforign dominationicreases.
Ontheotherhand,charging against the Apristas whohad raised
anti-imperialism"tothe levelof a program,a politicalattitude, a
movement that is an end in itself and ledspontaneously,due to
what process we don't know,whether socialism or the social
revolution"andexposingtheirthesisof"weareleftists(or
socialists) because we are anti-imperialist" Mariátegui,keeping in
mind that only the proletariat, together with the peasantry, can be
consistently
anti-imperialist,
pointed
out:
"For us, anti-
imperialism does not constitute,nor can it constitute by itself, a
political
a mass movement capable of conquering
 program,
power," and heconcluded:"Inconclusion,e are ai-imperialists
because we are socialists, because we are revolutionaries, because
we counterpoise socialism as an opposite system to capitalism,
destined toreplaceit, because in thestruggle againstforeign
imperialism  we fulfill
lour
duties of
solidarity  with
the
revolutionary masses of the world."
Thus, theanti-feudal and anti-imperialist struggle intermingle as
two inseparable matters and as integral partsofthe national-
democratic revolution which only the working class is capable of
leading, provided it establishes the worker-peasant alliance as the
starting point of the united front of the revolution.
d) The united front. Seeing the basic problems of the character of
society andoftherevolution and theanti-feudaland ani-
imperialist struggles,the question arisesoftheinstrumentsof
social transformation,of the "three key levers of the revolution":
The united front, the military problem and the Party.
"Myattitude,fromthetimeIincorporatedmysltohis
vanguard, was alwaysoneof aconvinced,fervent propagandist of
138
=====第138页=====
Let Us RETaKE MARIaTEGUI
1st,1924.Hepointedoutthat"warestilltoofewtodivde
ourselves" and the many common tasks pending in the service of
the class. He was a consistent defenderof the unitedfront,he
demanded it as a solidarity action, concrete and practical for those
who,witht clld,"lemelves
united by class  solidarity, linked by the common struggle against
the common adversary, linked by the same revolutionary will and
the samerenewing passion";andafterrecognizing that"the
varietyoftendencies and the diversityofideological shades is
inevitable in that humanlegion calledthe proletariat," he
demanded:"What matters is thatthose groups and those
tendencies to know how to understand each other before the
concrete realityof the day.So they do not crash like Byzantines in
mutual excommunications and ex-confessions. That they do not
alienate the massesfrom therevolution,bya bigshowofthe
dogmatic quarrelsof their preachers. That they don't use their
weapons or waste their time in hurting each other, but in fighting
the old social order, its institutions, its injustices and its crimes.
11
These words resound alive today as the current order, demanding
to unite so as to fulfill the common "historic duties"of developing
class consciousness and thefeeling of the class,ofsowing and
spreading and renovating class ideas,to wrest the workers away
fromthefalseinstitutionsclaimingtorepresentthem;tofight
repression and the corporativist offensive, to defend the
organization, the press and the tribune of the class,to struggle for
the rights and gains of the peasantry; "historical duties" in whose
fulfillment our paths will meet and join."
Onthatbasis_Mariáteguiproposedformingtheanti-imperialist
and anti-feudalfront which underthe leadershipof the working
class and based on the workers'and peasants'alliance could unite
workers and peasants,the petty-bourgeoisie and,under certain
conditionnicac,h"ouo"icww
139
=====第139页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP- VOLUME1(1968-1987)
call thenationalbourgeoisie. Theunitedfront isafundamental
weapon of thenational-democraticrevolution; but it can only be
developed basedontheworker-peasantallianceand ledby the
proletariat,otbythebougoisieorthety-bouoisiI this
front,the working class,through itsParty,enters into analliance
with otherclasses. "But inany event itwill givethe proletariat
amplefreedom of criticism, ofaction, ofthe press and of
organization." There we have the politics of the united front and
the independent class politics which the Party must ever
abandon.
On theother hand, Mariategui highlighted that when confronted
by a revolutionary threat the bourgeoisie alsoforms a united
front,"butonly temporarily, only while a definite assault on the
revolution is prepared. Afterwards each one ofthe bourgeois
groups tries to recover its autonomy .… Within the bourgeoisie
there are contrasts of ideology and interests,contrasts which no
one can suppress"; that way,the bourgeois block is necessity
broken by the development of its own internal contradictions and
the development of the class struggle.
sectarianism,whichtoday is badly generalized,keeping in mind
that"the masses demand unity" and keepour ears alert to these
relevantand peremptory words: "Thenoble,loftyand sincere
spirits ofthe revolution perceive and respectthat above any
theoreticalbarrier,the_historicalsolidarityoftheir efforts and
works. Sectarian egotism and the privilegeof incomprehension
belong to thelowly spiitswithouthorizonswings,to dogmatic
mentalities,who wanttopetrifyandimmobilizelifeinarigid
formulation."
，a
140
=====第140页=====
Let Us ReTake MaRiaTEGUI
deceitandits;itele's
camp sectarianism and hegemonism divide and conspire against
the common united action, each day more necessary and urgent.
We must struggleorunification,today morethanever,since"a
reactionarypolicywillultimatelycausethepolarizationofthe
lefts.Itwillprovokethefusionofallproletarianforces. The
capitalist counteroffensive willachieve whattheinstinct ofthe
working classes hasbeen unable to do: The united proletarian
front." Wearefighting againstafascist government which caries
on
general
corporative readjustment that, after intense
a
demagoguery and much propagandized "humanist, libertarian and
Christian socialism,"it confuses understanding and surrenders
wills, deceitfullyusingthereactionarydoubletactic,of repreeion
and political deceit, generates vacillation and sharpens conciliatory
rightism in the people's own ranks. In these circumstances, we
must adhere and apply the following proposals by Mariategui:
"Welivein a periodofopenideologicalbelligerence. The men
who represent a renewing force cannot enter into concerts with or
be confusedby, not even casually orfortuitously, those
representing conservative or regressive forces. An historical abyss
separates them. They speak diverse languages and do not have a
common intuition of history.'
"I think we must unite those who arealike,not those who are
unlike. We must getcloser to those whom history wants united.
That we must support those whom history wants to be solidarity.
That I thinkistheonlypossiblecoordination.The only
intelligence with a precise and effective historical sense."
And also: "I am a revolutionary. But I think that among men of
clear thinking and defined position it is easy to reach an
understandingandappreciate eachotherevenwhileclashing
witheachother.Aboveal,whilefihtingeachother.Withthe
141
=====第141页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
politicalsco,wiwchIillcuranding is
another thing: Thatof mediocrereformism,of domesticated
socialism, or with the democracy of pharisees."
11
f)Themilitaryproblem. Notmuchis saidabout Mariategui's
theses on the military problem, moreover it is believed he never
expounded on such an important question; on the contrary, in his
works the importance Mariategui gave to revolutionary violene,
war andmilitary organizationis notable. Alreadyby_1921he
wrote:"there is no such thing as a measured,even,soft, serene,
placid revolution"; in1923: "power isconquered through violence
…onlythroughdictatorhipis powerpreserved";in192:"While
reactionistheinstinctofconservation,theagonyof the past,
revolutionisthepainfulgestation,thebloodybirth ofthe
present"; and in1927: "if revolutiondemands violence,authority,
discipline,I am forviolence,authority,discipline.I acceptthm,
as a whole withall their horrors without cowardly reservations.
The thesis ofrevolutionary violence, therefore, is a constant
theme of his thought, theses that are hidden by opportunism and
which as Marxists we must raise firmly and consequently.
But this is not his entire understanding of the revolution, which is
conceived and defined as protracted: "A revolution is not a coup
d'etat,nor an insurrection,it is not one of those things here we
callarevolutionbythearbitraryuseofthatword.A revolution
takes manyyearstobefulfilled.Frequentlyithasalternate periods
when revolutionary
forces
dominant and then when
are
counterrevolutionaryforcespredominate. Just like a war is a
processofoffensivesandcounter-offensives,ofvictoriesand
defeats,aslongasoneoftheconflictingsidesdoesnotfinally
surrender,aslonasit deoteigfomthefghit is not
vanquished.Itdefeatis temporarybutnot total.Accordingto
this interpretationofhistory,reaction,whiteteror…aeut
142
=====第142页=====
LET Us ReTaKE MARiaTEGUI
revolution." Here we see the correct Marxist positionbefore the
struggle ofrevolution and counterrevolution, the unchanging
confidence in the necessary revolutionary triumph;here we have
the theses that must guide us.
Besides,Mariáteguiestablishestherelationshipbetweenpolitics
and war,hederivestheweaknessof themilitaryfrontfrom the
political weakness,andmilitarystrengthalsoas a political
product: "Because, that way, in this as in the rest of world war, as
in therestofitsgreataspects,the politicalfactors,the morale
factors, thepsychologicalfactors had more importance than
purelymilitaryfactors."So,warfollowspolitics.Heunderstood,
as our founder, that revolution generates an army of the new type
with its own tasks and different from the armies of the exploiters:
"The red army is a new case in the world's military history, it is
an army whichfeels itsrole as a revolutionary army and which
does not forget that its aim is the defense of the revolution. Any
specificand militarily imperialistfeeling isby necessityexcluded
from its soul.Its discipline,its organization and its structure are
revolutionary." Here we have the army of the new type which the
revolution generates and which can only arise under the absolute
control of the Party, as Mao Tse-tung teaches.
Finally, Mariateguipaids
special attention to the Mexican
Revolution in Latin America and the Chinese Revolution in Asia,
highlightinginboththeirnational-democraticcharacter,ther
agrarian roots, the role of the peasantry and the vital participation
of the workingclass,while atthe sametimehighlightingthe
contrary works ofimperialism andofthebourgeoisie which
betrayed or trafficked with the revolution.
Starting from thebasic premiseof"andforthosewhotillit," he
143
=====第143页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
national-democratic revolution. He highlighted its development as
a peasant's revolution which advancesfrom the countryside and
which develops in "revolutionaryactions," in montoneras [armed
groupofmassesintheAndes-Transjoinedtogetherbythe
solidarityofolierandofficersin"gaiunity,inwhoseveins
circulates the same blood"; in montoneras joined to the masses
with the same solidarity relations existing within them: "the same
relationshipof body,of class,existed within the montoneraand
the workers and peasants masses. The montoneras simply were
the mostactive,warlike and dynamic partofthe masses."
Evidently when Mariátegui wrote those words about the Soviet
guerrillaswhichinthe192O'sfoughtinSiberiaagainstthe
reactionaries,he thoughtof the montoneras in our country and
Latin America; and in doing so he described and revealed for us
the essentiallationshipbetweengurllaandthemasssofte
people,itsundetachableunity,theguerrillconditionofng
"the most active, warlike and dynamic partofthe massees,
1
integral partofthe masses and never an action separatefrom
them.
Thesepoints makeup Mariategui's thoughtaboutthe military
problem besideshisbasicthesisthatpeasant uprisings cannot
triumph on their own and if ever they triumphed it was under the
leadershipoftheoldbourgeoisie.Buttoday,intheageof
imperialism, and precisely in our America, where "the bourgeoisie
has not known how or wantedtofulfll thetasksofliquidating
feudalism," where "a close descendant of the Spanish conquerors,
it has been impossible for it to appropriate the rights and gains of
the peasant masses,"itcorresponds tothe proletariatand only the
proletariattolead themasseofthepeasantrytowards the
destructionoffeudalism through the protracted war ofthe
countrysidetthityithetioal-dmatvolution.
144
=====第144页=====
LET Us RETaKE MaRiaTeGUI
creatinglasyytoAcofontituoof
the PCP. Whatdoesthat meanSimplythattheclas strugge
demands from the proletariat their independent organization as a
political party,withtheiown interests ortheachievementofthe
historicalgoaloftheworkingclass.Inthatway,theparty isthe
result of the developmentof the class struggle in our country and
ofthe appearance,development and maturityof our proltaria. It
is a need ofthe logical development of our history, ofthe
existence of classes,of the existence of the working class and,
therefore, in no way can it be considered superfluous,quite the
contrary,it isthe main andindispensable instrument forthe
working class to conquer power andforbuilding the new
Peruvian society,necessaryforaslongasthereareclassesad
while the classless society is not yet achieved.
The CommunistParty"istheorganizedvanguard ofthe
proletariat,thepoliticalorceassumingittaskoforientiand
leadingthestruggleforthefulfillmentof itsclass ideals,"saysits
Program,establishedbyMariáteguihimself;andabout social
composition, the "organization of the workers and peasants with a
strict class character is the object of our effort and our
propaganda,and the baseof thestruggle," says pointIII of the
aforementioned Act. The Communist Party is the organized
vanguard of the Peruvian working class,there we have its precise
demarcation and adherence to Marxism-Leninism, "revolutionary
method in the age of imperialism" which "it adopts as a means of
struggle," as the Program says; while its social composition aims
at incorporating into its ranks the bestof the proletariat and the
peasantry.
The Partyisnotand cannotbeanelectoralapparatus butan
organization for the takingof power; while it may beable to take
advantage of elections, its power is not rooted in them.
Mariategui,analyzintheGermansituationclearlydelimd
145
=====第145页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
whatwas happening:"Thepowerofa Party,as shown in this
case,does not dependstrictlyonitselectoraland parliamentary
strength. Universal suffrage may diminish their votes in the
chamber,withouttouchingitspoliticalinfluence .…. The Socialist
Party,which is a class Party with more thanhundredand fifty
parliamentary votes,are enough to assure for them organizing a
cabinet, but does not authorize them to exclude from this cabinet
the bankersand industrialists,unless it optsfora revolutionary
road." That way, to Mariategui the Party is not electoral nor can it
follow"parliamentary cretinism,"parliamentarism is a political
organization of the bourgeoisie just as much as the corporativist
modes of organization. Therefore,for the Party the question is to
forge itself as a"systemof organizations," as a war machine for
the conquestof power by wayofrevolutionary violence to
overthrow the governing social order,like ourfounder reminds
us: "History teaches us that all new social State have been formed
upon the ruinsof the preceding social states.Between the brth of
the one and the deathofthe otherthere was,logically,an
intermediate period of crisis."
Once again,thefoundingoftheCommunistParty isthe
fulfillenofMaiuiocland cilganof
his directparticipation in theclass struggleit was his at
contribution and service to theproletariat,over more than30
years of combat in our contemporary history, which sustained the
appearance and developmentof the PCP. In contributing to the
buildingofour Party,Mariátegui gaveittheideological-political
bases we find in the Act of Constitution, the Party Program. In its
threefundamentaltheses: Backgroundand Development ofthe
ClassAction,Anti-ImperialistViewpoint,andOutlineofthe
IndigenousPoblem; as wellasMaritegui'sentire works,among
which we note Seven Essays,Historyof the World Crisis,Let's
Peruvianize Peru,andothers,in each oneof them hesets forth
problems of the revolutionary
and
resolves
struggle.
146
=====第146页=====
Let Us ReTakE MaRiaTeGUI
work of
Consequently,
the
mustunderstand
written
we
Mariátegui as partof theconstructionandpolitical-ideological
foundation of the Party.
José CarlosMariateguuoundr,crowedhistruggethe
Party withhisTheses of Affiliation totheII (Third)
International, an important text that must be remembered:
"The Communistsof the Partyadhere to the Third International
and agree to work toobtain that same adhesion from the groups
which form the Party. The ideology we adopt is revolutionary and
militant Marxism, a doctrine we accept in all its aspects:
philosophical,politicaland social-economical. Themethods we
endorse are those of orthodox revolutionary socialism. We not
only reject, but fight by all means and in all its forms the methods
and tendencies of social-democracy of the Second International."
"The Party isa class Party and therefore repudiatesany tendency
implyingfusionwithpoliticalforcesandorganizationsofthe
other classes. The Partyr
recognizes that, within national
conditions, reality will impose upon us pacts and alliances, usually
with therevolutionary petty-bourgeoisie;but in any event it will
win for the proletariateedomof criticism,ofaction,of the press
and of organization.
Here,we have a document editedby Mariátegui and which he
himself presented to the Central Committeeon 1st March1930
and approvedonfollowing March 4th;thisdocument isenough
to topple so much anti-Party phrase-mongering which today does
not deserve to be considered.
Finally, let'srecall thattoMariátegui:"Partiesare notborn out of
some academiclittlecouncil"andthattheParty"isnotand
cannot be a peacefulndunanimousacademy";but the Party is
147
=====第147页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
forged amidsttheclass struggleofthe masses and advances
amidsttheintrnaltwo-linestrugglesoithistorycanote
understoodoutside thered line imprintedbyMariátegui andits
protractedand windingstruggleagainstthe non-proletarian line
which
has always
surfaced,
openly
covertly,
or
against
Mariátegui's thought.
h)The mass line.Along withall thathasbeenexposed we see
how at the bottom of all these proposals there is a position,the
mass line, a basic question in Mariátegui's thought, which is little
known.It suffices to highlight here that Mariategui considers that
the presenceofthe massesflls contemporary times,thatthe
multitudes,as he says,are the main actors today. The working
class have a myth,a goal--socialrevolution,a goalwhichthe
proletariatupholds and marchestowards,with "an actie and
vehementfaith",in contrastto thebourgeois skepticism and
decadence.Themassesfightfor"thefinalstruggle" sureof their
victory and he says: "The sentence in Eugene Portier's song (The
Internationale)acquireshistoricalrelief:'It'sthefinal struggle!'
The Russian proletariat greets thisecumenical cryof the world
proletariat. The war cry and hope bythe multitudes, already
heard in the streets of Rome, of Milan,of Berlin, of Paris, of
Vienna and of Lima. All the emotion of an era is with them. The
revolutionary
multitudes believe they are waging thefinal
struggle.'
1
The masses,the main actors of history,today more than ever
before go on defining world history the way "the professionals of
intelligenceareunabletoind…thatthemultitudeswillfind"; the
formed out of anonymous heroes, the real heroes
masses
Mariátegui admired:"Theanonymousheroofthefactory,of the
mine,offield;theunknownsoldierofthesocialrevolution."
Masses whose interests are in solidarity confronting the
148
=====第148页=====
LeT Us ReTakE MARIATeGUI
"which work to create a new order" and to which we must serve
and interpret,since individuals and leadersare judged according
to"how welltheyhave beenableto serve and interpretthe
revolutionary masses.'
1
alwaysemphasizes
th
the
However,
Mariátegui
masses
ultimatelyarethebasicmasses,theworkersand peasants:"he
forceof therevolutionalwaysresidedinthealliance between
workers and agrarians,that is of the workers and peasants
masses," as he says speaking of the Mexican Revolution;that
before them opportunism is manifestedby "trusting more the
possibilityofexploitingthecontradictionsandrivalriesamong
chiefs than in the possibilityof carrying the masses towards clear
revolutionarypolitics,"andthatthe Mexican strugglealways
crushed the counterrevolution "by way of a great mobilization of
the workers and peasant revolutionary masses." These and other
proposals show the definite position of Mariátegui with respect to
the masses, in whose struggles he considers that Marxism is alive:
"Marx lives in the struggle for the realization of socialism waged
by innumerable multitudes animated by his doctrines throughout
the world."
What is said does not imply thenegation of the importance of
leaders in the class struggle, leaders whose dimension, we
reiterate,are measured by the identification with the interestsof
the revolutionary classes and service rendered to them, mainly to
the proletariat,the class that generates a new typeof"thinking
and acting" person. With respect to the actsof revolutionaries,
Mariátegui demanded taking into account the class struggle in the
mind of the individual: "Decadenceand revolution coexist in the
same world andalso in the same individual.The conscience … is
thefightingarenaofa struggle betweenthetwo spirits,the
understandnofthistugleomtimemotnaably,
149
=====第149页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
one remainsstrangledonthearena."Whilespeakingofthehero
he stated: "the hero always arrivesat thegoal blooded and torn:
only through this price can we wholly payfor his heroism,"
noticingthatthstrugglalwaysleaveitsmarkinallstating:
'"Today like yesterday a political order cannot be changed without
individualsresolved toresist jailorexile"and,"toarevolutionary,
a prison is merely a work-related accident.
Mariátegui's mass line meritsour attention,more so today when
the basic problem becomes the arena of a battle larger and
increasing each day. Let's keep in mind today, more than ever, the
following: "the masses demandunity. The masses wantfaith.
Their soulsrejectthe corroding voice,the dissolving and
pessimistic voice of those who deny and who doubt. They seek
the optimist and cordial voice,youthful andfruitful,of those who
affirm and who believe."
i) Otheraspectsof Mariátegui's line.All theabove confirms the
basic pointsof the general political lineof Mariáteguiabout the
Peruvian revolution; but that is not his entire work. The founder
of the Communist Party,from the viewpoint of the working class
andinfunction oftherevolutionary transformation ofour
Peruvian society,set specificpoliticallinesfor work intrade and
industrialunions,amonworkersemiist,outh,teacherand
intellectualgroups,andother workingfronts. These specific
policies are the basis to develop a class line in eachfront of the
mass work;also the question in them is to Retake Mariátegui's
Road and develop it according to the present circumstances in the
class struggle.
isetthegeneralpoliticallineofthePeruvian
Mariátegui
revolution.ItfollowsclearlythatMariategui,systematizingthe
experienceofstruggleof the working clas and thepeopleof
150
=====第150页=====
Let Us Retake MaRiATeGUI
participatoninthrhlllofthe
Peruvianrevolution,aswllasthespecificpoliticalclasslinein
the various fronts of the mass work. All this can be considered
Mariátegui's Road,theroadofthe Peruvian Revolution,the
general laws of the revolution in our country and of the action of
the working class as the leading classfor the conquestof power
andinstallingthedictatorshipoftheproletaallowinthe
building of a new society inour nation,socialism as the
revolutionarytransformationtowardstheclasslessociety,the
Communist society.
Mariátegui's Roadhas an axis: The Communist Party,without
which there can beno revolutionor genuine successes forthe
people. TheCommunist Party,theorganizedvanguardof the
proletariat,is needed so the working class can lead,since only it,
throughitsvanguard,isable toleadthe national-democratic
revolutionand sustained by the worker-peasant alliancefulfill the
first stage of the Peruvian Revolution so that, with the
dictatorshipoftheproletariatitcandevelopintothesecond
stage, that of the proletarian revolution.
So the decisive question in our revolution, today more than ever,
is to Retake Mariátegui's Road and to develop it in the midstof
the class struggleof the masses today to serve the working class,
the people and the revolution.
IV. TO RETAKE MARIATEGUI AND RECONSTITUTE HIS
PARTY SERVES THE WORKING CLASS,THE PARTY AND
THE REVOLUTION.
a) Mariátegui's Road emerged and developed through struggle.
Mariátegui's Roademerged in themidstof theclass struggle
against theexistinsocialordeihadtofighagainstthe
151
=====第151页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
reactionarsoflinbtluuslth
APRA,whichdeniedthe need foraPartyof theProletariat. The
foundingof the Communist Party was the productof a sharp
struggle andsets afundamentalmilestone intheprocess of
Mariátegui's Road. Howeverthe struggle whichJosé Carlos
Mariátegui waged was not only outside the ranks of the Party, but
alsowithinitsranks where he struggledtokeepitadheringto
Marxism-Leninism and the Communist International.
Quite soon, almost immediately after his death,
awhole
opportunistlinedevelopedwhichtreacherouslybegantospeak
about the "proletarianization"and "improvement"of Mariategui;
while
outsideParty
ranks the"Aprista criticism"
labeled

Mariáteguias"intellectualized"anda"Europeanizer"withthe
veiled purposeofdenyinghislineand destroyingtheParty.By
the early 194O's, questions surfaced concerning
gMariategui's
Marxistfoundation,thoughhypocritically,theyrecognizedits
greatquality.Lateron DelPradoand company,whilecalling
themselves"disciplesofMariátegui,"madean "inoffensiveicon"
11
out of him, whom they enveloped infrankincense while
renouncing his Road. That is how an entire period of denying and
questioning
Mariategui and his Road evolved;
however
Mariátegui's red line kepton living embodied in the strugleof
the classes, mainly of workers and peasants and in the minds and
actions of communists who carried forward Mariategui's flag and
continued the struggle within the Party in searchof Mariátegui's
Road.
b) Retaking Mariátegui's Road.Thedecadeof the1960'sshook
the internationalcommunist worldwiththestruggle between
Marxism-Leninism and revisionism,whichhad repercussions in
and theveryimrtantruggewagedbytheCommuistParty
152
=====第152页=====
LeT Us ReTaKE MARiaTEGUI
10'sof
and a great rise in the movement
the masses, especially of the
peasantry. The country experienced the deepening of bureaucratic
capitalism,stillgoingon;theworkers carriedoutlarge strike
movementsand increasedaffiliation to their unions; the peasantry
spontaneously carriedforward, mostof the time,conquering the
land withtheirown actions and anunending wave ofland
occupations shook the entire country. The petty-bourgeoisie,
especially teachers and students, became more and more involved
in the people's struggles. Atthe same time,the demo-liberal
parliamentary order entered a crisis, as in other parts of America,
and itspolitical parties,itsreactionary political partiesentered a
fierce battletogain positionsand reap privileges.Thisconfonted
reaction with the need to fulfill two tasks: To deepen bureaucratic
capitalism,taking the State as the main economic leverage,and
the corporate remodeling of Peruvian society so as to overcome
the crisis of bourgeois parliamentarism. These are the conditions
and the cause of therise of the currentfascistregime and the
tasks the exploiting classes and imperialism have charged it with
fulfilling, whenthey saw the dangersof the questioning of their
order entailedbythe rise in the strugglesof the masses, one
chapter of which was the guerrlla struggle,which contained
important future lessons for the people.
In the midstof these conditions andsharpening struggle,the
theoretical and practical action of the communists developed, the
Peruvian Marxist-Leninists,who,taking Mao Tse-tung Thought
and its wiseteachings,battled to_Retake Mariategui's Road and
Reconstitute his Party. In January 1964, the PCP expelled from its
ranks therevisionistcliqueof DelPradoand company,afact
which established a milestone in the long roadof the Party; that
way at the IV Conference a step was given to adhere to Marxism
under the guidanceof Mao Tse-tung Thought.Another point of
153
=====第153页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
centered itsattentionintheunderstandingofoursocietyandits
revolution,gettinguscloseryetto Mariategui'sline. Other
importantmoments in Retaking Mariateguiand Reconstituting
His Party werethesuccessful struggles the Communist
stParty
waged against a rightopportunist line masquerading
asleftist,
whose crowning point was the VI Conference, in January1969 an
event inwhichthePartyformalizeditsreconstitution starting
from the Basisof Party Unity, Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung
Thought,and Mariátegui's thoughtand the general political line,
whose cornerstone is Mariátegui; a reconstitution which, as was
sanctioned, implied reconstituting the Party for the People's War.
That is how the long periodofsearchingfor Mariátegui's
Thoughtwasfulfilled,
opening upthe stage of: "Retaking
Mariátegui's Road,"oneof whose stagesis the reconstitution of
the Party, as a basic and necessary question.
However,the struggle did not end there but is constant. The rise
ofthe current f
fascistregime andits counter-revolutionary
program impactedourranks by generatinga liquidationistright
opportunist line,whichaimed dangerously against the lifeofthe
Party itself. This struggle had as milestones the II Plenum of the
Central Committee, which characterizedthe struggle against
liquidationistpportunism,andcalldtoightagainstit,and the
III Plenum of the Central Committee "ON RECONSTITUTION"
which corroboratedthe defeatofliquidationism and setthe
political,organizational and mass work basis for thefunctionof
the reconstitution ofthe Party. That way, an ever beter
perspectieid up or
the PartyofMariátegui. Finally,theVIPlenumofthe PCP
Central Committee, underthe slogan of"FULLY
RETAKE
MARIATEGUI'S_ ROAD_TO_ DEVELOP_THE_MASS
WORK
TAKING THE PARTY AS ITS CENTER," offially
sanctioned
theetid
154
=====第154页=====
Let Us ReTaKE MARIATEGuI
the
fulfill
whose
applicationand
development
we
must
reconstitution of Mariátegui's Party.
OfwhatwiuiRadtatllitical
lineof thePeruvianRevolution,emergedanddevelopeditself
amidsttheclass struggle andthetwo-linestruggle withinthe
Party,theproletarianred lineimposedbyMariáteguiandthe
various non-proletarian lines it has assumed along the years. Thus
three moments can be distinguished in its development:
1) The emerging of Mariategui's Road and founding of the Party;
2) The search for Mariategui's Road;
3) The RetakingofMariategui'sRoadand Reconstitutionof the
Party. Three moments which imply over 40 yearsof our Party's
history,ofthehistoryofthe Peruvianproletariatandofthe
history of the class struggle in contemporary Peru.
c) Therelevanceof Mariátegui Thought. We saw how inthe
1960's Mariátegui's thinking went on establishing itself more and
more firmly; however in that period, in which we still live, interest
for Mariategui grows, inside and outside the country. At the same
time, we see a denial of Mariátegui on two levels: Some attack and
deny the Marxist basesof Mariátegui thinking,and others deny
its relevance. Those questioningits Marxistbases contend the
ideologicalbase sustainingit isirrationalidealism and the
concepts predominating in western philosophical thought, mainly
European. OnceMariategui's thesesaboutMarxistphilosophy,
politicseconomicandscientifisocalismaresetforth,these
observations need notbeanalyzedanyfurther;it sufficesto
reiterate thattheMarxist characterofthebasesofMariategui are
sufficientltitaete
argument: TheimpossibilityforMarxismto
bottomacentrala
155
=====第155页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
developinacountrywithfewindustralworkers. Thisaring
point uncovers an unacceptable mechanical position; for Marxism
to the level it had attained in Europe by the mid 19th century was
needed,andonthat material base MarxandEngels created
Marxism,whichfrom that pointon develops vigorously and
spreads itself through thefive continents. The revolutionariesof
the backwards countries, where there are immense masses of
peasantsandproportionallyareducedindustrialworking class,
found in Marxism an instrument to guide their actions and taking
its principlestheyfusedthem with specifirevolutioy
conditions; in that way, Marxism-Leninism fused with the
concrete conditionsof the movementsof national liberation and
their democratic revolutions.
This
swas consequently shown
incontrovertiblybyMao
Tse-tung
Thought, as it developed
Marxism.
A similar case is thatof thefounderof the Communist Partyof
Peru. Mariátegui also applied Marxism-Leninism to a semi-feudal
andsemi-colonial country,
furthermore, he analyzed similar
countries in Latin America; and participating directly in the class
struggle in our country he was able to develop himself as a
Marxist and to apply the universal principles creatively, therefore,
there is a similarity between many of
hisideas and Mao's
proposals. Facts prove, as the years passed, the Marxist essence of
Mariategui's thought. What happens is that those who are
unguarded get disoriented by the language heuses,which they
are unfamiliar with,compounded by ignoring the conditions in
our Latin Americaand, more fundamentally, by starting off from
positions which are contrary to Marxism.
ThosequestiointhlevancofMaritegulegthawl
leftbehin40oTheeoett ltuean
156
=====第156页=====
Let Us ReTake MaRiATeGUI
researches do not deny but quite
the contrary confirm
Mariategui'sthese;and,what is moreimportan,thatnot having
completedthe national-bourgeois revolution and much less
initiated theproletarianone,Mariategui'sthoughtandhisRoad,
be fullycurrentasshown,precisely,bythefourdecadeselapsed
and even more by the need to Retake His Roads born amidst the
great strugglesof the 1960's and the current class struggle.
c) Retake Mariátegui and Reconstitute His Party. In reaching this
point andafter having seen theaboveon Mariátegui's thought,
which is materializedpoliticallyinhis Roadforthe Peruvian
Revolution,thefirst thing we must reiterate is that Mariátegui is
the culminatingpolitical expressionof the Peruvianproletariat.
Ontheotherhand,thealmost50 yearsofdevelopmentof
Mariátegui's Roadshow thatitsflags are those of the working
class,proven over long decades during which it has been clearly
established that the successof the proletariat depends on holding
themfirmly to carry themforward, whileitsfailure is in
abandoning or underestimating them. No Peruvian class or party,
except the Communist Patty,is able to show such accumulated
experience, nor such lofty flags proven in the class struggle.
Thekey today,more than ever,is Retaking Mariategui's Road;
which impliesplacingtheworking class in commandof the
revolution, establishing
gtheleadership oftheonlyconsistent
revolutionary class to the process which will demolish the
prevailing socialorder;to develop the organized vanguard of the
proletariat,the Communist Party,so it can fulfill itsrole of chief
of staff without which there cannot be a revolution; while
adhering to Mariategui as the concentrated political expression of
the workingclas;insythis,ititostruggethleadership
Mariátegui becomethefagfor thepeoplofPeru,thebasis of
157
=====第157页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
the unityof theexploitedandbroad massesand theonly road to
our national-democratic revolution.
ToRetake Mariátegui's Roadisto Reconstitute the Communist
Party, his Party; to workfor
sideological-politicalbuldup,
develop the foundations given by its founder and simultaneously,
fightforits organizationalbuildupbyreadjusting
to
the
organizationaltothepolitical.ToReconstitutetheParty todayis,
in sum, promoting its reconstitution by Retaking Mariátegui and
aiming at developing the People's War.
The Communist Party,sure of its road and conscious of its goal,
in the80thanniversaryofitsfounderand 47thof itsfounding,
raises itsred proletarianflagsand declares before the massesof
our country,especially before the workersand peasants,that in
the current counterrevolutionaryoffensiveand the perspectiveof
the increasing development of the struggle of the masses, our duty
is to get ready for the struggle by preparing ourselves in the midst
of the storm of the class struggle of the masses under the slogan
of RETAKE MARIATEGUI AND RECONSTITUTE HIS PARTY
TO SERVE THE WORKiNG CLASS, THE PEOPLE AND THE
REVOLUTION.
158
=====第158页=====
ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE PARTY
BANDERA RoJA, No. 46 AUGUST 1976
"Alltherevolutionarystrugglesintheworldhavetheobjectiveof
taking and consolidating power.'
1
Mao Tse-Tung
Summarizingtheexperiencesof100yearsof working class
struggleand worldrevolution,in1948,ChairmanMao Tse-tung
wrote:
"If there is to be a revolution, there must be a revolutionary Party.
WithoutaevolutionaryParty,withoutarevolutionary Partybuilt
onthe Marxist-Leninistrevolutionarytheoryandin Marxist
Leninistrevolutionarystyle,it isimpossibleto leadtheworking
class and broad masses of the people to defeat imperialism and its
running dogs. In the more than one hundred years since the birth
of Marxism,it is only through the example ofthe Russian
Bolsheviks in leading the October Revolution, in leading socialist
construction and in defeating fascistaggression that revolutionary
Parties of the new type were formed and developed in the world.
With the birthof revolutionary partiesof thistype,theface of the
world revolution has changed. The change has been so great that
transformations utterlyinconceivable to people oftheolder
generation have come into being through fire and thunder…. With
the birthoftheCommunist Party,thefaceofthe Chinese
revolution took on analtogether new aspect.Is thisfact not clear
enough?" (MaoTse-tung,SelectedWorks,VolIVp. 284. The
highlights are by our Party)
Here we have condensedthequestionof theParty;its necessity
159
=====第159页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
and its construction as a Party of the new type whichbuilds and
gives preciedictiontotheworldvolutioandofachcountry
as it functions for the working class and its emancipation.
There are three questions that need to be taken into account :
1)Thenecessityof theParty,whichistheproblemof taking
power for the working class;
2)ThebuildingoftheParty,whichistheproblemofits
construction in a semi-feudal and semi-colonial country in which
the workingclass,andonlyitthrougitsParty,canleadthe
democratic-national revolution; and
3) The internal struggle, which is the problem in which the Party
developsitselfinthemidstofthestrugglewithtwolines inits
heart, strugglearound which Party unity and cohesion are
sustained.
These three questions demand that we take into account: first,
Marxism in theory and practice, the experience of Marxism in the
problemof Party building,the greatteachings systematized by
Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin and Chairman Mao Tse-Tung; second,
the building ofthePartyin ourown country;andthird, the
current situation in which the building of the working class Party
unfolds in our country.
MARXISM AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE PARTY
Inthe midstof thenineteenthcentury,withtheappearanceof
Marxism,the working class arose as anew class and the last one
inhistory. Withthe Manifestoofthe Communist Partythe
proletariat wasfurnishedwiththeprogramwhich would take
humanity towards anew world,toa Communistsociety,to a
160
=====第160页=====
ON THE CONSTruCTioN OF THE PARTY
classlesssty.Thsitandtheahicll must
necessarilycrossu
under the leadership ofthe proletariat
materialized in itsParty.Thereisnootherpathfortheclassees,
there is noother pathfor humanity. Worldhistoryeasily proves
this. The October revolution,the Chineserevolution andothers,
the rising national liberation movement,the persistent march of
the international working class and its revolutionary parties are all
part of this inevitable path. A path which in the coming 50 or 100
years will decisively develop in great earth shaking struggles,as
Chairman Mao Tse-tung teaches.
MARX, ENGELS AND THE BUILDING OF THE PARTY
Marx and Engels founded the concept of the workingclass which
is Marxism. Theyraisedsolid truths which we cannotabandon
such as:the principleofclass struggleto understandand
transform the world;violence asthe midwifeofhistory;the
dictatorship ofthe proletariat and the necessity ofhe
revolutionarytransformationof theoldsociety througha long
historical process,amongothers. Butalso,and at times it is not
emphasized enough, Marx and Engels realized their thesis on the
necessity of building the working class Party as an indispesable
instrument tofightforitsclass interests. Thus,in the midstof
arduous struggle againstold anarchist concepts witha profoundly
bourgeoisessence,they wereabletoestablishin thestatutesof
the International, in 1864 and 1872:
"In its struggle against the united power of the owning classes the
proletariatcannotactasaclassunlessit constitutesitselfinto a
politicalPatditinandoposedtoalltheoldpoltical parties
created by the owning classes.'
1
"ThisconstitutionoftheproletariatintoapoliticalPartis
indispensabletoensuethetiumphofthsoialrevolution and
161
=====第161页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
its ultimateol:theaolitionoftelasses…"
"Giventhatthelordsofthelandandcapitalalwaysusetheir
political privilegestodefendand perpetuatetheir economic
monopolies  andto subjugate
:labor,theconquestofpolitical
power has become the great dutyof the proletariat." (Marx and
Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 23 P. 243)
Marx and Engels startedfrom theidea that the workers
themselves had to struggle for their own emancipation as a class,
and thattheeconomic emancipationoftheproletariatis"the
greatend to whichevery political movement ought to be
subordinate as a means."
They proposed the need that the
1
workingclass has inorganizingitselfas a political Partyto
struggleforitsownclassinterests,to seize powerand then,
consequently
reach its goal, the realization ofits historic
objective: theabolitioofclasssand thebuildingof ew society
without exploiters or oppressors.
In the same manner they set forth that the working class organize
itself "intoa political Party distinctfrom,and opposed to, all the
oldpoliticalparties." Thisisbecausetheworkingclassupon
organizingitselfinto apoliticalParty,doessotaking asits
sustenance its class consciousness: Marxism. Because it has its
own program, which Marx and Engels set forth in the Manifesto,
which makes Communists "point out and bring to thefront the
commoninterestsoftheentire proletariat,independentlyofall
nationality"andinwhich"thevarying stages of development
which the struggle of
the working class anda
againstthe
bourgeoisie has to pass through,they always and everywhere
represent theinterestsofthe movement as a whole." Constantly
keeping holdofitsclass consciousnesswhichcan besummaried
"inthisiltce:Aolitioof pivat orty.Marx an
162
=====第162页=====
On THE CoNSTrucTioN OF THE PaRTY
buildingof a"distinctandopposed"Partythatwouldserve the
class unity whichtherevolution demanded,or,in theirown
words:
"To ensure the successof the revolution,the unityof thought and
action is necessary. The members of the international try to create
this unity through propaganda, discussion and organization…."
11
Inadditiontothedevelopmentof strugglein the Partyof the
proletariat they conceived the stage of revolution to be connected
with other oppressed classes. Marx set forth that in Germany the
workingclassrevolution would dependonbackingit"with a
second editionof the peasant war," while Engels maintained:"In
an agrarian country, it is vulgar to rise up exclusively against the
bourgeoisie inthe name oftheindustrialproletariat without
saying anything about the patriarchal 'exploitationof the stick'to
which therural workers are subjectedto bythefeudalnobility."
As such, Lenin would state:
"Whilein Germanythe(bourgeois) democraticrevolution was
not finished, Marx focused all attention on what he referred to as
the scialit
proletariat'stactic  of pushing
the
peasant's
democratic energy.
1
Finally,Marx and Engels carriedout a great and intense struggle
forthebuildingoftheproletariat'sParty.Theyinvested long
years in struggling against anarchism until converting Marxism
into therecognized conception ofthe working class and in
supportofitspoliticalorganization. Marxand Engelshadto
confront the machinations of Bakunin and his group who
"coveringthemselveswiththemostextrmistMarxism, didnot
1
direct their blows against the existing governments but against the
revolutionaries who didnot accepttheirorthodoxy and their
leadership"andwho"infiltratetheranksoftheorganization…
163
=====第163页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
and at thebeginningtrytotakeovertheleadership;andwhn
their planails,theytytodisruptit";who"organie…thr small
secretsects";who"publliclyattackintheirnewspapersallthose
elements whorefuse to submit to their will"and who"donot
retreatbefore any means,before anydisloyalty,lie,calumny,
intimidationndbetayalwhcallevethemequallell."
(Marx and Engels, Vol. 23, P. 459)Insummary,
against
anarchism whichbehindallits mascarades ofhigh sounding
radical leftism, hides its rightist essence and its economism which
denies the class politics of the proletariat. Later, they carried out a
struggle againstrightistdeviations and opportunism in the midst
of the social-democratic parties, especially in Germany, because of
its negations ofclass principles  and withits bourgeois
deformations ofthe political program. This,like the previous
struggle,was carriedout in defenseof unity demanding that"we
should have the courage to renounce immediate successes on the
altarof more important things." Teachingself-criticismand the
serious judgingof errorsand whatshould be greatly highlighted,
pointing out the root of the struggle and schism:
"Asfor therest,in the past Hegelsaidthata Partyshowed its
triumphbyacepting andresistingschisms. The
 proletarian
movementwill
necessarily
through
 diverse
phases of
go
development and in each one of these some people get stuck and
no longer goforward. This is the only reason in which the
practice of proletarian solidarityis carriedouteverywhereby
different
groupsof
theParty whostruggleforlifeor death
amongst themselves, like the Christian sectsof the Roman empire
during the period of the worst persecutions.'
These are fundamental questions which Marx and Engels taught
us inrelationtothenecessityoftheParty,itsconstructionand
developmerTritetifc
164
=====第164页=====
On THE COnsTruCTioN Of tHE PaRTY
times are not remembered.If Marxand Engelshadnotraised
these issuestheir gigantic taskwouldnothavehadreasonr
basis.But,aitiarttaicitaac
the scientific conceptionof the workingclass,Marxism, set forth
andresolvedtheproblemof theParty. Whathashappened is
that, as inotherfieldsof Marxism,thisrevolutionary theory and
practiceonthe necessityof theParty,its construction and the
struggleof two lineswithin it,hasbeen developed,synthesizing
the later great experiences oftheinternational working class,
efforts which have been accomplished at a global level by Lenin
and Chairman Mao.
LENIN AND THE BUILDING OF A NEW TYPE OF PARTY
The twentiethcentury broughtusimperialismasthelast and
reestablished
the
old
highest
phase of capitalism.
.me
the old
revolutionary theories of Marx and Engels, which
revisionists had tried to destroy,and elevated them to the level of
Marxism-Leninism. What implications doesthis developmentof
Marxism haveforthe construction ofthe proletariat's Party?
Lenin, conscious that they had reached the stage of seizing power
and of the dictatorship of the proletariat, repeated the necessity of
the Party to transform society. His great point is shown:
"Give us an organization of revolutionaries and we'll shake Russia
to its foundations."
For Lenin,to change the worldrequires a Partyand this has a
program which, according to his own words,"consists ofthe
organizationof theproletariat'sclassstruggleandtheleadership
of thisstruggle whosefinalobjectiveis the conquestof political
poweroy.
T
Understandglikoleiitime,tesitofte
165
=====第165页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
strengtheiehtllwichich
Communist can forget:
"TheProletaiainitsstrugleorpower,hanoweaponother
than
organization.
The
proletariat,
disunited
by
anarchic
competition within the bourgeois world,crushed by forced labor
at the serviceofcapital,constantlythrownin theabysofthe
most complete misery, brutality and degeneration, can only
become, and will inevitably become,an invincible force when its
ideological unionby meansof Marxist principles secures itsef
through theorganization's material unity, which gives cohesion to
the millionsof workers in the armyof the working class. Before
this army neither the decrepit powerof the Russian aristocracy
nor the decaying powerof international capitalism will be able to
sustainitself. Each daythis army will extendits ranksfarther,
despite  allthezigzags and  steps
backwards, despite the
opportunist phrases ofthe puppetsof contemporary social
democracy,despite thefatuous eulogiesof the backward circular
spirit, despitethetinselandtheintellectual's own anarchist
bankruptcy." (Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 7, p. 415)
We Communist and revolutionary Peruvians must payatention
to these words which are today more precious than ever. In them
we reiterate: In the first place, the struggle for power demands the
organization of the proletariat,and its importance is such that it
composes itsonly weapon. In the second place,despite all he
difficultiesimposedbyexploitation,if ittakesMarxism asis
guideandbasofdolicluitandolfiitbtihtening
their ranks inorganization,theproletariatwill beinvincible. In
thethirdplaceagaintthoganiedarmyoftheproletariat the
nor willimpilimilipilismonglobllvl.Ithe
166
=====第166页=====
On THE CoNSTrUCTiON OF THE PARTY
and moreagaintthesinistplotofcotmpoevisioim,
advancing despitetheevidentlydecrepitgroupand sectarian
spirit,and will marchon despite theorganizational renunciation
and the  declamatory
ofthe
verbiage
"intellectual's
own
anarchism.'
1
In that manner Lenin set forth the problem of the construction of
the Party,of itsnecessityand development in struggleand of its
ideological,political and organizational construction.
But this is notall. In One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, Lenin
set forth theorganizational theoriesof the Party,whose majestic
summary wetakefromtheoldandgreatHistoryof the
Communistatylshevik)oftheUSSRby talin, p.-9.
1) The Party is a military detachment of the working class, a part
of it. But it is a vanguard detachment which goes ahead, which
leads. It is a conscious detachment who knows the laws of the
revolutionary process, andit is a Marxist detachment which
firmly
sustainsitself in the  working
classes' revolutionary

conception.
2)The Partyis an organized detachment,it is a sstem of
organizations which "as a vanguard detachmentof the working
class, combines the maximum organization possible andonly
brings within itthose elements whoadmit,at least,a minimal
level oforganization"forwhichit hasits ownobligatory
discipline for all its members.
3)ThePartyis theproletariat's"highestformoforganization"
calledon toleadtheotherclasorganizationsforwhichgoal it
167
=====第167页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
class.
4)"ThePartyistheincarnationofthetiesthatunitethe
vanguard detachment of the working class with the masses." As
such, it will not live or develop separated from the masses and, on
the contrary, its life and development demand that it "multiply its
links with the masses and win the masses' trust."
5）The Partyshouldbeorganizedalongtheprincipleof
democratic centralism,with single statutes andwith an equal
disciplinelln"wthigelarht
be known as the Party congress. And in the intervals between the
congress andthecentralcommite'scongess, w he
submission  of the  minority
ytothemajority,ofthe district
organizations tothe central
organisms, and ofthe
inferior
organizations to the superior."
6)TomaintainunityinitsranksthePartyrequires a single
discipline applicable to all, a unity which demands great attention
because, as Stalin would say,"Comrade Lenin gave us the legacy
to care for the unity of the Party like children care for their eyes.
This thesis and the previousones we shouldbear in mind as
Communists and Peruvian revolutionaries,sinceall of themare
vital. Another problem of extraordinary importance discussed by
Lenin is that of clandestinity, a question which amongst ourselves
is confused with hiding,with ostrich policies. Lenin set forth the
need fora clandestine Party as a system ofhighly centralized
organizationswiththegoalofbeingabletoconstantlycounton,
in all circumstances,witha"highcommand"capableofleading
therevolutiilgsickbm i
repressionandpcutionThusclandetinity sevesothat
168
=====第168页=====
ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE PARTY
the worldwotinitlfromas.Due to
the necessitiesof thevery struggleinour countrywe should
highlight some pointson this complexproblem. Here it is
particularlyimportantto have a clearideaofwhatthe artof
conspiratorialorganization consistsof.Lenin,in hisown words,
in Letter To a Comrade On Our Organizational Tasks, a booklet
which is cited but whose principles are not understood much less
applied, tells us:
"Allartof conspiratorialorganizationshouldconsistof knowing
how to use everything and everyone,to give 'work for everyone'
and at the same time maintain theleadership ofthe entire
movement, not by the force of power it must be understood, but
by authority,energy,greater experienceand varietyof knowledge
and talent." (Lenin, Vol. 6, p.240)
In the same booklet,against those who understand clandestinity
as something rigid and mechanical, Lenin states:
"Besides,the levelofclandestinity andtheorganicformof the
diverse circles will depend on the nature of its functions. As such
it follows that the forms of organization shall be the most varied
dependingonthe typeoforganization,from the 'strictest' tight
and closed tothe'freest'broad,openand withlitlestructure.
1
(Lenin, Vol. 6, p. 245)
We consider this question to be of the utmost importance for our
current revolutionary situation as there is, we reiterate,too much
mechanical and non-dialecticalthoughtin consideringthese
problems. Lenin's theories regarding clandestine work are further
set forth in The Clandestine Party and Legal Work:
"The problemof theclandestine Party and the legal work of social
democracywithinRusiofthetysiloblems.
169
=====第169页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
ItoccupestheattentionoftheP.O.S.D.R.duringtheentire
period following therevolution(herefers to1905)and has given
place to the most violent struggle within its ranks.'
"It is around thisproblem thatthestruggleof the liquidationsts
againsttheanti-liquidationistshasdeveloped.… The December
1908 conference.…. focused with clarity on a special resolution, the
Party's criterion on organizational questions: the Party is
composed of clandestine social democratic cells who should create
'pointsof support for work amongst the massesin the form of a
net,as broadandbranchedofas possible,oflegalworkers'
societies." (Lenin, Vol. 18 p. 386)
Andhighlightingtherelationsbetweenlegalandclandestie
work:
"The main conclusion of the appreciation which our Party has at
the moment isthat Revolution is necessary and getting closer.
The forms of development which lead to revolution have changed,
but the old tasks of the revolution continue to stand. From there
we draw thefollowing conclusions:theforms oforganization
should change,the'cells'shouldadoptflexibleforms in sucha
manner that their expansion will not occur at the expense of the
cells themselves but ratherof their legal 'periphery', etc."
"But this changeofformof the clandestine organization has
nothingtodo withtheformulaof'accommodatingthe legal
movement.Itissomething completelydiferent!The legal
organizations are the pointsof support whichallow taking to the
masses theiasofclandestinell.That istoaythat we modiy
the form ofinfluence totheobjectiveofwhichthe prior
influencescontinueinthsenseofclandestiorientation."
170
=====第170页=====
ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE PARTY
itselfeoftyswkl ork
willt
p. 392)
And finally:
"The social democraticParty isclandestineinitsentirety,'in each
one ofits cells and,what isof greatestsubstance,bytheentire
content ofits work which proposes and prepares for the
revolution. Because of this, the most open work of the most open
cellscannot behad as the'open work of the Party.'"(Lenin, Vol.
18, p. 393-4)
This citation islengthybut we consider it to be ofgreat
importanceforallrevolutionary workinour country andit
deserves specialattentionasdoestheprecedingonclandestine
work.
In our countryit is common to thinkthat clandestine work
separates us from the masses. But we shall recall what Lenin said
with regard to this:
"ButSverdlov,thisalwaysprofessionalrevolutionary,didnot
become separated from the masses for even a moment. When the
conditions of czarism condemned him to carry out exclusively
illegalandclandestinactivities,lkeitdidtoallrevolutionaries of
his time, Comrade Sverdlov also knew how to always march
shoulder to shoulder andhandin hand withthe vanguard
workers under these conditions." (Lenin, Vol.29, p.91)
These are Lenin's fundamentaltheories which weshould keep in
mind in thebuildinganddevelopmentoftheproletariat's Party
andcorrectlyappltheminthereconstitutioofMaategui's
Party.
171
=====第171页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Toconclueitisufiienttocallththseciplsofthe
buildingoftherevolutionaryPartyoftheproletariat,ofthe
Bolshevik Party,ofthePartycapableof taking power,did not fal
outof thesky but wereestablished in the midstof a greatand
hard struggleagainsttheMensheviks,therightopportunismof
the time in Russia. Besides carrying outthe struggle forthe
Party's organizational principles Lenin had to do so with a precise
background: a rightopportunist political line. It wasfrom there
that he wisely concluded that problems of organization would not
change in 24 hours nor in 24 months. Tofinish,we recall that
Lenin established that the parties advance in the midst of struggle,
almost always under enemy fire. In his own words:
"Wemach, llulong
a steepand difficult path.We are surrounded by enemies onall
sides and must almost always march under fire. We have united
ourselvesby virtue of a freely adopted decision, preciselyto
struggle
against enemies and notfall or stumble into
the
neighboring swamp  whose  dwellers  criticize us  from
the
beginning that we separatedourselves into anothergroup ad
that we havechosenthepathofstruggleandnotconciliation."
(Lenin, Vol. 5, p. 355)
Are those theories of Lenin not important for us? Should not we
revolutionaries and Communists really adhere to them? Are we
doing it like we should? It is now time to setaside complacency
and seriously judge our revolutionary reality.
MAO TSE-TUNG AND THE BUILDING OF THEPARTY IN
THE SEMIFEUDAL AND SEMICOLONIAL COUNTRIES.
To conclude our topic, Marxism and the building of the Party, we
will use Chairman Mao Tse-Tung's thesison the necessityof the
172
=====第172页=====
ON THE CONSTRUCTiON OF THE PARTY
Party,itsconstructionandthestrugglein itsmidst.Inthis
article's initialcitationwepreciselyquotedhisthesisonthe
necessityofthe Party.It would be pointless to rpeat it.
Going on to the problem of the party's construction we start out
by noting that in Problemsof War and Strategy,Chairman Mao
setsforth the constructbased on the universal
principleof
revolutionary violence. Thus he teaches us:
"The centraltaskandthehighestformofallrevolutionisthe
seizure of power by means of the armed struggle.That is to say,
the solution of the problem by means of war. This revolutionary
Marxist-Leninist principle has universal validity in China as well
as in other countries." (Mao, Vol. 2, p. 219)
Starting
from
this Marxist-Leninist
principle
and
out
differentiatingbetweentherevolutioninthe capitalist countries
and in China, he established in the same work:
"In China the main form of struggle is war and the main form of
organization is the army. All the otherforms, such as the
organizations and strugglesof the popular masses are also very
important and absolutely indispensable, and by no means should
they be left aside.The goalof all these is to serve the war: before
the outbreak of a war all the organizations and struggles have the
duty of preparingforit,… After theoutbreakof a war,all the
organizations and struggles coordinate themselvesin a direct or
indirect manner with the war." (Mao, Vol. 2, 221)
Developing theproblemof thebuildingof theParty,Chairman
Tse-Tung inConcerning
the
Appearance of'The
Mao
Communist' Magazine setsforthandresolvesfundamental
problems. Therehe setsfortthati thefirstlae
173
=====第173页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1 (1968-1987)
strugglesinwhichitforgeditsmilitants,itscadresandits
organizations,whichobtained greatvictories andalso suffered
serious defeats. Andto understand thelaws ofthe Party's
development requires an analysisof itsown history and exracting
from it the solution to its problems of construction.
Inthesecondplace,inthe judgmentofhisownParty inits
relations with the bourgeoisie andits relations with the united
front and the armed struggle,he establishesthefollowing great
thesis:
"Through
these   complicated  relations  with
the
Chinese
bourgeoisie the Chinese revolutionand the Communist Partyof
China has developed. This
is a historical particularity,
characteristic of the development of revolutions in the colonies or
semi colonies,acharacteristicabsent inhistoryof revolutionin
any capitalist country." (Mao, Vol. 2, p. 28-7)
This question is basicfor we Communists and Peruvian
revolutionaries as our society is also semicolonial and semi-feudal
from which it is derived that our revolution will also be
bourgeois-democratic just likethefirst stage ofthe Chinese
revolution, and inwhich, iconsequnce,"The picipal tart of
the revolution shall be imperialism and feudalism."
Inthe third place, the Chinese revolution
presents
two
particularities, in Chairman Mao's own words:
"Thus, theformationbytheproletariatinto arevolutionary
national united front with the bourgeoisie or the forced rupture of
this frontin thefirstplace,andthe armed struggle asthe
principle formof the revolution in the second place,have become
the twofundamental
particularities in the course of the
democratic-bourgeois revolution in China."
174
=====第174页=====
On THE ConSTrucTioN oF THE PartY
Inthe fourthplace,theprecedinemphasizethatthebuilding
and developmentof the Communist PartyofChina cannotbe
understood on the marginof these two particularities which are
basicquestionsof thedemocratirevolution'spoliticalline.The
 same great leader teaches us:
"The defeatsand successesof the Party,itsretreats or advances,
the reduction or growth ofits ranks, its development and
consolidation cannot stop being linked by the Party's relationship
with thebourgeoisie and withthe armed struggle. Whenthe
political line firmly resolves the questions of establishing a united
front with the bourgeoisie or of the forced rupture of said united
front, the Party takes a step forward. In the same manner when
the Party approaches the armed revolutionary struggle in a correct
form it takes a stepforward.… The course of the Party's
constructionand its Bolshevikization hasthus beentightly linked
toits political line,toits corrector erroneous resolution of the
united front and armed struggle questions."
In the fifth place, it unfastens the problem from a direction set in
the Chinese revolution. In the cited writingthefollowing thesis
should make us think very seriously to see to what extent we are
on the correct path:
"The united front, the armed struggle and the construction of the
Party thus constitute three fundamental questions of our Party in
the Chinese revolution. A correct understanding of these three
questionsandofitsmutualrelationsthensignifiesan acurae
direction for the entire Chinese revolution."
Andfinally,markinouttheoleofthePartysaes:
"Experience.… shows us thattheunitedfront and the armed
175
=====第175页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
struggleare thetwo basic weaponsbywhichtoovercome the
enemy.The unitedfront is a front united to maintain the armed
struggle. AndoftheParty's organizations it is the heroic
combatants who wield these two weapons--the unitedfront and
the armed sruggle--to assault and destroy the enemy's positions.
Suchis the mutual relationship existing
betweenthesethree
factors." (Mao, Vol. 2, p. 295)
Itis here,toourunderstandingof theideologicaland political
basisofthe construction ofthe Party in a semicolonial and
semifeudal country which was established by Chairman Mao Tse-
Tung,that the importanceof these questions cannot beobliquely
slanted in any manner. Because as hehimself teaches us:"the
ideological and political basis must be correct, that not will decide
everything."
It is on this ideological and political base that Chairman Mao Tse-
tung rests hisplanof the Party's organizational construction,of
its tactics and principlesof struggle. This problem is setforth in
point6ofhisarticle AudaciouslyExpandthe Anti-Japanese
Forces (Volume II, Page 425). We shall analyze the problem. In
thefirstplaceitestablishesthepolicyoforganizational
construction in the areas dominated by reaction:
"In the beginning (the dominated ones), our policy is to maintain
the Party's organizationclandestinelyand makeit compact,
selective and efficient. To remain underground for a long period,
accumulateforcesandawait
the
correct  moment and  not
precipitate or expose ourselves."
Inthesecondplaceheestablishesthetacticalprinciplethat
should guide:
"Inaccordancewiththeprincipleofstrugglingwithreason,
176
=====第176页=====
ON THE CONSTrUCTiON OF THE PARTY
advantageandwitouovextndinoneselfoutacticithe
struggleagainsthercalcitrantsistofightosecurterrainand
accumulateforcesutilizingeverything thatisallowed by the laws
and decrees of the Kuomintang and social customs.'
place, heestablishesthepenetration ofthe
In the  third
reactionary organization and the work ofrevolutionaries within
the same.
In the fourth place, he states the basic poliy:
"Inall the areas dominated by the Kuomintang,the Party's basic
policyequallyconsistsofdevelopingprogressiveforces(the
organizations of the Party and mass movements),win overthe
forces (national bourgeoisie, sincere s
shensi,
intermediate
'heterogeneous'troops,intermediate sectorsof the Kuomintang,
the intermediate sectorsof the central army, the upper level of the
petty bourgeoisieand the minority political groups and parties (a
totalof seven categories))andisolatetherecalcitrantforces with
the goal of overcoming the dangerof capitulation and being able
to change the situation.'
Inthefifthplacehepointsouttheneed to prepare
efor
contingencies:
"At the same time, we should be plainly prepared to confrot any
emergency situation at the local or national level."
In the sixth place, he highlights clandestinity:
"ThePartyorganizations in theKuomintang zonesshouldkeep
themselves in the strictest clandestinity."
Inthecoft
177
=====第177页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
members:
"In thesoutheast bureau and inall the special, provincial, district
or territorial committees, each one of the staf members (from the
Party secretaries to the cooks) should be subjected to a severe and
minutescrutiny.Itisabsolutely impermissiblethatany person
susceptibleto the slightest suspicion remain inthese leading
organisms.
1
And finally:
"Much care should be given to the protection of our cadres."
Allof thesearetrueandvaluableinstructionsonthe Partys
struggle and organizational life.
As tothe internal struggle,it is worth rememberingthat it was
precisely
Chairman Mao Tse-Tung who has magnificently
developed the understanding of the struggle within the Party as a
reflection of the contradictions of the class struggle and between
the old and the new in the social world. More so, he proposes that
the struggle withintheParty isthe struggle between twolines
which coversits entire processofdevelopment andif such
contradictionsandstrugglesdidnottakeplace"thelifeof the
Party would end." In the same manner, he is the one who, for the
correct development of the struggle within the Party proposed the
thesis of "learning lessonsfrom past errors to avoid them in the
future andtotreattheillnesstosavethepatient."Today more
than ever we mustapply
greattheory,rememberingits
content:"We must put into theopen without consideration for
anyone,alltheerrors committedandanalyzeandcriticizein a
scientificmannerallthebadinthepastsothatinthefuture,
workwillbecarriedoutbetterandmorecarfully."Thatis what
he meansby"rsonomatrrstoodthmithe
178
=====第178页=====
ON THE ConSTRucTIoN OF THE PaRtY
future.",ieuiddc, oit
in the same way as adoctor treatingapatient withthesolegoal
of saving the patient, not killing him.
Chairman Mao has summarized the great historic experienceof
the CPC asto thetwo linestruggle,withthefollowing words:
"We must practice Marxism and not revisionism,unite and not
divide ourselves, be frank and honest and not foment intrigues or
machinations." We subject ourselves to this great
lesson.
Nevertheless,we must never losevigilance,as he himself taught
in 1964: "We must bealert againstthose whofoment intrigues
and machinations. For example, Kao Kang, Yao Shu Shi, Peng Te-
Huai, HuangKechingand othershaveappeared in the central
committee. Everything divides into two. Some devote themselves
to creating intrigue. What are we going to do if they want to act
like that? Even now there are people disposedto plot. That
conspirators exist is an objectivefact and not a question of
whether we like it or not."
But what is thestruggle within theParty for?In the end it is to
maintain unity and persistin_ Marxism,to reject schisms and
repudiate revisionism because,as he himself teaches us,unity is
raisedover struggle and is relative while the other is absolute.
Thus, in consequence,thestruggle isto maintain the unity within
Marxism,sinceunityis important."Theinternalunityofthe
Partyandtheunity betweenthePartyand thepeople are two
weaponsofincalculablevaluetoovercomedifficulties.All Pary
comrades should appreciate them."
Here then are Chairman Mao's substantive theories on the
necessity of the Party,its construction and thestruggle within it.
We shouldstudythembecausetheyaredecisive inguiding the
construction of the proletariat's Party in our country.
179
=====第179页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
With the foregoing, we have set forth what to our understanding
are the basic themes of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Chairman Mao,
on these questions which we, as we said, consider to be crucial in
the construction of the Party in our actual situation: the necessity
of the Party, the theory of its construction (in a semi-colonial and
semi-feudal country) and the struggle between two lines within it.
We maintain that the problem of the construction of the Party of
the proletariat does not receive the attention it deserves and does
not appreciate the complexity or theimportance of such
question. We have returned to re-summarizing thefundamental
theoriesof Marxism on the construction of the Party,at risk of
reiterating thingsalready known,for thesimple reason that only
bytruly absorbing Marxism-Leninism-Maoism willwehave a
correct guide, to fuse its principles with our reality, as Mariategui
would show us.
180
=====第180页=====
THE
AND
THE
PEASANT
PROBLEM
REVOLUTION
BANDERA Roja, No. 46 AuGUST 1976
I. The peasant problem and the problem of power
Itis especiallyimportantandcrucialtoaddresthepeaant
question from the standpoint of how it serves to seize power; and
this is what matters for the Party in theend,as the problemof
power is the central question of revolution._In this way the class
struggle must be led and organized as a whole with the defined
goal of taking power,and in this perspective it is fundamental to
clarifyand resolvetheproblems thatarise. The5thplenumof
PCP, when addressing topics such as this one, says:
"Theproblemof power as a central issue,thePeople's War as a
realization of revolutionary violence, the conditions under which a
Party develops in a country such as oursand the importance of
peasant labour asthebasisof thePeople's War are,perhaps,
substantial issues of our line, which we must always bear in mind
and whichtoday,while we promotethereconstitution ofthe
Party will be put increasingly on the table and have an impact on
the political line and its application.'
Thus,the importanceofaddressing a topic suchas the peasant
problemisprevalent:afterall,thedevelopmentofthepeasant
movement by meansof armed struggle is now the crux of the
problem of power.
The great tacherof theproltaatlaidthebasicqustins about
the issue. Marx puts it aptly inaletter toEngels:
"Thewhole courseofeventsin Germanywilldependonthe
181
=====第181页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
abilitytoassitthproletaianrvolutionbyecondedition,
meaning the peasant war.'
Lenin reafirmsthisidea, discussing the Russian Revolution:
"The proletariat must cary to completionthedemocratic
revolution,byallyingitselftothepeasantrymassesinorderto
crush by forcetheresistanceof the autocracy and to paralye the
instabilityofthebourgeoisie"(Two Tacticsof Social Democracy
in the Democratic Revolution)".
He affirms in a report to the Third Congress of the International:
"The movement progresses, and the working masses, the peasants
ofthecoloiesdepitthacthateyaellbackwad,wl
play a verygratevolutionaryroleinthesuccessivephassof the
world revolution.
11
finally
deep
And
Mao
Tse-tung,
who
reached
a
very
understanding of the role of the peasant movement, states:
"The current rise of the peasant movement is a great event. Soon,
hundreds of millions of farmers in the provinces of Central, South
and North China will rise like a storm, a hurricane, with such an
impetuous and violent force that nothing, however powerful, will
be ableto containit. Theyshallbreakallobstaclesandshall
throw themselves onto the pathof liberation. They shall bury all
theimperialits,waods,miltary,cuptfials,lcaltyrants
and 'shenshi'wicked. All Partiesand revolutionary comrades will
be subjectedtoatestbeforethe peasantsandshallhave todeide
the etilndctiidir wa
182
=====第182页=====
THE PEASANT PRoBLEM AND THE REVOLUTION
quickly".(" Reportonan Investigationofthe PeasantMovement
in Hunan).
Mariteu,teouof tertfdteioblem in
the General Political Line.Speakingof theindigenous peasants,
hesaid:"Theindigenoushopeisabsolutelyrevolutionary"and
reminded the PCP that in order to organize workers and peasants
with a class character, andto"stimulatefirst andafterwards
perform the tasksof the bourgeois-democratic revolution", or to
lead the agrarian revolution.
Togetbackon Mariategui's path, PCPhas beenraisingits
understanding of this important issue. So says the editorial of Red
Flag 41:
"Without revolutionary workamong the peasant masses, this is
politicallyguidedby Marxism-Leninism,ledbytheCommuist
Party,there can be no development of the armed forces nor may
there bePeople's War,in conclusionthere can be no national
liberation, nor,forthatreason,destruction ofimperialist and
feudal exploitation."
II. The peasant movement and the national democratic revolution
Thepeasantstruggleforland,whichisananti-feudalstruggle,
organisesthe basisforthe democratic-nationalrevolution; this
followsfromthegenerallaws ofthe class struggle ofour
revolution,laws codifiedby MariáteguiastheGeneralPolitical
Line. Our society has a semi-colonial and semi-feudal character,
where the Peruvian people sufferexploitation andoppressionof
imperialism,thudallanlordandbureaucaticapitalism; this
is where the need tooverthrowthese classes and sweep their
dominion is born, this is what the current stage of the revolution
callsfor,its content is bourgeois-democratic,whichdoes not pt
itself agaisthentirbouoisibutonlyagantpartfit,
183
=====第183页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
the  bureaucratic bourgeoisie as
well
fighting
thefeudal
as
landlords and imperialism.
We emphasizetheoleofbureaucraticapitalism,whichthrough
its development maturethefinalconditionsforthetriumphof
the national-democraticrevolution. Maoteaches us that this
monopolistaitalsoatdwihtateowe,awllassubject
to and closely linked to imperialism and to the landlords forms a
monopolisticcompradorandfeudalstatemonopolycapital.In
this manner it reaches the peak of its development and prepares
"sufficient material  conditions  for theNew Democratic
Revolution"leavingthetaskof"confiscatingthelandofthe
feudal clasandgivingitintothehandsofthepeasants"and
"seizing monopolists'capital".Inour country,thisbureaucratic
M
capitalism increasingly deepens and employs the state monopoly
capital as the leverof the economy, seeking to amass huge
amountsof capitaland to monopolizethevitalarteriesof the
economy. Allofwhichleadsinevitablytothesame conclusions
that were made by Mao Tse-tung onthetopicsof National-
Democratic Revolution and Peasant War. To analyze the Chinese
revolution, Mao Tse-tung establishedthe extent at which the
deeply linked to one another peasant problem and the problem of
war are absolute conditions of a bourgeois democratic revolution:
"Thus, thebourgeois-democraticrevolutioninChina has two
main characteristics: 1) the proletariat either establishes a
revolutionary national united front with the bourgeoisie, or breaks
it when it feels obliged to, and 2) armed struggle is the main form
of revolution. We do not consider here the relationship between
the partyand the peasantryanditsrelationship with the urban
these relationships are in principle the same with all the
Communist Partiesof the world, and second, in China, when we
talk aboutarmedstruggle,we meanatthebottomofthe peasant
184
=====第184页=====
THE PEASANT PROBLEM AND THE REVOLUTION
war andthecloserlationshipofthePartywiththepeasant war
anditsrelationshipwiththe peasantrybeingoneand thesame
thing."("the motive being the appearanceof The Communist")
It is thus clear thatthe armed struggle that we have tocarry out is
an agrarian revolution, which shall be made by peasants under the
leadershipoftheproletariat;which constitutes a constant,the
natural environment of the revolution.If the war has not yet been
brought into motion,everything must serve to prepare it, and,
once it starts, everything must serve to develop it.
The worker-peasant alliance. Mariategui has taught us:
"Thestrengthoftherevolutionalwaysresided intheallianceof
agrarian land and labour,it isthe workerand peasant masses.'
1
In agreement with this, workers and peasants will form the basic
masses of the revolution, once they are mobilized and organized,
the exploiters be overthrown andtherevolution will triumph.
Based on the alliance of millions of workers and peasants, it will
also be possible to unitetheurban pettybourgeoisieand, under
certain conditions, the national bourgeoisie.
The peasantry is the most numerous and most oppressed class,
andover it weighheavy chainsof the semi-feudal system,and
therefore it is a formidable force. In the words of our founder:
"The Indian,so easily crippledby submission and cowardice, has
not ceased to rebel against the semi-feudal regime that oppresses
him under the republic as much as under the colony."
Supportingpeasants in theistruggleforlandbringsustogain
the greatestallyfortheproletariatandin this wayorganise
powerfulfticTepsttotobethe man
185
=====第185页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
force of the national-democratic revolution and the bestally of the
proletariat.
Theproletaihmtadaedassinhioryhaheurgent
duty toleadthepeasantry. Mariáteguifullysynthesizesthis
problem in the preface to "The Amauta Atusparia'
"Farmersclaimsdidnotsucceedagainstfeudalismin Europe,
since they were not being expressed but rather in thejacqueries'.
They succeeded with bourgeois liberal revolution that transformed
them into a program. In our Spanish America,still semi-feudal,
the bourgeoisie hasbeenunableorunwillingto carryout the
tasks of the liquidation of feudalism. The following descendats of
Spanishsettlers had beenunable to takeover the claimsof the
peasant masses.Thistask consistsof nearingtosocialism. The
socialist doctrine is theonly one that can give a modern sense,
constructive, to the cause ofthe Indigenous peoples, which,
located inits true social andeconomicfields,and raised tothe
levelof a creativeandrealisticpolicy,seeksto carryoutthetask
with thewill and the discipline of a class that,even today, makes
its appearance in our historical process: the proletariat".
Givingproletarian leadershiptothepeasantryistheessenceof
the worker-peasant alliance, which means smelting the Party with
the peasantry and theirstruggles,give proletarian conception to
peasants, win over activists from among them and build the Party
in the field. In concrete terms: mobilising,organising and arming
the peasantryundertheleadership ofthe working class
represented by its Party, the Communist Party.
III. The struggle for the land
Thebureauratipah. Throughoutcenturieeudaloppression
has manifesteditselfinthefactthatownershipofthe land is
186
=====第186页=====
THE PEASANT PROBLEM AND THE REVOLUTION
concentrated in in thehandsofafewlandlords insuchthat
millionsof peasantscannot takeownershipof land,or if they do,
the landisvery
little. As
such,facing this
gigantesque
concentrationoflandmisusedcruellybythefeudalclass,a
systemofserfdom,whichunderdifferentmodes(free labor,
wages inca),lwthassofuallanlstlivelikea
parasiteinallluxury attheexpenseoflimitlessmiseryand
oppression ofthe peasant, therefore sinking
our
people in
backwardness and hunger. As such, latifundium and serfdom are
maintained throughout the centuriesaspillarsof social,political
and economic organization of Peru.
The economy of landlordship is developed though a very slow and
prolonged process towards a capitalistform,whichfollowsthe
bureaucratic paththat consistsofintroducingtechniques and
capitalist modalitiesthatmaintainthe grand agrarian property
and safeguards the powerof the class of the landlords. In this
way, the economyof landlordship has developed internally and
instead of liberating the peasant, takes advantage to the maximum
of the exploitationoffree laborandotherfeudal modalitiesto
guarantee anacceleratedaccumulationofcapital. The peasant
suffers painfullyfrom this large processof transformation, which
absorbs his work and his goods, and he finds himself stripped off
hislittleland, andhe is even chasedoutside thefield.
Landlordship and serfdom are maintained and shadowed under
(Agrarian Cooperatives ofProduction - CAP,
new names
AgriculturalSocietiesforSocialInterest-SAIS,"SocialProperty",
communal
work, etc.), linking themselves more
closely  to
bureaucratic capitalism and state Power.
Mariátegui explains this process in the following words:
"Capitalism,as an economic and politicalsystem,manifests itself
in Latin America, as incapableof forming an economy that would
187
=====第187页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP- VOLUME1(1968-1987)
be emancipated from feudal
defects.
Theprejudiceofthe
inferiorityoftheindigenouracegrantto capitalismthe
maximalexploitationoftheindigenousrace'slabor;andis not
willing to renouncethisprivilege,fromwhichmanyprofitsare
obtained.Inagriculture,theestablishmentsof the wage earner,
the adoption of machines don't efface the feudal characterof the
big property.They perfect,simply,thesystemof exploitationof
the land and the masses of peasants.'
'
The peasantproblem cannotbedetachedfromthe national
problem. Mariátegui hasalready toldus:"theproblemofthe
Indians is not the problem of three-quarters of the population of
Peru. It is the problem of
the majority.Itistheproblem of
nationality." Thestruggle against imperialism has its livelihood in
the  strugglesofthe  peasantry, in the  semi-feudal
struggle.
Detaching the two would be to fall in a false rationalism.
"Theland belongs to those who work it."Thefounderofour
party, in "the Scheme of the indigenous problem" says:
"The struggleoftheIndiansagainstthelandlordshasalways
rested invariablyin the defenseof their landagainstabsorption
and dispossession.
Therefore, an instinctive and profound
indigenous claim exists:the claimtotheland. To give an
organized,systematic and defined character to this claim is the
task that we must actively fulfill".
Mariátegui thus summarizes hundreds ofyears of peasant
struggle;wllthcsittochlthatpiration
of"thelandbelongs tothosewhoworkit",thereforeonlythe
proletaatiwte tiherthe land
will havea good result.The transferof thelandto thepeasant
after crushtecloownillrmit the
188
=====第188页=====
THE PEASANT PrOBLEM AND THE REvOLUTION
theuilu,
growth emerges in the bestof
possible conditionsforthepeasant.It is in thesecond phaseof
the revolution,thesocialist phasethatthesecapitalistrlations are
limitedand restricted togive wayforthe collectivizationof the
field. As such, as a partof the democratic way, the peasants push
foranagrarianreform,whichwouldliquidatefeudalism;ths
reform means:
Destructionof latifundium, and its repartition to the peasants
Confiscation or“expropriation without compensation"
'
Executiotwe'sower
IV. People's war is the peasants'war
War is an absolute necessity for the realization of our revolution.
Mariátegui has instilled this Marxist-Leninist
principle of
universal validity in the Peruvian Communist Party (PCP) and in
the Peruvian proletariat in thefollowing words: "Power is
conquered with violence.…. Power is maintained only through
dictatorship".To train the vast masses to the useof revolutionary
violence is key toachieving the liberationof our people,and this
is even more urgent in a country lagging behind, that finds itself a
semi-feudal and semi-colonial condition like ours.
War is the main formof struggle. Thevictoryof the proletariat
and of the people over their enemies is the inevitable future. The
current situation of the weakness of the people and the power of
the enemy is merely apparent and temporal, thus seeing things in
their whole,thereaction is nothing more than a "paper tiger",
while the peoplearean ironwall,the peopleare invincibl.This
conceptooisftofvctory
in the struggle, according to his own words:
189
=====第189页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
"Theenemyhailbasiitidiintiilly,it is
separatedfrom the peopleand submerged in inextrial
economiccriseandthereforecanbedefeated",andatthesame
time"the masses,themillionsandmillionsof menwho support
inallsinceritytherevolution.Thisistherealironwallthatno
force can break". Fearing the enemy as if they were omnipotent is
right-leaninthathaltaction.Itheirfearof theenemysome
will come to say:“fascism is thedestructionofthe peoples
movement and itsorganizations"and they will opt for occultism,
in the name of"doing the withdrawal"or"being made illegal".
Thereactioaiehaveatarmybuthoomyfindsitself
in big contradictions and it undertakes a serious economic,
politicalandideologicalcrisis. Theenemysstrengthliesina
weakness, but this weakness does not show itself overnight.
Likewise,themassesarehugeand strong,buttheirwakss
consists in the fact that they are not mobilized and organized.
It is necessary therefore to undertake a prolonged war, a war until
death until we destroy the enemy part by part. This way and only
this way, through a long process of turns and returns, the
weakness of the enemy will be rendered evident and the strength
of the people will be overwhelming.
Theproletariatmustforgeandtrainin themiddleofthe war,
they mustorganize and mobilizeallthe people, mainly the
peasant according tothisfromof sruggle.Thefactofbeing in a
semi-feudal semi-colonial country, in whichthe vastfields are
shackled infeudaloppression,without libertynor politicalrights,
determines that the armed revolution has to come to face with the
counter-revolution if the former wants to advance.
MaoZedonhauedtruticalll
190
=====第190页=====
THE PEASANT ProBLEM AND THE REvOLUTiON
value for building a Communist Party in these countries:
"In China, the main form of struggle is war, and the main form of
organization is the army. Allthe other
r forms, like  the
and  the  popular
masses are  also
organizations of struggle
important and absolutely indispensable,and under no mode they
must be leftaside,but the objectiveof allof those is to serve the
war. Beforetheoutbreakof the war,alltheorganizations and
struggles must have as their objective to prepare for it,. After
the outbreak of the war,all the organizations and struggles must
coordinate in directand indirect ways with the war".("Problems
of war and strategy").
It does not suit us to engage in a long period of preparation and
legality beforeunleashing the waras in a capitalistcounry.Itis
in the midstofwarthatwewill gain thepeople and wewill
destroy the enemy, part by part.
Mariátegui has analyzed the role of the peasant in the revolution
and sustainedthe necessity ofarming the workers andthe
peasants in order to gain their claims,thefirstof which isthe
land. He remarked "the armed action of the peasant masses" in
Mexico and that there "therebellion propagated in a fast way"
''
even though it had no plan: "itsfirst concrete claim was the claim
to the land taken by the landlords".("Themesof our America").
And hepointedoutthatit deals with a democratic-bourgois
revolution,whichwillonlyadvanceiftheproletariat leadsit.
Otherwise, the revolution will march"backwards"The hegemony
oftheproletariatinthenational-democraticrevolution, once
aligned withtherightpath,is measuredbytheinfluenceit
exercises on the peasant movement. The Party must be concerned
with the mobilization of the peasant and theorganization of the
peasant as a powerful force in the combat.
191
=====第191页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
Thepathof theevolutionisromthildtothecity.Mariategui
has taught this path when he said:
"Brokenbythfeudalistlandlordship,urbancapitalismwill lack
inforcesto resisttothegrowing working class".Thispath
consistsofencirclingthe citiesfromthe countryside,tofinish
taking the cities. This way,advantage can be takenfrom the fact
that the enemyis weak and that he has reducedforces inthe
fields andthereforethe vast peasant masses are the main
contingent in this war.
Therevolution must developitsforcesbyprimarilyoccupying
large rural onesandonceit isstrengthened inthefilds,it must
go on toseizecitieswherethearmedforcesof thereactionaries
are concentrated. This path of therevolution in the countries
lagging behind has been systematized by Mao Zedong,who with
his profound teachings,provides a valuable weapon for our own
revolution:
"Giventhefactthatthe powerfulimperialistsandtheir alied
Chinese reactionariesare for a long time entrenched in the main
cities of our country,revolutionary detachments,if they refuse to
compromise with imperialism and its watch dogs and if they want
to preserve the struggle,if they want to accumulateforces,to
loosen upandavoid,whilethey don'thavesufficientpower,a
decisive battle with the powerful enemy;they have to transform
theruralzones laggingbehind toadvancedandsolidbasisof
support,theyhave to transform them tobig military,economic
and culturalbastionsof therevolution,fromwhichtofightthe
fierce enemy,who attackstherural zones usingthe cities,and
taking thervolutiostepbysteptocompletevictory through an
extended strugle.(TheChineserevolutionand theChinese
Communist Party).
192
=====第192页=====
THE PEASANT PROBLEM AND THE REVOLUTION
Wewillnotwinoverthepeasantry immediately.Firstlywewill
build base areas in largeareas and from them we will develop the
People's War. Wewillbuild a baseofsupportr
requiredto
annihilatetheenemyforces,mobilizethepeasantmasesand
develop ourown armedforces.In these base areas the people's
power risesand land reform is carriedout. The problem ofbase
areas is cardinal for the development of people's war.
Partybuildingandit's work inthefieldshouldbeaimedat
converting the peasant struggle to
thearmedstruggle. Init's
overview of the revolutionary work it is required for the party to
bebuilt inthe countryside,where ithasit's main weight. The
Party mustadequatelyrecognizetheeconomic and political
situation of the countryside and using Marxism-Leninism must
investigate classes there to define who are the friends and who are
the enemies.
The Party must go to the poorestand "takerootamongthem,
mobilizingandorganizing themassesintheirstruggleforlad,
this workimperceptibly leads to the armed struggle, andwe
shouldbeleadingthisfightbecausetopplingthereactiory
power a region establishes the people's power. This is how the
Party carriesitself withthe problemsof establishing base areas,
advancing intheideological,politicalorganizationalandmilitary
aspects. Finally,we must make theagrarian reform,confiscating
the land of the feudal landlords and distributing it to the peasants.
Mariátegui wasalways concerned about the construction of PCP
in the field.While speaking about a peasant activistof that time,
he said:
"The'newIndianhopes.Hehasa goal.Thatishissectad
193
=====第193页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
come.ItwatheInieolutionaycalInin…ta
Sierra is full of spartans.
Another important problem of warfare is the people's army which
is the main form of organization and one of the three instruments
of the revolution. Mariátegui defines the role of this military of a
new type and says:
"The Red Army is a new occurrence in the military history of the
world.It is an armythatfelsitsroleas arevolutionary army and
does not forget that its purpose is to defend the revolution." And,
highlighting theguerrillas,hesaidthat"thesameformof body,
class, existed between the Montoneras and the worker and
peasant masses. Montoneras were simply the most active, warlike
and dynamic partof the masses. " The problem of war and its
general laws should bestudiedthoroughly by the entire Party to
resolutely fulfill the role that the history has shown us.
V. Road of the reaction
In our country the reaction develops a bureaucratic path that
essentiallyunfoldstheimperialistandfeudalrule,and onthese
two pillars bureaucratic capitalism develops.
From the beginning,it has found itself within the firm opposition
among the people,and it has presented itself as a difficult task to
advance. In the 60s, the peasantry rose up and dragged the entire
people to a revolutionary upsurge that has put serious strain on
the reaction and questioned its power. Hence the reaction came to
twoconclusions:I) deepen
breaucrati
capitalism and 2)
corporatize Peruvian society.
Inthespirofthoseeventsthefascisrgimearosewa
194
=====第194页=====
THE PEASANT PROBLEM AND THE REVOLUTioN
maintenance anddevelopmentof largeestates based onnew
formsoffrelabor.Itis thebureaucraticway inthecouryside
and not the "socialization" as they say.
Given the difficulties that these measures encountered due to the
opposition of the peasantry,general corporatereadjustment was
undertaken two years ago bythefascist regime, to secure its
objectives through"bring capitalism to the countryside", and
through afrantic exploitationofthepeasantsto achieve their
cherished "accelerated accumulation of capital". In the 7th.
anniversaryof the Land Law (June1976), the agriculture minister
announcedthat"allinstitutions,bothpublicandprivatesectors,
shouldattend thisgreat mobilization to transform the Peruvian
countryside in the fastest and most powerful path which will be a
step towards developing our country.
1
Actually,withthesemeasuresofbureaucraticcapitalism inthe
countryside,the path towards the rvolution will be made. Engels
had made this problem clear long time ago: " Transformation of
all the small rural house owners into industrial domestic workers;
the destruction of the old isolation and with it the destruction of
the politicalinsignificanceofthesmall peasantswhowouldbe
dragged into the"social whirlpool"; the extension of the industrial
revolution over the rural areas and thus the transformation of the
most stable and conservative class ofthe population into a
revolutionary hotbed; and, as the culmination ofthe whole
process,the expropriation by machinery of the peasants engaged
in home industry, driving them forcibly into insurrection.'
T
VI. Road for the people
The Peruvian people have a unique way towards liberation, this is
the pathofMariateguiThisroadtellsusabouttheurgenyof
knowing thatthenationaldemocratirevolutionwill goforward
onlyif we use"riflesprogramanddoctrineas Mariateui
195
=====第195页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
literallysaid,whatisnowknownasthe3instrumentsofhe
revolution: Party, Army and the United Front.
Currently,themain trendof thedevelopmentof the masses is
that in which the free people increase their strugglesand develop
allaspectsoflife:ideologicalpoliticalandorganizationalThe
deepest and the most backward masses of the country
live
through this situation intensely,with discontent spreading
gin
them as they prepare to unleash great revolutionary storms.
This foremost tendency necessarily lead to a riseof the masses.
Let us recall the experience of the_60s:therise ofthe masses
firstly meanstheriseofthepeasantry,at thattimethepasants
took the land and, unknown tothe courts, camethe violent
confrontation withthereaction. Certainly we live in such a
situation that,as Mao Tsetung said,"A _single spark can start a
prairiefire"inwhichall contradictionsaresharpened andthe
most sound people appear out a colossal and self-powered mass.
Mariátegui masterfully analyzesa situation similar to ours, that of
Mexico in the moments before it's revolution:
"But the peoplethathavefought so persistentlyfortheirright for
the possession oftheland,couldnotbringthemselves to this
feudal regime and give up their claims. Inaddition to the growth
of thefactoriesit created an industrial proletariat towhich the
foreign immigration brought the pollenof new socialideas. A
new coreof unionists and socialists appeared.And,above all,it
created the sour revolutionary mood in the countryside. A leader,
askirmish,anythingcouldburnthecountry."(IsuesofOur
America,p.39).Inthis intensesituation PCP was driven towards
reconstitutionand merging with the masses,mainlyfarmers. Let
Tse-tung:
196
=====第196页=====
THE PEASANT PROBLEM AND THE REVOLUTIoN
"The correctness or incorrectnessof theideologicaland political
line decides everything. When the Party's line is correct, we have
everything. If we don't have men, we will have them; if we don't
have guns, we will get them; and if we don't have the power, we
will conquer it. If the line is incorrect,we will lose what we have
already achieved."
=====第197页=====
1
(1968-1987)
COLLECTED
 WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
MAO
TO
GLORY
PRESIDENT
ETERNAL
TSE-TUNG!
OF
THE
TEACHER
THE
GREAT
THE
PROLETARIAT
INTERNATIONAL
AND
THE
WORLD
OPPRESSED
PEOPLES
REVOLUTION
MESSAGEOFTHE
CENTRAL COMMITTEE
OF
PCP
TO
CENTRAL
COMMITTEE OF CPC - SEPTEMBER 10, 1976
To the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
With profound grief and deep sentiments,we express our great
regret totheCentralCommitteeoftheCommunist Partyof
China andthroughit to theworkingclassand thepepleof
China for this immense and irreparable loss,which is the death of
President Mao Tse-tung,founder and guiding lightof the PCCH,
wise and unwavering leaderof the Chinese revolution and the
great teacheroftheinternationalproletariat,theoppressed
peoples and the world revolution.
The working class and the international communist movement in
its great history of struggle, has had moments of tremendous loss
and deep sorrow at the disappearanceofits greatfounders,
teachers andleaders;like Marx and Engels,Lenin andStalin,
which clearlyaffectedthecourseofhistory. Today,we arealso
facing oneofthese seriousand painful trances,and just like
yesterday,wemustlifthigheruptheinvincibleflagsofhow we
raise higher yesterday invincible banners of Marxism so that the
Program of the working class that Marx, Lenin and Mao launched
wouldreach moreandtarget moreefficientlyitsgoal the
emancipationoftheworkingclassandthefinalconstructionof
the classless society, the goal of all humankind.
198
=====第198页=====
ETERnal GloRY To PresidenT Mao Tse-TunG
InthegreatwhirlwinofclasssrugloftheChineseevoltion,
Chairman Mao Tse-tung,blieving in theindispensable leadership
oftheproletariatestablishedthestrategyofsearchingforciies
from which thestruggle could be lead,as hebuiltsupport bases
and
gradually unleashed a heroic People's War.
Underthe
directionoftheCommunistPartyof China,by means ofa
ProtractedPeople's War with setbacks andvictories, a united
front based on a worker-peasantalliance wasforged,an armed
struggle was wagedthat,in turn,createdalarge People's Army
and constantlystrovefortheconstructionof theParty.In1949
the workingclassandtheChinesepeopleledthe New
Democratic Revolution. The main laws of therevolutionthat
Chairman_ Mao Tse-tung acceptedremained consecratedinthe
same manner as the path that must be traveled bythose who
continue struggling
againstthe dominionofimperialism and
feudalism.
More than hisextraordinary collection of works,Chairman Mao
Tse-tung is a major influence through the conduction of the
socialist revolution in ChinesePeople's Republicthat he himself
created. He determined thefundamental lineof socialism based
ontheprincipleofclassstruggle,statingthatclassesandclass
struggledefine  socialism, and by
synthesizing  the  global
experience, he developed the Marxist theory of the continuous
revolutionunderthe dictatorshipof theproletariat,drivingthe
most colossal mass mobilization in history,the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution,asthe continuation ofthe revolution that
protectsagainst capitalistrestorationand serves the development
and construction of socialism. In this manner, Chairman Mao has
led the way toward the communistfuture,calling the masses to
fight underthegreatdeviseof"Rebellionis justifiedand
"proletarianphilosophy is the philosophyof struggle" inorder to
sweep the monsters thatevery sooftenescapefrom thecage and
199
=====第199页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
are expressedbythesupporterofthebourgeoiscapitalistrad
withinthePartyitsel.Allinordertostrengthentheproletarian
dictatorship,theinstrumentindispensable in the march toward
the fulfillment of the historical means of the working class.
Chairman Mao Tse-tung, in more than 60 yearsof fighting in the
centre of the Chinese revolution and the international proletariat,
adhered to Marxism and developed it by fusing it with the reality
ofhis country: Marxist philosophy,
, politicaleconomy
and
scientific socialism havebeen stampedbyhis nonperishable
contributions. Thedefenseof Marxism ledhimtofight against
Khrushchev's revisionism that was eventually unmasked before
the world as a denialof Marxism,as a bourgeois monster that
must be beaten in orderfor therevolution to advance. Through
the
great polemic and an international-level struggle,
the
campaign
against the social-imperialism of Brezhnev and his
revisionist clique, which represented the actual source of war, was
steadily propelled and directed.In this way,Chairman Mao Tse-
tung
inherited, defended and developed
dMarxism-Leninism,
raisingittoitspresent condition -a living soulamongthe
working class and the hope of humanity: Marxism-Leninism-Mao
Tse-tung
Thought;
so today, being
Marxist-Leninist
means
adhering to Mao Tse-tung Thought.
Chairman Mao Tse-tung founded the Communist Party of China
and wisely led it through more than 50 yearsof struggle: in its
historical beginnings as thevanguardof theChinese working
class, onthe difficultroads of the_Northern Expedition,inthe
epic of the Agrarian War and the Long March, in the tireless and
heroic Japanese War of Resistance, in the sweeping and victorious
War of National Liberation,in the construction of socialism and
the GreatProletarianCulturalRevolution. Chairman Mao Tse-
tung ledhiparyuaiit inthtwlstruglaant
themif
200
=====第200页=====
ETERNAL Glory To President Mao Tse-TunG
in recentascllgaistthvisoismthttookn a
right windstreamandacounter-revolutionarycharacterthrough
Liu Shao-chi,Li aoand,today, Deng Hsiao-ping.Inthe eat
world,andinthestruggleofthetwolinesitheirown ranks,
Chairman Mao Tse-tung has led the Communist Partyof China
to the pointof makingitthe"great,gloriousandcorrect"Pary,
which the working class and the worldadmire and respect. The
greatest revolutionary of China was forged in this melting pot, the
masterfulhereditary ofthe greatleaders oftheinternational
workingclass,the glorious militantCommunist,whoadanced
Marx and Lenin, the extraordinary man whose life beat to an end
with the undying lightof Marxism with powerful creative force of
the masses and the spirit of serving the people.
As Chairman Mao himself has said, the next fifty to one hundred
years will see the world shaking and changing, we are,therefore,
living at a crucial time for the working class, the people and all of
humanity.The great revolutionary storm will light up the face of
the earth, many new problems will have to be solved and between
victories there will be setbacksand failures. The revolution is the
main currentof history,but it will have toflow pastrocks and
counter-currents;thus, we will be sure thattherevolution will
prevail."Inone word,theprospectsare bright,buttheroad is
winding."
1
The founder of our Party, José Carlos Mariátegui, taught us: "It is
notpossibletoremainindifferenttothefateofa nationthat
occupies such an important position in time and space. China is a
heavyweight in human history,so why are we not attracted by its
deeds and itsmen?"If we were told thisabout Old China, what
are we to say about New China? So,forour Party,for the
Peruvian communistsand people thehistorical
perspective
demand nowaaysmorethnevr,inthisgret panful trance for
201
=====第201页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
the workingclass and the world revolution, to adhere to Marxism,
to consider the philosophyof struggle,convert grief into strength,
and topullthestringsaroundtheredlineof theCommunist
Partyof Chinathatholdshightheflagoftheundefeated
Chairman Mao Tse-tung,to advance with the partiesfaithful to
Marxism,with the working class and the peoplesof the world,
solemnly promising to march under the red and victorious flags of
Marx, Lenin and Mao Tse-tung.
Chairman Mao Tse-tung died, but his ideology and actions live on
in the working class, among the oppressed peoples and the masses
ofthe world;andwherevertherevolution leadsthe struggle,
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-Tung Thought will live eternally.
EternalglorytoPresidenMao Te-tunggreateacherofthe
internationaproletaitheoppesepoleantheworld
revolution!
202
=====第202页=====
MAO
ETERNAL
GLORY
TO
CHAIRMAN
TSETUNG!
COORDINATING COMMITTEE
ORGANIZATIONS ADHERED TO MARiaTEGUI
VP. No.6, DeC.76
LIMA, SEPT. 18TH, 1976
In thousandsof yearsof incessantstruggle to pass through the
kingdomof necessitytotheoneof liberty,humanitygenerated
the working  class andthis
class, withitsinexhaustible and
growingstrenght,hasgiven Marxism-Leninism,synthesizedin
Marx and Engels, in Lenin and Stalin. Thus, since the appearance
of Marxism theworkingclass,theoppressedpeoples and the
whole humanity havea goalanda hope: to constructthenew
society,the communist society toward which they march"with
vehemance and active faith."
In the epoch ofimperialism or monopolist, parasitary and
agonizing caitlismepoch inwhichthewringclsb means
of their strength rising up in arms conquer political power, and in
whichtheincreasing andfuriousimperialistoppression, the
Chineserevolution is developedthatteachesand astonishesthe
world.Inthishistoricalcrucibletheinternationalworkingclass
was concreted in Chairman Mao Tsetung,who in 1921 founded
the CommunistPartyofChina,theorganizedvanguardthat
conducted the
democratic
crevolution
triumphantly
new
culminated
dwiththefoundationofthePeople's
Republicof
China, theParty thattoday throughthe Great
Proletarian
Cultural Revolution
develops the Socialist
Revolution
and
strenghtens the proletariat's dictatorship.
203
=====第203页=====
1
(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
Thus Mao Tsetung Thoughtemerged. In this manner Marxism-
Leninism found the path in order to guide and to incorporate the
oppressedpeoplestotheunrestrainabletorrentofthe world
revolution. In this way Marxism-Leninimsfoundthepath in
order todevelopuninterruptedly theSocialistRevolution and to
march toward its future inexorable goal, the communist society.
In thegrandioserameofclassrugge,ihigeatountryand
inthe world,Chairman Mao Tsetunginherited defended and
developed Marxism-Leninism. He defended it
against  the
revisionismthatoday,umaskedaovieiliperialism,s
the main sourceof war at the present time. And he developed it
inall thefieldsraisingit to his presentsituationofMarxism-
Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought. Thus Marxism, in the flames of
class  struggle
and the actionof the great masters of the
proletariat, became Marxism-Leninism andthis in Marxism-
Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought. Therefore, today,
tobea
Marxist is to adhere to Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought.
Chairman Mao Tsetung has died!His greatheart has ceased to
beat, his pulse has stopped and his life, has gone. A deep sorrow,
denseand heavy,falls upon the workingclass and theoppreesed
peoplesoftheEarth,andtheredbannersathalf-staff tollin
universal mourning.
Thegreat master oftheinternational
proletariat has passed away and his unsoundable absence is felt in
the whole world; it is the greatabsence that Marx leftus, it is the
great absencethat Lenineftus,butyesterdayaswell astoday the
working class and people's masses,turning their sorrow into
strengthandthrough thestorm, willcontinuetowardsits
luminous goal,hoisting always the unconquered bannersof Marx,
Lenin and Mao Tsetung.
TheOraztionsAdheretoMaiatguiitihourofrrow,
204
=====第204页=====
ETERNAL GLoRY TO CHAiRMAN Mao TseTUNG
express to the Chinese people,to the Chinese working class and
to the great, glorious and correct Communist Party of China their
most profound sorrow for the decease of Chairman Mao Tsetung,
great masterof the international working class,of the oppressed
peoples of the world and of the world revolution, whose thought
iliuminates the world and will always illuminate it
ETERNAL GLORY TO CHAIRMAN MAO TSETUNG!
=====第205页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
(1968-1987)
TO
TO
BE
A
MARXIST
IS
TO
ADHERE
MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO
TSETUNG
THOUGHT
BANDERA RojA No. 47/48, OcTOBER 1977
Chairperson Mao Tsetung, on the basis of Marxism-Leninism, has
systematized the development of world revolution and has
established fundamental theses that develop Marxism, and that we
must bear in mind in order to orient ourselves in the
understandingof the present international situation.In his great
work,"On New Democracy,"heemphasized that withthe First
World War and with the October Revolution, history had entered
a new era,"of the new world revolution: the proletarian socialist
worldrevolution"andthat,inconsequence,"everyrevolution
undertaken by a colony or semi- colony against imperialism, that
is, against thebourgeoisie or international capitalism,will
lno
more belong totheold categoryof world democraticbourgeois
revolution, but to the new category.
'
Thus, he conceived that the powerful revolutionary movement of
colonies and semi-colonies was a partof the revolution that the
international proletariat leadson a world level. Heemphasized,
after theSecond World War,thatthepeoplesof Latin America
whole of Asia“a great national liberation movement”had come
forth, and, calling the Asian countries to combat imperialism and
the internal reactionaries, having as their goal the emancipation of
the oppressedof Asia,he said,"We must take our destiny entirely
into our own hands. We must extirpate from our ranks any idea
which is an expression of weakness or impotence. Any point of
view which overestimatesthe strength of the enemy and
underestimatesthatofthe people is wrong.Welive inahistorical
206
=====第206页=====
To BE A MARXisT is To AdHErE To MLMZT
epoch in whichcapitalismandimperialism in theentireworld
hasten towardsruin,and socialism anddemocracy in theentire
world march towards victory.'
Condensing
theforthcomingstruggle, hecharacterizedte
present epoch: "The next 50 to 100 years from now,more or less,
will be a great epochof radicalchange in the social system in the
world, an epoch which will shake the Earth, an epoch with which
no epochbeforeitwillbeableto compareitself.Living inan
epoch like this, one must be ready to wage a great struggle whose
forms willhave many characteristicsdifferentfrom the past
epochs."
Analyzingthisepochoftheproletarianrevolution,Charperson
Mao Tsetung established his great thesis on the reactionaries: "All
the reactionaries are paper tigers. In appearance, the reactionaries
are terrifying,but in reality they are notso powerful. From a
long-term pointof view it is not the reactionaries but the people
whoarereallypowerful."In"Talkwith AnnaLouiseStrong,
''
where the above quotation is found,analyzing the contradictions
and the distribution of socialforces, he also stated: "The United
States and the Soviet Union are separated bya vast zone which
includesmany capitalist,colonialand semi-colonial countries in
Europe, Asia and Africa. Before the U.S. reactionaries have
subjugated these countries,an attack on the SovietUnion is out
ofthequestion.Tothesestatementsof1946,thefollowingof
Chairperson Mao's analyses on the contradictions among the
imperialiststhemselvesandbetweentheimperialists and he
oppressed nations and contending forces must be added:"Above
all, the contradictionthathas to dowiththe scrambleamong the
imperialistcountriesand their dispute forthecoloniesstands out.
What theyare doing is to take as an excusethecontradictions
that they have with us in order to cover up their own
207
=====第207页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
occurringtheretwotypesofcontradictionsandthreedifferent
forces converge.These twotypesofcontradictions are:frst,he
inter-imptoain,t,tcetween
the United States and England and between the United States and
France,andsecond,theonesthatexistbetweentheimperialist
powers and theoppressed nations. Of the threeforces involved,
the first is the United States, which is the major imperialist power;
the secondis EnglandandFrance, imperialist countries ofa
second order, and the third is the oppressed nations.'
''
In January of 194, Chairperson Mao pronounced a declaration in
supportof thepeopleofPanama;in it,afteremphasizingthat
U.S. imperialism has continuedoppressing the peoplesof Latin
America,pillagingthemandrepressingin those countriesthe
revolutionary national democratic struggle;"after denouncing that
"it has converted . .. parts of Korea and Vietnam into its colonies,
keeps Japan under its control and semi-military occupation...
and intervenesand assaultsother Asiatic countries;"after pointing
out that in Africa, U.S. imperialism continues intensifying its neo-
colonialist policy,
"triesbyall
to replace the old
means
colonialists, loots and enslaves the peoplesof Africa, undermines
andsuffocatesthenationalliberation movements;"askingfor
vigilance against the Yankee's ... aggressionand war "intends
firmly to put into practice itspolicyofpeacefulevolution'in the
the socialist countries;"and that“even with their West European
North AmericanandOceanianallies,theU.S.imperialists are
applyinglioftwofatl
step on them;" he concludes calling:"the peoplesof the countries
of the socialist camp should unite;the peoples of the different
countriesof Asia,Africaand Latin America should unite;all the
peoplesofthedffrentcontinentshouldunite;althepeace-
208
=====第208页=====
To BE A MARXisT Is TO ADHERE TO MLMZT
oppositiontotheU.S.imperialists'policyofaggressionand war,
in order to safeguard world peace.
'
Inthis way,heeouceU.S.impeialism,allnguocomat
it. Buttherevisionists usurped powerintheSoviet Union,
restoring capitalism and convertingit into a social-imperialist
country, which, as such, extendedits penetration, subversion,
control and domination, contending with Yankee imperialism for
world domination.
Focussing on the referred to intermediate zone, Chairperson Mao
declaimed: "TheSovietUnion is at present under a bourgeois
dictatorship,a grand bourgeois dictatorship, a German fascist type
dictatorship,a Hitleriantype dictatorship." Andcallingfor the
struggle against the two superpowers,he put down the following
importanttheses: "TheUnitedStates is a papertiger. You
shouldn'tbelieve in it.It canbepiercedby one stroke. The
revisionist Soviet Union is also a paper tiger.""Soviet revisionism
and U.S. imperialism,entering into conspiracythemselves, have
much  wickedness
s and infamy that  the
perpetrated
revolutionarypeoplesofthewholeworldwillnotletthemo
unpunished. The people of all the countries are rising up. A new
historicalperiodof struggleagainstU.S.imperialismand Soviet
revisionism has begun.""Peoplesof allthe world,let us unite and
oppose the warof aggression thatany imperialism or social-
imperialism might unleash;let us oppose especially a war of
aggression in which atomic bombs are used as weapons. If such a
war explodes,the peoplesof the whole world musteliminate it
with a revolutionary war, and we must get ready right now!"
So was fixedtheperiodof strugglethathasopenedagainstthe
two superpowers,the United StatesandtheSovietUnion,ad,
within thisperspective,reiterating theroleofthepeoplesofthe
world,he madehisfamousstatement inMay1970:"every time
209
=====第209页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
when thepeoplofasmallcountrydaetoriseupinsrgle,
ventureto grasp weaponsandholdintheirhands the destinyof
theirowncountry,theywillunfailinglybeableto defeat the
aggressionofbigcountry.Thisisa lawofhistory."Chairperson
Mao Tsetungalways gave a lotofattention to tactical principles.
Withregardto this,hiswork"Onpolicy"isofthe greatest
importance;there heset downthefundamentalpolicy:
: "Inthe
relationswiththediferentclasseofthecountryapplythe
fundamental policy of developing the progressive forces, win over
the intermediate ones,and isolate the anticommunist die-hards;"
to have a revolutionary dual policyagainstthedie-hards, and in
order to combat them apply:
7:“Inthe struggleagainstthe
anticommunist
die-hards,
s,our policy is to make  use of
contradictions, win over the many, oppose the few and crush our
enemies one by one, and to wage struggle on just grounds, to our
advantage, and with restraint."
These criteria,firstestablishedforthestrugglein_China,are
applicabletothestruggleagainsttheimperialists.Intheyear
1957,Chairperson_Mao summed upthe strategicaland tactical
ideas in the struggleagainst the enemy:"We havedeveloped a
conceptover a long periodfor the struggle against the enemy,
namely, strategically we should despise all our enemies, but
tactically weshould take themall seriously. In other words,with
regard to the whole we must despise the enemy, but with regard
to each specific problem we must take him/her seriously. f we do
not despise him/her with regard to the whole,we shall commit
opportunist errors. Marx and Engels were but two individuals,
and yetinthoseearlydaystheyalreadydeclaredthatcapitalism
would beoverthrown throughoutthe world.Butwithregard to
specificproblemsandspecificenemies,if wedonottake them
210
=====第210页=====
To BE A MarXisT is To AdHERE To MLMZT
one. Peasants can only plough the land plot by plot.
The same is even true of eating a meal. Strategically,we take the
eatingof a meal lightly;wearesure to manage it. Butwhenit
comes to the actual eating, it mustbe done mouthfull
by
mouthful.You cannot swallow an entire banquet at onegulp.
Thisiscalledthepiecemealsolutionandisknowninmilitary
writings as destroying the enemy forces one by one.'
CC
Up to here we have thefundamental problemson the historical
period in which we are living,the contradictions andthe
developingforceandthetacticsallsubstantiveproblemsof
strategy and tactics;butfurthermoreChairperso MaoTsetung
also devotedhimself to sum up the experienceofthe socialist
revolution,stingforthhisgreattheory andpracticeofthe
continuation of the revolution under proletarian dictatorship.
Healsofound theadequateformofdevelopingit through the
Great ProletarianCulturalRevolution.Inthe beginningsand
developmentof thisgreat revolution heset down thefollowing
theses: "A great disorder under the heavens leads to a great order
under the heavens,and the same happens all over again every
seven or eight years. The monsters and demons will come out by
themselves to the palaestra. As their own class nature determines
it, they cannot behaveotherwise.""In the past we waged struggles
in the rural areas,in thefactories,in the cultural circles,and we
carried out the movement of socialist education. Nevertheless, all
this could not solve the problem,because we had notfound a
form,a means of mobilizing vast masses in an open way, in all
areas and from below upwards, in order to expose our bad side."
"Infact,those elements with power,followersofthe capitalist-
road within the Party, who support the petty tyrantsof bourgeois
acadamies,andthose representativeofthe bourgeoisieinfiltrated
in thePartywhopotctttnts,ae inactipetty
211
=====第211页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
tyrantsinthePartywhodo notreadbooksornewsparswh
do not keep in touch with the massesor possessany knowledge,
andwhorelyonlyonacting inanarbitraryform and repressing
thepeoplewiththeirauthority,andusurpthenameofthe
Party."
'
"Thebourgeoisrepresentativeswhohaveinfiltratedinsidethe
Party, the government,thearmy and the diferentcultural sectors,
are a groupofcounterrevolutionaryrevisionists whowill seize
power andwillconvertthedictatorshipof theproletariatintoa
dictatorshipof the bourgeoisie,if they have the chance. Someof
these persons,we havealready seen through;but not yetothers.
And in some of them we stll trust and we prepare them to be our
successors. For example, persons of the Khruschev type still dwell
at our side."
"The main targetof the present movement are those elements
with power,followersofthe capitalist-roadwithinthe Party.
''
"What will you do if revisionism appears in the CC?This is very
probable, this is the greatest danger.
"The proletariat must
exercise an all-embracing dictatorship over the bourgeoisie in the
superstructure,including the different domainsof culture.""The
Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution is completely
present
and
timely to consolidate  the  proletariat's
very
necessary
dictatorship, prevent
the
restoration ofcapitalism andbuild
socialism."
”
"ThepresentGreatProletarianCulturalRevolutionisonlythe
first one, and in the future undoubtedly there will be many more.
In a revolution,the problemof who will defeat whom will only be
solved inalonghistorical period.Ifthingaenotadequately
solved,theillbossilitinmomoatlist
“Itis justtorebela
against the reactionaries."
restoration."
''
212
=====第212页=====
To BE A MARXisT is To AdHEre To MLMZT
handfulofleadersinsidethePartywhoarefollowersofthe
capitalist-road!" The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution hit the
counterrevolutionary bourgeoisheadquarters headed by Liu
Shaoqi, the Chinese Khruschev,whose deputy is Deng Xiaoing,
CC
another top element with powerfollowing the capitalist-road
within theParty;"and italso crushedthecounterrevolutionary
conspirator headquarters headed by Lin Biao.
Thus, the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution was developed in
order to consolidate the proletariat'sdictatorship,to prevent the
restoration of capitalism and to build socialism; and whose
summation was made in the IX Congress of the CP China, which
was a great landmark in thehistoryofthe CP China and the
international communist movement.
The developmentof class struggle, in China,thestruggle between
capitalism and socialism, between the bourgeoisie
andthe
proletariat and between Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung Though
and counterrevolutionary and capitulationist revisionism, was
manifested in the great campaignof criticism against Confucius
and Lin Biao, which discussed the problem ofrestoration and
counterrevolution,the long process of consolidation of a power-
holdingclasswhichimpliespreventingitsreseizurebythe
reactionaries and the resultant restoration, and if power is lost, to
strive for reconquering it, a problem which was raised in the
beginnings of the debate against Khruschev-Brezhnev revisionism.
Later,thestruggle centered on the decisive question and on the
very essence of power, the problem of the proletarian dictatorshi.
Chairperson Maosaid:"Why didLenin talkaboutthe needof
exercisinga dictatorshipoverthebourgeoisie?It is necessaryto
havethisquestionclear.Lackofclaritywithregardtothiswill
lead to revisionism. All the nation must be made awareof it." "In
one word,iouy.eoeioit ddot
213
=====第213页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
differmuchromcapitalism.Nowitstllpracticesalarysystem
ofeightgradesdistributiontoeachoneaccordingtohis work,
and exchangethrough money,allofwhichishardly different
from theoldsociety.Thedifferencelays inthattheproperty
system has changed.
"Our country now practices a commodities system, a salary
system which isalso unequal,like thatof theeightgrades,and
thingsof thattype.This,underthe proletariat's dictatorship, only
can be restricted. Becauseof this, it will be very easy for persons
like Lin Biao to set up a capitalist system if they climb to power.
For thisreason,we must study more Marxist-Leninist works."
"Lenin said:Small size productionengenders capitalism and the
bourgeoisie continuously,every day,everyhour,spontaneously
and in big volumes.'
This also occurs with a partof the working class,and a partof
Party members. Both among the proletarians and theofficials of
public enterprises,there arethose whoindulge in bourgeois
lifestyle."Lenin spoke about a bourgeois state without capitalists,
built in orderto protect the bourgeois law. We have ourselves
built a state likethatone,inwhichthings do notdiffer much
from those of the old society, because there is still a hierarchy —
an eight grade salary system, a distribution according to work and
the exchange of things of equal value still prevail."
These theses and the former ones are,evidently, the continuation
and developmentof the basic principlesof Marxism-Leninism.
Chairperson Mao Tsetung reiteratesthestandingof Marx's and
Lenin's
concerning
the
long
statements
revolutionary
transformationof theoldsociety;theneedof theproletariat's
dictatoriannhgtusnclsrgle
214
=====第214页=====
TO BE A MARXiST Iis TO ADHERE to MLMzT
generationofcapitalism andthe
restriction, the  constant
bourgeoisieandthepossibilityoftherestorationofcapitalism
through climbing to power.Heestablishes,furthermore,the
need of aiming against thecapitalistroaders withinthe Party, ad
ofcontinuinthevolutionundetheproletriatdictatorship
by means of the cultural revolution.
In January 1975, Deng Xiaoping became Vice-Chairperson of the
Central Committee,whichhe had joined in the X Congress.In
September the same year, the unfolding of criticism against On
the Water's Margin' was calledfor. Chairperson Mao calledfor
payingattentiontocapitulationwhichisanessentialissuein
revisionism; he says:
"The meritof the narrativeOn the Water's Margin'lays precisely
in the description of capitulation. Serving as a teaching material
in the negative sense,it helpsthe people to know the
“OntheWater's Margin'opposesonly the
capitulationists.
'
corruptofficials,but not theemperor.Itexcludes Chao Kaiofhe
Hundred
and
Eight.
Sung
Chiang
capitulates,
,practices
revisionism, changes the name of Chu Yi Parlour,given by Chao
Kai,intothatof_ChungYiParlour,andacceptstheofferof
amnestyand enrolment. Thestruggle between Sung Chiang and
Kao Chiu is astruggle waged by a fraction against another among
the landlordclass.SungChiangcapitulatesandthen goesto
combat Fang La."(Chao Kai: founderof the peasant rebel army,
inthenarrative;the_108:therebel captains;Sung Chiang: a
character who usurps the rebel army's leadership; Chu Yi Parlour
means to get together and to rise up in rebellion and so the rebel
leader gave that name to the parlour where they met; Chung Yi
Parlour means to profess loyaltytotheemperor,anevil trick
employed by the usurper).
Letusemphaithatlonsmimlielscalaion
215
=====第215页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
beforethebourgeoisieinthecountry,andcapitulationofhe
nation before imperialism onaninternationallevel,andthat
capitulationism is revisionism. In these circumstances, the
struggle
waged
against
the
is
restorationist, anti-Cultural
Revolution rightist wind.
In it Chairperson Maostates: "Afterthe democraticrevolution,
the workers, the poor peasants and the low middle peasants have
not stoppedand want to maketherevolution. Contrriwise,a
partof the militantsofthe Party arereluctant to continue
forward, and some have gone backwards and have placed
themselvesagainstthrevolution. Why?Becausethey,ah
officials thattheyhavecome tobe,try to protecttheinterests of
the high officials.'
"It so happensthatthe socialistrevolutionfallsontheirown
heads,and in this way duringtheagricultural cooperativization
there werealready those in the Party whoopposed it and when
bourgeoisrightis criticized,theirfeeling isthatof rejection. The
socialist revolution is being carried ahead; however,it is not well
understood where the bourgeoisie is. It is exactly in the
Communist Party,the leadersfollowingthe capitalist-road in the
Party. The capitalist-roaders still follow their road."
"To revoke justverdictsgoesagainstthewillofthe people."Itis
impossible to advance without struggle..
“Being800million
people,can wedo without struggle?!""What is thatabouttake
the three instructions as thekey link point'Stability and unity do
not meanrenouncingthclassstruggle.Classstruggleistheky
link of the net and all the rest are mails."
"Thisperodoenoprist iclasstruglhehaer
distinction between imperialism and
black
kcat'making
no
216
=====第216页=====
To BE A MArXisT Is To ADHERe To MLMZT
against Deng
Marxism.”Inthisway,thestruggle cnterda
Xiaoping,againsthim who,llowing theCineseKhruschev, Liu
Shaoqi,heldththoryoftheextinctiooflasstruggleaaist
who,in1956,inhisreportonthestatutes'modificationin the
VIII CongressoftheCPChina,heldthatclassesweeextinct,
especiallytheboueoisie,thatthesocialistevolutionhadalready
fulfilled thegreater partofitstasks, andtheyshould not
emphasize the class struggle,but the tasksof construction; against
him who, in the same report,followed Liu Shaoqi's theory of the
masses in order tooppose Chairman Mao's thesis on the Party;
against him who upheldtheSovietUnion's XXParty Congress,
in which  Khruschev attackedthe proletariat's
 dictatorship
camouflaginhimslundertheso-calledstugle
againstthe
"cult of personality,"
considering the congress  of possessing
"important merits," precisely for him"oneof the most important
merits”isthatstruggle against divinization”whichhe used to
combat Chairperson Mao Tsetung.
The Great Proletarian Cultural  Revolution's
campaign
to
counterattackthe(revoking)revisionistwindcentered against
Deng Xiaoping. Against the tenacious defenderof Peng Dehua,
the climberand conspiratormilitarychiefsanctioned in 199 and
defended by Liu Shaoqi andhisreactionary headquarters; it aimed
against Deng who, forming a gang with the Chinese Khruschev in
the dificultyear199-1961,attackedththeeedbans:te
general line, the great leap forward and the people's commune.
Against him whoadvocatedtheincreaseof landsfor private use,
free markets,enterprises responsiblefor theirown profits and
losses,andagriculturalproductionsharesbasedoneachfamily,
unleashingarvisionistwindofindividualistiagiculturallabor.
Againsthimwhoheld:"Beitblackorwhite,ifacathunts mice,
it is a good cat."
217
=====第217页=====
E1(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
This the Deng Xiaopingof the1950sand60s,anotherleading
element with power,capitalist-roaderwithin the party"as he was
typified,Li Shaoqilieutenantwhopeformed as secretary
generalandwhom theGreatProletarianCulturalRevolution
overthrew. The struggle thatChairperson_Mao ledin orderto
counterattackthereactionaryrevisionistwindaimed at Deng
Xiaoping,
who since the 50s held a counterrevolutionary
programme and who,likeothers, as soon as hereturned to
leading posts continued hisold road unfolding anew an opposing
programme basedon "take thethre instructions as thekey
point,"aiming atconquer the ideological stand as a means to
form publicopinion,"takeintoaccountfirstofall,theleading
bodies,"inordertotakeholdoforganizationalpositions,"they
rectified in all aspects.
CC
It was a programme oriented at revoking the GPCR, usurping the
leadership in ordertopromoterestoration,undermining the
proletariat's dictatorship,divulging theextinctionof class struggle
and centering in the development of the productive forces. It was
a programme thatfought the GPCR imputing thatit "injured"
the“experienced cadres” and served to“overthrow”"good cadres
ofthe Party,”typifyingitas“ultraleftistforcombatingthe
capitalist-roaders.
This struggletocounterstriketherevokingwind ledto"Deng
Xiaoping's removalfromall his postsinside andoutside the
Party,"a resolutiontaken"according tothe proposalof the great
leader Chairperson Mao Tsetung.Chairperson Mao Tetungs
decease, as the deathofall theproletariat's great leaders, has
generated deep commotions and wide repercussions in China and
in theworld;and,intheconditionsin whichthe struggle
developedin China.Itpropitiatedthe circumstancesfor the
d'etat, usurping the power of the
rightists  staging  a  coup
proletariat's dictatorship.
218
=====第218页=====
To BE A MARXisT Iis To ADHERe To MLMzT
It helped them undermine the conquestsof the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolutionand openthe doorsto capitalistrestoration,
inChina
to capitulation andto revisionism. Class struggle
between revolution and counterrevolution, between Marxism-
Thought and revisionism,
between
Leninism-Mao Tsetung
Chairperson Mao's proletarian lineand therevisionist bourgeois
counterrevolutionaryancapitulationistlineheadedbDeng
Xiaoping,
has entered into crucial, complex  and difficult
moments;strange and surprising methods are resorted to in the
dealing withproblems andthestruggle;important andvast
changes in theleadershipandintheorganizations mainlyofthe
Party,wereproducedatthametime,theciticismcamign
against Deng Xiaoping's revisionistrevoking wind issusended;
the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution is openly questioned;
capitulationis developed, especially national capitulation, and
Deng's counterrevolutionary programme is hoisted as a banner.
All this isnothingbutarightistcoup inthesharptwo-line
struggle in the period of the continuation of the revolution taking
advantage of the circumstances and the repercussions of
Chairman Mao Tsetung's death. The situation that arose in China
is not an unimportant problem.
It is, on the contrary,a transcendant problem forrevolutionaries
and communistsofthe world and we all must give it a very
special attention,becausefrom the usurpationof power derives
the general changeoftheline, both inthe developmentof
socialism andintheinternational policy. Thekey questionof
Marxism istheproletariat's dictatorship;itis itsessence,and a
rightist coup andits usurpation is a problem of the utmost
seriousness and importance;and it is not a question in China
have to do with world revolution.
219
=====第219页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Theexperienceofrestorationandofusurpationof power in the
USSR arerecentlessonthatwecannotforgetMariateguihas
taught us:Itisnot possibltobunitestedinthedestinofa
nation thatoccupies such a principalplace in time and space.
China weighs too much in human historyfor us notto be
attracted by itsdeeds and men."This great truth continues to be
valid today more than ever for all communists and revolutionaries
in the country.
Butalthoughtheeventsin China,especiallyafterChairperson's
Mao Tsetung's death move us to a just concern and to the duty of
defending the bannersof Marxism,precisely to beable to defend
them let us guide ourselves by his own forecasts."If the rightists
carry forward an anti-communist coup d'etat in China, I am sure
that it willnotknow peace either, and very proably
its
domination will beshort-lived,because itwill not betolerated by
anyof the revolutionaries whorepresent the people's interests,
more than 90 percent of the population.
"Let it be in China or inother countriesof the world, broadly
speaking,morethanninetypercentofthe populationwillfnally
support Marxism-Leninism; many persons who,owingtothe
deceitofsocial-democracy,visionism,mprialismanlhe
reactionaries,have nottaken yet political consciousness. But in
any way they will gradually wake up and will support Marxism-
Leninism. Thetruth of_Marxism-Leninismisirresistible. The
masses will invariably rise up in revolution. The world revolution
will inexorably triumph."
220
=====第220页=====
AGAINST
CONSTITUTIONAL
ILLUSIONS,
FOR
THE
STATE
OF
THE
NEW
DEMOCRACY
PCP - CENTRAL COMMItTeE - April, 1978
"Marxist politicselvatestheworkerstotheroleoftheleadersof
the peasantry.
11
Lenin
While Peruviansocietyfacesitself inanextremelyacutecrisis,it
hasenteredatranscendentalperiod.Inperiodslikethisone,
importantpoliticalsituations are defined,andthepartiesset
positions and initiateactionswhich may layout their futurefor
many decades. Underthese conditions the third restructuring of
the PeruvianStateinthiscentury isdeveloping,and as partofi,
the electionsfora Constituent Assembly, as wellas, inte
following years,theapprovalof a new constitutional charter to
replace thatofthe1933andgeneralelections,accordingtothe
timetables of the regime's Tupac Amaru Plan. For this reason, it is
necessary to analyzethe current processinthe country and be
ableto guideourselveswith certaintyanddecisiveness,since,
today more thanever,we must navigate in turbulent waters
towardourunavoidablegoal:thePeruvianRevolution,whose
road wasestablishedbyMariateguiandafterfiftyyears,itas
been proven to be right.
I.FUNDAMENTAL
LQUESTIONS：THE _STATE,VIOLENCE
AND ELECTIONS
The analysis ofthe current situation mustbebased on the
fundamentalproblemsofthe workingclass,whichthroughits
221
=====第221页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Partyand inthe lightofMarxism,have beenestablished and
proven in our country.
ON THE STATE
The PeruvianState is a landowning-bureaucraticState.It isa
dictatorshipofthefeudal landowners andthebigbourgeoisie
under the command of Yankee imperialism, a dictatorship which
has developedinthis century in the shape ofrepresentative
democracy and within it,in crucial moments, under military
regimes to defendordeveloptherulingorderofexploitation.
Starting in the decade of the 1920's, the Peruvian State was led by
the comprador bourgeoisie,andafter_1968,bythe bureaucratic
bourgeoisie:bothfactionsof thebigbourgeoisie. The Peruvian
State is a typeof State most commonly found in semi-feudal and
semi-colonialsocieties,in whichitexerts a joint dictatorshipof
two classes:feudallandowners and big bourgeoisies(comprador
or bureaucratic,as the case may be), under the leadership of the
latter, but within the domain of imperialism or, lately inroads of
social-imperialism. It is a dictatorship which,whatever its system
of government(representative democracyorcorporativism)and
the  politics  guiding
git(demoliberalorfascist) exploits and
oppresses the people.
ON VIOLENCE
Violence with respect to weapons, the army, police and reressive
actionslikethatatCobrizain1971,Andahuaylasin1974or
Lima on February of 1975, to mention some examples, or military
actionsliketheantiguerrillaactionsin_1965torememberthe
most importantone,inadditionto the daily
activities ofthe

forces, the
jailing,
persecutions,
suspension of
repressive
guarantees, state of emergencies, curfews, etc.,
constitutional
enablea,
222
=====第222页=====
AGAINST CONSTITUTIONAL ILLUSIONS
tomaintainitsorder,defendanddevelopit.Violenceinur
country helpsandsustainsthelandowning-bureaucratic State
unleashingitaganstthepeople;espciallagaintthproeariat
aware of it, as they have
andthe peasantry, who are well
experienced it as part of their daily struggle.
There
is
also
However, violence is notonly
reactionary.
revolutionary violence, from the
mobilizing
people,which
peasants under the leadership ofthe proletariat generates a
people's army led by the Communist Party. It is the violence that
rises in the countryside and develops a war of masses to destroy
the old Stateof landowners and big bourgeoisies in order to build
the new democracy. Violence is a universallaw. It is the
transformationof theold world through guns,the glorious road
of President Mao Tse-tung.
Violence is written at the bottom of our history. The conquerors
used it to submit these landsand subjectthem to colonialrule.
Tupac Amaru unleashed violence to defendthe rights and
demands(reinvindicaciones) which mobilized hundreds of
thousandsofindigenouspeasants.Violenceofyesterdayand
today,is the usual means of the struggle the peasants have in
theirhad"nller."
Violence ispartofoucityscentuiesofhistory,mailyofthe
peasantry, that continues to confront the landowning-bureaucratic
State,especiallyagainst gamonalismwhichistheold Stae'sbase
and sustenance.
But revolutionary violence in our historyhasreached a new
dimension under the proletariat,resumed in Mariátegui and his
Party.In this way,sincethelastfiftyyears,inwhichthe PCP was
founded,theold bourgeois revolution became a revolution of a
new democracy. It_became an anti-imperialistandanti-feudal
revolutionwhicholthepltttouhitPrtyiableto
223
=====第223页=====
  
lead.Rvolutoaryvolencmasttlapaanta
bthele
countryside.Thisis theonly road tofollow and whichhas been
conclusivelyproven,evenbytheheroicguerrllof1965,whose
defeat did not negate Mao Tse-tung's theoryof the People's War
nor the road of Mariategui. On the contrary, it demands from us
its accomplishment,putting in commandthe correct general
political lineestablished by Mariátegui with tenacityand firmness,
and followingthedevelopmentof theclassstruggle in more han
fifty years,especially the great lessonsof the1960's.
ON ELECTIONS
Marxpointedout:"Every so many yearstheoppressed are
authorized to decidewhichmembersof theoppressorclasswill
representthemand crushthem inParliament!"Andthatisstill
morevalidwhen it comes toelections to approve constitutional
charters. That way,if the elections are the regular orderof
the bourgeois dictatorship ofcapitalist societies
renewing
(including the most democratic ones),one could imaginethe
normal courseof its political functioning for the preservation and
development of capitalism. In the landowning-bureaucratic States,
like thoseof Latin America,in whichthey have accomplished
theirroleofchanginggovernments,and inthe circumstances
when they have respected the norms of the demoliberal bourgeois
system,elections have only beenthetools at theservice of the
feudal landowners andbig capitalists,whetherit is a periodic
renewal,as isbeing done latelyinColombia,ortheend ofa
military government, as in Argentina for example.
Theaboveiseasilyverifiableinthecountry.Withimportant
interruptionsbythemilitarygovernmentsdurinthperodic
electoralprocesses,especiallyinteruptionslinkedontheone
hand to thedevelopmentofthepeople'sstruggle,andonhe
224
=====第224页=====
AGAINST CONSTITUTIONAL ILLUSIONS
other,to thecontradictionsbetweenfeudallandowners and
between the compradorbourgeoisie, and thebureaucratic
bourgeoisieitis importanttonotethatthemilitaryregimes
themselveshave been instrumental in implementingelections, be
it to normalizetheirown situation,end their rule,or to guaratee
them. Elections in Peru haveundoubtedly served to preserve or
the formal
republic,
the
develop the old  Peruvian State,
dictatorship offeudallandowners andthebig bourgeoisie.
Therefore,elections have been (and it could nothave been any
other way within the contextof theruling socialorder)tools in
the hands of the comprador bourgeoisiefirst,and then a tool of
the bureaucratic bourgeoisie. Thishasbeenthe most important
aspectoftheelectoral processesofthe PeruvianState inthis
century andit's what has determinedthe class character of
elections in  the  country.These
fundamental
questions
are
summarized as follows:
The PeruvianStateis landowningandbureaucratic.It is a
dictatorshipoffeudal landowners andbigbourgeois,underthe
controlof Yankee imperialism. Against this,the people's struggle
must destroytheold existing orderin ordertobuilda Stateof
new democracy.
The PeruvianState,likeevery State,sustains,defendsand
develops itself using violence; it faces what the people need, which
is revolutionary violence following the road surrounding the cities
from the countryside.
Elections are meansof domination by landowners and big
bourgeois capitalists. Theyare nottoolsof transformation for the
people nor a means to overthrow the powerof those who are
ruling. Therefore,the correctorientation for us is to useelections
when it comes only for purposes of agitation and propaganda
II. THE CURRENT PERIOD
225
=====第225页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Thisproblemrequirestheanalysisoftwoissues:Theeconomic
situationandcisinthoutryandththrestructurinof
the Peruvian State.
THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AND CRISIS
AftertheSecond WorldWar,thedevelopmentofbureaucratic
capitalism was increased. This type of capitalism can be traced to
the end ofthe last century. The expansion ofbureaucratic
capitalism is more considerablein the196O's,especially after
Octoberof 1968,with the current regime which is based on the
problemof the peasantry. To thisend,it carriedout the more
extensiveand profound evolutionoffeudallandowning property.
As a result,there is a greater concentrationof the property land,
the preservationofservileformsofexploitation,bureaucratic
management systems and direct controlbythe State over
territorialrents. Thus,the Statelaystherootsforbureaucratic
capitalism in the countryside.
In synthesis, the expansion of bureaucratic capitalism aims at the
process ofindustrialization and generates, anindustry more
dependent on imperialism (mainly Yankee), as well as greater
participation by the State, especially in those industries which are
consideredbasic and extractive. Thus, theState becomes the
motorthatsustains theeconomic process,and plays a principal
role in banking, finance, including trade.
Inthis manner,the expansionof bureaucratic capitalism is the
continuationofthe capitalistprocessalreadypointed outby
Mariategui: a capitalism subject to the dominationof Yanke
imperialism,andlinkedtofeudalismItisthisprocessand
expansion(profuniacio)thathavegeneratedthecurent crisis
Peruvian society is going throughwhich is agravatedby the
world crisis.
226
=====第226页=====
AGAINST CONSTITUuTiONAL ILLUSIONS
Thecrisis,inesenceis theresultoftheexpansionofe
capitalist development in a semi-feudal and semi-colonial country.
It is not the result of the destruction of semifeudalism but of its
evolution,and it is nottheresultoffreeingthe countryfrom
imperialistdomination,mainlyYankee, butthe developmentof
semi-colonialism. Therefore, after three years of economic
measures aimed at ending the crisis,we now see ourselves in the
midst of a deep crisis whose end is notforeseen or expected in
1980. The following
gdata  helps  us visualize the economic
situation:
A = very small properties (minifundio)
B = family units
C = medium size properties
D = large and very large properties (latifundio)
If we add the agrarian debt of tens of thousands of soles, 68% of
which totalis payable to thelandowners, 24% of_which is
paymentfor credits due to the bankers, and 8% of which is
bureaucraticexpense;and if we bear in mind that theState has
extracted 6.473 billion solesfor real estate taxes from the
production of agrarian cooperatives in thefive-year period 1971-
1975, of which 3,639 billion, more than 50% was taken in 1975,
can anyone then speak of theold semi-feudal system as having
been destroyed?Can anyone really claim to have brokenthe
backbone of the "oligarchy?" Isn't it clear who benefits and who is
protected by the agrarian law? But let's see other data:
On these tables,cessionand infationare seenveryclearly.They
also show the diminished productionandrise in picesthat whip
the Peruvian economy, as well as the serious situation ofthe State
budget.Butlet'spointou,thatwhilewages weremultilied y
four from1968 to1976, profits for enterprises or businesses were
227
=====第227页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
multipliedbyseven in thesame period.Andif weaddthe
evolutionof wagesandsalaries,basedontheindicesofactual
remunerationformetropolitanLima (since therearenoother),
wages were100solesin1968,by Decemberof1977,hadben
reduced to 72.23soles,and itisforeseenthatby Decemberof
1978theywilbeeducedto52.29soles,wheathealaieshat
was 100 soles in1968, in December of 1977 was reduced to 86.95,
and it is predicted that by Decemberof1978 they will be reduced
to 60.70 soles. Thesefigures areenoughto seethesituationin
which the economic production develops,who benefitsfrom it
and whom it hits,and the above does not take into consideration
the bankruptcies,factoryclosings,layoffs,etc.; whichaddedonto
the above showthe serious crisis and the ongoing process of
greaterconcentrationofcapitalforthebenefitof the landowners,
the big capitalists and imperialism.
To completethistrend,let'sseetheproblemof theforeign debt
and the real value of the sol, which shows clearly, the domain of
imperialism and the dispute between the superpowers. Remember
that in September of 1975 exchange was established at 45 soles to
adollar,in June of_1976it went downto 65,then camethe
minidevaluations that ended in 80soles toa dollar by September
of 1977; and from Octoberof that year came onfloating, which
raised the exchange to 130, in December, and now, to speculation
paying180soles per dollar in money order certificates,although
the oficialexchangevaluedidnotvary;a situationintimately
linkedtotheInternationalMonetaryFund controlled bythe
United States.Accordintoofficialfiguesin1968thcountys
foreigndebtwas737milliondollars,butby1977 itwas 4.17
billion dollars, a sum that forced
the use of up to 41% of exports
to cancel off interest payments
ofthedebt in 197. Theforeign
debt is oneof the hottest problems todayandfrom this we can
see how thesuperpowers contend in our country,as can alsob
228
=====第228页=====
AGAINST CONSTITUTIONAL ILLUSIONS
theSoveIdtoutypially
for the saleof weapons; as well as for Soviet maneuvers on the
renegotiationof thedebtwithPeru,and using itas leverageto
take positionsThisisclearl seen in the campaignofthe
revisionistnewspaper"Unidad"andotherswhoexalttheSoviet
social-imperialist "kindness" and "understanding."
Thesefacts,onthe agrarianproblem,especiallytheindustrial
economic production and the rule of imperialism and the quarrel
ofthe superpowers, are stunning proofofthe expansion
(profundizacion)ofburaucraticcapitalism,thevolutionof semi-
feudalism and the development of our semi-colonial condition; of
serious crisisthefirstone throws us in,andshowsthe current
situation and the perspective which forces  the specialized
economic publicationto saythat"theforecastsforthis year,
1978, are even more nefarious.'
1
In10 years, what economic direction has the government
followed? Ingenerallines,in1969and1970theyprepared
conditions  for their
plans.
s. Thentheyapplied the
1971-75
economic-socialplanaimingataccumulating capital. This was
canceled inits last yearbecausethedificultieshadalready begun,
the 1975-78 plan was approved aimed of a greater accumulation of
capital. It was a plan that in its first two years sought the control
of the crisis but withoutachieving it.In 1977,the Tupac Amaru
Plan was approved, whichapplied the modifications proposed by
the President in March of1976, a plan to extend until1980,on
which date the crisis was supposed to be over. During this period
the State fulfilled a main role, as the driving force in the economic
process, and developed theState's monopoly.However, in the last
few years,theneed to reinvigoratethe privateeconomic activity
was proposed,and in theimperialistorder within whichour
country and theStateoperate,it prepares conditionsforfuture
developmentofthemonopolyproductionof imperalism and the
229
=====第229页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
1(1968-1987)
big bourgeoisie associated with it.
What is being proposed today for thecountry's economic process?
Concretely,thatthe noStatemonopoly,or privateector,isthe
motor reinvigorating theeconomy,so thattheexpropriation,or
"privatization,"of the great meansof productionwhich the State
has been managingand concentrating,especiallyinthe last ten
years, and the greater concentration of property derived from the
crisis; as well as theestablishing of new forms incrementing the
exploitationofthelaborforces,torestricorcanclthebenefits,
rights and conquestsof the masses,as usuallyhappens in every
economic crisis, and it is a condition to contain and overcome the
crisis. This the economic period in which we now evolve, a period
that in the short term benefits imperialism,the exploiting classes
and their government in two important problems:
The financial problem, now centered in the foreign debt.This
will demandto takeother measures besidestheones already
taken;
the economic problem, taken as the productive process, which
demands an economic plan which has already been announced
andiscloselylinkedtotheongoingelectoral processand to the
"social pactforthenationalsalvation"thatisbeingelaborated;
between these two questions,the second one is more important,
since thefirstfor the most part hasalready been defined,while
the second is more complex and has a long term effectin
perspective.
ABOUT THE THIRD RESTRUCTURING OF THE PERUVIAN
STATE
The bureaucraticbourgeoisie wasdeveloped during theSecond
World Waranditaims at leading
gthe State.Its presence was
Bustamante andBelaunde,
notorious  inthe governments of
230
=====第230页=====
AGAINST CONSTITUTioNAL ILLUSIONS
especiallythhowvlcntlinOctobofit
was when it assumedthe leadership oftheState,thatis it
assumed thereignsofgovernment throughthe armedforces,
displacing thecompradorbougeoisiewhosincethe1920's had
been enthroned as the leading class in the reactionary camp.
Under what conditions did this promotion take place? It takes
place amidstthe crisisof theso-calledrepresentative democracy.
The Peruvian State was organized as a formal boureois
democracy,systematically,withtheConstitutionof1920,under
the leadershipof the compradoror "mercantile"bourgeoisie,as
Mariategui calledit.Thishelped developbureaucraticcapitalism,
which is a processthat consolidatingits Power through he
"Oncenio" de Leguia,underthe mantleofYankee imperialism.
However,the1929-1934 crisisand the developmentof the class
struggle, mainlybytheproletariat,withthefoundingofthe
Communist Party, generated a
periodof
upheavalin our
contemporary history. Also,during this period theelectionsof
1931 took place, which drafted the current Constitution still force
(at least in words.)
The constitutionof_1933_hasthecharacteristicsthatKarl Marx
masterfully pointed out:
while itrecognizesthe demo-bourgeoistyperights and
liberties, each article sanctioning them contains its own
contradiction,that is,the same time thatrights and freedoms are
stipulated,theyarelawfullyrestricted. Thefollowing samples
suffice and it's precisely one of the examples given by Marx, Art.
62 reads: "All personshavetheright toassemblepeacefullyand
withoutweapons,withoutcompromisingthepublicorder. The
law will regulate the exercise of the right to assemble."
It shows the contradiction between the Executive Powerand
231
=====第231页=====
E 1 (1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLuME
to tie downtheformerinthelegislativefacts theExecutive has
been imposingitselfmoreandmorereflectinthdevlomnt
Executive Power as well as its principal support, the army.
Finally,it wasborundethotctioofthebayo which
broughttothworltoitandquestioneditcurrntlidity
whenever the interestsof the State demanded it. As these maters
areforeseen,theywill befoundagain in the new Constitution
andits debates,but on thebase ofthe contradiction between
representative democracy and corporativism.
After1945,alltheseconstitutionalcontradictionsharpened with
the struggle
ebetween the comprador bourgeoisie and the
bureaucratic bourgeoisie and more by the increasing development
of the forceof the peopleandof the workingclass. During the
government of Bustamante, the contradiction Parliament-
Executive sharpened,and the President himself had to propose
the needfor a new Constitution. The problem surfaced again
during the Belaunde government and there were many disputes
about areferendum andreform ofthe_Constitution,whichin
1965 took Action Popular to draft and introduced a bill about the
functionalSenate,a corporativistmodalityestablishedbyarticle
89of theConstitution,but neverimplementedup to this day,
since eventheActionPopular'sbill wasrejectedbythe APRA-
Odria coalition. This direction, on thebase ofdeepening
bureaucratic capitalism,and the contradiction in the midst of the
big bourgeoisie between the compradorand bureaucratic factions
and,above all,thedevelopment of theproletariat(itsreturn to
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism-Mao Tse-tung Thought and the Road
of Mariategui), and the upsurge of the people's movement, mainly
the great surge of the peasants movement which shook Peruvian
societyprofoulyanth196gullstrglewh
problemoccurring inontemporary Latin America.
232
=====第232页=====
AGAINST CONSTiITUTIoNAL ILLUSIoNS
Under these circumstances the armedforcestookover the
leadershipoftheState infunction,mainlythe interestsof the
bureaucraticbourgeoisie,withtwotaskstofulfill:thefirstone,to
carryforwardtheexpansionofbureaucratic capitalism and,
second,to reorganize Peruvian society. That is how the current
regimebega,uidedbacist olitilotiodevloping
the corporativization of the Peruvian Society,which is a process
that is taking place through the following three phases:
1. Basesand developmentofthecorporativization,inwhichall
past  practices
 arequestioned,
labeled
the  old
"pre-
as
revolutionary"order,thebaseoforganizatioaresetandhes
called"ideologicalbases"areestablished.Thislastedallthe wayto
1975.
2. General corporative readjustment, andevaluation ofis
successes and problems so as to consolidate positions and advance
toward the CorporativeState,presented as a "social democracy
withfullparticipation."Thatbeganwiththereplacementof
Velasco by Morales Bermudez, August 1975.
3. Third restructuring of the Peruvian State,from July1977 to the
present, and the establishing of a political timetable with elections
for a Constituent Assembly,approvalof a constitutional charter
which must "institutionalize the structural transformations carried
on since October3,1968"and must carryoutthe geeral
elections, according to the Tupac Amaru Plan, until 1980.
So here we have, in general terms,the corporativization followed
inten years. How hasthe contradiction betweenbureaucratic
bourgeoisiesand theproletariat developed in thisdecade? The
bureaucraticbourgeoisieheads the countrevolutionarycamp,
and it commands thefeudal landowners and the comprador
233
=====第233页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
bourgeoisie,andit is linked toi
imperialism, mainly
Yankee
imperialism,uiaeiibga
an 
its
 penetration,
precisely  with
the
bureaucraticbourgeoisie. Thepeoples camphasa center:the
proletaro
develop itsvaguardandiactadtharmedruggl.Thus, it
willbeabletoforgetheworker-peasantallianceasitsgreatally,
to win over the petty-bourgeoisie as a sure ally and, under certain
conditions and circumstances, to unite even with the national
bourgeoisie.
In thefirststagofcororativion,theburaucaticboureise
managedtoisolatetheproletariatandeventopartillytieit
down, presenting  itself as
progressive force  and
as
a
"revolutionary"withthesupportofopportunism,mainlythe
social-corporativist revisionism of "Unidad"
In the second stage,thegeneral readjustmentof corporativism,
the influence of the bureaucratic bourgeoisie in Stateaffairs began
to decrease,its mask fell and it shed its disguises making it more
difficult foropportunism to tie down the proletariat to the tail of
its enemy.
The third stageof corporativization was the restructuring of the
State,
in
which
the contradiction
 between
bureaucratic
bourgeoisie
and
proletariat became
sharper
againin
its
Both
contending  classes began to
antagonism.
polarize
its
positions more, one against theother, and conseqntly
the
-
proletariatacquiresa greaterdimension,astheonlyleading lass
of the revolution of new democracy.
What is theperiodthatwenowlive?Since1977,weliveia
234
=====第234页=====
AGAINST CONSTITUTIONAL ILLUSIONS
andbythedvlopmeofthestrulofthepopulrmases in
preparationforthe launchingofthearmed struggle. This is a
period thatoccurred in the second moment of the contemporary
historyof theoutr,thts,omthecond World War tothe
present; a periodin whichbureaucratic capitalism deepens and
the corporativization developsundertheleadership of the
bureaucratic bourgeoisie; a moment in which, on the other hand,
the conditionsforthe democratic revolution mature andthis
begins to define it by the force of arms in order to create a State
of new democracy.
But,whatistheimmediatesituationofthepoliticalperiod that
we now livein?Toimperialism,to theexploitingclasses and the
bureaucratic bourgeoisie leading the process,two matters arise:
first, to carry onelectionsforthe Constituent Assembly,and
second, to open up the road to materialize the third restructuring
of the Peruvian State. The second, is the principal one because it
is more complex and has future implications, and from which the
bureaucratic bourgeoisie expects to consolidate its leadership role.
On theother hand,the first task has the support of most of the
political parties,who see intheConstituenttheirrevivaland
perspective. To the people, the ones exploited and the proletariat,
what is being proposed is that they do not allow themselves to be
tied to theelectioneering process,whichopens the door tothe
restructuring of the State,andto develop the growing popular
protest to mobilize,to politicize and to organize the masses,
especially the peasantry. This second aspect is the most important
one.
III. POLITICAL SITUATION AND THE PEOPLE'S ROAD
Inorder toanalzethelctionandorintoursvescrrectly,we
need tokeep in mind thefundamental issuesarisenfrom it, and
thecurrtuIfuiofl
235
=====第235页=====
COLLECTED WORKSOFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-1987)
opportunistswamp.Wereiterate,theConstituentAssembly
electionsaretherealbeginningofthethirdrestructuringofthe
Peruvian State by the bureaucratic bourgeoisie,and the ones who
will struggle most to carry the corporativization forward as much
theyareabletimiatablintmlvatheleading
class ofthe exploiters. The ongoingState restructuringis a
consequenceof the expansionof bureaucratic capitalism and the
corporativization of Peruvian society and the elections are in fact
its beginnings. They are a preambleto"institutionalize the
structural transformations" whose consequences for the people are
in sight.Wellthen,theConstituent Assembllectionshelpfirst
andforemostthebureaucratic bourgeoisie. Thatis our main
concern. This is the starting pointin taking a position with
regards to the ongoing electoral process; and in doing it that way,
we, andthose whofollow Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung
Thought, those who really follow the road of Mariategui and who
are at the service of the proletariat and the people, cannot fail to
take into account this basic question and must judge it from the
position of the working class, infunction ofthe Peruvian
revolution. Let's analyze briefly some of these problems.
ON_THE_CONVERGENCE_OF_CLASSES;FACTIONS_AND
PARTIES IN THE REACTIONARY CAMP
For years,the bureaucratic bourgeoisie and more specifically the
armed forces, in its name,have wanted to exercise leadership of
the State and doaway with the comprador bourgeoisie and the
feudal
landowners, outside  the  margin  ordered
by the
Constitution and conform themselves to their own
statutes,
concentrating
all
State
powers,
postponing
the
political
organizationsandevencastingasideciviliansforthebenefitnot
justofthemlitarinactivvicbuvthtredmilitary.
This contradiction does not mean that it has not represented and
236
=====第236页=====
AGAINST CONSTiTUTIONAL ILLUSIONS
and the lat tatdu aripof
State Powertookthe buraucraticbourgeoisiedurinthecrisis of
the representativedemocracytoappealtothearmedforces as
sustenance of power itself, which was the institution in a position
of power to advance its interests.
But ten years haveelapsed and todaytheir main purpose is the
e, which will generate the convergenceof
restructuringof theS
theexploitingclasses,itsfactionsanditsparties.Isthisanyhing
strange? No, as Marx demonstrated. Thus, the restructuring of the
State will cause a convergenceofthetwofactions of the big
bourgeoisie,thecompradorandthebureaucraticfactions,and
especially ofthebureaucratic bourgeoisie with the feudal
landowners. However,this convergence does notexclude their
discrepancies but,theneedofrestructuringtheState and the
situation of crisis in which this develops, enlivens those
endeavors, bothfor thelandowners andfor the comprador
bourgeoisie,to recover positions and to defend their interests. In
that way,theneedtorestructuretheStatebenefitstheexploiting
classes, and what takes them to a convergence, because they must
restructure the Stateorder which enables them to preserve and
develop their exploitation andrule and providesthem witha
constitutional orderallowing a normal and periodic processof
renewalof the powersof the State. Butat the same time,the
endeavors to have the interests of their class orfaction prevail,
and above alltheir contentionforthe leadership of the State
enlivens their divergences. The historical tendency of the
exploitersundertheruleof imperialism,mainly Yankee,is the
developmentof the process of corporativization,which at this
time,is the convergence inordertorestructuretheState. Ther
proposals onthesocialpact"isa goodexample,butthis
convergence or collusion ofinterests develops
samidstsharp
intense as the  peoples
contradictions which become more
struggle develops.
237
=====第237页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
Inthecontextofthecollusionandcollisionbetweenthetwo
factions ofthebig bourgeoisie,we are able to understand the
positionsandactionsof theirpolitical parties.Thesepartiesre
grouped in two: thoseof demo-bourgeois roots,among them the
Peruvian Democratic Movement (MDP), Popular Christian Party
(PPC), Accion Popular
(AP),
principally APRA. Those of
corporativist tendencies, among
them Popular Socialist Action
(APS), Christian Democracy (DC), Socialist Revolutionary Party
(PSR) and mainly the  social-corporativist
revisionism of
"Unidad."Thoseofdemoliberalroots,morearelinkedtothe
comprador
bourgeoisie,
generally
support
representative
and differamongthemselvesin those wantingto
democracy
the Executive, such as APRA;facing
strengthen
thecurrent
politicaltimetable,somedemandimmediategeneralelections,
such as PPC_and AP,others supportthefulfillmentof_the
Constituent Assembly, such as APRA.
Thoseof a corporativist tendency,who are more linked to the
bureaucratic bourgeoisie,
generally
support the corporative
organizationofsociety,althoughdifferinginformbutnotin
substance. Some propose a "socialist society"suchas PSR,and
"Unidad" whileothers such as Christian Democratic Party speak
about a"comminatorysociety.Theydfer,then,PSRprooses
supposedly"Peruvian socialism" while"Unidad" preaches the pro-
Soviet revisionist"socialism." Thoseof corporativist tendencies, all
support, the current political timetable. Some such as DC
(Christian_ Democrats)labeledit as"rushing"the callfor a
Constituent Assembly,takingtime to decide whetheror not to
participate;similarly,facingtheConstituent,ifallwereforthe
"participation"ofthegrassrootorganiationsPSRwaant
it.
In conclusion,we must bear in mind the collusion and collisions
238
=====第238页=====
AGAINST ConsTiTuTioNaL ILLUSIONS
taking plaeitamofamogitlitcions
andits partie.Thienablesustounderstandthe paricul
decisions and positionsofeachoneand,furthermore,thiswill
enableus toanalyzeandorientourselvesin thecorrelationof
forces now emerging and which will define them during and after
the June elections.
ON THE OPPORTUNIST LINE IN ELECTIONS
Right opportunism has a long electoralist tradition in the country,
which isintimatelylinkedto DelPradoandcompanyand
revisionism which has as its voice"Unidad."Inthe general
electionsof1936,1939,1945 and 1963,opportunism tied down
the people and the working class to the band wagonof the big
bourgeoisie,of the compradorbourgeoisie before World WarII
and ofthe bureaucratic one afterwards. The essence ofthis
electoral lineandof parliamentary cretinism is synthesized in the
following proposals which sustainedthe1945 elections: "the
workers as a whole have the historical taskof strugglingfor an
alliancewiththebourgeoisie";"weno longer launch candidates
with theaim ofagitation and propaganda. Now we launch to
make representatives out of them,"
proposals which
were
accompaniedbythese statements: "wewillonlyresort tothe
present strike when the employers show such intransigence that a
peaceful solution is not possible...But before we go on striking
we mustexhaustthelawfuland peacefulmeans"; "insteadof
strikes as a tactic, which must be used only as a last resort --which
corresponds toother concrete situations--the working classes
must propitiatecompromises and peaceful solutions ofthe
problems by wayofstateorganisms." These are theright
opportunist teses wichacomaedthllowinwitheads
to the peasantry:"wemusttake intoourhands the sloganof
making consciou votersoutthethousandsofpeasants ad
indigenous individuals."
239
=====第239页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
And essentiallythesethesesare theoneswhichonce more, at a
higherlevelanwitmoactualieationltionsguidethe
corporativistrevisionismof"Unidad"in thegreatestcapitulation
of its dark history. But is this happening only with "Unidad? No.
These arealso seen onthemagazine"Marka," thatwith
increasing persistence is calling the peopleand the working class
to be tied down to the tail of the bureaucratic bourgeoisie. But the
problems do not end here, and what is more serious is that
electioneering is impacting the people's own ranks,through the
position of revolutionarists who despite the"reasons"they invoke,
they are supporting the third restructuringofthe State, a position
which has taken them, in an open renunciation of their principlees,
to join on one-side the revisionism of those having as their voice
"Mayoria," as is the case of UDP,and onthe other, ofthe
Trotskytes in Focep
ON THE ROAD OF THE PEOPLE
All this takesus to propose toourselvestheposition ofthe
proletariat and the people in the face of the elections, to draw the
fences clearly and sharply,more so if there are organizations that
do not compromiseand openlyreject the capitulation and,even
more,if we havetheobligationofserving the people and
cooperate in the development of their class conscience.
Having placed the elections for the Constituent Assembly within
the period of the third restructuring of the Stateand forging the
beginning of the armed struggle, nowadays that the crisis becomes
harsher on the people and the people's protests develop, and
participatin inctins doe ot support the pltait,nor the
people,rtollucisie,
the exploitersand imperialism.To participate in theelections for
the Constituent Assemblyisto deviatetherevolutionfromits
240
=====第240页=====
AGAINST CONsTiTUTioNaL ILLUSiONS
road,istopuitioswam;snceit wulowonstitutionl
Constitution,nlimatlithcto.It,isythesis,to
wanttotakethepeoplebytheoldelectoralroadofright
opportunism, of which the hardened champion is the revisionism
of"Unidad" commanded by Del Prado and Company.
FacingtheConstituentAssemblyelections,theonly correct
position is the non participation, the boycott. What is needed is to
apply the teachingsof the great Lenin. Lenin applied the boycott
preciselyagainsta Duma,a "representativeorganization," which
wouldelaboratea Constitutiontotheserviceoftheprevailing
order in Tsarist Russia,and to reach this conclusion he relied on
two bases: first, participation would deviate the revolution from its
road and, second,
l,anincreasing
revolutionary process was
developing. We must analyzeand apply this thesis in accordance
with our concrete conditions. Objectively,in our country the
politicalperiodwhichwedevelopis,on oneside,thethird
restructuring ofthe State whichis led
bythe bureaucratic
bourgeoisie aiming at completing the corporativization of society.
On the other,the development of the masses takes us to the task
of initiating the armed struggle, which the proletariat must carry
on undertheleadershipof its Party. Thatis thefirstquestion
Lenin had in mind. The second one,isthe ascending people's
struggle ending up in armed struggle. In our country the road is
not that of the insurrection in the city,but of an armed struggle
in the countryside, of surrounding the cities from the countryside
through a protracted People's War;among us the uprising is,
essentially, the uprising of the peasants movement, and it is out of
thisthattharmedrugglewillcomthhstorofthcoury
and thedecadeofthe1960's provethatconvincingly;that is how
we must understand, in our case, the problem of the ascension of
the masses which Lenin had in mind.
241
=====第241页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1 (1968-1987)
ToupholdthenonparticipationintheConstituentAssemly
elections,thecall for theboycott,thegeneratingofamovement
of rejectioofthction,icodemedas"f-wigianl
disorder."Howevr,thationllablthattiestocovertheacts
with a shower of words; because what is being debated here is not
the infantilism or senility of anyone. What is being debated is the
real,objectivesituationoftheclassstruggle inour country; what
is being debated is on which period we are now in, and what is its
characteristics and its perspective. V
Whatis being debatedis
whether or not the mass movement in our country,mainly the
peasantry,leads us ornotto thearmedstruggle.What is in
debateisifitisappopratetosowlectoralillusionstopropagate
electoralism,if that isany help to the proletariat,tothe people, to
the democratic revolution. That is what is being debated, and we
have the obligation to debate; only by defining these questions we
will beable to ascertain which positionis the correct one,then
toiltoimplement it in deeds notonlyin words. Anyother
attitude andeventhose who want to silence with words,with
labels and mountains of paper, are old and obsolete maneuvers of
right opportunism, here and everywhere else. This is the position
of the Road of the people, of the Road of Mariategui, confronting
today the ongoing electoral process and facing the restructuring of
the State. This is a road which today demands from us, more
insistently thanyesterday,
that we struggle to mobilize, to
politicize andto organize the masses ofthe workers, and
especially the peasantry as the principalforce of our revolution,
andtheproletariat astheleadingforce whose direction is
synthesized in itsorganized vanguard,byits Communist Party,
the Party of_Mariategui whose reconstitution isabout tobe
crowned. Let's guide ourselves bythe wordsof President Mao
Tse-tung: "Only when the workers and peasants,who constitute
90percentofthepopulation,havebeen mobilized, will be
possibletvthowialismandualim"t's apply 
orderofMariategui:"Theorganizationofworkerand peasats
242
=====第242页=====
AGAINST CONSTITUTIoNAL ILLUSIONS
ona strictclassconsciousnesscharacteristheobjectiveofour
effort and our propaganda."
AGAINST THE CONSTITUTIONALIST
ILLUSIONS, FOR
THE STATE OF NEW DEMOCRACY!
LET'S
RETAKE
MARIATEGUI
AND
RECONSTITUTE
HIS
PARTY!
LONG
LIVE
MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO
TSE-TUNG
THOUGHT!
=====第243页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
FOR THE NEW FLAG
IX PLENArY Session Of THE CENTRAL CoMMitteE, June 7, 1979
The Flag
Many are calledbutfew are chosen. Weare not theonlyones.
We are all subjected to the storm; the wind blows away the leaves,
but the seeds remain. In 1927, a great storm led to the birth of the
Communist Partyof Peru (PCP). The Partyhasentered a great
storm;everythingwillbesetablaze. Fora longtime,we have
sought to become a polar center. Now is the time. The path we
areundertakingis correctandalltheproblemswefacewillbe
resolved.
Today is the dayof pledging to theflag,butours is the Red Flag,
a distinctone,with the hammerand sickle.Ourflag isabsolutely
red; all those who rebel have red fl ags.
The Ninth Symphony is long and beautiful, it is the expression of
the bourgeois victory, the song of the triumphant bourgeoisie. Its
authorlovedliberty,he struggledforit. He wrote the Third
symphonyfor Napoleon,but whenhisidoltrampled upon
freedom,he statedthat it was nolongerorhim,butforliberty.
The NinthSymphonyhasone characteristic,a slightrumbling
sound which rises into a crescendo until bursting into a musical
explosion. In the human voice, the voices of the choir, is the earth
that is converted into music. Above the background of the choir,
four individuals sing;the masses generate those voicesthat sing
higher,butthereisonevoicethatreachesvenhghtll.ver
before wasanyoneabletosing it. Neverbefore wasthispitch
reached,utinthietuytrmaneforts,whatwas erly
244
=====第244页=====
FOR THE NEW FLAG
impossllt
man cannot accomplish!
Theyweretheflagsof thebourgoisieintheirhighestepoch,
which haspassed away. Now comes thenew humanity, the
humanityof joy,theproletaiattheonlyblazethatwill never be
extinguished! We are one of its sparks. We are a small part of this
immense bonfire, it is our turn to set them on fire. The sparks are
fanned bystorm winds. Leteveryonefulfilltheir journeyand
allowtheproletariattocarryoutitshistoricaltasks.Theworking
classwilldefineitspathitselfnothingwillprevailagainstit,it
willdestroyallobstaclesandaworldfulloflightwillinevitably
come. Who will be able to contain us? What are we? Sparks!
What can we fear? Can muffles silence the furyof the cannons?
Can a spark arise against the bonfire? Can the old foam survive in
the storm? Much scum will rot in the stagnant sea.
How can silence calm the thunder? The sparks cannot contain the
flames,the upheavalsare born in the vortexof fire and nothing
can detain them. The hammer is brandishedbythe working
classes,theanvilisthestruggle;everyonewillfulfilltheirtask.It
is foolish to try to destroy the matter.
Silence canoccur to peoplebut not fortheclass.Theclass ves
birthtothePartyand thPrtyieandbeginstowalkti the
child oftherevolution. The Party can never be crushed or
destroyed. ThePartywill inevitablytriumph.ThisPartyforged
itself,Mariategui is itsfounder.It is done. How canhistory be
repeated? The Reconstitution came and the deed was done,it
cannot be turned back. Our eyes turn towards other dawns, other
thingsarise,whylookback?Afactisafac,itcannotbeedon.
Are we going to repeal time,ouracts thatare sealed in matter?
already concluding our summit.
245
=====第245页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
There is an old song:
"Who is that who has her sights like the sunrises, beautiful as the
moon,illumiating asthesun,imposing like thearmiesof waving
flags?"
Why look backwards when the decision hasalready beentaken;
we need to look forward to see the dawn and what arises out of
the fireof therevolution. We will carry out thearmedstruggle
and that is what we must do. We repeat: that is what we must do,
and we mustdo it!Itwill be carriedoutbecause it is necesary
and nothing can detain us, absolutely nothing can detain us. How
can the grain detain the wheels of the mill?It would be converted
into dust.
Anotherchapter in history shouldbegin,ourvision should be
turned towards it. We must begin to climb_slopesof another
mountain in order to scale more brilliant summits,this is how it
shall be. Farfrom me,awayfromall pessimism,letus develop
optimism in its place.If we have some pessimism it is the result
of the injustice of this world.
Behind everythingI say isourflag. Aflagthatisthesourceof
hope,a redflag unfurledto the wind. Fora longtime some
wanted to strike our political line on two flanks but we stated that
we would pass through the middle. We accomplishedthis with
our heads held high,beating drums and our vision dreaming of a
distant future. The deeds go on hammering you and your mind
opens,generating the idea. Weare notabandoning banners like
some foolish person would think becauseour hands were not
made for dropping the flag but for unfurling it.
Fora longtimeourflaghasfltredover thesummit.ned
246
=====第246页=====
FOR THE NEW FLAG
to leap into theunknown but notforself-destruction. We have
commencedtheleap,theflagisfirmlyplantedinthehighest
summit.Afoginterposes butourarmed handswill riseup with
the masses.
The flag has already been placed on another higher summit, once
again it has been unfurled, the drums begin to beat and the wind
is agitated.Theredflagisabeautifulcry,itcallsallofus. We
shallheedthe message. Theredflagfluttersmuchhigherand
towards a new summit,there is where we must go and when we
arrive we must raise the flag to an even higher peak; we can do no
more. The revolution cannot be detained,that is a law,our
destiny. Whyour silence? They arefragile drops, particles,
muffledvoices in opposition and somber sparks that want to
negate thebonfire.Why arethe sparksgoing to revealthemselves
against the bonfire? Because some have littlefaith, hope and
charity whileour spirits shouldbe great. We have taken three
theological virtues in order to interpret them. Paul stated: man of
faith, hope,and charity. One is worth nothing,the masses are
worth everything. If we desire to be partof something it should
be part of the masses. What's the use of talking about individual
glories? Our love, faith and hopes are collective and achievable, al
three in one fl  ag.
We had one small storm cloud and Marxism swept it away. There
areeyesthatdon'tsee,deafears andclosedhearts,thatyou
yourselves close. What do you want to preserve? Silence? Aging
scum?Here there isonly one thing to uphold,the flag ofthe
Party that has been placed on another summit. If we are part of
the Left, we have to be consumed with passion because that fervor
will bringaboutthedestructionoftheforces so muchtalked
about. The bonfire is ablaze. We should burn ourold idols, burn
everything we adored and extol what we degraded.Whatelse can
247
=====第247页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
cosmos "I will develop?" Imagine its roarof laughter!
Theysay thathipaofthcosmostuctureditlaE
over 15billionyearsbillionofyearsinordertoevelo
Communism. How long does one man last, much less the simple
twinkling of a dream? We are nothing more than a pale shadow
which pretendstoriseupagainstall thisprocessofmatter. We
will be its dream at its conclusion. Arrogant bubbles,is this what
we want to be? Aninfinitesimal part that wants to rise up against
15 billion years. What arrogance, what rot!Old,aging seas, rten
bytimefeudal,bourgeoisandimperialistperiods,sewagein
decomposition. Whatelse is it? Ridiculous stench. Let us be
materialists!Communists!Letus demonstrateit,it is necessary
and no one can oppose necessity.
Marx understoodthe new road to traverse;Lenin assumed
responsibilityfor starting the bonfire. Maois Mao because he
soaredlike no other,he had a historical vision,heforesaw the
centuries, he showed us thousands of years in brief pages and he
completedhis mission androle. He stated: I have made the
revolutionbyoverthrowing ChiangKai-shekandcreatingthe
Great CulturalRevolution,I have served nothingelseandour
advancementis smallin comparisonto whereit shouldbe.I
wanted to reach a more definitive summit butI failed. Hetells
Chiang Ching: you can do it, if you fail you will be hurledoff the
heights, and if you fall then the guerrilla war must begin.
As Communists in formation,what path do we want to follow?
Who are we? We are nothing except Communists.
It is necessaryto definetheproblem today.Wefacethe same
problemsfacedbytheRight Opportunist Line,butweare the
Left.Hereiubidiry,ur obmiwththem,if
248
=====第248页=====
FOR THE NEW FLAG
problmie
burnthefutile,itshouldwashitselfcleanseitself,remaining
clean. It should clean itsstable and shed theold crust in a frank,
truthful and honest way. Each of us responds to what happens to
the other,we are childrenof the same cause.It is easy forus
because we are theLeft. Let everyone demonstrate his/her
condition as a Communist. We made the Party and that is what
we are.The massesare ready,theyare awaiting us. They want
light not shadows,swords not butter,fire notice.TheLeft should
fulfill its role.The problem is simple,evenfor those with a hard
spirit. The problem is to open your hearts with resolution,it is
easy to do. The revolution demands it. Enough of the sewageof
individualism.
In this new epoch we must wash our souls and wash them well.
Think of the revolution and the Party which implies the people
and the class,necessity demands it. Let us go to the rootofour
problems but without involving our egos. Let us go to the root of
our positions in order to nail our spirits definitively to the flag of
the Party.
Some see only themselves, they live in a house of mirrors; you are
Communists,raise your fists,strike out and once again the blood
will boil to tear down the wall. That is what must be done.
The problem is having twoflags in thesoul,one black and the
other red. We are leftists, let us make a holocaust with the black
flag, it is easy for everyone to do so.If not the rest will do it.
TheRedFlagwillprevail,theblackflagwillbeuprooted.Let
everyone demonstrate his or her condition as Communist. The
other windsareblowing inoucountryandeveryone analyes
249
=====第249页=====
their problems within their lineand muddies their wornflags.
Something helps us: our Flag is much higher. How can we not
fulfill our role! I hope we can complete it. I hope.
250
=====第250页=====
DEVELOP
THE
GROWING
PEOPLE'S
PROTEST!
PCP - CENTRAL COMMITTeE - SeEPTEMBER, 1979
"Whether it iscorrecto not,ideologicaland politicalline decides
everything. If the Party's line is correct,we have everything: if we
don't have fighters, we will have them; if we don't have weapons,
we will get them; and if we don't have Power,we will conquer it.
If the line is incorrect, we will lose all we have obtained."
MAO TSE-TUNG
Politics,whichistheclasstruggleorpower,haenteredintoour
country in a moment of great importance. Counterrevolution, the
bureaucraticroad,led by thebureaucratic bourgeoisieas a faction
of the big bourgeoisie, is developing the third restructuring of the
State in this century. Ever since it approved the new Constitution,
it aimsat celebrating generalelections inMayof1980. On the
other hand, the revolution, the democratic road, whose axis is the
proletariat,strengthensthe growing popular protestand orients
itself toitsdevelopmentinfunction ofinitiatingthe armed
struggle.
The central point on the current political question is the existence
or nonexistence of a revolutionary situation. The definition of this
problem isof vital transcendence for the people and is the object
ofpersistetlhadandfundamentaldbaTousinthhtof
Marxism,
goingthrough
developing
our
country is
a
revolutionary situation, and consequently, the strategy and tactics
to follow must depart from this reality. Furthermore, all Peruvian
politics at thepresenttime,thestruggle betweenrevolution and
counterrevolution, cannot be treated
outside  the frame  of
251
=====第251页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
analyzing this situation.
Todayin Peru,theproblemoftherevolutionarysituationis not
understood,and as a result the monumental political mistakes
madeon thepole'ide,lws.Fromthundertandingf the
existenceof a developing revolutionarysituation in the country,
derivesthe correctness orincorrectnessoftheideological and
politicallineoftheproletariat,itsapplicationandperspectie.
These problems cannot be judgedwith certainty,but in the light
of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought,specifically by the
applicationof Mao Tse-tung Thought to the backward countres,
that is,semifeudaland semicolonial countries,andfromthe
analysis oftheclass strugglein our society inthe present
situation. Only in this way, is it possible to understand the class
struggle today,manageits laws and developtheroadofthe
people from the position of the proletariat.
1. WE
ELIVEINAREVOLUTIONARY
SITUATION
IN
DEVELOPMENT
Peruvian society lives in a revolutionary situation in development
that is thefundamentalquestionand theonly correctpointof
departure for the politics of the proletariat. We can arrive at the
understanding of this  reality if  we
baseourselves onthe
conception of the proletariat,from thestudyand application of
thethesesof Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thoughtonthe
"revolutionary situation,"theseswhicharesimpleandclearand
which,however,are crudelytwistedfromthepositionofrght
opportunism,  positionexprssed mainly in the pople's camp by
"revolutionarism." Forthatreason,todaymore thanever,if we
want to serve theproletariatandtherevolution,we must susain
ourselvesirmlinMrxismandapplitcrrctlyandcisivly,
252
=====第252页=====
DEVELOP THE GROWwinG PeopLe' PrTET
follow facinthethirdrestructuringoftheStatandelections,
particularlyfacingfutureelection. Thesearetheerrorswhose
principal consequence is to focus in the planof reaction,and not
in the development of the revolution.
IN
THE
REVOLUTION
THE
NATIONAL-DEMOCRATIC
COUNTRY
When hefoundedthe CommunistParty,Mariátegui established
that in Peru,the revolution would have two stages: democratic
and socialist; the first one is the prerequisite and condition for the
second,and canonly be ledby the proletariat through itsParty,
the Communist Party. It is in the first stage of the revolution that
President Mao Tse-tung defined as the new democratic revolution,
that is, anti-imperialist and anti-feudal, since it has to scrub away
the feudalism that subsists and break off the imperialist domain.
As history has proven to society, this can only be accomplished by
the armed struggle, that is the People's War, following the path of
surrounding the cities from the countryside. This is a fundamental
truth from whichall proletarian politics must be based. The road
of the armed struggle startsfrom the countryside to the cities, is
supported mainly by the peasantry,who rise up in arms, under
the leadership of theCommunist Party,generates the people's
armed forces as the principal form of organization. It is the form
in which revolutionary violence is synthesized in semi-feudal and
semi-colonial countries. This is a revolutionary violence which is
precisely theveryessenceof Marxism. Sobeing a Marist,
applying
intheoryandin
practice the conception of the
proletariat, in countrieslike ours, demands to subordinate
ourselves to thearmedstruggleand,therefore,centertheactivity
instartingit,if ithasnotstarted,anddevelopingit if it has
already started. Thismateris clearandsimpleand thereisno
Thought,and it is also clearif wetruly serve the
Tse-tungT
253
=====第253页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
proletal
in empty words.
Alltheaboveareelementaltruthsoftheinternationalexperience
and were thoroughly debated in our country in the decade of the
1960s, a time when Peruvian Communists, reaffirmed and upheld
the great thesesofMariategui and adhered themslves to the great
development which Mao Tse-tung Thought meant for Marxism-
Leninism,and concludedthatin the countrytherevolutionis
democraticand can only be fulfilled by armed struggleand not by
elections,following the road from the countryside to the city and
taking as its mainforcethe peasantry,especially the poor
peasantry.This is a greatexperienceofour people,ofour class
andof Communism in Peru. It is an experience which nobody
who upholds Marxism can forget to take into account the current
conditions of development.
WetheCommunistsinthecountry,andalltherevolutionaries
must ask ourselves a simple question: why is it that the working
class has not yet conquered Power in our country? The answer is
concise: It is because up to now,an armed struggle has not been
developed nor have we initiated it nor applied the principlesof
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung Thought. There is in Peru,a
longelectoral experienceand many times the people have been
called, andtherevolutionaries have beentaken to participatein
elections. As a result, there have not been anyfundamental
benefitsfor the class or for the people and much less,of course,
conducivetothe conquestofPower. The classand the people
have been called to participate on the supposition that
transcendental decisions and consequences were at play orstake.
That way,the massesof the people put their hopes and became
focused on the elections as the main task, which disoriented them
and took them away from theirown road. What have the class
andtheopltoutofucctoalctvttth
254
=====第254页=====
DEVELOP THE GROWING PEopLE's PrOTEST
a few spots in thechamberofdeputiesorthesenate,whih
ultimatelonlybenefitheisupposedrepresentatives,haveonly
helped to sow parliamentary cretinism,fuel upopportunism and
reap disillusionments. Well then,inourcountry,there is avery
dark electoraltrajectoryandabitteexperience wecannot forget.
We must remember that in every electoral process in the country,
opportunism goeswildsowingillusions,dreamingabouttaking
up positions in government,invoking afeigned defense ofthe
democratic advances and generating
masses,
offering  great
uncontrolled greed and appetite. All these politicians aim at riding
on the people's struggle in functionof their own dark purposes.
These are concrete lessonsof our country and they show that the
actors can change or survive, but electoral opportunism remains,
and nothing comeoutof it for the people, except taking them off
the correct path.
We also have had many popular struggles and even insurrectional
actions in the cities of Peru,not to even mention the so-called
"revolutions," whichhave merely been military pronouncements
or coups d'etat that at one point or another even involved sections
of the people. However, none of these actions, some of them very
heroic actions,have resulted in powerforthe classorforthe
people,but were verybloodily crushed bythe Army,ortheir
outcome has only served and helped one faction or another of the
exploiting classes. This shows thattheroad to take power is
neitherthe uprising northeinsurrection in the cities. Thatis
anotherfundamentalexperience ofourrevolutionary struggle,
which must vaccinate us againstinsurrectionalroads ostensibly
centered in the working
g class, as the principalforce of the
revolution in the country.
Similarl,ithoutyiemanpaatstruglaen
carried out,but noneof them were developed as an armed
255
=====第255页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
them land,and muchlesshavetheygenerateda new Power,a
new Statefortheclasandforthepeople.Linkedtothe large
struggleofMandtheELN,butotllwinthconptioof
the proletariaton thePeople's War, nor being properly linked to
the peasantry,theywerecrushed.However,these gullaactions
left great experiences for our people.
What do all of these facts show?They simply show that in more
than 50 years of the Communist Party and revolution of the new
democracy up to now, the working class has not taken Power and
therefore, the people of Peru have been unable to free themselves
of imperialist domination or to sweep away feudalism. However,
we have participated in many electoral processes. The masses have
rebelledinthe cities,thepeasantshavebattledandspilledtheir
blood heroically,and we even have had guerrilas,although not a
People's War. Despiteallof this,theproletariatandthe people
have not been able to conquerPower. Thus,up to the present
time, the democratic revolution, the revolution of new democray,
the national-democratic revolution has not been developed
through armedstruggle accordingtotheprinciplesof People's
WarsustainedinMarxism-Leninism-MaoTse-tung
Thought.
Therefore, we have notfollowed the road of encircling the cities
from the countrysideand,consequently,wehave not created
revolutionary support bases in the country norhave we built
revolutionary Power sustained by the people's armed forces. This
is the reason why we have not destroyed the old social order and
the working class, and the people have not conquered Power.
What followsfromall that? Concretely, up to now,the national-
democratic revolution has not begun to be developed in its
highest ormand,theor,the pincipaltaskof thevolution in
Peru is to initiatethearmedstruggle;thatis thecentral taskof
256
=====第256页=====
DEVELOP THE GROWinG PEoPLeE's PrOTEST
the democraticrevolution.All must be done for this purpose and
thatis,consequently,thecentralactivitytowardwhichal
communistsandrevolutionaries mustorientthemselvesif they
truly want to beat theserviceoftheproletariat,thepeopleand
the revolution.In that way,the pending task of the democratic
revolution in our country is to begin the armed sruggle.
In general terms, many revolutionaries and some organizations in
the midstofthe people are in agreement with the above, but
claim that while that is the strategy tofollow,current conditions
do notallow us tofocus on initiating the armed struggle.
Accordingtothem,there is no revolutionary situation, and
therefore,we must centerourselves on activities like mobilizing
the masses even on elections, precisely,they say,to generate a
revolutionary situation. Thus,the debate on whether or not a
ysituation exists in the country, has become a
revolutionary
fundamental problem of our politics,which must be judged very
seriouslyin the lightof Marxism and the analysisof our own
reality. Let's address this isue taking as a basis the thesis of Lenin
and Mao Tse-tung.
LENIN AND THE REVOLUTIONARY SITUATION
Lenin setforthfundamentaltheses abouttherevolutionary
situation. Analyzing the great strike movements of the working
class andthepeople's struggleintheseconddecadeofthis
century intheoldtsaristRussia,heestablishedthattheirroots,
and their cause, were the existence of a revolutionary situation. To
illustrate this matter he wrote the following:
"Russia lives in a revolutionarysituation becauseof the crushing
oppressioofthevatmjorityofthepopulationousthe
proletariat,butninetenthsofthesmall producers,mainlyte
257
=====第257页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
sharpenedpsso,hiry,tear
rightsnibla
disagreementwiththestateof productiveforcesin Russiawith
the degreeofconcienceandthelevloftheivindicatofte
1
masses ...
Can we saythatsuch condition do notexisttoda inur
country,and for many years?It isevident thatthese conditions
are present in Peruvian society and,furthermore,such conditions
have entered these pastfew years in a process of profound
worsening; do we need to prove this? Do we need to prove that
"nine tenths"of especially the peasantryof Peru,are subjected to
a growing oppression and exploitationof the Peruvian proletariat?
Do we need to prove that thehunger,the misery,the denial of
theirrightsand thehumiliationisinflicteduponthepeopleof
Peru? Allthat is so evident that nobody can denyit and,
moreover,we don't need to look at the distant past,andall that
has been worsening since 1968, since the present regime took over
Power.It has been getting worse by the day up to the crisis we
suffer today,since 1975. Can anyone deny the harsh realityour
country suffers? Nobody. No one who is based on the most
elementaryobjective analysisof our reality can deny it. Precisely,
the existence of these conditions of oppression and exploitation
arethemselves thebase of therevolutionary situation. For this
situation toemerge clearly,wealso needanother condition,as
Lenin himself says:
"Oppression,howevergreat,notalwaysresults inarevolutionary
situation in a country. For the revolution to explode,it is not
sufficient thattheonesbelow do not want to go on living as
before.Itiaocthatoaboveebleton
managing,and ruling as they did uptothat time."
258
=====第258页=====
DEVELOP THE GROWInG PEoPLe's PrOTEST
whattheobjectiveconditionsis.Hesynthesizedthemintwo
cases:
–that those below don't want to go on living as before and,
- those aboveare unable to go on managing and ruling as they
did up to now.
Those are the two conditions that generate mobilization of the
masses, their struggles, and the strike movement of the
proletariat,among others.It is not,then,the mobilizationof the
that generates  the
revolutionary situation, butthe
masses
opposite;therevolutionarysituation,theobjective conditionof
the revolution, is what cause the mobilization. This is their effect.
In addition, it is very important to note that Lenin considers that
the revolutionarysituation generatesa political crisisat the very
base of the State; in his own words, he states:
"Russia is in the middle of a political crisis on a nationalscale,
and it is preciselya crisis whichaffectsthebasesofthe stae
structure,andin no way some minor part of it. It affects the
foundationsof the building and not thisor that accessory, this or
that fl oor."
Thisisfundamental,andtherevolutionarysituationaffectsthe
very bases,the foundationsof the State and therefore "a reformist
exit ofthe situation" is not possible. Patches or sutures are
inadequate,and theonly possible solution is a revolutionary exit.
Lenin himself,
masterfully
summarized
the
revolutionary
situation, as follows:
"The conditionsof the masses of the population in Russia, the
worseningof their situationby virtueof theagrarianpolicy (to
which the feudallandownershadtoappeal as theironly hope,
259
=====第259页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
the internationalsituationandthecharacterofthegeneral
politicalcrisisinour country,constitutethe sum total ofthe
objective conditions which makethe situation in Russia
revolutionary, due to the impossibilityof resolving the tasks of the
bourgeoisrevolution continuing onthisroad,andusingthe
existing means(in the hands ofthe government andof the
exploiting classes)."
All thatseems to havebeen writtenforour country today! We
highlight theproblemof"thoseabove";obviously inPeru, those
above cannot continue to govern and administer things as they
did up to now.The proofof this is thethird restructuringofthe
State that is being stipulated in the new Constitution. Evidently, it
has to do with the basisof thestate,itsfoundations,and affects
the entire state order.
The transcribed quotation of Lenin clearly summarizes a situation
very much like that in our country today,a resultof the existent
objective conditions and revolutionary situation in our country.
However, in Peru there is a serious confusion about this problem.
Some erroneously consider that the mobilization of the masses is
the causeforthe existence of therevolutionary situation. This
ideaobviously contradicts theexceedinglyclearthesesformulated
by Lenin, and it has a purpose: to prioritize the reformist struggle
(movimiento reinvindicativo) of the masses in order to postpone
the revolution,the seizure ofPower and,ultimately,toblock
revolutionary violence inorder to goafter theelectoral processes,
andpropagate parliamentary cretinism. Othersin
thecountry
formulate that the revolutionary situation derives and develops by
complementing theobjective conditions withthe subjective
conditions, whichindicates another serious error. Subjective
forwardthevolution,ashetatdithellowing:
260
=====第260页=====
DEVELOP THE GRowiNG PEopLE's PROTEST
"Neithertheoppressionofthosebelownorthecrisisof those
above,is enough to producetherevolution-theonly thing these
willachieve is theputrefactionofthecountry,if thecountry in
question lacksarevolutionaryclass capableoftransformingthe
passive state ofoppression into an active state of wrath and
insurrection.'
Therefore,a revolutionary situation or objective conditions of the
revolution,are notthe same as thesubjective conditions. The
latter are the classand the instruments capable of converting the
revolutionary situation into revolutionary violence,which in our
country meananarmedstruggle,the unitedfront,a Partyto
manage bothprolaatapablofadinandulllinoe
as the leading class, and a peasantry capable of rising up in arms.
MAO TSE-TUNG AND_THE OBJECTIVE SITUATIONIN
THE BACKWARD COUNTRIES
President Mao Tse-tung uses the term objective situation to
analyze the revolutionary situation or theobjective conditions of
the revolution and their development in backward countries, that
is, semi-feudal and semi-colonial. He startsoff from the need to
penetrate to theessenceofthings and notstay with simple
appearances. To him,the main thing is to considerthe semi-
feudal base and imperialistoppression of the backward countries.
Under these conditions, the revolution is democratic, that is, anti-
feudaland anti-imperialist, whose development demands the
armed strugglefromthecountrysidetothecity through
revolutionary supportbasesas the New Statewhichbegins to
andsimultaneously,theoldbureaucraticlandowning
emerge
reactionaryStateisbeingdestroyed.Thisisfundamentalin
understandinthespcifi conditionthattherevolutionary
situationhasinsemiualansem-colonalcietyandthe
development of these societies.
261
=====第261页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
President Mao Tse-tung establishes the conditions that conform to
the objectivesituation and also the contradictions thatexist,and
from which the road of the revolution derives, which in essence is
the armed struggle,and the inevitable triumphof the revolution.
As stated in point fourof his work,"A Single Spark Can Set the
Prairie on Fire,"
he
highlights
the
following
points
and
−
contradictions:
On the international level, he discusses the development of the
contradiction between the imperialist countries. Evidently,ithas
increased between the two superpowers,Yankee imperialism and
Soviet social-imperialism.These contradictions have an impact on
our country as contradictions in the midstof the exploiters,
mainlythebigbourgeoisie,as wehaveseenlatelyin itstwo
factions:
the bureaucraticbourgeoisie andthe
comprador
bourgeoisie, which far from ameliorating, will develop further.
He alsoillustrates the contradiction between the reactionary
rulers and the great masses of taxpayers. The growing state
apparatus necessarilyendsupraising taxes,whichfall uponthe
massesof the people and,besides,thestateeconomy develops
amidst constantbudgetary crises. Theprocedurethatisbeing
followed under the current regime and the situation today proves
this. In addition, the masses of people are the ones, who through
indirect taxation, support the state expenditures more and more; a
situation which is getting worse and will continue to worsen.
Contradiction between imperialism and national industry. In
the countrythiscontradictionisevident;thenationalindustry is
increasinglysubject toimperialist domination anda
access to
markets is more restricted every day. Ontheother hand, the
aggressionbyforeignimports(e.gcommodities)handledby
imperialism,restrctsthedevelopmentofthenationalndustry,
andthefinancialimpositionsofimperialism,sinksit intoan
economicrecession,whichis worsenedbytheworldwideris.
262
=====第262页=====
DEVELOP THE GROWING PEOPLE's PrOTEST
As Mariateguiadimpialismdoesolowthdevelopment
of a national industry.
Contradiction between the bourgeoisie and the working class.
Thecapitalist,"yintudethecisiandolvethiproblms
deepen the exploitation of the workers,who in turn oppose and
resist these measures." This statement of fact by President Mao is
proven to satiety every day among us. We see today the profound
crisis the country has been suffering in the lastfew years. In
synthesis, we see how brutally salaries have been cut. The
workday has been increased and harsh working conditions have
been imposed so
as to safeguard entrepreneurial  profits.
Furthermore, we see the resistanceof the proletariat through the
persistent strike struggle, even whenfaced with all sorts of
persecution  and
repression,
suspension ofconstitutional
guarantees and a state of emergency.
Further deepening ofthe contradiction between the
landowning class and the peasantry. In the country,the State has
assumed collectionoflandrents throughthe agrarian debt,
imperialistinvestment mainlythroughthe agrarian bank and
controlof theentire systemof associations (cooperatives,SAIS,
etc.) in agricultural productionand,besides,it maintains servile
forms of production, and is included in the old landowners feudal
exploitation. In this way,thesituationofthe peasantry has
worsenedby the evolution offeudalism resultingfrom the
agrarian law,and the penetrationof bureaucratic capitalism into
the countryside.
Merchants in national commodities and independent producers
see themselves pushed more and more toward bankruptcy. Today,
the economic crisis clearly showsthevalidityof this premise. It
sufficestorecallthesituationofbankruptcy confronted bythe
small industrial producers and small merchants,as well as small
miners. We musthighlightthe serious situationfacedbyhe
ambulatory merchants whoareaffectedbya brutalrepression,
andmuchrepressionfallsuponthemButthecriseshitthe
263
=====第263页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
medium producers as wel.
The reactionary government increases its troops without limits.
Throughoutthe country thedevelopmentand reinforcementof
the reactionaryarmed and policeforce isevident,both in sizeof
contingentsand in weaponry. This is shown by the creationof
new repressivebodiesofthestateandthewideningof thir
functions, and  the  greater  control they
yexertover society.
Inevitably, this process will develop further.
Hunger and banditryextends throughoutthe country. The
popular asochut,iis
is even worse. The masses,the peasantry,especially the poor
peasant, s
paired withsickness,which mostlyaffectsinfantsand youth.
Criminality increases more and more and cow-thievery (abigeato)
grow in the countryside protected by the authorities themselves.
The majority of the peasants' masses and the poor in the cities
find themselves in a situation inwhichtheyare barely able to
survive. This comparison, which President Mao made in China is
also acruelealitythat prvailmonus,mierentenchesitself
more and more amidst the popular masses of our nation.
Becauseof the lackof budgetfunds,manystudentsfearthat
they will notbe able to continuetheir studies. Thisis also a
reality for the country,astheeducational budget as well as the
health budgetiscut. Theeducation sectorisfacedwith a
profound financial crisis. As a result, many students do not study
for lack schoolsordropschool in large numbers becausethey
don't have the resources available to them.
Due to the backward characterof production, many graduating
students have no hopeof finding employment in their vocation or
academicfield,and thousandsof them have to work ianyhing
they can.
ThatisooTultioay
situation in the  backward
countries.
s.Inanalyzing
the
264
=====第264页=====
DEVELOP THE GROWING PEOPLE's PROTEST
contradictionspresentintheobjective situation,hefindsthe
material base thatsustainsarmedstruggle,its developmentand
victory.From the above,we can see how in our country, we have
a similarobjective situationandhowthesame contradictions
Theseare
develop. This is a factthat nobody can deny.
contradictions thatare developing,and in no way can they be
resolved by a reactionary government. Furthermore,weall know
that these contradictions are not being resolved,but continue to
sharpen,so theobjective situation in our country is and will be
each time more propitious to the development of revolution, and
to the developmentof a superiorform,the armed struggle.
Consequently,the most importantmatterthatconcernsllofus
is to start thearmed struggle.This is an unavoidable perspectie
that our countryhas. Whatotherroad can wefollow in Peru?
What otherhopes can our popular masses and the proletariat
have? President Mao
Tse-tung
stated
thefollowing
he
as
concluded his analysis:
"Byunderstandingallthese contradictions,wewillrealizethe
desperate situation, the chaotic state faced by China today and we
willseethatinevitablysoon. Therevolutionledaganstthe
imperialists,the military chiefsand the landowners,will emerge.
All of China isfull of driedfirewood,which will soon burn in a
great conflagration."Since our countryfollows the same laws of
revolution, has a similar experience and the same perspective,can
we think in any other way? No, not at all.
President Mao Tse-tung established a brilliant distinction between
developing
a
revolutionary
situationand
a
stationary,
revolutionary situation, as can be seen in point threeof chapter I
ofhis work,"WhyRedPower CanExistin China?" Hestated
that in a semi feudal and semicolonial country such as ours, there
is always a revolutionary situation,orobjective situation as he
calls it,for thedevelopmentof anarmed struggle,howeverthis
265
=====第265页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1 (1968-1987)
occurs in two forms:
a stationary revolutionary situation and,
a revolutionary situation in development.
Byanalyzing
ghistheses we are able to saythat a stationary
revolutionary
situation can betransformedinto a developing
revolutionary situation, by the actionof thesubjective conditions
on the objective condition; that is very important to keep in mind.
In addition,we must be able to differentiate between uneven
developmentand revolutionary situationand takeinto account,
that the latter can occur in a region, and then the revolution may
spread to the entire country,or it can even begin by a general
retreatof the revolution,as was shown by the autumn harvest
uprising of August 1927 in China.
TODAY WE LIVEIN A REVOLUTIONARY SITUATION IN
DEVELOPMENT
Theanalysisofournationalreality,basedontheapplicationof
thetheses ofLenin and Mao,whichis Marxism-Leninism-Mao
Tse-tung Thought, draws the following conclusions:
Our country meets the two conditions about the existence of a
revolutionary situation set forth by Lenin.
Our country shows the objective situation which Mao analyzed
as a contradiction.
In order to understand our situation, it is fundamental that we
keep in mindthedifferencebetweena stationaryrevolutionary
situation, and a developing revolutionary situation.
Based on the analysisof thethesesof Leninand Mao, and their
applicationtoourreality,weconcludethatweareliving in a
revolutionary situation. This is expressed by the
developing
266
=====第266页=====
DEVELOP THE GRoWING PeOPLE's PrOTEST
being fueledbthecisistht wehavebeelivininfor years.
Thus,if we base ourselves on Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse-tung
Thought,andanalyzetheconcreterealityofthePeruvian
revolution,wehavetoconcludethatweliveina developing
revolutionaryituationand,conquntlylltategy,tacicad
politicalactions mustbebasedonthatfact,if not,we would be
grossly mistaken.Insynthesis,theclasstruggle,thantagonic
contention between revolution and counterrevolution, can only be
seen accuratelyand correctly,and appliedfirmlyand decisively, if
we startfrom therecognition that there is a developing
revolutionary situation.It isfrom thisrecognition that the
proletariat,theParty,andtherevolutionariesinthecoutrywill
beabletojudgethecurrentpoliticalsituationandthenestablish
the correct tactics.
2. THE REVOLUTIONARYSITUATION _AND_THE
TWO
ROADS IN THE CURRENT POLITICAL SITUATION
In thefirst part we concludedthatthere is a developing
revolutionary situation. In the second part,our problem is to see
how, in general terms,
the two roads within this situation
manifest themselves. On the one hand, how the bureaucratic road
develops,which is the reactionary road,of the exploiters headed
by the bureaucratic bourgeoisie through the armed forces that for
years have been exercising Powerin their name. On the other
hand,the developmentof the democraticroad,the classes that
make up the people, and whose axis is the proletariat. In
synthesis, in this part we will point out how those above confront
those below,the two poles in the struggle which determine the
developing revolutionary situation.
This contradiction proves
more convincinglytherealityoftheobjectiveconditionsofthe
revolution,and the development of its two components,and its
perspectives.
267
=====第267页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
THE
REACTIONARY
PLAN:
RESTRUCTURING
AND
GENERAL ELECTIONS
SinceJuly
1977,
,the bureaucraticroadcontinuesthe third
restructuringofthePeruvianStateinthiscentury.Itcelebrated
elections for the Constituent Assembly which in a year approved
a new Constitution and recently convokedfora general election
to be held in May1980. What does it mean? Has the State been
fortified? Hasitovercomethecrisisaffictingitforsuchalong
time? Let's analyze this.
Eversince theendof World WarII,theascendingbureaucratic
bourgeoisie aimed atrestructuring theState and,from the
beginning ofthe present regime aimed to promulgate a new
Constitution. That was the purposeof its corporative and fascist
policies. Italso aimed at developingorganizations which could
provide a corporative base to the State, including the organization
ofapoliticalparty.ThefailedPoliticalOrganizationofthe
Peruvian Revolution (OPRP), which had already publicized its so-
called "ideological bases," is an example. However,by mandateof
Yankee imperialism and the profound crisisof the country since
1975,theinternationalsituationtendedtoward"representative
democracy" inLatin America,and theplansof thebureaucratic
bourgeoisie were disrupted. Thus, the new Constitution does not
fully expressthe corporative plans expected by the bureaucratic
bourgeoisie neither does it satisfies completely the needs of the so-
called "representative democracy." Consequently, the Constitution
born under the aegis of bayonets of the armed forces, and product
of a mediocre Constituent Assemblysatisfies neither Tyrians nor
Trojans in thereactionary camp,much less can it be a Charter
able to satisfy the people,and as soon as it goes intoeffect,the
battles will begin to amend it.As was thecaseoftheConstitution
268
=====第268页=====
DEVELOP THE GROWING PEOpLE's PROTEST
bourgeoisie of Peru: the bureaucratic bourgeoisie andthe
comprador bourgeoisie. The perspective is to amend it, within the
historical process of the
bureaucratic road,thelogic ofthe
reaction will be a new restructuring for a more thorough
corporativizationofthePeruvian State, infunction ofthe
leadership and exercise of Power by the bureaucratic bourgeoisie.
On the other hand, for the people and the proletariat the problem
will be to sweepawaythis new Constitution,andof anyother
kind thatexpresses the old existing order,and to elaborate one
which truly meetstheirclassinterests.Thiswillonly beachieved
by forging a Stateof New Democracy bythevictorious armed
forces of the people.
This is the situation and the perspective of the third restructuring,
and for this reason thefollowing question arises: Is the Peruvian
State a strong one? In "A Single Spark Can Set the Entire Prairie
on Fire" President Mao wrote:
"Although the subjectiveforces of the Chinese revolution are
weak at the present time, the whole organization (the Power, the
armed forces, the parties,etc.) of the reactionary ruling classes, an
organization based on the backward andfragile social and
economic structure of China ...is also weak. And even though
the subjective forces of revolution in China are now weak, no
doubt therevolution advances toits submit quicker thanin
Western Europe. That is because here theforces of the
counterrevolution are relatively weak as well."
Thisgreat truthformulatedin1930,and washistoricallyproven
in China and in other backward countries, and we must keep this
in mind without forgetting our specific conditions. And, why does
this fragilityoftheStatehappen?Ifweanalyzethethesesof
269
=====第269页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
PresidentMaoontheStateinthebackwardcountries,wwill
understandwhy.Inhiswork"OntheNew Democracy"in
treatingthesystmsofthevarious States, he states:
"The firstkind isthetateof theOldDemocracy.Today,after the
Second World Warbegan,notracesofdemocracy remainin
many capitalistcountries.Theyhavebeentransformed orare in
the
process ofbeing transformedin States in which the
bourgeoisie exertsa bloody military dictatorship. TheStates,in
which thelandowners andthebourgeoisieexercise a joint
dictatorship, may be included in this group."
And lateron: "Here we are speaking about thesystem of the
State.' Decadesofdisputes,whichbegan in thelast yearsofthe
Chingdynasty,havenotbeenabletoclarifythismaerIn
reality, theproblem simplyreferstotheplaceoccupied bythe
various social classes within the State. Thebourgeoisie always
hides the place occupied by the classes, and exercisesits
dictatorship of one class under the label ofnational.' This cover
up doesnotbenefittherevolutionary peopleatall,andforthis
reason, this matter must be explained clearly to them."
Also,hesays: "Withrespect to thequestionof thesystemof
government,it is theshape inwhich Power is organized,the
shape in which a given social class impresses upon the organs of
Power it establishes so as to fight off its enemies and protect itself.
Without adequate organs of Power representing them, there is no
State."
President Mao Tse-tung developedthe Marxisttheory onthe
State. He resolved the problem of the State in the backward, semi-
feudalandm-coloalcoutisHetaredofbpoitinout
that it is thctioftwclasofbuoaof
270
=====第270页=====
DEVELOP THE GRoWinG PEOpLE's PrOTeST
'systemofgovernment,"theformerexpressingthekindof
1
dictatorship,which in our case is a dictatorshipofthebig
bourgeoisieandthefeudallandowners. Hehighlightedthatthe
"systemofState"indicatesthepositionofthevarious classes
within the structureof the State, which in our case means the
placing of the sixclasses inour society: abigbourgeoisiewithits
the feudal1
landowners,
the national
bureaucratic
factions,
bourgeoisie,
the
bourgeoisie,
the
and the
petty
peasantry
proletariat.
The"systemofgovernment,asMarxclearlystates,is"theshape
in which power is organized"to exercise the dictatorship,an
organization which in our case hastheform of a republic
sustained by theso-called"representative democracy." This is the
organizationalform
upon which  it
soughtto incorporate
corporativeforms,butit hadnotsucceededfullyby the new
Constitution. It simply followed the process of development of the
State, has sanctioned thestrengtheningofthe Executive Power,
setting downthebasesforcorporativizationandestablishinga
more direct participation by the armedforces in the structureof
the State andin the exercise of Power. Italso,expandedthe
actions oftherepressiveforcesthroughthe so-calledstatesof
tofight against the
emergency
people's struggles
andthe
revolution.
If we keep in mind these substantive theses by President Mao Tse-
tung
andat the same time apply
ywhat wassaid about
revolutionary situation andfracture oftheState, then we
understand clearly that as a whole,and in perspective,the
Peruvian State and its organizations are weak due to the economic
and social backwardness sustaining them. This is a base upon
which we have six classes,ofwhichfoursufferfromoppression
andexploitation, mainly thetwofundamental classes:the
proletariatand thepeasantry.Therefore,wehavea broadbase
271
=====第271页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
E1(1968-1987)
that is failingafractureofthefoundationof theStateupon
which thebigbourgeoisieandfeudallandownersexercisejoint
dictatorship.Additionally,uponthisfragilestructure imperialism
operateswittottonandcotadon.pcilloday,
Yankee imperialism dominates us, and Soviet social-imperialism is
trying to underminesuchdomains,whichisanintr-imperialist
contention whichaggravatesthefragilityofthe system ofthe
State in general,and especillythatof thesystemof government
itself. It is developingthe contradictions between the classes
which exercise dictatorship andthe variousfactions through
which theimperialists pretendto maintaintheirimperialist
supremacy or undermine each other.
Besides theragilityofthePeruvianState,intermsof statesystem
andgovernment, whichis essentialandincurableduetoits
conditionas a semifeudaland semicolonial country(condition
that will developfurther), we must addthe contradictions and
difficulties derived from the third restructuring of the State and is
ongoingimplementation,includingthegeneralelections. The
general electionswill beconducted after17 yearsandfrom which
a civilian government must emerge to substitute the armed forces
in the exerciseof Powerafter12 years. This fragility is stressed by
the insurmountable circumstances that continue to develop
amidst the worst crisis Peru has seen in this century. This is a
situation in which a new Constitution must 
be
applied,
implemented and even modified in order to confront a
popular
movement in development. Furthermore,the increasing protests
willincreasethedemandsforbetterlivingconditions.Itwill
generate an overflowofthe masses to meetits most basic
demands, and thus will advance its political process.
All ofthisshowsusclearly thefragilityof thePeruvian Stateand
theessentialfractureofitsownfoundations,the weakness ofits
272
=====第272页=====
DEVELOP THe GroWinG PeOPLe's PROTeST
todayandithutueItheacofthirality,thetatewill
appeal to violence andits repressive means to maintain its
obsoletesystem,andpreservetheinterestoftheexploitersand
imperialists.
THE
THE
ROAD:
DEVELOPING
DEMOCRATIC
INCREASING PEOPLE'S PROTEST
What is the situation in which those below find themselves? They
are suffering a deep crisis,sunk in an increasing pauperization
and misery.The following table shows the situation of this crisis:
SOURCE: Revista Actualidad Economica No. 17.
+ Projected for the entire year based on January-March 1979
++ March of 1979 with respect to March of 1978
+++ In thousands of workers.
EAP refers to those who are able and willing to work. Employed
are those who receive income equal or higher than the minimum
vital salary and have steady work 36 or more hours per week.
Sub-employed are those not perceiving that income nor working
that many hours. Unemployed are those who have no work and
actively seek work. The hidden unemployed are those who do not
work,althoughtheyare able to work but do notactively seek
work.
This is theeconomic situation the country isliving in;the
reductionof production,whichreflectstheeconomic recession,
can be observed in thereductionof the GNP per capita,of
consumption,ofinvestments, ofimports,therising pries or
inflation,thereduction in salariesand wages,and the largeand
still
growing unemployment. Butthe problem is that the
economicresultsofthefirsttrimesterof1979,showequal
tendenciesanthatdespitsupposedfnanaladvantagesin
273
=====第273页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
internationalrelationclaimedbytheregime'propaganda,the
problemofinfatotius,andtheoductivecess is in a
recession andthat,despite recent measures like the National
HousingFund,thciihaeeabend insighand wll
continue tohitthemasses.Thefollowingtableisveryexpessive
of this economic decline:
Let's highlight that while compensation to workers went up from
1960to1968,it went downfrom1968to1977. Wealso must
pointoutthatthereis a constantreductionintheperentae
corresponding to farmers,which goes parallel to theincrease in
thereturntocapital,whichdiminishedfrom_1960tol97l,but
went up heavily from1968to1977.However,it is more indicative
to compare theindexof real compensation to workers in 1973-
1977: while wages in 1973 were 100.0, by December of 1979 they
wouldbe_49.4. Inthesame period salaries wentfrom_100.0to
71.7;whilethe legal minimum wentfrom100.0 to 60.5. These
figures show the evident deterioration in the compensationof
workers. However,these data are calculated based on a rate of
inflationwhichinrealityis smallerthattherealinflationrate.
Therefore, the buying power of the masses of workers would still
be less, and the misery and hunger would be more.
Parallel to the above,the serious problemofunemployment
develops: in 1976 absolute unemployment was 5.2% of the EAP
and sub employment was 43.9%; by 1977 6.0% were unemployed
and 46.0% subemployed;butby1978 unemploymentreached
7.27 and sub employment was 47.0%,so 54.0% of the EAP lived
inthe most abject poverty. Nevertheless, during
gthis year
unemployment rose again. Add to this the ever growing inflation,
the constantrises in prices whichflagellatesthepopulation;
inflation reached 24.0% in 1975,44.7% in 1976, 32.4% in 1977,
73.7% in 1978 and this year it is estimated it will surpass 75.0%.
274
=====第274页=====
DEVELOP THE GRoWiNG PEoPLe's PROTEST
That is thecritical situationendured by the massesof the people
in our poor nation.In this way,we see how hunger and misery,
which Leninspokeabout,makesthesituationof "those below"
living the way they do now.
The countrysidedeservespecialattentioninthesefigures. Ten
years aftertheAgrarian Law,theredistributionoflandhas
reached 21.1%of the cultivated land and 7.7%of the cattle and,
according to somecalculations,"itwouldonlyaffectabout 347of
the total"ofagricultural workersand"it canbesaidthatone
millionof minifundiaownerswith lessthanthreehectares(7.5
acres)have been totallyleftout inthe reassignmentof lands." But
the problem doesn't end there. Today,one thousand enterprises
are managed by the State (that previously was ten thousand farms
or estates). More than 50% of them are in crisis, with no profits
atall,cannoteven paythe minimum salaries and lack the most
basic management organization. Besides, the countryside has
transferred "17billionof solesfor paymentof the agrarian debt,
almost 10 billion in direct taxes and several billion more as 'profit'
in enterprises  such  as
EPSA, EPCHAT, ENCI, PNATA,
ENACO,"state
for  the  commercialization  of
monopolies
agricultural and ranching products. Allof thesesupport,that the
peasantry is oppressed and exploited
ythe  surviving feudal
strings,not toforget the 400 years old of
"gamonalism."Once
again, we see what Lenin saidabout theexploitation and
oppressionof thsmall producers,mainlythe peasantry, which is
a fundamental partof"those below," who neither want to,nor
can go on living as before.Allofthis is avery important part of
the developing revolutionary situation in which we live in.
What is implied in what we have exposed? What is implied by the
crisis enduredby"thosebelow" joinedtotheircenturiesold and
still risingexploitation?Doestheaboveshow the situationof
275
=====第275页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
"those below" who no longer want nor can goon living as they
had donefor centuries? Doesn't this situation show us the
existenceof thebasicconditionforevolutionarysituation? And
how are themassesreplying?Isn'tthere a growing popular
protestwhichexpresses itself inanascendingstrike movement,
which,whileitculminatedin1975,againtoday,afteran intense
repression,renews its upward development,as shown by the
increaseinthe numberofstrikesin1978(364with1,389,400
strikers) and the 225 strikes in the first semesterof this year? And
as far as the peasants movement,isn't it true that it continues to
fightindefatigablysincethe1960s,andrepressioncannot contain
it, despite mass slaughterslikethe lastone in the Department of
Cajamarca? And as far as the people's movement in general, isn't
it true that it is showing a growing development, as we have seen
from1976 to thisday,withrealuprisings in many townsand
cities in the country,even in some sectors thatappeared to be
sleepy?All of this is just the developmentof a growing popular
protest that is a consequence of the existenceof a revolutionary
situation in the country. That is the conclusion derivedfrom the
most elementary analysis of the situation of our reality,of the
situation of"those below," of the massesof the people,of the
peasantry, and of the proletariat of our country.
In that way, if we analyze, in the lightof Marxism-Leninism-Mao
Tse-tung Thought,theobjectivesituation,theobjectiveconditions
of the country, thesituationof "those above" who no longer are
able torule oradministerthings the way theyused to, and the
situation of"those below" who no longer can, nor want to
continue living in the same way they used to live up to now, and
the growing popularprotest,we concludethefollowing: Inour
country thereisevolutionaryituionidevlopmentandthis
is the lllate
and tacticservinthepoletait,thepeopleand therevolution.
276
=====第276页=====
DEVELOP THE GRoWING PEOPLe's PROTEST
politicaloci
the circumstances in which we livein,only disorientthe masses
away from therevolutionary road. Confronting those who
pretend toattachtheclassand the people tothetail-endof the
reactionaryplanofthethirdStaterestructuringandofgeneral
elections claimingasupposedlydemocraticprocess,letsoppose
this withwhatLenin saidaboutbourgeois democrayand
elections:
"Marx highlighted magnificently thisessential featureof capitalist
democracy by saying,..thatevery so many yearstheoppressed
are authorized to choose which membersof the oppressor class
would represent them, and crushthem inthe parliament!"
What must be the centerof political activityof the working class
and the people right now? The answer is simple and concrete: to
develop the growing popular protest which has become the
principal contradictionbetween the popular masses and the
government (by government we mean the organized expression of
Powerof the Peruvian State),pointingto anoverflowofthe
people,that,vopmtofteruleofthmases o
hereactionaryStateorder,
surpassing the legal order of the existing system; all in function of
initiating the armed struggle and thus elevate the democratic-
nationalrevolution to the superiorform of the struggle:the
People's War that following the roadof encircling the cities from
the  countryside,  will
create
revolutionary
support bases,
progressively
destroying
the
old
reactionary
landowning-
bureaucratic State so as to create a Republic of New Democracy.
This is not an easy task but Marx taughtus:"Obviously making
history wouldbtoocomortableif we wouldn't startthe struggle
unlessourprobabilitiesmakevictoryabsolutelycertain"Let's
keep in mindthoe wdsbytheounofMarismandstrting
277
=====第277页=====
E1(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
from theexistenceof a revolutionarysituation in development,
let's centerourselvesondeveloping thesubjectiveconditionof
our revolution,andontheinstrumentstocarry itforward: Party,
United Frontandarmedstruggle,mainlyonthfirst,sinceit is
"the heroicfighter"who commandstheothertwo,with the
criterionthattheunitedfrontistoservethearmedstruggleand
this one is the crucible in which we forgeand develop the united
front and the Party itself. In that way, then, the crux of the matter
is to developthe political activityof the masses,especiallyof the
poor peasantryin thefunctionof initiatingthearmed struggle.
There is no other road nor any other perspective. President Mao
Tse-tung wrote on this matter:
"In China,the mainform ofstruggle is war,and the principal
form oforganization is the army. All theotherforms, such as
organizations and struggles of the massesof people, are also very
important andabsolutely indispensable,and in no way should
they are cast aside. However, but the objectiveof all of them is to
serve the war. Before the war starts, the objective of all
organizations and struggles is to prepare the warr.'
These wise words,withoutforgettingour specificconditions,ae
completely validforus: Theproblemin Peruis to initiatethe
armed struggle. It will be the start of the superior form of struggle
and thedefinitivestruggletofulfillthenational-democratic
revolution.Thebeginningof thearmedstruggleistheguidig
lightofthepoliticalactionofthecommunistsandrvolutionaries
today.
immediate task, then, today, is to develop the
Ouri
increasingpopularprotestinfunctionofinitiatingthearmed
struggle.
LET'S DEVELOP THE INCREASING PEOPLE'S PROTEST!
278
=====第278页=====
OF
CONCERNING
THREE
CHAPTERS
OUR HISTORY
FROM THE GeneRAl NationAL CoNfEReNcE, DeCEMBer 3, 1979
We have been saying fora few days that we wanted to talk on
certain issues. There are moments when men resort to talking in
symbols,metaphors or in less intellectualforms. But we would
prefer that our group of Communists speak for us in a direct and
broad manner.
We want tobrieflytalkabouthowthehistoryoftodaywillbe
seen decadesfrom now. We place ourselves in a planof
revolutionary imagination andlookbackwardsfromthefuture,
this is usefuland alsoservestofortifythespirit.Wehaveclear
minds,
resolute
wills
and
inextinguishable
passions,
a
revolutionary imagination will increase them even more. Let us
think about it and allow our imagination to speak to us from the
future. Let us place ourselves decades ahead in the future,in the
second part of the coming century.
We are in the final part of the XX Century, very soon we will see
the years going by and they will pass even faster as we advance
towards the transformation of our society in the third millennium
of humanity. Theendofthe199O's means the endofone
millennium and the beginning of another in which Communism
will bedefinitivelystampedonhistoryandhumanitywill take a
leap from the realm of necessity into the realm of liberty.
We shouldthinkofthesecondhalfofthenextCeturHitory
will be writtenbyusand thosewhowillfollowareus,thefture
Communists, because we are an inexhaustibleforce. When
childrenbeintoanbinmmb,ill hae
279
=====第279页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
a history to read and it will recount:
I. How Darkness Prevailed.
In thissociety,there was a time inwhichdarkness prevaile.It
does notimplythateverything was dark,butit means at
darkness prevailed.In our country, in our America, there is an old
and long tradition and
a slow history which should be known. We
need to search for the profound roots of who we are, not because
we are nationalists,but because we have historical particularities
and nobody can make revolution if they do not have historical
roots. We are an old society.
Some twenty thousand years ago,man arrived in these lands in a
very primitive state;ten thousand years passed.In about four to
six thousand years they beganto developagriculture and basic
shelter to protect themselvesfrom extreme weather conditions
and theyalso started sewing covers to protect their bodies. Two
thousand years later we already had very productive agriulture
and became a great agrarian system. The community develops
and the_Ayllustartstobeforged:aspecificagrarian communal
expression of our people. Thereafter, a surplus was generated
alongwiththecreationofclassdifferencespropertyandthe
State.
Approximately 700hundred yearsago the Statebegan to develop
and expand,and astheState grew,exploitation cameinto
existence generatingoppression. Thus,thepeople weredivided
between theoppressors andtheoppressed.Also,theselands were
dividedintosmallregions,big confederationandkidoms
Huari is anexample. Time passed and theIncan empire was
formed. Then came Inca Pachacutec who brought more imperial
orderand reorganizedtheState,makingitstronger.Thisshows
that in ancientPeruthere were nationsthatexploitedother. The
280
=====第280页=====
CONCERNING THREE CHAPTerS OF OuR HisToY
existenceof clases wasevident,thereweretheexploited and
exploitrHovuctfiedkgooa
Strange men cameand destroyed theexisting agrarianorder. But
it is nottruethatthepeopleoftheAmericasllontheirkes.
People resisted and defended thesystem of exploitation that they
had created, but it was a rotten system based on exploitation, and
it collapsed when confronted with a superior order.
Thus, in our country the system collapsed and a long and vicious
process of feudal exploitation began. Our people were takento
the mines,theirblood wastransformedinto goldand silverfor
Europe. We view the developmentof European capitalism as the
product of the flesh and blood of our ancestors.
Centuries passed and a system of mestizaje develops. There were
rebellionsespeciallythemobilizationanduprisings ofthe
peasants in the XviII Century,whichrockedthesystem toits
foundations. The worldwide actions of capitalism prosper along
with the spirit of emancipation of the masses; and since classes are
noteliminatedand theproblemsof landand sovereigntyare
unresolved, these two old problems continue to persist.
The XIX Century involved the transformation of the feudal order
to a semi-feudal order, andfrom a colonial order to a semi-
colonial one. We changed masters from one group of Europeans
to another,from Spanishhands into Englishones. The new
exploiters were enthroned and they were more cruel and sinister
than the previous ones,but the people always rose up to fight
without truce in an arduous class struggle although with periods
of greater usurges in which the system was shaken up.
Inthe latterpartofthelastCentury anew imperialistorder
surged,theUniteStatesofAmerica.Itarrivedearlyinese
lands,and inthe192'sits dominatiowaconolidated.Hence
281
=====第281页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
at thatstagofourhistorydarknespvalediourlands.At
the same time,a new class emerged,theproletariat,and a new
chapter begins.
II. How the Light Emerged and the Steel Was Forged.
The working class emerged,a new class was born. It was the
working class andtheinternationalproletariatthat was also
expressed as the proletariat in our country. That is who we are.
Theproletariatbeginstoiluminatethedarkness,itistheclass
that is represented here. This light was transformed into steel.
From1885to1919therewere nearly30yearsof intense class
struggleinwhichthePeruvianproletariatbegins to developand
their presenceshoweda definitivechange in ourcountry.The
class struggle,
e,internationalactions, andthe struggles ofthe
proletariat and peasants allowed the forgingof Marxism and José
Carlos Mariategui,whofoughtlikefewothers intheselandsof
the Americas. Our people are notfrivolous, as some ignorant
people say,we have produced many great people. Mariátegui is
one of the few men in these lands who applied Marxism-Leninism
to the special conditions andourpeoplebegin tofind a new
untraveled road. A new and more pure light emerges,a shining
light. Thatlight we carry in our heartsand souls.Thatlight was
founded with the land and that soil became steel. From light, soill,
and steel springs the founding of the Party in1928. The steel was
forged, that is what we are. That is the problem of how the light
emerged and the steel forged.
In1928wewerefoundedandwehaveneverfllenintothe
criterion offorming another Party. We have come to an
agreement thatheretheclasand massstrugglgavebirthtoa
282
=====第282页=====
CONCERNING THREE
ECHAPTERSOFOURHISTORY
lightand stel inour country.No matterwhattheysay we can
never go back.
Itisipt
willottslll
whiletherearestillclasses.Butwehadapossibilitywhich came
apart whentheliofououewascushort.Althohitwas
negated,distortedandconcealed,theunaccomplishedtaskof
Mariategui remained as our 
Program and Plan, the class
embodiedit, it continuedbeating inthe class,the combative
people and the Communists. We cannot deny that the actions of
the class and Communists who fought tirelessly has allowed us to
reach this stage.
Time passed. The Second World War came,the mostextensive
one in history,which marked us and created a more profound
bureaucratic capitalist system and a more intense class struggle.
The working classkeptadvancing but never in peace,always in
the midst of torments and storms; it was forged with more light,
more steel, more strength and invincibility.
Our people were illuminated by a more intense light, Marxism-
Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought. We were at first dazzled by the
eruptionofthisunendinglight,lightandnothingelse;but little
by littleourretinas began to comprehend this light,we saw our
country, Mariátegui and our reality and we found our perspective:
the Reconstitution oftheParty. Thus,the chapteron howthe
light emerged and the steel was forged begins to end.
III. How the Walls Collapsed and the Dawn Unfolded.
Today beginsa new chapter:how thewallscollapseand a new
dawn unfolds.ItwillbesaidthatourParty,forgedwiththe
strongestlightand pureststeelhada decisive moment. This
283
=====第283页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
momentgeneratesthePlanofNationalConstruction,andthe
Party which wasa pieceof theflagunfurledtothe wind, spreads
out in order to iluminate our country. The Communists from all
partsofthecountry werecalledand anational system was set in
motion. Communists rose up and the land reverberated. With the
rumblingoftheland,theCommunistsadvanced. For this
purpose,a landmark conference washeld,political bases were
established and a course to follow was set.
A flag was planted,avery highflag foranewepochand with a
new objective: Initiate the Armed Struggle. Men struggledhard
and the few Communists that existed were gathered from various
pointsand intheend theycommittedthemselvesbymaking a
decision: toforge with deedstheFirstCompanyof the First
Divisionof the People's Army. In this manner,they beganto
clear out the darkness in a definitiveform. The walls shook and
were breachedand with clenchedfists,the dawn broke out. The
key was the First National Conference,a milestone markingthe
beginning of a new chapter. The spirits were joyful and our eyes
glistened withlight.Onechapterwillsay: we carriedaheavy
burden,we gave our quota,and in difficult moments we buried
our dead, we dried our tears,but continuedfighting. This is how
it happened, and the People's Republic was proclaimed, a national
holiday. Once again the work was recovered bringing joy among
us. The countryside became more productive and freedom began
to palpitate in our people, with the red banner guiding us forever.
Our America willshine.Itis already afree worldwhich has
extended itself toother parts of the Earth.Today old empires sink.
They are dirty waters and poisoned asheswhichare being swept
away. Work isredeemedandthefieldflourisinthe Red
Republic.
Theywillask,what are we going to dotoday?Todaywewill
284
=====第284页=====
CONCERNING
GTHREECHAPTERSOFOURHISTORY
workingclassnver losesw.Thisishatitory willsay.W
head towards the inevitablearrivalof Communism inorderto
reachfullandabsolutelight.Thebloodofourfallencomrades
criesout:"light!light!WewillreachCommunism!"Thatwill be
written someday, it will be history.
Today we have made a historicaldecision. Wehave expressed
with our clenchedfistheld high to giveour lives. Rising to our
feet withourfists intheair we have offeredour lives. Inthis
moment the crumblingof the walls and the breakingof the new
dawn begins.
As you haveallpledged,I toopledge:beforethebannerof
Marxism-Leninism,MaoTse-tung Thought,beorethefiyof
our founder,before the lineof our Party and the unconquered
banners of our Party: I too am committed to fight and struggle to
topple thewallsof theoldorder,I tooam a combatantof the
First Companyof the First Divisionof the People's Army.Ionly
have one aspiration,like all of you: to serve my people,base
myself in the masses who are our supportand to strugglefor
proletarianinternationalism. IntheInternationalCommunist
Movement we have only oneflag: Marx unfurled it,then Lenin
andMaoraisedithigher;itisthelightthatwillneverbe
extinguished.Wehavestoodup,andI willfulfllwhatI must.
What matters  to me  is to
complete myjourney well. We
Communists expect nothing, only to serve Communism. My
decision is the same as yours.I too will be a simple combatant of
the First Company, I will do what must be done, I will do what is
right,
except  to  serve  the  cause  of
expecting
gnothing
Communism. This is also my pledge: my decision is yours your
decision is mine, because we are united. The topplingof the walls
and the unfolding of a new dawn begins.
"Hisoholirols
285
=====第285页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
not emerge nor develop in a spontaneous and gentle form, but in
the struggle against the opportunism of
the'Left'ontheone
hand,and against theopportunismof the'Right'ontheother.
Without combatingand transforming these pernicious deviations
that underminetherevolutionandtherevolutionary war,it will
be impossibletoelaborateajustlineandachievevictoryinthe
revolutionary war.'
MAO TSE-TUNG.
286
=====第286页=====
WE
BEGIN
TO
TOPPLE
THE
WALLS
AND
UNFOLD A NEW
DAWN
FROM THEIIPLENARY
SESSION
THE CENTRAL
COMMITTEE,
OF
MARCH 28, 1980
I. The Masses Clamor to Organize the Rebellion.
Since ancient
times,
masses have been subjected to
exploitationandoppression. Theyhavealways rebelled,it is a
long andinexhaustiblehstoryThlasstugliconstant.It
cannot besuppressed.For ages,sincethey began struggling,the
masses have clamored toorganize therebellion,to be armed, to
rise up, to be led. It has always been this way and will continue to
be. Evenafterwards, in the new world,there will bestruggle but
in different forms.
Misery exists together withfabulous riches. Eventhe utopians
knew that both are linked: enormous wealth tied to condemnable
and flagrant poverty.It is like thisbecauseexploitation exists.
Exploitationis tied tooppression and thistoo exists,killing the
masses,consumingthem withhunger,shacklingand garrotting
them. But the masses are not sheep. They are people grouped into
classes who organize themselves, develop their parties and the
latter its leaders.
The leadership should listen to the most minor murmur of the
masses,listen to their movement,try to scan thefuture from a
distance and standfirmly on the ground in order to record the
faintest tremor of the masses. A leader that does not do this is not
a leader.
We are Communists,Marx taughtus thatas revolutionaries we
287
=====第287页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
havetheprofessionalobligationtoorganizemiseryinorero
topplethelOultly
in accordance with the lawsof class struggle and wit
thawareness
of the goaltowards whichthecass and people march.That isour
obligation,we havecomehere inordertoorganizetheclamorof
the
masses, to organize and arm them. In this way the
disorganized powerofthemassesexpresseit streh,s
invincible power,and the masses become the creators of new
orders, thereby
undermining
and boisterously toppling
the
strongest walls.
We can not call ourselves Communists if we do not act in such a
manner. There can be no leaders who are deaf to the clamorof
the masses,blind to their strength,harshorindifferent. Thisis
unacceptable. Nevertheless, what have we seen? Blind, harsh,
indifferent and deafleaders; aretheylosingtheir status as
Communists? The soulsof Communists should tremble like the
souls of the masses tremble,should become happy with what
brings them joy, be hurt by what hurtst
them, become
impassionedby what impassionsthem,uplifted bywhatuplifts
the  masses. If_not, the militant's character becomes
samere
formality, an insignia, a rubber stamp, a kind of etiquette.
There can be no Communists, much less leaders, that dare to lose
confidence inthe masses;thatis to lose confidence in theonly
force of history.The"reasons" could be veryelaborateones but
they wouldbehollow,an unacceptableemptiness. The Party
cannot continue toallowthose militants,andthe leaders who
deny therole of the masses. We cannot permit that. While the
bourgeoisie sees the wavesof strikesand the reawakening of the
peasants,the Communists deny whattheireyes see,and what
their hands make.It makes no sense and cannot be permitted for
the Communist to deny the masses.
288
=====第288页=====
say,c
the transformationofthe masses. Withoutthis,we cannot
accomplishoumisiohoulweollowtheroadofthe
those comrades who act that way what can we expect tomorrow?
They aredarkand sinisteropportunistswhotraffickwiththe
masses. Never again shall we allow sucha thing tooccur,much
less with our leaders.
Thereis aowerfulalityinthiscoutryofoursitisthe masses.
They havea magnificenthistorythatisoftenignored;buteach
time the masses speak up the land trembles,and each time the
peasant masses rise-upthefoundationsof theoldsystem rocks,
Reactionaries worry in a thousand ways when they rebel but only
with bloodandfire havetheyplacated the masses. Reaction is
helpedbyits cunningopportunistswhomisdirectandobstruct
the struggle; but they can only appease the masses,never contain
them.
Engels taught us that there are two forces in the world, the armed
force of reaction and the disorganized masses. If we organize the
powerful forceof the masses,their potential develops into actions,
what was a possibility becomes a reality. What is a law and a
necessity becomesforcefuldeeds which sweep away all that is
believed to be firm. Nothing is permanent. Everything is a house
of cards, if it is not sustained by the masses. And when the masses
speak upeverythingshudders,theorder begins to tremble,the
high summits stoop and the stars change their course,because the
masses are capable of anything.
If this convictionbeintoltwthiu,theCommuist spirit
commences to fall apart.We mustbe vigilantand what we have
289
=====第289页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
E1(1968-1987)
lived througinthisPlenarySessionshouldbewarningtous: it
must never happen again. If a Party has leaders who are deaf to
the masses,its days are numbered!If it occurs,our duty is to
crush and destroysucha bureaucratic machine since it is not a
Partyany longer,but amonsterthatmustbedismantled. What
did Chairman Maotell usonthis matter? Hesaid,we atheists
have only one divinity, the masses; we invoke those Gods in order
for them to hear us so when that happens exploitation will be
eliminated. We mustforge our militants with this view today
more than ever, and even more so tomorrow.
The masses clamor toorganize the rebellion. Therefore, the Party,
its leaders,cadresand militantshave an urgentobligationand
destiny: to organize the disorganized force of the masses and this
will only be accomplished with arms in hands. The masses must
be armed gradually,part by part,until thearmingof the entire
people and when this comes aboutthere will be no more
exploitation on Earth.
II. Let the Actions Speak.
The II Plenary Sessionof theCentralCommitteehasalreadya
timbre of glory, a timbre that characterized it with the decision to
develop the militarization of the Party through actions.
The Communistshave paid dearly through theirviolent struggle
to establisha newflag: initiatethearmed struggle. We are all
witnesses to thetoughideological struggle to conclude the
development of our line: Initiate the Armed Struggle (ILA).
We have taken firm and decisive steps in as much as we are sure
of what we want and where we go. Let us remember Lenin: we
will triumph because we know what we want.
290
=====第290页=====
WE BEGIN TO TOPPLE THE WALLS AND UNFoLD A NEW dAWN
It is good to pauseforaewminutesand askourelve.How have
 determinationto
develop the
great
arrived   at this
we
militarizationof theParty throughactions?Ithasbeeninthe
midst of an intense struggle, perhaps it has not been as srident as
others,butit is deeper,more turbulentand ithasa verywide
perspective.
Two positions have been in clear contention. Those of us who
since the VI Plenum have inculcated the idea of converting words
into actions,today convert the verb into armed actions. That is a
decisive materializationandtranscendental development. What
we have agreed upon is to developmilitaryactions,whiching in
our minds, palpitate in our hearts, clamor in our heads and
agitates our wills when we speak about action.
Someof us have struggled for agreement on passing over to the
languageof military actions and others haveobstinately oposed
this with sophisticated maneuvers and even slyness. But this
decision has been imposed on us and determined because our
country demands determination, because our people demand
actions. Our people clamorand we respond to that cry, to ther
demand,wefeel what theyfeel and want what they want, they
want their hands to speak the precise and convincing language of
armed deeds.Yes! Developing actions are always the deeds of the
masses,of the people: when the trench is dug it is the action that
speaks, when the anvil is forged it is the action that speaks, when
men investigatethey derive laws,it is theaction that speaks and
when armed hands areraised it isthepeople whofight. First
comes the deed and then the idea, and that idea will carry you to
higher levelsofactioneachtime.Weare sureand justelections
of ourreality.Wehavepreachedextensively,calledtoarms fr
the armedstruggle.Ourvoiceshavenotfallen in thedesert,he
seed fellin a ood frrwandhasbegutospou.Thevoces we
launch areverypowerfulandwithgrowingechoes thatwill
291
=====第291页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
thunder throughoutour land.Those who wecalled upon to stand
up,to rise up in arms,to sow with theirwills,respond: we are
heeeadd
we will continue to progressand do more.Either wefulfillour
promisesorwewillbecomethelaughingstockandunfaithful
traitors. And surely we are not these.
If we haveplanted,preachedandorganizedandall this bears
fruit, then our obligation is to lead, because the march has begun.
Let the armed actions confirm our words. May our blood be
joined with the bloodof those who must shed it, we don't have
therighttoletthatbloodshivaloneletitsfrigiditymixwith
the warmth of our own, or else we are not what we are.
In an almost insensible form we became Communists. It is like a
long trail, like walking. Moving with one foot demands you step
with the other, and if you get tired, it is not to straggle but to take
a smoothand calm rest,and then continue climbing. Tomorrow
matter will take us in with its belligerent peace, there we can rest
definitively.
That is why we have been formed as Communists, for this reason
Marx,Lenin and Mao cameforward toteachtherest,toteach
them tofulfilltheirresponsibilities,inordertoassembleothers,
organize them, and raise them up;for this reason the class
generated us.
What have we seen here? Some comrades andleaders have
opposedtheParty'smostdecisivestepofitshistory"toinitiate
the armed struggle." On what grounds? Because of the supposed
"lackof conditions?"And intheirtremblinvoieswhospeaks? It
wastheblackgulletofoppressionandexploitation,theblack
292
=====第292页=====
WE BEGIN TO TOPPLE THE WALLS AND UNFoLD A NEW dAWN
people,itiamofams
the most obvious proof that it is in decomposition.
And whencomradesandleaders wantto stealour soulsand
minds,should we permit it?No. Their "arguments"went up in
1
threadbare"considerations'
1
and
their
smoke,
their
paper
"steadfastness" are rotting in the sun.
Never again in our Party should we have to listen to those sinister
voices among Communists and even less so among leaders. And
all those daring to stand up,crush and destroy them like they
deserve. Today this is much more urgent,this is less permissible
now because it is undermining and destroying the hopes of the
masses,the laborof five years,and precisely whenthe masses
begin to express themselves concretelyinreality.Inthese times
these pacifists are shameful.
Many lessons areobtainedforallof usfrom these meetings,for
some there should be deafening warnings and forceful calls to our
attention. Never again. We have a clear and definite orientation:
letactions speak. To Developthe Militarizationofthe Party
through actions. To convert this into reality is an urgent task. It is
a call to order,the class,historyand the people demand it. We
cannot work in any other way. It is a necessity. What we have
accomplished in the past has brought us here. The road is defined
and the actions are established: let us carry them out. We have no
other right. This is the order of the day: let actions speak.
III. We Begin the Toppling of the Walls.
We havealready agreed to the Developmentof the Militarization
of the Party through actions. What shall we do next? We should
commence to topple the walls. Now is the time, at once.
293
=====第293页=====
(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
There are thosewhohaveopposed,resisted,and even someone
who fled in cowardice,deserting for a second time,and who has
been defended. Will it be useful forour Party to defend cowardice
and betrayal?Thinkofthosewhohave committed such acts.
Remember "Prometheus", the Oceanidsand Hermes: weask for
Communists in the XXCentury in a Communist Party
that
strives  for  the  launching  of  armed
struggle,
debating
its
development through armed actions,
weheard
leaders who
praised,supported,nourished,andprotectedbtrayalWillts
political behavior beof any use to us? No. Let us rootout the
poisonous weeds. It is pure poison, a cancer which corrodes and
we must not permit this.It is a sinisterand decaying pus that we
must never allow within our ranks, much less now. Let us remove
these sinister,harmful vipers. We can permit neither cowardice
nor betrayal;they are asps. It isimpossible totolerate this. It
manifests itself within us and in our leaders. This is unacceptable,
condemnable and marked for fire. We must begin to root out that
poison. We mustforge ourselves in another temperament and
with another spirit. Let us root out and burn the leeches,
otherwisethepoisonwillbegeneral.If wedon'tdestroyit, the
vigor of the Party's healthy body will dissipate.
It is urgent and pressing to finish with this.We must not leave a
trace, a purge should serve this purpose,clarified with facts.
Those who have exhibited that behavior should be thefirst ones
to leave.It will be a signof our advancement.In order to topple
the walls, we should sweep away the debris and eliminate poisons.
In orderto begin the topplingof the walls, we need tofortify
ourselves and thisfortification is to sweep away the rot of
rightism ingeneral.Letutakethischallengevery seiouslyso
that we can accomplishour tasks with the highestvigilance. We
mustpresevetheLeftanthosewitdiffcultiewilladvance.
That will be the sign of our actions, our commitment.
294
=====第294页=====
WE BEGIN TO ToPPLE THE WALLS AND UNFOLD A NEW DAWN
raiseactions.Havinuleahedthestruglagainsabeheaded
Right is a greatandmagnificentstepforward.Wealongwith
those with problems  will exemplify
:determinationand
our
assuranceas partoftheLeftandbevervilantItisessentialto
do this in orderto advance,andfortify ourselves and become
powerful.
There is no need to call those with problems powerless. Power
will come from actions. Action is the toppling of the walls. Let us
carryout militaryactions.Wewill be temperedbythem. From
the novices we are we will become experienced combatants.
Thus,byapplyingthedevelopmentof themilitarizationof the
Party throughactions,thewalls willbeprofoundlyundermined
and theirtopplingwillbegin. Thekeystothisarethe armed
groups, the armed groups without arms. May your unarmed
hands snatch away the arms of those who own them with
creativity, then utilize them shrewdly and with clear ideas.
Let us expand the groups,let us act in boycotts,harvests,land
seizures,sabotage,terrorism and principally with guerilla actions.
Thisisourdesireanddestiny.Wehaveallpledged:lethe
violenceflourish as elaboratedintheinitiation ofthe armed
struggle(ILA),wewillcarryitforwardwitharmed groups,
beginning with unarmed groups, and from those ardent seeds will
sprout forthardent sunfowers.Wehaveasunthatwilliluminae
us, Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought,we have a fertile
land thatwillfortifyus:theincreaseof theclassstruggleofthe
masses.
Whatdowelac?Teoignfiofrmed roups
without arms!
From  those
humble
seedsandblossoms,
295
=====第295页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
monumentsof theclasscapableoftoppling thewallswill grow.
That's the way the dawn will appear in our country.
The key to our success: thegroups;ofvitalimportance: our
decision; the base: the masses.
May the armed groups without arms flourish! That is the order of
the day.
IV. Unfurl Optimism and Overfl ow with Enthusiasm.
We areCommunistsofa distincttemperament and special
material, weare Communistsready foreverything and we know
what needs to be fought.We havealreadyfought it and will fight
it again tomorrow.
What willbe confrontedtomorrow willbe the child ofthe
present, it will beharderbutbythen we willbetempered by the
past and as we forge ourselves today. We will temper our souls in
the revolution, this is the only flame capable of forging us.
We need a great deal of optimism and there is a reason for it. We
are the makersof tomorrow,we are guides,the garrisonofthe
invincible triumph of the class. This is why we are optimists.
We are enthusiastic by nature. We are nurtured by the ideology of
our class: Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought. We live the
life of the class. We participate in its heroic deeds. The blood of
our people flow and burns within us.
Wearelikeapowerfulandpalpitatingblood.Letustakethe
unbendableiron and steel, theclass,and mix it together with the
unwithering lightofMarxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought.
means to participate in theforce ofthe Gods,
Enthusiasm
1
296
=====第296页=====
therefore,wearefullofenthusiasmWeparticipateinte
divinitiesoftherealworld:Themasses,theclass,Marxism and
the revolution. Thatis whywehaveinexhaustibleenthusiasm.
That is whywehavestrength,optimism,and a vigorous spirit
overfl owing with enthusiasm.
And whathave we seenhere? Militants and leaders without
optimism.Deadspiritsanddeciduouswillswithfting passions.
This is unacceptable.Weknow well their roots: Their support is
not Marxism, the class,nor the masses,rather it is the corrosive
individualism,thereactionaryrotthatmakesthemfearful,the
sewage moldof theoldorder,theexpresionofthedying world,
the lethal swamp gassesof reaction. This is why their spirits are
broken,their hearts tremble,theirthoughtsforsake them,their
nerves are destroyed, and their actions disturbed.
This hasto beuprooted,it can not nest among us. It is
unacceptable,inadmissible,letusburnitand blastit.This cannot
be allowed in the Party, much less prevail. What have we seen in
this moment? Leaders with these positions and attitudes. It is
despicable. Neveragain should this happen. And precisely today,
when we need to unfurl optimism and enthusiasm, now? That is
unacceptable. It is corrosion, pure gangrene,and it should nevr
have taken place, today it is much more unacceptable.
If the comrades don't uproot these weaknesses what typeof
cadres are theygoing toform?Whatkindofmilitantsare they
going to form? Apply the following: a company always reflects its
leadership. Tolead a company without optimism results in a
company withoutoptimism. A pusillanimous leadership makes a
pusillanimous company.Itwill be defeatedand broken before it
engages in battle.
We need to unfurloptimism and overflow enthusiasm. Our
297
=====第297页=====
COLLECTED WORKSOFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-1987)
powerfulideologyincisivelineandCommunistwillmustbe
manifested above all in the leaders.
The orderoftheday is: Unfurloptimism and overflow
enthusiasm! Mayit beshared with others,with our cadres and
bases not present in this meeting. May this enthusiasm manifest
itself in action and motivate us in order to eliminate the crust that
impedesouradvanceandservetoothersasaexampeouoot
these weaknesses. May the optimism shine, and manifest in us a
powerful enthusiasm.It is practical and necessary in as much as
we carry it out.
Noone can denythatthis is a struggle between positions. We
have recorded right here and
l the summary will be the expression
of what we have seen. But in thefirst place,what was important
in our Party? What is important now? What willbe important
tomorrow? It is the Left. Who cries about its defeat? The Right.
They should understand thatits cry is useless. They must burn
their old idols,burn theold and decrepit,and place their spirits
up to the these times.
The spiritof the times is owned by the Left.It is consistent with
the needsofour country,our people clamorfor revolution. We
cannot fail. If our blood and lives are claimed, our response is: we
carry our lives in our hands to give them up, we put them at the
service of the greatest and most just cause.
Our deathforthegood cause shouldbethe sealof our
revolutionary action. The constant andfirm actions forour cause
will be the hallmarkof our livesas Communist combatants. This
is whatwehaveunderstoodthebest.Thatis whythepositive
weighs so much more in us.
298
=====第298页=====
WE BEGiN TO ToPPLE THE WALLS AND UNFOLD A NEW DAWN
been overcome.Thatisa lossofviilancetherecoulda
thousand"reasons",butitisonlysewage.Elevateyourvilance
and sweepawaytheerrors withdetermination,destroy theold
and decrepitthrougharmedactionswhichwillbetherealand
effective seal.
Perhaps some people think that we shouldonlyspeak about the
positiveteexistlandhaowcta
should summarizeandlearnlessons Thismeeting is agreat
lesson. We will notforget it.We have anobligation to preserve
the Left so that the Party can meet itsobjective. With the actions
we are undertaking and with thisexcellent meeting, we begin to
topple the walls and unfurl a new dawn.
We can summarize this in four voices, in order:
1. The masses clamor to organize the rebellion.
2. Let the actions speak.
3. We begin the toppling of the wals.
4. Unfurl optimism and display enthusiasm.
This Central Committee is strong and will become more stronger
if weall carryoutour responsibilities,mainly the"Development
of the Militarization of the Party through actions."
Let the comrades speak  and express  their
optimism and
enthusiasm. It will be a sign of their determination. Do not let my
words become a pretext to some comradesfor losing optimism
and a retreatingofenthusiasm.I believe we have reached the
moment of overcoming the old defects of 50 years.
299
=====第299页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Another world isopening up for us.We have begun to define it
ourselves,thismeetingis oneofdefinition.Leteverythought,
word,actolinganwillofurfrmti.Itiasible,
indispensable and necessary. We can and must do it. And we will,
because we know what we want.
This meeting is verygood,ithasunitedand bondeduseven
more. We have unanimously agreed touphold the military line
anditsrealization:"DeveloptheMilitarizationoftheParty
through actions." From now on, let everything express our taught
willingnesstocarryoutwhat wehaveagreed uon.
"In the historyof the worldtherehave been no wars that began
and ended with a continuous victorious offensive. If there were,
they were an exception. That is true even in common wars. But
when thefate ofa class is at stake, when the alternative is
capitalism or socialism,is there a basis or logic to suppose that a
nation which confronts this problemforthefirst time can
immediately discover the correct method,free of errors? What
reasons are there to suppose this? None! Experience teach us the
contrary. Noneof the problems wefaced could be resolved at
,but onlyafterrepeatedattempts. Tosuffer a defeat,
once,
commence anew,redoing everything. To discover the method for
the approximate solution--a definitive solution or at least a
satisfactory one--that is how we have been working and should
continue to do so. Given the challenges that are presented to us, if
there were no unanimity in our ranks, it would be a sad indicator
of a weak and very dangerous spirit that had penetrated the Pary.
On the contrary, if we do not fear speaking the truth,no mater
how hardand bitter it is, wewill learn. And it isentirely certain
that we will learn to overcome each and every difficulty."
LENIN
300
=====第300页=====
WE ARE THE INITIATORS
FROm THE First MilitaRy ScHOoL, ApRil 19, 1980
We are theinitiatorsand weshouldkeepthisfactdeeply in our
spirits. This meeting is historic.
Comrades,we will pass into history as the initiators. For some
time,thePartyhasbeen writingthishistoryonindestructible
pages.
Wearetheinitiators. ThisfirstPartyMilitarySchoolisbotha
seal and a breach, it concludesand begins.It concludes the time
of peace and opens the time of war. Comrades,our tasks with
unarmed hands have concluded,and today our armed words
begin: Let usuplift the massesand peasants underthe unfading
flagsof Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought.One period
has ended and the preparations for the new one have concluded.
From here, the past deeds are sealed and we open the future. The
key of the future is determined by actions, the objective is power.
This weshall do,history demands it,theclass urges it,the peole
have foreseen and want it. We must accomplish it and it will be
accomplished. We are the initiators.
We should discuss some problems. Just as you,I will also speak
with an open heart,sincere words and a rational sentiment. This
also has a strict logic.
I.WeAre
Entering
the
Strategic
Offensive ofthe World
Revolution.
Centuriesof devastating exploitationhave passed. The masses
havebeenexploited,subjugated,forced toyieldandimplacably
301
=====第301页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP - VOLUME 1(1968-187)
oppressed.Butthroughallthistime,theexploitedmasseshave
always resisted,becausetheyhave noother sentimentthanthe
class struggle. However,throughout history,the masses were
abandoned andhad no direction. Theirwords,protests,actions
and rebellions were crushed and defeated. But the masses never
lost hope. The classalways has hope. The masses are the light of
the world that forge themselves ahead. They transform and create
instruments with their own hands. They are the social fabric, the
inexhaustible beatofhistory. Thus,theyhave been generating
ideas, science of the most advanced kind.
But thelaws ofhistorythat came aboutas a resultofthe
developmentoftheclass strugglehave generatedone last class:
Theinternational proletariat. The class has surged up struggling
in the midstof a sinister system,capitalism, which
 appeared
sweating blood and muck fromall its pores.A system in whose
the combative proletariat developed unions, strikes,
center
resistance and revolutions. All ofthis became embodiedin
Marxism, and the class,endowing itself with a Party,evolved into
amature class withits own interests. The masses of the world
finally have their liberator. In theold times,the masses awaited
fora liberator. Theyused toputtheirfaithin the handsof
supposed saviors,until the powerful andinvincible proletariat
appeared, which is capable of creating a true new order. The class
organized itself politically, and another history begins to unfold to
become a reality.
In one hundred years of struggle, setbacks, and victories, the
proletariathas learned how tofightandseize powerwith arms.
The workers took it once in an embryonic form but were crushed
with bloodandfire. Nevertheless, weremember theParis
Commune,where those who were reviledare today heroes. And
302
=====第302页=====
WE ARE THE InITiaToRS
State.TewMa-tad
a new road and resolved unsolved problems. The class began to
fight
under the flags
Tse-tung
 of Marxism-Leninism Mao
Thought.
Around the Second World War, the revolution entered a strategic
equilibrium,leaving
gbehindthereactionary holy alliancesand
theirpreviously u
untouchable tormentors and enemies. With the
powerful international workers'movement,the cresting wavesof
the
national liberation movements, the
developmentof
Communist Parties,andthe elevation of Marxism to thehigh
summit of Mao Tse-tung Thought, a new situation has been
created: We are entering
gthe strategic offensive ofworld
revolution. In the next50 to 100 years,the dominationof
imperialism and all exploiters will be swept away. History cannot
go backwards.In thehandsofthe working class,under the
leadership ofthe Communist Parties and throughthe mighty
force of poor peasants, the peoples war will be sustained and grow
each day untiloverthrowing theold order. The world is entering
into a new situation,thestrategicoffensiveof world revolution.
This is of transcendental importance.
As Chairman Mao said: "The storm draws nearandthe wind
roars in the tower." Thus, the vortex draws near, the vortex
begins, andtheinvincibleflameoftherevolution grows,
convertingitself into leadandsteel.Andfrom the dinof battle
along its inextinguishablefireswill comeforththelight.From the
darkness a lightwill appear and a new world will be born. The
oldorderof reaction crackles,itsoldboatleaksand_sinks in
desperation. But comrades,nobody can expect reaction to retire
gently. Marx warned us: Evenwhiledrowning,thereactionaries
were capableofinfl ictingasphyxiatingchokeholdsanddesperate
blows in order to see us sink. That is impossible. The reaction has
the hyena's dreamsofblood.Convulsive dreams shake their
303
=====第303页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
somber nights.Theirharsschmesiisterhcatombs.Term
themselvestothetethbuttheycannotprevail.Theirdestin is
weighedandmeasured.Thetimehascomeforthesettlingof
accounts.
The imperialistsuperpowers,U.S.A., U.S.S.R.,andother powers
seek toinvadetaufaroyanddwrytng
with terror. But as Chairman Mao said,byattacking, assaulting,
and launchingoffensivestheyoverextend themselves and enter
thep
powerfulcore ofthe people. The peoplerise up,
，arm
themselves and rebel, putting nooses on the necks of imperialism
and reaction. The people take them by the throat,threaten their
lives and will strangle them out of necessity. The reactionary meat
will be trimmedof fat,they willbe torn to tattersand rags,the
scraps sunk into mire, and the remainders burned. The ashes will
be thrown to the windsof the world sothatonly the sinister
reminder of what must never return will remain.
Comrades,that is the world today.It has befallen on us to live in
an extraordinary epoch. Thus it is written,mankind never had
such a heroic destiny. To the people of today, to those people who
breathe,struggle,andfight,hasbefallenthetaskofsweping
reactionfrom theface of the earth,the most illuminating and
magnificentmission given to any generation.Wefindourselves in
this situation: The worldrevolution enters a strategicoffensive.
Nothingwillprevailagainstit.Theinnumerableironleions
arise,andmore and more willarise,inexhaustibly multiply
encircleand annihilate reaction. Reaction,whichunleashesits
bloody claws tearingthefleshoff thepeople,continuesto sow
discord,embroil,andseekstosateitselfwiththebloodofthe
people.uhobooadieouate
strickenfleshconvertsitselfintoa powerfulvengefullash.Ther
ero
304
=====第304页=====
WE ARE THE InITiaToRS
Comrades,reaction willnotprevail inanyform.Thehourhas
sounded,thervolutiowilltriumph.Thestrugglewillbehard,
arduous,cruelanddifficult.VictoryisoursThemasseswill
prevail,thepeasantswillarise,theworkingclasswilllead,the
Communist Party will command and the Red Flags will be raised
forever. Reaction hasentered itsfinal chapter. We will develop in
that world.
II. Our People Begin to Seize Power Through Armed Struggle
In thismagnificentepicof worldhistoryour peoplalong with
the Latin American working classes and masses have a role to
play. This role is being fulfilled. Our people begin to seize power
through armed struggle.It ishundreds of yearsof strugglein
which the peasant movements have shaken thefoundationof
exploitation,but they have not beenable to uproot it as yet. In
this countrythe Communist Party wasforged as pure steel. It
brought light to the people by upholding Marxism-Leninism Mao
Tse-tung Thought. Comrades, in this country we are embarking
upon a third epoch. The third epoch is a battle between armed
revolution and armed counter-revolution,which are prepared for
violence. Counter-revolution withits oldandbloodyviolence,
peace at the hands of bayonets, their damned wars that annihilate
people in the prisons,schools,factories,in the countryside, and
even assassinating children with hunger and misery in their
maternal wombs.
Today,thatsinisterviolence meetsitsmatch. Therevolutionary
violence prepares to take up the battle in arms.Our people with a
rich history arefinally embarking
thefinalchaptr,the
completion of the democratic periodof the revolution.The masses
tremble, thefloodtideises,andthestormapproaches. Reaction
in thiscoury wllsinthewld,alodamofoakig the
305
=====第305页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
revolution withbloodandfire,of drowning it inblood.Theseare
old, dark, and violent dreams.
Theyarenotfacinthsamesituatioayesterday.Timehas
passedand bureaucratic capitalismhas maturedtherevolution.
The agrarian laws promulgated by the regimes have been failurs
one after another,and the peasants have understood the lesson:
nothing will be given to them,nothing will derivefrom a law.
The land must be conquered by their own armed hands.
The working class is moreaggressive,mature.Ithasahigher level
ofconsciousness,it is numericallylarger politicaly
more
powerful,and much strongerthan in the past. The popular
masses have grown in our country. The petty bourgeoisie is being
proletarianized. It has no other destiny than to serve the
revolution and put itself atthe disposalof the proletariat.Its only
course of action is to serve the revolution according to the dictates
of the workingclassand toforcefullyfightbehind the road paved
bythe Party. This is goodto remember,becausefrom this
experience we should particularly winovertheintellectuals. As
Mariategui has already shown us,the masses must be mobilized
and only in this manner will we will fulfill our role and serve the
great battle that history has arranged for us.
Comrades,we have concluded that we are embarking
intothe
third epoch of  contemporary
Peruvian society.
But just
as
yesterday, when we expounded upon the two moments of
contemporary Peruvian history as partof the process of the
developmentof bureaucratic capitalism inthis country,some
condemned us and rejected our thesisand ideals with insolence
and contemptibleaccusationsof infantilism.Weare putting forth
today,withcleaanpciiionthouroutn
This thesis
will  also be  subjected
third
epoch.
to
306
=====第306页=====
WE ARE THE INITIaTORS
lessons[tralat:tietothetwlinstrugglwitinthe
Party].Nevertless,itiotasyorurccurtoasilacept
and comprhendit.Itequireconvincingdeeds,concreeactions
that pound into theirhardheadsand shattertheirspeculation to
pieces,so that they also may carry the realityof this country in
their spirits.
The understanding of the third epoch is key to the advance of our
people. What doesthethird epochimply?Itimplisthe
revolution,the people with arms in hand begin to seize power,
that reaction with400yearsofexploitation,added tothe
exploitationof other epochs, (comrades, we should think clearly,
400 years of foreign oppression, a vile slave system that continues
to exist today, a state which although weak,stillhasforce),
implies that reaction willtryto contain us andoppose the
advanceof therevolution.Itis wellknownby materialiststhat
what exists refuses to die;reaction exists and therefore refuses to
die. It is an unburied corpse but it protests,negates,resists, and
attacks with furyand desperation,opposing its placement into a
casket for its burial.
Thus, we must understand that the revolutionary struggle will be
hard,violentandcruellycontestedbyreaction. Theywillsend
their sinister army armed to the teeth tofightus,assaulting the
working class,the peasants and popular masses,spreading their
sinister claws.They will try to encircle, isolate,crush and wipe us
out. But we are the future, the strength, and history.
Comrades,revolutionand counterrevolutionarealsocontending
forces in our country.Theyare two partsofaunityofopposites
in constant
struggle.
T
 reactionaries
arearmed
and
defending
gthemetropolisand capitals.We
concentrated,
eare
307
=====第307页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
rooted inthe countryside,insmallvillages,withthemasses,
especiallywithepoorpeaatswiththforcofthepopl,
among theidisorganizedforceinordertoorganizeitinoa
powerfularmy.uttiswillotbasy.Theark,siisarmies
of reaction willfightagainstus,mount powerful aggressions and
greatoffeniv.Wewillespondinkndslngtem,aig
them fall apart, and converting their offensives into a multitude of
our smalloffensives. Therefore,those whoencircle willbe
encircled,the would-beannihilators willbeannihilated, the
would-bevictorswillbedefeatedandthebeastwillfinallybe
corralled. As we have been taught, the clamor of our armed voices
will make them tremble with terror.They will be crushed by their
own fears and be converted into scattered black ashes.
That is whatwill happen. This isthe wayit is, Comrades.
NeverthesstilbafudlW
need to steel our spirits,
be strong, vigorous, fearless and
confident in ourvictory. May the confidenceof victory dwell in
our hearts in as much as we serve the people and class. The
problem is to initiate thearmed struggle with decisivenessand
firmness. We must deploy it and populate the land with our flags
and with sonorous actions that history will record. Comrades, our
people are embarking on the seizure of power with arms. We are
launching the most magnificent march that our country has ever
seen before.Nothinglike thiswill everbeseenagain.It will be
truly remarkable. This is what we will do! The people,the class,
and the proletariat demands it. We can not and must not fail.
III. The Party Develops Itself Through Armed Struggle.
It has been more than 80 yearsof working class struggle and 52
yearsof thePrtysexit.Ittookabout10argouf
men and women,led by Mariategui,about10 years to found the
308
=====第308页=====
WE ARE THE InITIaTORS
thewl
manyofushavefought,andwillcontinueto struggleuntil
exploitation is abolished. That is our destiny. We are a growing
torrent confronting fire, rocks and mud. But our power is greater.
Weconverteverythingintoourfire.Theblackfire willbe
transformedinto redfireand thered is light. That iswhere we
are, thatis the Reconstitution ofthe Party. Comrades,we are
reconstituted.
The Party is a Party of a new type. The purposeof this Party of a
new type is to seize power for the working class and the people of
this country. The Party can not be developed more but through
the use of arms,through armed struggle. That is the hard lesson
we have learnedin50years,great lessonthatweshouldever
forget: We have no power because we have no guns.
Like
Chairman Mao has written,whoever has more guns has more
power. Whoever wants to seize power must forge an army,and
whoever wants to keep power must have a powerful army.This is
what wewillaccomplish. ThePartyhasembarkedtodevelop
itselfthrodguoloWo 
backwards.
Comrades,we can now state that the development of the Party
has prevailed.Itspossibledestruction,as ithad tobe,has been
averted. This is the conclusion we can derivefrom the 2nd
Plenary Sessionof the Central Committeeand the FirstMilitary
School. We have completed a task that we only now have begun
to appreciate. We asked ourselves, how will we develop the Party?
A plain and simple response is: Through armed struggle. In
critical timesthe situation enters into contentious struggles,and
accordingtothelawofcontradiction,specificircumstances can
lead into development or destruction,of course transitory, but it
does not cease to becomea destructionif thatcouldlead us to
sink in the mud or march through a muddy place.
309
=====第309页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
The Party has triumphed as it had to.Itsdestruction cannot take
place. ThePartyembarksfirmly,decisively,voluntarilyand
energetically in its development.Comrades,this is what is derived
from these meetings.
s. However, what contradiction is being
debated? The launching
of armed struggle
presents
a
contradiction: Theold versus the new. The development of the
Party througharmed struggleisthe new,andthe old is our
accomplishments up to now,including the good ones. Even the
best of our achievements have aged, and no matter how much we
add tothistradition,wealsoaddtothatgreatgarbage which
parties,classesandorganizations generatethroughout decades.
We must be very clear on this point. There is only one new thing,
to develop the Party through armed struggle. Today,this is our
contradiction. Just like in theinternational arena where the
contradiction is between the strategicoffensive and the strategic
defensive of reaction, in our country the contradiction is between
the armed people and armed reaction. This contradiction, through
the People's War, will inevitable lead to the triumphof the class
and sweep away 400 years of oppression. Comrades, in the Party
there is also a contradiction.It callsfor serious reflection and no
one should doubt it.
Today,the Communists should be clearon the contradictionof
the old versus the new.I reiterate, the new is the armed struggle:
the unfadingflamesof People's War,the steel which must be
made purer,the sharp sword and piercing spears in orderto
wound the entrails of reaction. This is new. Everything else is old,
it is the past, and from that past we must guard ourselves, because
the pastalwaystries toreestablishitself in a thousandforms in
the future.
Comrades,letusnotforgetthatinorderto guarantee the
Today,
310
=====第310页=====
WE ARE THE InITiaToRS
advancitde
the action istheguofoouhsowtheew with
lead,crumbling theold walls.Comrades,this is thenew.
Everythingelse isold.Weshould beabsolutelyclearand
understandit. ThePartyhas embarked onitsdevelopment
through arms. This is our fundamental situation. Having stated
this point, we have three conditions:
First,weembark on the strategic offensive of worldrevolution.
That is our situation. The revolutionary tide is on our side.
Second,the people set out to seize power with arms. The future
will be decided through the advancement of People's War.
Third,thePartybeginstodevelopthroughthearmedstruggle.
Thus,theParty willbecomethepowerfulParty which the
revolution needs, and since it is needed it must be forged.
Comrades,the world process,the processof the nation and the
Party areinterrelated. Therefore,thefuture is assured,it is
palpitating in the armed actions that we will commence to
undertake. It is a delicate task that needs to be nurtured with the
clamorofour arms,developed withguerrilla warfare,fortified
with People's War,caredforand nourishedlike theseedof an
army, giving birth to armed columns,allowing it toflourish into a
guerrilla army that we must build into a powerful army.
Comrades,these three conditions determine that the Party leads
the armed struggle of the masses. In our hearts, minds and wills,
the power of the people is alive,and we carry it with us. In the
beginning we have no rearguard or we will have one that is small,
weak,fragileand uncertain.Comrades,we must never forget the
people's powertheStatofthworkinclastf
311
=====第311页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
themuzzlesofouifles,nestledinouminds,throbbing inour
hands,anditwillalwaysbeburning inourhearts.Itis the first
thing on ourminds. We should never forget it. Comrades,the
todevelop throughchange,fromthe
butits destiny willbe
variationoffragilitylikeatenderplant.Theroots we plantat the
beginning will be thefuture of a vigorous State. Comrades,all
this begins toflourish with the modestand simple actions that
tomorrow we will carry out.
There arethreeinterrelatedthings: worldhistory,thehistoryof
our country,andthehistory of our Party. These are three
convergences,three realities,three combinations and onlyone
final conclusion, only one unmovable truth, only one future. We
will respond to the flourishing revolution in our country.
IV. We Begin to Develop the Militarizationof the Party Through
Actions and Apply the Plan of Initiation.
This is a derivation from the three issues discussed above. It is a
logical, necessary,irrefutableandireversibleconclusion. Onthe
three previous issues,the Party in the Second Plenary Sessionof
the Central  Committee has concluded
follows: The
as
"DevelopmentoftheMilitarizationofthePartythroughactions."
It ratified that through
narmed actions,
,the Party will be
transformedinto a powerfulandrecognized vanguard ofthe
Peruvian working class,and the legitimate centerof the Peruvian
revolution. The Second Plenary Session has also ratified a "plan of
initiatingthe armed struggle"thatsolvesa problem unresolvd
until today, of how to begin the armed struggle.Comrades, this is
not to instill ourselves with pride but to understandour immense
responsibility.No traceof vanity shouldeverbe inus. Modesty
and simplicity should accompany us,and the more we fulfill
lour
tasks, the more modest and simple we become, because we are the
312
=====第312页=====
WE ARE THE INiTIaTORS
even more profoundly among us. We have comrades by way of
the actions of universal history, by Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-
tung Thought,bythelaborofourpeoplethatbeginto define
their historythrougharms,bythelaboroffiftyyearsof Party
struggle andofinnumerable Communists, and as a derivation
from whatour ownfounderinitiated. We have resolved the
problemof initiating thearmed struggle. Wehaveresolved the
firstfundamental military problem,how to initiate the armed
struggle. We know what needs to be done and how to arm
ourselves. Mostimportantly, we know how to raise upthe
peasantry sothatthrough arduous struggles we can unleash
guerrilla actionsfromthatpowerful land.Weknowhowto
confront and destroy their encirclements.
Comrades, the problem of initiating the armed struggle in Peru is
resolved. No one should have doubts about it. We have nothing
to doubt. The problem is resolved. Take itfor whatit is,a
derivationfrom Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought, a
result of our people embarking on the seizure of power with arms.
A derivationfromfiftyyearsof theParty. Thus,wewill havea
historicalsense,a comprehension and knowledgeof where we
stand now,where we are going and the safe port we will arrive.
V. We ArmOurselvesin TheoryandPracticetoLaunchthe
People's War.
Wearearmingourselvesintheoryand practicewiththeMilitary
Lineand with thegeneralpoliticalmobilzation.Weare forming
detachmentand develoig actionstoitiatethearmed struggle.
This should be indelibly recorded.
ThisFirstMilitacolitoicWeakedorlv,
313
=====第313页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
this school? If the Second Session of the Central Committee is the
"ChimeofGlory",whatisthisschool?Wewillrepeatitonce
more,it is"theSealandBreach",becauseitclosesandopensIt
concludes our unarmed life and begins
Sou
People's War.
Comrades,
that is this school. Here we have
applied the
ofthe  Second Plenary
agreements
Session ofthe
Central
Committee.
Wehave successfully
completed
and
resolved
problems,thattheCentralCommitteeshallratifyverysoon,at
the same time it arrangesforthe Party's readjustment and the
commencing of actions.
Thus,the Party,throughitscentralorganizations,itsleadersand
cadres,armsitself with the military line in theoryand practice.
Comrades, the last meeting is a demonstration of the distribution
of forces: proof of the encirclement and annihilation of pessimism
and opposition. It has burned and annihilated what among us and
inside of us could have opposed. We have raised up optimism and
arefilled with enthusiasm. The victories to come have been
unfurled. We must understand it in this way. We have seenthe
fighters march, we have seen advancedfighters with their leaders
at the foreground,openingbreaches;we have seen the ranks
march in order to maintain and support the actions. We have
seen at last the definitive action,a passionate and ardent faith to
reach the summit. What we have done today is a demonstration
of how to act militarily. That is why we say we are arming
ourselvestheorticllyand practillyIthismararminghe
cadres andleadersforbasic effectiveness, we have obviously
entered the general  political  mobilization. Remember what
Chairman Mao said: thekey is to mobilize the cadres. That has
been accomplished. The mobilizationhasbegun,andwhat we
have achievedhere willbereverberated tomorrow in more
314
=====第314页=====
WE ARE THE InITIATORS
tomorrow.It is whatthebeatingheartsof themilitantsandthe
masses thatwork jointlywithus desire tohearand dreamof
realizing.
Comrades,theeneralpliticalmobiliatioofthePartyison the
march. Forming armed detachments and developing military
actions we initiate the armed struggle. This begins from here, and
that is why this meeting is both a seal and a breach.
VI. We Are the Initiators.
Wearetheinitiators.Webeganbystating wearetheinitiators.
And we end by stating we are the initiators.Initiatorsof what? Of
the People's Warand thearmedstruggle thatis inour hands,
shining in our minds,beating inour hearts andirrepressibly
agitating in our wills. This is what we are "a handful of men and
women,Communists,payinghomage to the leadershipofthe
Party,theproletariatandthepeople.Onthis19thofApril,
history will state,
expressed
their
standing
upright   they
declarationof revolutionaryfaith,withtheir hearts burning with
an inextinguishable passion, with firm and resolute wills, and with
clear and bold minds,assuming theirhistoricalobligation of being
the Initiators. Whatthey decidedon April19thtook shapein
autumn withboycottsandtheharvest,followedthroughwith
actions againstthereactionary power,aimingat local authority,
continued withlandseizures and with the peasant massesin
rebellion theguerrillas wereraisedup. The guerrillasgenerated
the powerful army we have become today, and the State based on
it. Our countryis free…"  Thatis whatthey will say,comrades.
This is materialized in our party decision,apparentlysimple but
of great historical importance.
Comrades,dothesthreefinalissuealopresntu with
315
=====第315页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
contradictionYe,theydo.Hee,ithParty,theocusison
our agreement concerning the"Developmentof theMilitarization
ofthe Partythroughactions"andinapplyingourPlanof
Initiation is theessenceof the new,anew partof the world which
cannot bedetained becauseourarmedhandshave surged with
more to ollowtomorrow.Thew isocused inurcountry,the
armed solution, andtheParty's developmentthrough
 arms
intensifiesthroughthearmedstruggle.Thus,on thequestionof
developing and applyingtheplan of initiation,the new is the
focus and theoldis confronted. Theoldwill pledgeitself to the
opposite,butitisalready defeated,it is a greatdefeatfor the
Right. Theirdestructionisalreadyassured,thdevelopmenta
triumphed, letusshape it through thunder,write it with lead, so
that it remains written forever on pages of steel upon the ridge of
the mountains;sothat it can never be erased nor written ina
contrary form. That is the contradiction.
Atthe end, everything  reduces to
problem. The
contradiction enters to address the problems of arms, war,armed
struggle and how to initiate it. If up to now we have acted as an
unarmed people,the problem now is that we begin to act with
armed hands. From times of peace to times of war. And the times
of war have other requirements and other urgent demands.
Comrades, the contradictions will accumulate but we will handle
them. We have learned to handle history, the laws and
contradictions. It is in our hands to resolve them,shaping them
with armed deeds. Nothing willstopus. We will pass through
times of irreversible war, the contradiction will unfold, it will take
us to a successful conclusion.
We are the initiators. What contradiction is presented to us? We
and theother Communists of our bases,present or not,who
reverberatewithinu,awatwitanxitywhatisdcdedhere.All
316
=====第316页=====
WE ARE THE INITIATORS
Comrades,the timehascome.It is time foragreat rupture. We
will breakalltieswithwhatisoldandrottenin orderto
completely and thoroughly destroy it,for if we have an interest in
that decrepit world,we would notbeableto destroyit. Men
speaking individually can be weak. Eachof us should think hard.
As an individual,each person can befragileand weak. Butthe
revolution is all-powerful, and the armed revolution even more so,
because it is sustained by the masses,whoaretheforceofthe
land and led by the Party, which is the light of the universe.
Comrades,we begin the greatrupture. We have stated many
times that we embark upon that rupture and that many ties shall
be broken since it links us to the old and rotten order, and if we
don't do it, we could never demolish it. Comrades, the time has
come, there is nothing more to discuss,the debate has been
exhausted. It is time to act, it is the moment of rupture and it will
not be done with slow and tardy meditation, nor in the halls nor
insilent rooms. It will be done with the roarof armed actions.
This is the form for carrying it out,a correct and adequate form,
the only form. It is through actions,as we have studied, that the
conscious capacityofpeople intensifies,the willis tenser,our
passions more powerful andour energy enraged. Comrades,
throughactions wewillfindtheenergy,force,andsufficient
capacity for the great rupture. We have embarked upon this. The
trumpets begin to sound, the murmur of the masses grows and it
willcontinuegrowing,itwilldeafenus,itwillbringustoa
powerful vortex, with one note: We will become the protagonists
ofhistory,conscious,organizedandarmed. Thus,the great
rupture willbeopen and we willbecome the makersof a
definitive dawn.This is what we have embarked upon, comrades.
I want toconclude.ThichoolthisFirstPartyMilitarySchool,
is the seal andthcitateesuptotayand
317
=====第317页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
opens a breachfor tomorrow. What we have accomplished until
now is verypositiveand has bornefruit.There is a saying that
popleed.
There is nothing more to prove. What has been done until now is
good. The breach,what we mustdo,willbeeven greaterand
definitivelytheonlygreatthingwehaveto accomplish. Itwill
come forthfrom arms,from the barrelsof the guns.It will come
forth from the direct action of the Party upon the masses. It will
come forth from the People's War.
Comrades,this schoolis historic. We cannot undertandits
dimension,we cannot weigh it as it deserves unless we turn our
gaze decades into the future.This is the Schoolof the Initiators. It
is the name given to it by the Central Committee.In a word it is
IAS_80(ILA 80),which means: Initiatethe Armed Strugglein
1980. It is a commitmentand challenge. We are deployed. We
will surpass it.I am notonlysaying that wewillaccomplished it,
but we willsurpassit,because it is a mandate and a historic
necessity imposed upon us by our people,nobody can speak to
the contrary.
Comrades,therole of the School of Initiators,ILA 80is: Initiate
the armedstrugglein1980. Decadeslater,in thefuture,itwill
interpreted like this: ILA 80,the armed struggle was initiated in
1980.ILA was done here. That word is beautiful, it has a double
meaning and if we look at it even more, it has a further meaning.
It is the synthesisof what we done up to now. It shapes all the
past. Comrades, what has guided us? Toinitiate the armed
struggle, was not this stated in the Ninth Plenum? Comrades, it is
the pastsummarized,opening into the present,it is thefuture
that mustbe irrevocably accomplished. ILA_ 80is alsothe
implementationof our past agreement on initiatingthe armed
struggle.Inthepresentitmeaninitiatingthearmedstruggle
was
318
=====第318页=====
WE ARE THE InITIATORS
initiated in 1980.
Comrades,all that we have done during these complex days,in
difficultmomentsbutinthefinalanalysis,satisfacory days,
fruitful,hlotlldoo
of Initiators: ILA 80."
The CentralCommitteeandthePolitical Bureauof the_Central
Committee congratulates those present and everyone else because
with their actions they helped in the materializationof this reality.
Congratulations to the Party,because with its actions, it has made
this reality concrete.Congratulationstothemasses andour
people, because their actions through centuries have been realied
here. Congratulations to the working class ofthe world,the
international proletariat and the peoples of the world, because
their actions have borne fruit here. We render homage, as always,
to the unfadingflagsofMarxism-Leninism MaoTse-tung
Thought,because their grandeur which will always live has been
realized here. They, now live within us. The spirit ofthe
revolution dwells in the Party,our people, and our class. Finally it
has arrived!All our struggles have been validated. Comrades,
finallyithasbeenrealized:Initiatethearmedstruggletoday
Everything that we have accomplished, including errors that have
served as experience, are validated here. This is the essence of this
School.
The CentralCommittee,thePolitical BureauoftheCentral
Committee feelsand expresses through thisspeakeran immense
delight,because we have completed a simple and magnificent
task: Thatthe initiationof the armedstruggle,ILA 80, dwells here
and puts thefinaltouchesonthe past,specifiesthepresentand
opens the future.Comrades,we have accomlishedthis.Thus e
future opens with promise and hope. We remember the words of
a wised"Wutle."
319
=====第319页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung
Thought,theinternational
proletariat,fwl,tewass,eople
of this country,theParty withitsbases,cadres,andleaders,all
this magnificentactionthroughthecenturieshasbeenrealized
here. The promise blossoms and the future unfolds. ILA 80.
Our duty is tofulfill it.Whathasbeengiven to us asafuture, we
mustfulfllit withour ownlives,for the people,workers,and
Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought.
Comrades,theefortsinvestedareasatisfaction,adelightin the
accomplished tasks, pleased by what has been done,and seek no
compensation.
The futureis inthebarrelsof theguns!Thearmed revolution has
begun!
Glory to Marxism-Leninism Mao Tse-tung Thought!
Long Live the Communist Party of Peru!
Initiate the Armed Struggle!
320
=====第320页=====
TOWARDS GUERRILLA WARFARE!
EXPANDED CENTrAL CoMMiTtEE, AuGusT 24, 1980
Thefirst
I.ThePlaoIiitapliioandtouoofthe
firstactions,are brilliantand all-round successof transcendental
importance,with greatrepercussions that havekindled the ever
living flames of the People's War in our country.
II. Summarizingtheexperiencesof theGeneralBalanceof the
firstactionshasledtofurtherdeveloptheParty's military line,
andadvanceditconsolidationcrushingtheRightism which
proposed militarist positions tending to evolveinto a bourgeois
militarist line.
III.The Party fortified intheforging ofitsfirstactions is on a war
footing ready to march toward the launching of guerrilla warfare.
The first stands out as a brilliant and clear success obtained by the
Party, which has a great historical repercussion.
The secondindicatesthat in the balance of thefirstactions,the
militarylineofthePartyhasdevelopedandadvanced.Ithas
consolidated by combating militarist positions that tend to evolve
as a bourgeois military line.In this manner,we have obtained a
majordevelopmentandconsolidation. Themilitary line,likeall
lines, only develops and consolidates itself in struggle.
ThethirdestabliheandhihlightthtthPartyispreparedto
march towards the beginning of guerrilla warfare.
321
=====第321页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
E 1 (1968-1987)
We havefinishedthefirstphase,whichisessentialand the basis
ofthis meetingof the Expanded Central Commitee.Upon these
solid bases, we canoutline the nationaland international context
and layoutthlntobegintheguerllwar.Weshould bevry
consciousof the brilliant and greatsuccessof theapplicationof
the PlanofInitiationofthearmedstruggle. Thisplanisof
historic transcendence and hasshakenthe country,placingthe
Party in the center of the class struggle and political contention.
The constant struggleof Communistmilitantsas theexpression
of proletarianclass struggleandthemassesofourcountyhas
been historically molded and defined in the countryside. We have
embarked upon a superiorform of struggle,armed struggle,to
destroy theoldorder andconstructanew societ.
From now on,thePeople's War dwells in us andinhabitsthe
nation. Itsever-burningflameskindleand inflame our people. Its
flameswill beinvincible,tremblingand demolishingthe rotten
dominant society, flames from whose hearts will be born the most
potent bonfire of the future.
It has befallen to us the historical mission of launching the armed
struggle in our country and to develop it and sustain it as part of
the strugglesof Latin America,theinternational proletariat, the
peoplesof the worldand world revolution,which we serve by
adhering atullytoe picipleof poltaaitrtionalism.
Thestrugglewillbelongbutfruitful,bloodybutbrilliant,and
hard but vigorous and omnipotent. It has been said that the world
will be transformedwitharms,andthatis whatweare doing
now. From thebarrelsof gunseverythingwillcome. Weare
already living itandwewillseeitmore as thePeople's War
develops.
322
=====第322页=====
TOWARDS GUERRiLLA WARFARE
To the CommuistmmbrofthisPrty,inthiotry,who
have brokenthestonewallof morethanfiftyyears,theirspirits
mustbenolessthanvibranttodaywiththerealizationof this
great balance which proves and tests the achievements,counting,
measuring and weighing the future. We are very conscious of and
responsibleforouractions. We have nothing to bevain about
except tofulfill our duty. We have nothing to bragabout, since
glory is fortheclass,the peopleand the Party. Nevertheless, we
need to be optimists,assured that the pebblesof the new order
begin to fall into place. Thefuture begins to be written. We will
write the new history with flowers of stone in bronze forever
more.Wewilltamethehills,wewill writeanewhistorywith he
pointsofswords,thelightoffire,tearing downiniquityand
giving birth to the future.
For every Communist Partythat assumes itsrole as the armed
vanguard of the proletariat,there comes a time to tear away the
centuries of oppression. It lets out its war cries and assaults the
heavens,the shadows and the night. It begins to tear down the
oldand atiaryll,itbitotlndacleke
dry leaves before new andtenderflames,before young ut
crackling bonfires. The People's War begins to sweep away the
oldorder in order to inevitably destroy it. From theold, the new
shall beborn.Andfinally,likethepureandgloriousphoenix
bird, Communism will arise for all time.
We should unfurloptimism andoverflow withenthusiasm,
futhermore thinking that we serve to carry out a task that will last
forevermore. We humans are merefragments of time and heart
beats,butour deeds willremainfor centuries stamped on
generationaftergeneration. Men marchinevitablytowards teir
end,buthumanity,theworkingclassandtheir creationswil
neverend.Wewillolethethwithindhappiness.
323
=====第323页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
With us,withour armed struggle,the authentic and only true
liberty begins to beborn. We are trumpetsof thefuture, the
inextinguishable fire that crackles in the stormy present.
Long Live The Irresistible March Towards Guerrilla Warfare!
324
=====第324页=====
TO OUR HEROIC FIGHTING PEOPLE!
PCP - CeNTRAL COMMITEE - 1 JANUARY, 1981
Peruvianpeople!Youaresufferingfourhundredyearsofhard
andcruelexploitation,undeignominiouforegn dominaion,
violent opression of the native exploiters and bloody repression by
the reactionary State.
Peruvian people! Today, after twelve yearsof false revolution and
real reenforcement of your chains under a fascist military regime,
in the middle of the big crisis that you have endured, today it is a
government  that  rules
throughoutdated reactionary
new
monstrosity  of, so
called,
"representative democracy",false
democracyoffalserightsand liberties,offalse carefor the basic
needs of the people, and false democracy of the real opression and
exploitationin theserviceoftheexploitingclassesants
imperialist master; new reactionary government
which is
drowningyou
day by day in the hunger,
unemployment,
ignorance,lision.
Peruvian people! Your history is not only the one of exploitation
and bloody opression that was imposed and keep imposing with
the language of reactionary violence and the wordsof demagogy
of the false promises.Your history,is theoneofrebellion and
struggle; it's the historyof the proletariatasa leading class,of the
peasants, especially of the poor one which struggles and fights for
the landhelivesoff,of thepopularmasseswhichlive off the
sweat of theirforeheads,of your best sons whichoffer up their
life,of the peoples which wake up more and more tofight for
rliberty,foryour emancipation. In summary,our people,
your
rhistory istheheroic oneandunfading struggle ofthe
your
popularmasses; it'sthestruggleforthebradforyourchldn,
325
=====第325页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
for the education, which clears the minds and makes them more
conscious,for your conqueredrightsand libertiesfor the priceof
your blood,forthemarchingrevolution,thrivingfor definitive
emancipation,forthedestructionof theoldandrttesystem of
dominance,and definitely for the creationand forgingof the new
world for your sons, by your armed hands.
Peruvian people! And today, your best sons, blood of your blood,
steel of your steel,forged in your thousand battlesand hardened
in your tireless action,following your shining and heroic example,
today, our peruvian people, your best and devoted sons have rised
in the wind thered flamingflagof therebellion,theyhaverised
in the armedactions opening the way which everyone hasto
follow: the way of democratic revolution which shall demolish the
imperialistdomination,feudalopression,capitalistbueraucratic
exploitation and the outdated State whose
supportisthe
e
bureaucracy.
Peruvian people!Todayyour sonshoistthegreatredflagofthe
rebellion which started to express with thefacts your highest
revolutionary dreams. Today your sons have started the effort,
hardandbrilliantpathofenclosingthecitiesfromthevillage,
glorious way of the people's war. That way, today,your sons that
came out of your powerful entrails,offer up to you their armed
actions andtheir liveswhile saluting your heroic struggle and
magnificent future in this new year.
Peruvian
people!Thearmeds
struggle has begun! Laborers,
peasa,
masses,letus march together into combatand with weapons in
ourhandswlluttuhuofurl!
LONG
LIVE
MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO
ZEDONG
THOUGHT!
326
=====第326页=====
TO OUR HEROIC FiGHTING PEOPLE
LONG LIVE THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU!
DEVELOP THE ARMED STRUGGLE!
=====第327页=====
COLLECTED
1 (1968-1987)
WORKS
PCP - VOLUME
SOF
OF
LONG
THE
ARMED
STRUGGLE
LIVE
OUR
PEOPLE!
HOAX!
DOWN
WITH
THE
REACTIONARY
PCP - PERU, 8 SEPTEMBER 1981
The Communist Partyof Peru,started in May 80,in defense of
the sacred interests of our people, and our heroic armed sruggle.
This transcendentalrevolutionaryactwithguerrilla actions:
propaganda and agitation, mobilization, crops andinvasions,
sabotage,assaultand confrontation, mainly in the field, opens the
doorsof the armedrebellion,the revolt of the masses of poor
peasantry, especially, the conquestof power for the proletariat and
peoples through a protracted people's war from the countryside to
the city masses. This is the real and only way to our liberation.
In more than a yearof battles and victories,whose milestones are
Chuschi,San Martin dePorres,Airabamba,Aisarca, Luricocha
and others who stand out among more than the two thousand
armed actions that have rocked every corner of our country fueled
by the burning combativenessofour indomitable people. Today,
in its inevitable development, our struggle begins with a new and
big wave that hits the old reactionary ruling system deeper, which
by being in turn transitory is headed by the demagogue Belaunde
and his gang of smugglers, looters,starvers and traitors.
The recent and forceful blows in Quinua,the USA embassy and
its residence,theSouthern,thecentraland local People's Action
andothers are partof a seriesof armedactions againstUS
imperialism,the mainforeign exploiterof our people and the
servile Belaunde government and his rampant repression and false
democracy.
328
=====第328页=====
LONG LIvE THE ARMED STruGGLE OF our PEOpLE
But,tryintovtheuwfrowte
havegenerated,unitedtothe heroic
political crisis thatthey
strugglesofour people,and in defenseof its imperialist master
(nowitn"r",r"l
of
"ElDiario",
the
focused
electioneering
opportunists,

the
reactionary and corruptBelaunde government hasmounted
the
crudeandsenilecanardthat"wouldbedrugtraffickers,"
perpetrators of such actions, at the same time are spreading
fallacious and ridiculous denials. So they atempt to cover up the
greatreality:thefailuresinitrepressiveplan andthebooming
development of the armed struggle.
Workers, peasants,women, youth, masses of our country,a new
truth lies beforeus:thearmedrevolution is on! Wegrette
future hitting the reactionary power more and more strongly, with
arms in hand and heart seething with hope as embodied inthe
unquenchable flames of our people's war.
DOWN WITH THE REACTIONARY HOAX!
LONG LIVE ARMED STRUGGLE !
GLORY TO MARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM!
22o
=====第329页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
LET US DEVELOP GUERRILLA WARFARE!
PCP - CeNTRAL COMMITTEE - MaRCH, 1982
"He,who is notafraidof deathbya thousand cuts,dares to
overthrow the emperor.
1
I. The Armed Struggle Blazes Victoriously
The CommunistPartyofPeru,theorganizedvanguardof the
proletariatfoundedbyMaritegui,reconstitutedthrough
nmore
thanfifteen yearsof hard struggle as a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist
Partyof a new type,andassumingitshistoricrole and dutyof
fightingfor the conquestof powerfortheproletariat and the
people,in Mayof1980has set burning the invincibleand ever-
growingfameofthrmtruglof uellwaraeno
country. This struggle,which is rooted every day more deeply in
the class struggle in our land, soon will become a raging hurricane
of armed battle to demolish theold,rotten prevailing order, and
to bring to lifea reallyfree,sovereign countrythat providesfor
the well-being of the millions of exploited and oppressed.
Intwenty-one monthstheParty hasvigorouslyinitiated and
developed the only
for
people's and nation's
means
our
emancipation: the armed struggle,the guerrilla warwhich blazes
victoriously in the two thousand nine hundred armed actions that
have sweptthelandinallbutfourdepartmentsthatstirsthe
jungle,thecoast,andthehighlandsmostofal,thatshakesthe
city and especially the countryside,whose struggle isserved by the
Thus, highlands  and
mountains, which made the
former.
countrysideaetheowrlantualupportoanyossib
330
=====第330页=====
LET US DEVELoP GuERRiLLA WARFARE
concentrated in base areas -in bases of the New State of workers
and
peasants,isolatingthereactionariesandtheirimperialist
masters inthecities,wheretheproletariatandthe mases,by
burning thesolesof theenemy's bloodypaws mainly through
armed actions that servethe struggle in the countryside, the
center of the storm, prepare conditions for the final assault on the
cities and the total, complete and thorough defeat ofthe
reactionary order and the reactionary army that maintains it. This
road, the only road to revolution, is now open; this is the road on
which more and more of the proletariat and the masses, our
people,are moving toward their own armed emancipation, by
their own hands,since: "The people, and the people alone, is the
motive force in the making of world history.
Two thousand nine hundred actions! These actions that began
with theboycottofthegeneralelections of_1980,carried in
Chuschi and manyother places,trking withaitationand armed
propaganda through the seizure ofradio stations,leaflets, and
posters, and direct actions that sow panic between the
reactionaries and arouse the enthusiasm of the people with our
rallying criesof"Armedstruggle,""Governmentof workersand
peasants," and"Down withthereactionary government" This
showed a new world to win through the hammers and sickles that
light the hills,and through the unfading red flags proudly waving
on top of hills and heights proclaim"It's right to rebel!"
These actions are armed mobilizations thatarouse the peasants,
teach the people,andalarm the reactionaries such as those in
Miraflores and San Isidro. Sabotage weakens and undermines the
social and economic system of the ruling exploiters, as in
demolishingelectricaltowersandproducingblackoutsinwide
areas in thecenterand northofthecountry,including in the
331
=====第331页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Porres,Fiat,Toyota,Hindu-Hogar in Lima ,and in the ane
plantationsofthe north.Repeated actionshavebeen taken against
banks throughout the country, and against reactionary companies
like Bata, Hartinger,Centromin,etc.,oragainstrenowned litist
colleges,whichare concentratedand humiliatingexpressions of a
fierce reactionary, pro-imperialist foreign education.
Overwhelming actions that rock the semifeudal foundations of the
state,unleashinarmedvindicatingactionagainsbland
owners lords of the new and old type, like in Airabamba, Aisarca,
Urpihuata,Palermo,Toxama,andPincos,amongothers,truly
rejoicingof the peasants witnessing avibrantreemergenceofther
hopes andcombativitywhichhas never languished. Tothislist
could be addedthe veryimportanttakeovers ofcitieslike
Acosvinchos,Vinchos,Cayara,Pomatambo,and Occroro,which
intenselyand profoundlystirthecountrysideand promoting the
participation of the masses in the armed struggle.
Solid actions have hit directly the interestsof Yankee imperialism,
the principal imperialist power on our soil,such as the attack
against Southern in the south of the country,the seriesof actions
against U.S. companies orthose connected with them inthe
capital,and,especially,theresoundingblows againsttheU.S.
embassy andthesymbolicblasting ofKennedy's statue in
Miraflores, as wellas the blows at the Chinese embassy,the
sinister caveoftherevisionist Deng Xiaopingandhis lackeys,
who is a notorious chum and accomplice of A
Yankee
imperialism,andviletraitortotheinternationalcommunist
movement and principally to Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
In addition, powerful and important actions have been carried out
againstthestate,itsrepressive apparatusandespecially aainst
the policeforces.Many actionshave been conducted against the
332
=====第332页=====
LET US DEvELOP GUERRiLLA WARFARE
cityhallandministriesandagreatnumberoftheoficesof
AcciónPopularinalloverthecountry,includingtheircentral
headquarters in Lima,and even the National Parliament and local
officesof the police(GC), andthe Republican Guard(GR),and
PIPthroughouthecoutry,awellathepuihmenanst
known agentsofrepressionlikethoseinArequipaand Huaraz
amongothersandagaincetaiaroganlandlordady
landowners known to be enemies of the people and murderers of
Maoist combatants. Aboveall,the very important and audacious
assaultson police stations and outposts like thoseof Ocobamba,
Luricocha, La Ramada, Quinua, Tapuc, Yauli, Tambo, Quicapata,
Totos, Yanahorco, Acchi, andin Puno and Tacna, whose
effectiveness washighlyexpressedin therecent assault on San
Jos&eactute;deSecce;in the disarmingof policeinLima and
especially Ayacucho;and in the important raid on the naval air
base at Callao which they have unsuccessfully tried to cover up.
All theseactionshavehitpowerfullyatthereactionary armed
forces,theiponlcontients who,as mecannon fode,
are being usedforinterestsotherthantheirown;actions that
have allowed us to capture arms from the enemy, the main source
ofour weapons and,what is mostimportant,it has deliverd
powerfulblows to the moraleof thereactionarystateapparatus
and its support base.
Alsotherehas beena brilliantandsuccessfulapplicationof the
policy of jail breakouts, whose greatest expression was the March
2 [1982] assault on the Public Jail of Ayacucho. This was a heroic
action that marks an historic milestone in our armed struggle and
in the annals of the Peruvian revolution: freeing our comrades
and fightersfrom the dungeonsof the reactionary Peruvian state.
With the courage,strength and bloodof the peoples soldiers, our
guerrilla warhasbeestrgtheedandhas takena great ea in
its development.But in thesame way wecelebratethisundeniable
333
=====第333页=====
COLLECTED WORKSOFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-1987)
victory,weprotestdenounceancondemnthedepicale
murder and massacroftheofourbravecomradebythepolice
who,rabidin theirdefeatandhatredhas caried outavile,
cowardlymuiteRlHtlofttit(Aacuc)
and attempted toexecute twoother sonsof the people (who were
saved by other patients and employees who snatched them from
the clawsof the regime's henchmen. Thefive were recovering in
the hospital under police custody. The people will notallow this
detestable murder to go unpunished! We arefighters and we
know that the armed struggle demands its measure of blood and,
as the peopleandtheproletariathavetaughtus and as the
revolution demands, we offerour lives, our practice proves it. But
in our revolutionary war, we apply and we will continue to apply
a policy toward prisoners which corresponds to the laws of war,
and as we do practice it we demand the other side do the same.
Butthetorturestherapes,thecrimeagainstthe sonnd
daughters of the people,and especially against our combatants,
will be punished as the justice of the people demand,and we,
their soldiers will carry them out no matterhow long it takes
from the time of the crime to the fair and just punishment we will
impose. Peruvianreactionanditsgovernment,ledby Belande
andhis gang,using its _police
forces have mounted
a
new
campaign
against
Basing
ourselves  on  our  just
tus.
and
revolutionary war,we willonlysaythatlike the previous ones,
will fail.Andfinally,wecaaythatthedmagoguelaudehas
already directly receivedourreplay: Onthe10thof march we
rocked his "Government Palace"with a dynamite blast so that he
might continue to hear the voice of the armed people.
The
twenty-nine
hundred
actions
clearly
proved
our
combativeness and
bellicosity
ofour emerging
revolutionary
armed
forces,
guided
by
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
led
absolutelybythe Party.
Thearmedactions takeplacein the
countrysideanithecitiemlitheormi aarmd
334
=====第334页=====
LET US DEVELoP GUeRRiLLA WArFARE
struggle that assumes diverse formsof actionbut whose axis is the
guerrilla war,which is complementedbyotherforms ofthe
struggle. These are the armed actions whose support and fuel are
the class struggleof ourpeopleand thrive solely
the
on
inexhaustibleenergyof thepeoplethemselves,especlly
the
workers and peasants.
The successfularmed actions,offer a bright future and have so fr
achieved four greatvictories: First,the temperingof the Party,of
leaders cadres,militants,andfighterstogetherinthe struggle,
they
becomefd
and
steeled
in the  only
definitive
revolutionary crucible:the armed s
struggle. Although this is
already a greatvictory,wemustaddanotherachievementof
obvious and clearsignificance: theformation and construction of
an armedforce led by the Party whichsurges into flamesof the
guerrilla warfare thatwillnever be extinguished,andis the
principalinstrumentforcompletingthepoliticaltasksofhe
Peruvian revolution and which, under proletarian leadership, has
established an armedforce that is developing as an arm of the
New State of workers and peasants. A third victory is to be found
in theincreasing quantityandgrowingqualityachieved byour
armed actions,actions that have been taken mass character both
in their numberand theability of the sons and daughters of the
people to carry them out,as well as the increasing quality shown
by the higherlevelthathasbeen achieved. Finally,a fourth
victory, which is the most important and principal: the emergency
and development of guerrilla zones within whose boundaries, the
vigorousand growingadvancedof the guerrilla warfare,we will
build ourfuture supportbases,those advancerevolutionay
bastions thatarethe legaciesof themilitarythoughtofChairman
Mao Tse-tung, base areas that are the very essence of the road of
surrounding thecitiesfrom tecountrysidebase areas that are the
essence of the People's War.
335
=====第335页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Becauselloass
peopleofouountryspcilltooundomitablepeasantry,
THE ARMeD STRuGGLE BLAZES vicTORioUSLY. Through
itsinitial flames signaling thegreat
t blazeto come,the masses
themselves  will  take  their
rown destiny
yintheirtriumphant,
creative,and surehandsthemakersofhistoryand every
revolution.
II. Counterrevolutionary Action Fuels our Struggle
What hasbeenthereactionary response? Whathas beenthe
reactionofthedemocraticgovernmentasitcallsitself,thatself-
proclaimed upholderof the constitutional orderand defender of
the sacred humanrights?It has responded in the way thatits
reactionary class character and logic demand. Since the beginning,
it hasunleashed persecution,repression,torture,imprisonment
and murder against the revolutionary combatants and people. The
government of Belaunde, a phony democracy,a hypocritical and
demagogic government has used itsforcesof repression,mainly
its police, to drown in blood our nascent armed revolution.
They are tramplingonthe mostbasic,universallyrecognized
rights embodiedinits constitution of1979, thereactionary
governmentof_Belaunde andits so-calledforcesoforder have
brutally broken and stolenfrom whatever homes they'd wanted;
they have persecuted, arrested, and jailed whomever they want to;
they have burned, robbed, raped, and murdered with impunity to
sons and daughters ofthe people in accord with their lowest
instincts;they have gorged their dark,reactionary zeal on savage
beatings of the masses, mainly the peasants, in a stupid attempt to
intimidate themand driven away from the armed struggle; they
have generalized the useof torture,trying to crush their will and
extractfalseconfessions,despicablyandperverselyhumiliating
people so as to bend the revolutionary moraleand annihilate the
336
=====第336页=====
LET uS DEveLoP GueRriLLA WarFARE
combatants;they haveused rapes as an infamous,vile,and
abusive means toforce submission and to tarnish the pure,
resolute, and firm spiritof the daughtersof the people; they have
deniedallrightandguaranteestoprisonersforcinthemo
behind bars  in  filthy
endure continuous  persecutions  even
their harassment
and
dungeons, and they have extendedt
repression to include the prisoner's families. Thus, the persecution
and repression of the armed struggle and the people expose them
as a treacherous farce, their claims to respect even the most basic
humanrights, whichin reality is a sinisterplan to crush the
people through counterrevolutionaryviolence. Butallthishas
failed to achieve their dark hopes, because the sons and daughters
ofthepeople,theclass andtheParty,holdtheirheads high,
victorious and firm in their trenches of combat wherever they are.
The despicable Belaundegovernmenthasalsoappealedtothe
legislature promulgating Law Decree (D.L.) No. 46, a terrorist law
to be used as a clubagainst the armed struggle and the people.
This cavernous decree violates the mostelementary principles of
the bourgeoisie's own criminal law,andestablisheswidespread
and indiscriminate repression. And if they have not yet instituted
the death penaltythattheyso eagerlyand cunningly seek it is
because the present constitution prohibits it and they have not yet
found the conditions to amend it. The whole reaction,especially
its mercenaries (ganapanes) and media hacks,all in the name of
"order"and "social peace," callforthe"drasticapplicationofthe
law." Thus,the so-called autonomous judicial system has carried
out its sinister intrigues;of manipulatingtheoppressivelaws,
hanging judges,kangarootrials,and prisons;utilizing contrived
evidence,acceleratedprocedures,twistinglawsandsellingthe
principlesthtthlimtoaguarTheyhavebegun to swing
their rotten club on the sons and daughters of the masses,
imposing monstrous punishments that even some reactionaries
have criticizedforbeingvileandcounterproductive.Ablindand
337
=====第337页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
dumb reactionary justicehasbeenput inmotion,as it must,in
defenseof the dying,exploitative,and repressiveorder.But in o
doingiuttoounlouoltory
essence,andexposeseven more the dark natureof thelegal
systemandthesarosactjudicialpower.utvethisold legal
butchery cannotbend the sons and daughtersof the people who
proudly defy it in the revolution.
But in addition to the persecutionand repression,torture and jail,
legalclubandjudicialmachinery,andtheactionof their police
bloodhoundsof
the security andintelligence units, someof
whose henchmen the people haveand will keep clearly in mind,
the government has mounted independent policeoperations and
joint actions with the policeforces of the GC, GR, and PIP and
their correspondinganti-subversiveSinchiand Dircote unitsin
particular. They have mounted two large operations to date: the
first in January 1981and thesecond, of a larger magnitude and
importance, in Octoberof the same year,where they declared a
state ofemergency infive provinces in the departmentof
Ayacucho in order to give themselves more firing power and
broader impunity,counting upon thesupport and adviceof the
armed forces.
What has been the result ofthe well-publicized
October
operation?It wasa categoricalfailure.Itendedquietly w
without
fanfare orglory and without even
the merestpublic
report
summinguptheresultsofthevastpolicemobilization which
obviously
entailedenormous expenses. Thatthe"finaland
definitiveoprationaitwacalledItlookedlkedeliveryin
the desert, with more noise than substance as proven by the facts.
They failedinitsobscure goalof wipingoutthearmed struggle,
to smash the armed organizations and annihilate the Party in that
region. Onthe contrary,thefactsshowthaton December10,
duringthestatofmecandth"ftivpratio,"t
338
=====第338页=====
LET US DEVELop GuERRiLLA WARFARE
guerrillacarriedout anassaulagainstthe policeoutpostof Totos,
and otheractions immediatlyollowed inthegionof Ayacucho
culminating in the resounding action at San Jos, de Secce.
What did theanti-subversiveoperationshow?Plainlyand simply
that the massesreject and resist aggression;thatreactionary
brutality,arrogance,andviolencedid notdisheartenthem,but
rather it so aroused their justclass angerthat theyeven confront
with their barehandsthearmed aggressors protectedbythe
structure of the state. It shows that the people support and
protects thearmed struggle,theguerrillawarfarethatthey sustain
and defend withtheir lives,and thattheirunderstanding, hearts,
and will,go out to the guerrilla war because itadvances and
serves their liberation. The police operations and all the repressive
actions only confirm thatthe war is gaining in strength and
developing,andthatif we pay with our sweat,suffering,and
blood, this is no more than our quota for having risen in arms in
a justand necessaryrebellionfortheclassand the people.Itis
proven that we are learning warfare through waging warfare, and
that we have advanced and will advance furtheras wefollow the
leadership of the Party more closely and better,whose just and
correctideological and political line is expressedand molded in
irrefutable deeds like those that mark the past twenty-one months
of vigorous revolutionary armed struggle.
And what is the essence of the government's political and military
position withregard to the guerrillas?It is to combat them as
"terrorists."Butinthis,Peruvianreactionaries,theistate,andthe
governmentof Belaundeare onlyfollowing the model set down
bytheir Yankee imperialist masters how to counter the armed
struggle.ItisknowntoallthatReagan,thePresidentofthe
UnitedStates,hisSecretaryofStateHaig,andtheirollowr ut
the brand of "terrorism"on revolutionary wars now being waged
in the worl.Wttichemeteyty toictarmed action,
339
=====第339页=====
E 1 (1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
traffickingandplyinonthemassescrrctjectioofthold
individualisnachisndimlsism ongodemed by
theclassicsofMarxism,lumping togetherthedefenseofproperty
andso-called"socialpeace"alongwithwhattheyclaimis the
defense of life, dreaming to win the masses to their side or at least
neutralizing them.
Therefore,tolabelthearmedstruggleas"terrorism"isnothing
but  the  demagogic
 andreactionary
position of Yankee
imperialism,raised up in order to oppose the armed revolution,
seeking to cover it in a cloakof slanderwhilethey mount the
bloodiestrepressionand genocide. Further,theyusethisrotten
maneuver in their contentionforworldhegemony with Russian
social-imperialism, trying to link revolutionary action, through s-
called"terrorism,"tothesocialimperialistsuperpowerInhis
way they seekalsotodiscredit genuine revolutions,which can in
no way be compared with the sinister centerof contempory
revisionism which has converted Lenin's and Stalin's homeland
into the hegemonic superpower of today.
As expected, the Peruvian reaction, the governmentof Belaunde,
and their media mercenaries can do nothing else but apply at all
cost theorders and directivesof their master,imperialism. But
they are not theonly ones who condemn our armed strugge as
"terrorism."
Also jumping on this bandwagon,
the
are
opportunistsmanipulatedbythehardenedrevisionistJorge Del
Prado andhis clique, who obedientlyfollowthebaton ofthe
Russian imperialist bossand imperial bludgeon Brezhnev. And it
isonlynaturalthattheseenemieoftherevolutioact this way
since theycannotremainwiththeirarmscrossedwhilethr
positionovethemasses,aold-timelloutsithesrvicof
collusionand contention between social-imperialismand Yankee
"PatriRcultlclm"t"
340
=====第340页=====
LET US DEvELOp GueRriLLA WARFARE
role in an ominous divisionoflaborcallsfor waging
an
ideololtg
Yesterday's
government.
enemiesof Deng Xiaoping,andtodayhis admirers,they must
attack usforfightingYankeeimperialism,thepartnerof their
new revisionist boss, and even more so,for applying Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism, whichthey yesterdayinvoked,andtoday
rejects. Nevertheless, others have united with this chomp of
clowns,stilldazzledbytheso-called"democraticopening"and
"parliamentaryroad,"who'veyettorealizethattheworldhas
smashed their dreams into the smithereens,and who continue to
bedeludedbyparliamentarycretinism and daydreaming on the
forthcoming 1985 elections.
But in the end, while some these and others there added up may
seem to be a lot, in reality they are nothing but representatives of
a thin film floating on thefathomless seaof the masses of our
country. And we must keep in mind thatfor Marxism,there is
only one tactic with regard to the masses,to draw a sharp line of
demarcation betweenthe broad masses, who ascendfromthe
depths,andthlthy,decaying scumthatloatsunsteadily on the
waves as a fragile base for bureaucratic trade unionism and
counterfeitworkerspartiestruly"bourgeoiworkersparties."
This tacticimpels us toeducate the masses,theoretically and
practicallyin revolutionaryviolenceandinthe consequent
resolute and firm struggle against opportunism.
TothoseandallwhoclaimtobeMarxistsandrevolutionary
fighters, whethertheylead,goalong with,orembrace the
imperalifis
from thevery heartoftheclass struggleofour people
 as
"terrorism"weitteaaphomthra:
341
=====第341页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-197)
"And so matters aremovingahead!Despitetheincredibleand
utterlindebl,ad iae ithe
armed.
Individualterrorism, bred of
matter
of
getting
intellectuliallmieast
military operationstogetherwiththepeople is now
It is byengaging in suchoperationsthatthe
commencing.
pioneersof an armed struggle become fused with the masses not
merely in word but in deeds,assume leadershipof the combat
squads andcontigentoftheproletaria,tain in thcrucibleof
civil war dozensof people's leaders who,tomorrow,on the day of
theworkers'uprising,willbeabletohelpwiththeirexperience
and their heroic courage thousands and tens of thousands of
workers. . .
"Long live thepioneersof the people'srevolutionaryarmy!"Itis
nolonger a plotagainst some detestedindividual,no actof
vengeance or desperation,no mere 'intimidation,'no,it was a
well-thought-out and prepared commencementofoperationsby
acontingents of the revolutionary army, planned with due regard
for the correlation of forces ...
"Fortunately, the time has passed when revolution was 'made'by
individualrevolutionaryterrorists,becausethepeople werenot
revolutionary. Thebomb has ceasedto bethe weaponof the
solitary'bomb throwers,and is becoming and essential weaon of
the people." . . .
"We wentfrom experience to experience. We sought to create a
willful army marching blindly,groping our way,searching fr the
path to fulillthetask in that situation.Andthe task was clear. At
present wearestllveryfarofffromhavingfredourselves from
these difficulties.Atfirst weactedina completelyabstract way,
like revolutionaries who make speeches but who completely
ignore ways to overcome problems. Naturally
manypeople
342
=====第342页=====
LET US DEVELOPp GuERRiLLA WARFARE
accuse us,andall thesocialistsandsocial democratscontinue to
accuse us eventoday,ofhaving startedsomething without
knowing howtocarry itthroughtotheendButtheeareno
more than ridiculous accusations of the living dead. How could it
bepossibleto launchintomakingthegreatestofrevolutions
knowing beforehand how to carry it to the end? No, our decisions
could only arise out of the experience of the masses.'
1
In conclusion, while the initiated armed struggle develops as fiery
guerrilla warfarewithbrilliantprospects,the counterrevolution,
following its ractionary logic,fights and attacks us.And there are
those who,serving distantrevisionist masters,jointhe chorus,
whileothersfollow in this same veinorapproach this path. And
as the  people
support and
further
even
encourage
us,
strengthening ourforces,there are those who want to smother
our revolutionary advances under the ragged cloak of "terrorism,"
since we are the advancing armed revolution. There are those who
callus"Sendero Tenebroso,"thegloomypath,whiletryingto
perpetuate the shadows that begin torecedefromthebrilliant
light of our actions guided by Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
There are those who call us "unpatriotic" while continuing to sell
the country to imperialism. There are those who call us "infantile"
without any proof whatsoever and without even seeing that even
if such was the case,thegenuinestruggleof theclass and the
people teaches and matures while opportunist senility rots and is
a disease that contaminates without regard to age. There are those
who brand us as "provocateurs"withoutever noticing in ther
blindness thatthey are persistently provoking therighteous ager
of the peoplefor theirfrustrated and unrepentant promotion of
capitulation.Andfinally,thereare those who callus
mass
"adventurists"withoutnoticingintheirpoliticalstupidity
ythat
they are justthe  same oldpolitical
swindlers
and
petty
343
=====第343页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP- VOLUME1(1968-1987)
right
about
thing:
completely
wehave
lovefor
one
do not
parliamentary
cretinism
and
we
worship
electoral
We
simply
and
plainly
are
Marxist-Leninist-
opportunism.
Maoists.
Chairman Mao Tse-tung has taught us: "It is a good thing to be
attacked by the enemy, since it proves that we have drawn a clear
line of demarcation between ourselvesand theenemy. It is stll
better if the enemyattacks us wildlyand paints us as utterly black
withouta singlevirtue.It demonstratesthatwe have notony
drawn a clearlineof demarcationbetweenthe enemy and
ourselves, but achieved a great deal in our work."
For
all
that
has
been
said,
reaffirm
that
we
COUNTERREVOLUTIONARY
ACTION
IS
THE
FUEL
OF
OUR STRUGGLE!
III. The Crisisof the Reactionary Order Deepens and the People
Call for Armed Revolution
What is the current situationofthereactionaryforces? The
former military government,which lastedtwelve years,cameto
power with two goals to achieve:
1. to strengthen bureaucratic capitalism, and
2. to reorganize Peruvian society.
Tocompletethefirsttask,ittookasthe drivenforcethestate-
controlledeconomy. Inordertofulfillthesecondtask,the
a fascist political outlook and
government was
guided
promoted thereorganization of societyalong corporate lines. In
its first phase it made advances in obtaining its objectives, but the
economiccrisisgeneratedbyitself,andespeciallythe persistent
struggle of the masses,
forced the  military government to
reexamineitobjectiveanlimiitsltoenealeadjstment
ofits plan to  subsequently
proceed with the corporate
344
=====第344页=====
LET US DEVELOp GUERRiLLA WARFARE
reorganization inordertoinstitutionalizethosechanges that they
had set outfrom the beginning,and,moreover,to proceed to a
future transfer of state power. Nevertheless,the deepening of the
economic crisisandtheintensificationoftheclass struggle cut
shortthroalantwoituothuti
third reorganizationof the Peruvianstate in this century did not
achieve the molding of a corporate Peruvian society. It only
allowed for the strengthening of executive power at the expense of
the parliament,and a greater participation of the armed forces in
the runningof the state. As a corollary to the military measures,
two elections were held, the elections for the constituent assembly
and thegeneralelections of1980. Inboth,voter turnouts
declined,partof a trend common throughoutLatin America,
showing a loss of faith in elections and government.
Under these conditions' Belaunde took over the government, and
today,more than one and a half years since his term began,the
economic crisis continues, the publicized resurgence of the
economy isnowhere in sight,a persistentgrowing inflaon
continues to pound any economic advance, andthe budget
deficits, the very basis of the government's measures,
increase

uncontrollably,
gravely
threateningan
increasingly
battered
Peruvian economy.Imperialist domination sinks its nails deeper
in our country,taking over more and more of our natural
resources,spciallyilextndingigripintotheaant'aas,
and broadening its control over the country's commerce and
finance. The so-called "agrarian reform" has been concluded.
Theelectoralopportunists jointhechorusofthoseclaiming that
the landproblem isendedandresolved. Theytrytofoolthe
peasantswiththbotched"arminandctle-aisingprograms"
1
at the same time as they advocate the development ofthe
landownersomouctaliclueunder
345
=====第345页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
(1968-1987)
thecontrolofthebigbanksandwiththedirectparticipationof
Yankee Iimperialism. The proletariatand workersare burdened
with growing unemployment and declining wages while working
conditions deteriorateand prior gains are negatedor threatend
ever
increasing pauperization, theintellectuals  in
particular
are
thwarted and thepeople in generalface hungerwhile the new
reactionary government tries to subjugate them even more. The
nationalbourgeoisieandmedium-sizedcapitalistsseegrowing
restrictionson their businesses,suferingalso theconsequeneesof
the government'sintensifiedunderminingofnational industry.
Meanwhile,intheverybosomof thebigbourgeoisie,a sharp
struggle betweenthebureaucratic and compradorfactions,and
even withinthesefactions istakingplaceoverwhowillreapthe
most profits or benefiis.
In sum,then,guided byanorientationthatseesdeveloping big
monopoly, mainlyYankee capital, as the motor ofeconomic
development,the present governmentaimsat further developing
the subjugating semifeudalstructure,thatstill rulesthe country,
for the direct benefit of the old and new type landowners and the
old typerich peasants.The current government undermines the
basic industrial structureofthe countryinorderto directeven
more the economic trend toward extraction and production,
particularly mining and petroleum. And
d now,it transfers and
seeks to auction off the state enterprises,those which the former
government had concentrated in the hands of the state at the cost
of a staggeringpublicdebtplacedonthebacksofthe people.
Thus,preparinga succulentoferingtothinsatiableappetitof
big capitalists,
particularlyimperialist capital. The current
reactionary government,whosehead,prime mover,and most
responsiblivavln
346
=====第346页=====
LET US DEVELop GUERRiLLA WARFaRE
imperialismprinciplltothebenefitofbimonopolycapital,
especiallybigbankinandfinancecapitalundertheasphyxiting
and ever widenin expansionof U.S.imperialism.But even if this
is theoutlineand schemeof the government,the same complex
confl ictofinterestsamongtheexploiters,thepersistentand
deepening crisis, and even more, the class struggle which sharpens
day by days does not allow the government to overcome its
present difficulties,a crucial matter in order to organize and work
out a coherent plan based on the clear and defined program that
the ruling order loudly demands.
Onthepoliticalplane,thegovernmentcontinuestofacethe
complex and entangled turning pointof the class struggle which
of
the
generates  the  introduction
a
new constitution,
consolidation of a bureaucracy totally devoted to it, and a
regroupingofreactionary politicalforcesplacedinhibernaton
during the previous twelve years,and,principally,generated the
need to rein in the masses who have been drowning in years of
stifling crisisthatpropels them one more time into actionto
defend their own vital interests,these are the masses deceived by
the long harsh years of a demagogic government pretending to be
"revolutionary" and aided (asalways!)by the same opportunists,
have seen their most basic needs denied and their aspirations
mocked. All thishas created a complicated politicalsituation for
the reactionary rulers. Nevertheless, the reality is crystal clear.
In a year and ahalf the decrepitudeof the democratic/bourgeois
order has become evident to the people, who see the contrast in a
hypocriticalinvocationofhumanrightsandlibertiesalongside
their brutal
negation of what  they preach. The obsolete
parliamentaryinstitutionsare comingapart likeanempty barrel
rolling downhill,sinking in the pompousandsterilerhetoricof
the anointed"fathersofthecountry"whilebasiclegislative
functionsgiveintothrogativasioof urisdctiobthe
347
=====第347页=====
E1(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
Executive. Andanarthriticand anemic so-called judicial power
carries outitsfunctions,compelledonlybythe mountainsof
pending proceedings,crooked dealings and servile subjugation to
whatever arrogant authority is in charge,and in constant violation
of its own reactionary laws,directed, asalways,againstthe people
and which,especially today,fedsonrevolutionaryfighters. And
then there is also theso-calledautonomouselectoral power that
routinely rigs elections, covering upits crudest manipulations.
Added to this are the sharp contention andsplitbetweenthe
reactionary parties thatare repeatedlyrevealed in public scandals
andwhichfindexpression inallkindsoflawless proceedings.
Thus the reactionary political system clearly reveals the frailty and
rottenness that it attempts to hide behind the mask of democracy
and its phony concern for the masses (who are needed only for
occasional voting and for demagogic drum beating). In this way,
as Marxism teaches,the armed forcesand the police,mainly the
former, are ever more the true backbone of the reactionary state
andtheir true bastion,hencetheir growing importance and
growing interference in the running of the state. Nevertheless, we
can neverforget thatan armedforce,in essence,strategicallyis
only as strong as the social order it defends,no matter how
heavily armed it may be tactical.
The ruling,exploitative,oppressive order is also in an ideological
crisis despiteits hypocritical hand wringingover the so-called
"moral crisisof the people," which is nothing but the destruction
of old principlesshattered by the blowsof acuteeconomic crisis
and the politicalfeeblenessof thereaction.And, thisis precisely
what is principal, the crisisof bourgeois-democratic principles and
the social order that, superseded by historical development, by the
class struggle,bythevigorous riseofthe proletariatand the
popularmassesan theeaadicaltansformigprcessthat
is left moreexposedinthlihtofdaotonlithehistorical
348
=====第348页=====
LeT US DEveLop GueRRiLLA WarfarE
sense,butaloin thesensethatevery day its politicaldecrepitude
,Everyday witnesses a declineinthe
grows more pronounced.
infl uenceofbougeois-democratic pincipleswhich,ifincenturies
past were revolutionary,havefor decades been reactionary. That
theirholdopeopleis waingcanbeseeromtheresultsof the
last election. Belafnde took office with 46 percent of the votes and
feltexaltedto theheavens,theholderofabsolute power,the
unchallenged voice above the class struggle and contentions.
Nevertheless,a year and a half have been enough to smash his
electoralsand castle,dissolvingitlikesewagefoam,withhis
fictitious "greatauthority"cast between the pounding waves and
swirling vortexes, marches to its total ruin.
Finally,
we should speak, even quickly
andbriefly, onthe
question of Ecuador. Ecuador's questioning of the Rjo Protocol of
1942 goes back many years. This situation has become aggravated
in recent years as proven by the border incident of the Cordillera
del Condor of January 1981. But the present Peruvian
governmentand Belaunde whoheadsand leads it(even more,
being the person who directly conducts international politics and
who consequentlyisprincipallyresponsible)hasbeendealing
with thisdelicateand important problemin a totallyerroneous
and irresponsible way;insteadof lookingfor a means to clarify
the borderquestion,theyadopt an alarminglysuperficialand
frivolousattitude: if the Ecuadoran question is not treated justly
and correctly, it has the potential to become a serious problem of
grave and vast consequences. This problem,obviously, has never
been addressed directly by anyone but the people themselves, who
with their own blood and efforts have given us the territory which
makes upour country. Heretoo,thereactionarypolitics and
measuresofthegovernmentofBelaundeare evident, since
everyone can seethatthemanyconfl ictsinourLatin Aerican
countries and the many wars our people have been involved all
349
=====第349页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
contentiowitthoofitagenanitrnalprrwo
govern ourrepublics.Andthis is a greater worry today when the
Latin American scene reveals various potential confl icts unfolding
in thestirred-upclimateofcontentionbetweenthesuperpowers
in their pursuitfor world domination. In sum, we see the
sharpening crisisofthereactionaryorder,whichapproachesthe
year 1982 with dark perspectives.
And what is the present situation of the people? A peasantry with
a centuries-old
fundamentalgoal,"Landtothetiller," whom
despiteitsundauntedstruggle,hasyettoachieveitsgoal.Thsis
a peasantry whom theyhave tried to deceive with three supposed
agrarian reform laws in the past twenty years. And yet,after the
bombastic demagogueryandtheirfullimplementation, the
peasants were left with the same old unsatisfied thirst for land.
A proletariatwhoselong,vigorousstrugglehayieldedonly
miserable wages and other concessions from its exploiters, only to
lose them in each economic crisis society endures. This is a
proletariat whose struggle rotates on a vicious iron circle and who
once again today is involved in theunending battleover wages,
working hours, and working conditions.
A petty bourgeoisie, making up a broad stratum characteristic of a
backward country,thatseesits dreams ruinedby therelentles
impoverishment to which theruling order subjects it. There is a
middle bourgeoisie,a national bourgeoisiethat is weak and laks
capital, thattotters between revolution and counterrevolution,
while each new crisis crushes it nearly to the point of suffocation.
These are thefourclasses thathistoricallymakeupthe peope of
our land.Ofthem,it is thepeasantry whichis the principal
drivenforce,as much as it is the proletariatthatrises and
350
=====第350页=====
LET US DEvELop GueRRiLLA WaRFaRE
thewrb
possiblerevolutionaryfront. Thepettybourgeoisieuniteswith
them,andtogether,thethree,undertheleadershipofthe
proletariat,are the backboneof therevolutionaryfront, which is
nothing if it is nota frontforthearmedstruggleand theclass
framework for the New State. This solid union, this solid front, is
heldtogether solong astheproletariatfirmly
yretainsits
hegemony, bases itself on the worker-peasantalliance,forged and
developed in the heatof the armed struggle,of guerrilla warfare.
Itis thisfrontofclassesthatthe national bourgeoisie will
sometimes join (and sometimes leave) dependingon the raging
winds of the class struggle.
And the Peruvian people,thisimmense majority,these masses
that are the true makersof history,these powerfulproductive
forces, are constrained by the persistent
decrepitude ofthe
exploitative social relations that impose
unemploymentand
underemploymenton 56.3 percentof
"economically active
population" (according to the government's own statistics), and in
the countryside, twoof every three peasants are underemployed.
Thus the decrepitsystemof exploitation destroysandholds back
the powerful creative forcesof the people, the only forces capable
ofthe thoroughrevolutionary transformationfor which our
country hasfoughtfor too long. Furthermore,the reactionaries
defend thisevil destructive system withbloodandfiretothe
benefitof thebiglandlords,of theoldand the new type,of a big
comprador or bureaucratic bourgeoisie and their masters, Yankee
imperialism that for each dollar it invests extracts five.
This rotten,bloodysystemis heldtogetherbytheoppression
imposedbythereactionarylandlord-bureaucraticstate,through
its stateapparatus,itsbureaucracy,itarmedforces,its judiciary,
its jails,anditancientandrepressionof murderous proportions,
principallytuhthereds,whicetalbackbone
351
=====第351页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
oftheruling-classdictatorshipthatdominatesandincreasesits
profits extractedrom the swea,t, and bloodofour people.
Ifyou
are talkingaboutexploitation andoppression,you are
talking aboutthestate;ifyouaretalkingabout thestate,youare
talking
about classes,if you are talking about classes you are
talking aboutclass struggle; if you are talking aboutclass struggle,
you are talking about people's struggle;and, as facts have shown
in history,if you are talking about people's struggle you are
talking aboutrebllonanarmedstrugglegurrillawrae,as
the situationintheAmerica's show today.Our peopl,likall he
peoplesof the world,havetheirown proudhistoryof struggles
etched with theirbloodandheroism. The most earthshaking,
turbulent, and splendid battles have been those waged relentlessly
bythe peasantry,
especially
thepoor peasants,throughthe
centuries. It is sufficient to remember here thatour republican
emancipation was won as a resultof the great armed peasants'
actions of the18th century,and our own 20th century has been
marked by big peasant struggles in the1920's and 1960's. These
and thepowerful struggleof 1963 are sourcesofextraordinary
experiences, to which it is necessary to add the armed struggle led
by MIRback in1965,astrugglewhichleftus invaluableesons
which every revolutionary must knowabout. Nevertheless, it is
with theappearanceof Marxismand the Communist Party that
thepeasantstruggleacquireditsfullrevolutionaryexpression.
With theleadershipoftheproletariat,throughitsParty, the
peasantry has metwithand isfollowingthe realroad tothe
overthrow of the presentexploiting order,thatis, People's War,
the highest expressionof proletarian military thought established
by Chairman Mao Tse-tung.
Thus our people,asall people in the world,have been nurtured
and have advanced in the courseofrevolutionaryvioleneIt is
352
=====第352页=====
LET US DEveLop GueRriLLA WarFARE
have won demands,rightsandliberties.Noneof these conquess
have fellfrom theskies,nor was it given;"despite whattraitors
mightsay."Inthefinalanalysisall was conqueredand defnded
withrevolutionaryviolenceifiercefihtagainstreactiony
violence.
That is how the 8-hour day was won, how territory was won and
held, andhow rights were won and tyrants overthrown.
Revolutionary violence is the essence of our historical process and,
if the freedom ofthe republic was won with arms on the
battlefield,it is easyto understandthatthe development and
triumph of the Peruvian revolution,of our democratic revolution,
of the emancipation of the people and the class, will be won only
through the most splendid revolutionary war of our people, rising
in arms en masse through People's War.
And today,our heroic people,inheritors of such a rich history
andfollowingthisglorious road,wage battles against the new
reactionary government,wage battle inthe countryside against
thebigand smalllandlords,thesocialbaseofreactionarystate
power inagriculture;wagebattleinthefactoriesand mines
against  their  exploiters  and
oppressors, wage battle in the
countless barrios,striking out against hunger and misery; wage
battle in the universitiesand collegesfor their need to learn and
becomeeducated;wagebattlesin thesmalland medium sized
cities against a suffocating centralism;wagebattleineducation,
science, and culture for the undeniable right to nourish the spirit
and enjoy peaceof mind; wage battle in the streets forthe right to
earn a living;wagebattletomaintainrightsandlibertiealeady
won, forfreedom ofthought, thefreedoms of speech, of
organizationofasembly,forthighttosrike,and numerous
othervictories wrenchedthrough their struggleand toil which,
353
=====第353页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
bythearrogananabusivactionofthoseipowerandby
whateverhighlyplacedsocialclimbers,whichis in apositionof
authority (as is the naturalorderof thingsamong those who run
thesa.oiouh
politicied ttaanmoa,ir,and cisive
than yesterday,it is becauseof the enormous presence of the
proletariatguided by unconquerable Marxism-Leninism-Maoism
that arms their minds and fists.
Our heroic fighting people enter into battle even when this means
facing againsttheclubs,bombs,bullets,andfiercebattalionsof
reaction. They do it in certaintybecausethatstruggle tempers,
mobilizes,organizes, politicizes,and armsand prepares them for
the great battles to come. And if our people are learning anything,
today morethanbefore,itisthattheclassstrugglenecessarily
leads to the strugglefor power,and thatthis canonly be won
through violent revolution which for us means revolutionary war,
armed struggle, the guerrilla warfare of People's War. Only in this
way can power be conquered by the class and people. And only in
this way canthe NewState arise andthe dictatorship ofthe
proletariatisestablished,soastocarry out the great and comlete
transformationof_society sothat,finally,thebrilliant,resolute
light ofcommunism willshine in our ownland. This spirt
already dwellsamongthepeople.Thisisclearlyshownin the
countryside and in the cities where the people begin to once again
use violence to repelreactionaryviolence in defense of their
rights. And, more important and demonstrativestllis the greater
support the people givethearmed struggle,the guerrilla war, led
by the Party. Though they may not yetunderstand t in its total
depth and scope (that requires its continued development), with
the wisdomofcollectiveactionthepeoplearefullycapableof
seeing thattheseflamesoftodaybegintopresage the armed
bonfires to come, and in this the realhopeforinexorable
emancipation is bellowed and welded.
354
=====第354页=====
LET US DevELoP GueRRiLLA WaRfARE
This is,accordintothscienceofMarxism-Lninism-Moim
wayof seeing things,thesituationofthereactionariesandof the
people. In this contradictory situation we seethetwo concrete
aspects and specificsof today's revolutionarysituation.Sowe can
see clearly therevolutionarysituation manifestingitselfand how
Lenin understood it: today those on top can no longer continue
ruling as  they
did yesterday,and those on the bottom are no
longer willing toliveas theyhaveuntilnow.Inthe reactionary
camp,we can see the lack of a precise and defined acceptable
program capable of welding the reactionary forcesand the rratic
jumble of moves and counter moves that betray the lack of a fixed
course,the understandableresultof the lackof a unified program
and much less an accepted one. Among the people we can see the
firm and decisive move toward armedrevolution,their willfor
revolutionary transformation, although
alimitationthey
as
sometimes may express themselves in a s
simple desireto
overthrow the decrepit ruling system. But still, if this was all there
was to it, this is the basic and enough reason to meet the correct
course of action, because it is the armed struggle itself, through its
accomplishments, that open even wider the road of armed
struggle and, likewise,shows in deeds the correctness of this road
in the minds of people,and thus the masses become more and
more part of this great road of People's War.
Such are the concreteissuesofthe developing revolutionary
situation. We have reached this point due to two factors:
1. The polarization of the class struggle, and
2. The armed strugglethatevolves as guerrllawarfare sprung
from the very heart of the class struggle in the country.
The polarizationoftheclassstruggleanditsfurtherdevelopment
as armed strugglehasintensifiedthepreexistingrevolutionry
situation. Thus, today,and in perspective,we can see that as the
355
=====第355页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
developinvoltioarituationhatupitillutherdeepen
the class struggle and both will strongly impel the further advance
of thearmed struggle. Thisis,insynthesis,the current situation
ofboththepoplandtheeaction.Thelattropose,through
thegovernmentofBelaundea"socialpact"or"concertation"
(reconciliation or class collaboration) which is nothing more than
a rehash of the position of the previous government, but the
people's position in perspective is: support the armed struggle.
Thus, today the class struggle is polarized and will continue to be
polarized even more in the future: "concertation" vs. support for
the armed strugle.Rconciliaionistheblackflagof theraction;
supportfor the armed struggle is
theredflag of the people.
Reconciliation is the flag of reaction bent on binding the people's
hands and feet,and, in more limited terms,to weld together the
contendingfactions in the ractionary camp.Toachieve this, the
reactionary regime will resort to whatever means, including
repression,with theobjective of maintaining their dominance. In
the last resort they increase the use of armed force,since that is
the card reaction keep up its sleeve for the opportune moment.
Support forthearmed struggle is the redflag of the people and
must be their necesary perspective since,forthe people,
reconciliation is capitulation. The roadforour people begins to
manifestitselfwith greaterclarityand determination: supporting
and buildingthearmed struggleis theonlyhistoric road that
corresponds to the path of the people,
,there is no other.
Supportingthe armed struggle today means simplyto develop
guerrilla warfare.
Forall that hasbeensaid we conclude: THE CRISIS_OF THE
REACTiONARY ORDER DEEPENS AND THE PEOoPLE CALL
FOR ARMED REVOLUTION.
356
=====第356页=====
LET US DEvELOP GUeRRiLLA WaRFARE
IV. Develop Guerrilla Warfare
ChairmanMao Te-tungstates:Thecentraltaskandhiget
form of revolution is the conquestof power by means of armed
struggle,thatis,thesettlementoftheissuethroughwar. This
revolutionaryMarxist-Leninist
principleis
universal
truth
applicable in China as in all countries."
Further he says: "Before the outbreak of war, all organizations and
struggles have as their goal preparing for it ... After the outbreak
of war, allorganizations and struggles must be coordinated
directly or indirectly with the war effort."
The Communist Party of Peru, a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Party of
a new type,loyal to its principles and program,conscious of its
historic mission as theorganized vanguardofthe Peruvian
proletariat,has assumeditsresponsibilityto launchthe armed
struggle to fight for the conquest of powerfor the working class
and the peope,and today is developing guerrilawarare, learing
from advances and setbacks,fanning more widely the living
flamesof armedconflictandrootingthemmoredeeplyamong
the poor peasants, principally,
,andwill
inbuilding
lead
revolutionary base areas that will finally give concrete form to the
triumphant roadof People's War. Prior to the launchingof the
People's War,thePartyhadtobereconstituted,followingthe
expulsion of Del Prado andCo., the standard bearers of
revisionism in the Party's ranks. In the IV National Conferenceof
January 1964,we entered the long and complex process of
reconstitution,itagreed laterby means of theVI Conferenceof
y1969inwhichthePartythrewofftheweight of
January
revisionism and became a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist Party of a new
type. With thecompletionof thisarduous and glorious task, the
9th Plenary Sessionof the Central Committee in1979 approved
the launching of the armed struggle. Once this historic mandate
was completed,in May1980,thearmed struggle wasinitiated
357
=====第357页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
with the proclamationofthetwobasicslogans:"Armed Struggle!"
and"Workers'andPeasants'Government!"_ Thus,our actions
were initiated,unfolding as guerrillawarfare,and now,in accord
with theCentralCommitteeofJanuary1981,wearefurther
developing the guerrillawarfare.Thearmedstruggle initiated and
led resolutelybytheParty isthecontinuationoftheclass struggle
of the Peruvian people; it is the armed continuationof its political
struggleand is profoundly linked to and indissolubly united with
the masses,mainly the poor peasants. The masses are our only
base and support,the source of our strength and vigor. We are
firm practitionersof the great principleofrelying on our own
strength,aswearfirmllowerof proletaiintrationalism,
unfurlingthatimmortalcallofMarxand Engels,"Proletariansof
All Countries Unite! ," Andas communists wealways raise
highest thethreegreatbannersof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism,
Marx, Lenin,and Mao,which demands us to be irreconilable
enemies of revisionism and all forms of opportunism.
In waging the revolution in our country we are serving the world
proletarian revolution, which will not rest until communism
shines over the face of the earth. The revolutionary reality of our
country shows that in fact the armed struggle burns victoriously,
that thecounterrevolutionaryactionsfuelourstruggle,thatthe
reactionary order sinks in crisis,and the people callfor armed
revolution. Thus our heroic people arefaced with the pressing
historic necessityto supportthe armed struggle,which today
means developingguerrillawarfare. TheCommunist Partyof
Peru, the Party founded by Mariá tegui, the Party reconstituted as
a Partyof a new Marxist-Leninist-Maoisttype,has begunthe
armed struggle inour country andhad,throughtwenty-one
monthsof theenrichmentofcombative life,developed it as
guerrillaware.TheCommuistPartyofPeru,whichhasien
o tetots
andthepeopleintheiremancipationcallsonthePruvin
358
=====第358页=====
LET US DEVveLOp GueRRiLLA WARFARE
proletariat,andespeciallythepoorpeasantryandbroad masses
throughout the country,to take our historic destiny in our hands
and overthrowtheexistingrotten,reactionaryrulingorderand
build the new revolutionary socialorder that the people demand
and cry out for.
youth,
and
Peruvian
Workers,
people!
peasants,
women,
struggle!
the
intellectuals,
the
armed
Support
support
development of the guerrilla warfare!
Peruvian people!Your vigorous voice, likefurious thunder,has
begun to expsitselfithevibrntandpurifinlnguageof
revolutionarviolencein aarmedtruggle.Through guerrilla
actions,through guerrilla warfare,youare creating milestones in
your new history, your definitive history. We have embarked on a
great road,a long and arduous one,but victory will be decisive,
since "except for state power, all is but illusion!"
DEVELOP GUERRILLA WARFARE!
LONG LIVE THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU!
GLORY TO MARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM!
=====第359页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
MAOISM.
ON
MARXISM-LENINISM-
MAOISM
PLENUM SeSsioN Of THE CeNTRAL CoMMITEE - NovEMBEr, 1982
EXTRACTS
SFROM THE REPORT"MAOISM. On MARXISM-LENINISM-
MAOISM"
Our
objective is to initiate a campagn
aboutMaoism, an
abbreviatedform to say Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, or tat
Maoism is the principalof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism in the
present.
Thenextyear,we celebrate ninetyyearsof Chairman Mao
Tsetung's birthday,because he was born on December2thof
1893.It isevidentthattodaythere isa sharp struggle between
Marxism and revisionism. Furthermore, also in those who defend
Chairman Mao there isn't enough clarityand completeadhesion
to Maoism as the third stage of Marxism, due to this we say that
it is struggle concerning Maoism.
We must hoist the slogan: LONG LIVE MAOISM! in order to
initiate this great campaign which,obviously,is of a strategical
character. It is a campaign of vast dimensions and a complx
problem: it is adifficult task,butit isanobligation that we have
as communists, as about the complexities of this campaign, but
the importance that it has weighs much more,and historically it
is necessity because world revolution needs Maoism in order to
unfold a higherpeaks,inorderthatthestrategicaloffensiveof
world revolution be infolded,tasks in which we communistsof
the world are engaged. We do not pretend to saythat Maoism
360
=====第360页=====
Maoism. On MaRXism-LenInism-MaoIsm
starting from what is established since Marx. Because the ideology
ofthe prlait i owrfulciencettdvopitlfthrough
big leapsgnetorofhestageeactime:witMx
Marxism, with Lenin, Leninism and with Chairman Mao,
Maoism, as the first,second and third successive stages, Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism, and, mainly, today's Maoism.
Therefore the objecive is to develop a campaign that possesses
strategical characters and serves the world revolution. Due to the
circumstances the contribution that we can make is important, we
do not say that it is decisive, but it is important within the context
in which we unfoldourselves. Let's not pretend to tell History
what to do,she is the one thatthroughclass struggleestablishes
the laws and definesthesituations.It is possible thatour own
Party or others can give a decisive contribution.
In this moment it is more necessary thaneverforus to talk of
Maoism,and obviously we cannot do it without referring to the
struggleat the world level against revisionism; therefore it is vital
and urgent to analyze Maoism again,aiming to define more and
better it contents and meaning, guided by the judgement that to
hoist, defendand apply Maoism is the essenceofthe struggle
between Marxism and revisionism in the present.
We must think how to develop multiple campaigns in order to
obtain solidresultsand of long perspective. And in this way to
unfold the instruction of militants, combatants and masses, and to
strive to divulge Marxism starting from the transcendence of the
people's war thathehimself guided. Theproblem is to put in
motion the ideological dynamics. We look foreward to contribute
to the defense of what is peremtory to defend: Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism. It will have repercussion beacause everywhere there are
interestedtoachmanltothommsbcaut
361
=====第361页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP- VOLUME1(1968-1987)
more open-minded; we have to strive to make them understand,
being sure thatMarxism does not spring up spontaneously,but
with effortand struggle,this is a law of Marxism. Marxism has
not takenonestepforewardi lifenorhasobtained anything ut
with sturrgle,conquering witheffort,and Maoism is not and will
notbean exception. The strugglein behalfof Maoismas the
third stageof Marxism,is and will be hard, long,complex and
difficult,itwill never impose spontaneously. This isour history,
we do nothaveanother way: struggle,effort,unyielding tenacity
and undeclinable persistence, and time so that practice may prove
and sanction the truth.
Itis the beginningof a campaignthatthe Party must geton
organizing step by step. We open up an arduous but necessary
campaign, it is important for the international proletariat which is
our class. The idea is: the beginning of a campaign,ans struggle
ofcommunists inbehalfofthe proletariat. Considerit as
audacious step that we must take;allaudacious step is the
beginning of a new task, and the new has a problem: a terrain not
sufficientlyknown;let'stakefirm steps,beingsure thatall
beginning is nothingbutthat,the beginning,that many issues
will be developed, because there are things which we do not have
enoughknowledgeof;and therefore, be more farsighted, more
firm, moredemandingof ourselves. Let's apply: Wage the battle
and you will know how it unfolds. We communists are audacious
and we are so because we are consequent materialists, and we are
not afraid of making mistakes,nor are weafraidof confronting
anybody because truth is on our side. This is our convction and
we cannot have no other; we are men of conviction,"convinced
and confessed"inthegreatesttransforminscientificideloy
thereisanologyoEatththahadthepcticltstlke
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism; nor never have so many millionsof
e been andwillto draggedalong by so
people
powerful
362
=====第362页=====
MaOiSM. On MARXisM-LENINISm-MaoisM
revolutionary storm.
For thefulfillmentof thistask,let'sstartfrom the understanding
of Maoism following this scheme that we present as follows:
LONG LIVE MAOISM!
INTRODUCTION
1. Lenin and what is new in the revolution.
2. Maoism is to be imposed through struggle. Stalin.
I. CONTEXT OF MAOISM.
1. International context.
2. In China.
3. The Biography of Chairman Mao.
I. CONTENT OF MAOISM.
1. Theory.
2. New Democracy.
3. The three instruments.
4. The people's war.
5. The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.
6. The World revolution.
WHAT_ISFUNDAMENTAL
IN_MAOISM
IAND
WHAT
IS
MAOISM.
III. THE STRUGGLE CONCERNING MAOISM.
1. The uprise of Maoism.
2. Maoism and revisionism.
3. Maoism in the present.
363
=====第363页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
The people's war has made up understand more and better the
developmentof Marxism-Leninism madeby Chairman Mao
Tsetung,how wearebeforea thirdstageof theideologyof the
internationalproletariatandtherefore ithastransformedinto
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, being Maoism the principal. And if
in the IV Plenum Sessionof our Central Committee we agreed
upon thesloganof: Towards Maoism!, in this session we have
assumed the task of: Impose Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, mainly
Maoism as the command and general guideofall our partiday
activity,and to serveand strivealso,so that Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, mainly Maoism, be the command and guide of the world
revolution,all inbehalfoftheundeclinableandglorious goalof
all humanity: Communism.
36
=====第364页=====
THE
DON'T
INSTEAD,
EXPAND
VOTE!
TO
CONQUER
GUERRILLA
WARFARE
POWER FOR
THE PEOPLE!
PCP - CENTRAL COMMItTTEE - FeBRUARY, 1985
"Strengthen the People's Committees,develop the baseareas and
forge forward the New Democratic People's Republic."
Communist Party of Peru (PCP).
"All reactionaries try to wipe outtherevolutionthrough mass
slaughters and think that the more people they kill the more they
will weakentherevolution. But,contrarytotheir wishes, facts
show that the more people theykill,the stronger the revolution
becomes and the closer reactionaries come to their doom. This is
an irrefutable law."
Chairman Mao Tse-tung.
1. THE GENERAL CRISIS OF PERUVIAN SOCIETY
Contemporary Peruvian society is in general crisis. This society,
whose trajectory began towardtheendof the
XIXcentury, is
gravelyilland isincurable.Itcanonlybetransformedthrough
the armed struggle, which the Communist Party of Peru is doing
it today, leading the Peruvian people. There is no other solution.
The factis that Peru today is a semifeudaland semicolonial
society in which abureaucratic capitalism is developing,a delayed
capitalismlinkedtothebiglandowners.interestsand which,
consequently,in no way seeks the destructionof semifudal
conditions but at most seeks its evolution. What is more
importantititypofcaitalimcompltelsujteo
imperialism,inour case principallYankeeimperialism,ad
365
=====第365页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
therefore,doesnotdevelopthegreatpotentialoftheproductive
forces of our country.Furthermore, it wastes,shackles, or destroys
the productive forces and in no way develops a national economy.
On thecontrary,itiscompletelyattheserviceofimperalism's
increasingexploitationand istotallyagainstthenational interests
of the majorityof the population, and the basicand urgent needs
of our people.
Thus,the modern Peruvian economy was born deformed and ill
at its roots.It was born intrinsically tied to the archaic semifeudal
system which, despitetheregimes bragged-about
"agrarian
reforms," continues to exist and characterizes the country from its
most basic foundations to its mostelaborate ideas. This situation
maintains, in essence, the great land problem, the driven force of
the peasantsclassstruggle,especiallythe poor peasants that made
up the immense majority. Moreover,the Peruvian economy was
born subjugatedbyimperialism,thelastphase ofcapitalism,
masterfully
characterized
and
as
monopolistic,
parasitic,
moribund.
Although this imperialismallowsour political independence,as
long as it serves imperialist interests,controls the entire Peruvian
economic
C process: our natural
resources, export
products,
industry,bankingandfinance,etc.In sum,it sucks the blood of
our people, devours the energy of our national development, and
today,especially, it squeezes us through the huge interess of the
foreign debt, just as it does other oppressed nations.
Therefore,the moderneconomy,the bureaucratic capitalism,is
tied to theunburied cadaversemifeudalism,and it is subjugated
bythemoribundimperialism,whichincreasinglylivesofffrom
the bloodoftheoppressed,eapedrom anxloitationguarantee
by itsown waos and toeofitlcks,wiethedomination
oftheworldidisputeinnevrendincisianconention
366
=====第366页=====
DON'T VOTE!
waged primarilybthtwosuperowers,theUnitedStatesand
the social-impeialitSovietUnion.Iconclusion,weareithe
midstofthegeneralcrisisofPeruviansociety. This crisis,
including thecrisisofbureaucraticcapitalismwhichhasenteed
intoitsfinalstagehasfullymaturedtheconditionsfore
developmentandtriumphof therevolution,thenthe general
crisis thatplagues theold societyencompassestherevolution in
its entirety and in all its manifestations.
This is our reality,this is thefoundation on which Peruvian
societyrestsand the materialrootsofourproblems and the
misfortunes of our people. This is the social system that the ruling
classes andtheirYankee imperialist mastersarefaithful toand
defendwithbloodandfire,throughtheirbureaucratic-landlord
state based ontheirreactionary a
armed forces, continuously
exercising  the  class
dictatorshipofthebigbourgeoisie and
landlords,whetherit is through defacto military governments
like the many we had,for example Velasco and Morales
Bermudez,to mention justthe most recentones,or through
governments bornoutofelectionsand called constitutionallike
Belaunde's government today.
Thus,the governments inPeru,civilianormilitary,areruling
cliques, elected or not, which exercise dictatorship over the
people, the proletariat,the peasantry, petty bourgeoisie,and even
over the nationalor middle bourgeoisie itself,forthebenefitof
thebigbourgeoisie(especiallybigbankerstoday),oftheb
landowners (particularly in their expression as gamonalism to
exercise power inthe countryside),in theserviceof theruling
classes, and of Yanqui imperialism and totally against the interests
ofthepeopleandof thenation.Andthatneeds no greater
historicalrecountordemonstration,since theproofis rightin
frontofouryes: theBelaunde governmentitsel andhiscliqu; a
367
=====第367页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
from
electorals
system."
This is
precisely
the
beforetoimpalismandsunkerviascityiitsmosiss
in modernhistory;ithassubmergedthepeopleinthemost
implacablehungerandhaspersecuted,imprisoned,tortured and
murderedthepeople,
e,even perpetrating mass slaughter and
genocide because the people,led by the Communist Party, have
dared torise up in arms proclaiming, "It is Rightto Rebel,"
irrevocablerightofevery people drowned in exploitationand
oppression,therightofevery peopleandclassthatrefuse to be
enslaved.
Thatis therealityofthecountry,of Peruviansocietyandthe
performanceof the present government. It will remain the same
with anyother government in thefuture as long as we do not
overthrow the prevailing order byforce ofrevolutionary arms
throughPeople's War. Thehistoryof the worldandourown
history has proven this,furthermore,we have it before our own
eyes: the murderous regimeof Belaunde and his gang that starve
our people will go down in history as the government of hunger
and genocide.
II. TO VOTE IS TO ENDORSE THE_SOCIAL SYSTEM AND
ELECT_ANOTHER_ GOVERNMENT,WHICH_WILL
BRING
,
ABOUT MORE HUNGER AND GENOCIDE.
Under what condition(s) arethe current generalelections being
held? Economically,allagreethatthecountryis sufferingthe
greatestcrisis in atleastthelastonehundredyears.Inaddition,
economy wouldbarelybemeetingits1976levels. Thatis,a
quarter of acentury wouldhavebeen wasted becauseof the much
publicizedeconomic devlopmentButthproblemdoesn'tend
up
368
=====第368页=====
DON'T VOTE!
throughacrisis in the second halfof each decadeandeach new
crisis is worse than the previous one,and the next one is already
onits way. The reactionary economists themselves paint a bleak
pictureforthe coming years. Furthermore,relianceon highly
glorifiedforeigncapitalishinderedbythepresentforeigndebt
and the impossibilityof payingeven theinterestsonit. Atthe
same time,internal savings are reduced,industrial production is
on recession, agriculture is in crisis,the prices of our export
productswill continue
to decline, the foreign markets are
shrinking,etc.Insynthesis,itis a black perspectivewith no real
solution in sight whatsoever, much less one that would satisfy the
growing elementary needs of the masses,which are denied more
each day,offeringonly more unemployment,lower wages and
salaries, the curtail of workersrights, and more cutsof past gains
and benefits.Thus,there is a blackeconomic perspective for the
obsoletePeruviansocietyand moreoppresionandexploitation
for the people.
Politically,theConstitutionof1979, justlikewiththerestofits
type,denieseachrightitrecognizesinits contents.Itdidnot
satisfy eventhefactionsof the reactionary camp,much less the
people, for that reason modifying it is, and will continue to be, an
arena of contention. The presentConstitution gives direct
participation to its armedforces and police in every aspectof
social life, strengtheningtheir domain, at the same time it
empowers thefaculties of the Executive and organizes the most
repressivepolice system inourhistory. Despiteallitsfilthy
demagoguery,the current Constitution is the harshest and more
violent and bloody shock that a Constitution has ever had with
our conditions. This is shownbythe contrast betweenthe so-
called"righttolife"andthesinistergenocidebeing carriedut
with crueltyand impunity by thearmedforces in theregionof
Ayacucho, directed by Belaunde himself.
369
=====第369页=====
COLLECTED WORKSOFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-1987)
And, how do thesanctifieddemobourgeois intitutions work?A
parliamentltvuciotutm
the Executive. Thejudicialpower(the courts)is incapableof
judgingthethousandofacused,muchlesapplingtheirown
laws,theyeven consent to and coverthe plan of annihilation of
the prisonersof war in the concentration camps known as"El
Fronton"andthesecretsoneslikethose inTotos"Los Cabitos,"
the stadium in the cityof Huanta,etc., in complicity with the
Public Ministry. TheExecutivehas becomethereallegislative
power,with the most basic lawsof thecountry inthehands of
rancid bureaucrats, andtechnocrats trained andadvised
by
imperialism;withsuperministerswho,like theold autocrats,do
and undo as they please,with broad and repressive powers used
daily,from theclubs to thebombsandbulletsagainst the people,
the state of emergency decree used even to confront a worker's
strike,let'snotforgetthefrequentlyappliedcurfewsorstageof
siege.
Finally,hereactionary armedforcesandpolicehaveshownall
their hatredandbrutalitythatarecharacteristicof their actions,
they haveshownclearlythatit "authorizes"anyabuse,even
murder committed with impunity against any son and daughter of
the people. Andthose Armed Forces which continue to call
themselves"tutelarinstitutions,"asifthepeopleofPeru were
made up exclusively of persons under age, those Armed Forces so
specialized in defeatsbefore foreign
enemies,
,asthey
are
experienceincrushingbybloodshed
andfire our unarmed
population,today manifestmore clearly thereactionary interests
which they defend,andallthe classhatredshown in ther
intervention
against  the  victorious  armed
struggle.
Their
leadership,the JointCommand,the NationalDefense Council,
headedueimlilapm
370
=====第370页=====
DoN'T VOTE!
the fraudulentPeruviadmocracyandthatbogus democrat and
cunning demagogue Belaunde has exposedbefore our people and
the entire world their sinister anti guerrilla actions.
Thus,on topof a bleak perspective,obsolete and reactionary
institutions are erected and onlysurvivebytheforceof inertia
and thearmsthatsustain them,alwaysspilling more blood and
bathing themselves in the incendiary bloodof the unarmed, vilely
oppressed people,who are already saying, Enough!,Andeach
day they believe less in the old State and hopes for less from the
government.In conclusion,thelackofcredibility,the disorder,
the chaos, besides the rampant corruption and the most shameless
cynicism,corrodethe bureaucratic-landowningState,for whose
governmentallofthem compete sofrivolouslyand cheerfully,
with verbal skirmishes and perhaps one confrontation or two,a
few demagogues who poorly concealtheir interests and gred.
They are Alva Orlandini,Bedoya Reyes,Morales Bermudez and
Alan Garcia, candidatesof
Popular
Action,Democratic
Convergence, DemocraticFrontofNationalUnity,and Apra,
respectively. Allare well-known defendersof theexisting order.
Among them is also the devious andopportunistic Barrantes
Lingan, false Mariateguist and loyal defender and supporter of the
ruling system,as representativeoftheso-calledUnitedLeft, an
organization mounted byitsleaders as the most unfettered
expression ofthe old way ofelectoral
opportunism
and
parliamentary cretinism in the country.
Buttheoppressivelegacy doesotendthere.Thclassstruggle of
our people has gone to develop into an armed sruggle against the
old social order, the old State and its reactionary armed forces and
police. The revolutionary war is now entering itsfifth year. Two
of thoseagainsttheoldarmedforcedthemselves.This historical
fact has radically changedthe conditions,ithasshown how
through anarmed strugglethobsoletesystemcrumbland the
371
=====第371页=====
E 1 (1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
New Power is builtfor thepeople,fortheoppressed. This new
and irreversible process will continue to develop more and more
as the principal problem of
PeruvianState,becauseitisits
negation,itsdestruction.Itis againstthisprocessthattheold
state will have to confront more and more in defense of the
exploiting classesandoftheirimperialistmaster.The people, the
masses,willincreasingly jointthepeasant wargoingon in he
countryside,since as Lenin stated,hunger itself impulses them:
"In the West,tensof millionsof peoplearesuferingthe torments
of hunger. Thatis,precisely,what makesthesocialrevolution
inevitable,sincethesocialrevolution doesnot emerge outofthe
programmesutomthtthaofilloofopa
'rather thanliveand starve,wepreferto diefightingfor the
revolution.'"
Therefore,we mustask,whatare the implicationsof electons?
Do thepeople needto go to theballotboxes?It is tothe
advantageof
people to vote? Seeing our own Peruvian
experience,whatrevolutionarytransformationhavethe people
achieved throughelections or in parliamentary activities? Every
conquest won by the people has been wrested away in the course
of the people's struggles.As a resultof thesestruggles,laws were
enacted. Fromthebeginningthestate started cuttingbackand
initiatingaprocesstoreducetheeffectoftheselawsor doaway
with them entirely,as is shown in the history of labor legislation
inthe country. Thevictoryofpoliticalrightshasfolloweda
similar course. All of this clearly has been won outside the frame
of the conquest of Power,since for a revolutionary, power is only
conquered by meansofrevolutionaryviolence.In Peru is simply
the armed struggle from the countryside to the city.
Furthermoreleasourselvewhatbenefithavetle
really won by teritointeCoitusmbynd
372
=====第372页=====
DON'T VOTE!
in thelcofIeipltete
century,withtheresultsalready saw. Inthe second case,the
resurgence ofthegovernmentofBelaunde thatis one of the
biggest selloutsofourhistoryand whichhas drownedour people
in widespread hunger and bloodiest genocide.
Moreover,looking in perspective,what can the people hope for,
the masses,expectfrom participating in the generalelectionsof
1985?Wellsimplyandplainly: ToVoteis toavailthesocial
system andto electanothergovernmentthatwillbring more
hungerand more genocide!Itwillhelp landlord-bureaucratic
State toreplace,according toitsown lawsand conditions,their
authorities who shall exertthe class dictatorship against the
people andinfavorof maintainingthe semi-feudaland semi-
colonial society in whose womb bureaucratic capitalism is
developing,for the benefitof the ruling classes and their principal
master,
Yanqui imperialism. To vote is to help install
a
governmentwhowillbring stllmorehunger, since thisis
determined by the needs and the class character of the old State of
which it is a part.To vote is to help establish a government which
will still be more genocidalthanthecurrentone,since this toois
determined bythe needsof theold state,to defendits decrepit
society in the face of the revolution, that way it will also push the
Old Stateto defendtheirobsolete societyfacingthe people's
struggle and mainly before the push of the armed struggle which
with guns is destroying the old to create the new: the forms of the
New Power,of the New Society,sustained by the people rising up
in arms.
The peoplecannothelptheirexploitersandoppressors,y
cannot help them to resolve their problems,they cannot avail
their social system,even lessto help elect anothergovernment
bringing stll more hungerand moregenocide.Since that is not
373
=====第373页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
their road norithlpstheirowninterests,theonly thingthat can
bepresentedtoday is,NOT TOVOTE!; and theonlytruly
popularanswebeforethlectionbythereactionary State that
brings hunger and genocide.
III. EXPAND THE GUERRILLA WAR TO CONQUER POWER
FOR THE PEOPLE!
The Communist Partyof Peru,a Marxist-Leninist-Maoist party
reconstitutedcombatingrevisionism,includingwithinitsown
ranks, a party  ofthe new
type to conquer Power forthe
proletariatandthe people,
assumeditsrole ofapplying
revolutionary violence by initiating thearmed struggle on17 May
1980. Thus,theclassstruggleofthe proletariat and the people of
Peruhave takenaleapinitslong journey.Thepolitical strugle
continues as revolutionary war,taking armed struggle as the
principalform and therevolutionary armedforces as its main
form of organization.
In this manner our party left behinda historical baggage,more
than 50 years old,and has overcome a dark and rotten electoral
ism imposed on the masses. With dynamite and bullets it began
to write the genuine people's liberation,armed and united from
the beginningwiththepeople,mainly thepeasants,whohave
alwayss
supported the most heroic actions of the Peruvian
revolution, and do so today more than ever as the armed struggle
hasfulflledthe centuriesold hope in an un extinguishable
bonfire.
As Chairman Mao said: "Whenits existence is threatened,the
exploiting classalwaysresorts toviolence. Assoon as it foresees
revolution,itstrives to annihilateit throughviolence...It uses
violencealsotoepress thevolutionary peoplefrom the moment
in whichtheylaucthmlvetotheconquetofow"
374
=====第374页=====
DON'T VOTE!
the"l
to eliminate the revolution through mass slaughters . . .
1
The old Peruvian State has acted and will continue to do so in the
future inaccordance with these laws. Firstthey mobilized their
policeforces: GuardiaCivil(GC), Guardia Republicana(GR),
PoliciadeInvestigaciones(PIP)anditselite counterinsurgency
forces: sinchis,theself-proclaimed"Llapan Atic,",Dircote, etc.;
they applied their notorious persecutions, tortures, imprisonments
and murders with the brutality and cruelty thatare their nature.
Then they started their patrols, home searches,and raids in the
city and countryside,mainlyinthe countryside,followingthe
reactionary law of: "Burnall, lootall,kill all." Thesearmed forces
at the heightof their actions,at most wereable to launch three
operatives (January andOctober of_81, andin March of82),
which were highly advertised and inflated by the press, and which
despite being ledand supported directly by theArmed Fores
ended up in totalfailure,suferingsounddefeatsatthehandsof
the revolution, a fact that even the reactionary press had to admit.
Thus,the policeforces were used as cannon fodder and guinea
pigs caught in theirown contradictions in the reactionary camp.
Despitethe clamor which demandedtheir participation in the
anti-guerrilla warfare,thearmed forcesof the Peruvian State did
not enter the war directly until the endof1982,due tothe
oppositionof Belaunde, who wasfearful that the military would
use their participation to stage a coup d'etat against him or take
overthegovernmentbitby bit. The Armed Forces enteredthe
warall threetogether: Army,Navyand Air Force,although the
first two ones as the principalforce,so to be jointly responsible
since
enewatobbm
alonebytheir
counterrevolutionary actions. Butfromthebeginning theself-
375
=====第375页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
likepeasantandcivilguards,tocommitatrocitieand mass
slaughters in thevain attempt to separate usfrom the masses.
They carried out numerous bloody
ymassacreslikethosein
Huambo, Iquicha, Sacsamarca,etc., among them the massacreof
the journalists.
These actions of the armedforces were all a
approvedbythe
Councilof National Defensewith theexpressauthorization and
congratulationofBelaundehimselfYetthoseattempsild
becauseof thestunningblowsat thehandsof therevolutionary
forces, and due to the necessity to conduct the municipal elections
of Novemberof 83,the Armed Forcescarriedout generalized
massacres.Thus,in less than two months more than 800eopl
were assassinated in the neighborhoodsof Ayacucho,and then
begin thedisappearances. These werevile,ignominious, and
unpunished crimes committed with impunity.
Julyof1984broughtimportantstatemeasuresalthoughtey
were not public, which is yet anotherviolation oftheir own
judicial
system. The JointCommand ofthe armed forces
conferred upon itself the right to intervene in any part and every
partofthe country'tofighttheguerrllas,andontheirown
discretionandrequest,tocreatepolitical-military commandsand
establish emergency zones. Thus the country remains at the
controlandexpenseoftheJointCommandandthe Executive
extends carte blanche to the Armed Forces so they can use it as
they seefit. This is theso-called Peruvian democracy today. It is
under thisauthority that they carry out new plans, premeditated
raking operations and, under death threats,forcefully concentrate
part of the masses under pressure to simulate a supposed struggle
among pasats,whninatitissimplandcalycopofe
1
the
peasant
organizations,"formedin GuatmalundrYaneguidance and
376
=====第376页=====
DoN'T VOTE!
especiallyinthecountrysidewheretheArmedForceshaveto
confront agenuine peasant waledbythePCP,anddespite the
sinistergenocidestheycarryontheirsinisteplantoseparae he
guerrillas from the masses ending in a total failure.
Therefore,theycannotproclaimvictoryandrecentlytheirown
Ministerof War himslf spokeofthe necesityof taking time and
having patiencetofghttheguerllasoftheneedforstrnger
measures and of thesupport ofall Peruvians. This was a clear
confessionofthedificultiestheyhaveinconfrontingan armed
struggle whichfollowsthe principlesof thePeople's War. Such
reactionary difficulties are even manifested in the uneasiness of
the Pope who, while in Ayacucho, in that Papal meeting with the
repressive forces, preceded by more than a month of intense
persecutionsandraids,thePopeblessedthe criminal weapons,
consecrated the
infamy,sanctified
the
mass
graves
of
counterrevolutionary war,blessed the genocidal armed forces and
police, mainlyitsbloodthirstychiefs,exoneratedandwhatis
more, supported the governmentof Belaunde and called on him
to annihilate us as soon as possible. And in a bombastic tone he
threatened us to change our course,to abandon the revolution, in
concrete to submit ourselves to theruling order,to betray the
people. To this "communique" we have given our immediate, firm
and completereplyonFebruary 4th,withthe massive blackout
whichplacedallofLimaandtheentirecentralregionofthe
country in the dark.
What has thearmed struggle achieved inalmostfiveyears? The
year 1980 canbe defined as theBeginning,81 and 82 asthe
beginningof the developmentof the guerrilla warfareand of the
formationof thefirst People's Committees,embryonicformsof
the New Power. From thattime to the present,the war has
concentratedoetablihmen/counteestablishment,thatison
the counterrevolutionarywartodestroytheNewPowerandthe
377
=====第377页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
revolutionarywartodefenditdevelopitandbuldit,
destroying
littlebylitleandmoreeachtimetherottenand
reactionaryold Power.Inthese nearlyfive years we have carried
out morethan20,00actions. ThePartyhasmultipliedits
membership manytimesandhastheprestige as it neverhad
before,within and outside the country;we have constructeda
People's Guerrilla Armyofthousands offighters;andwhatis
more important, hundreds ofPeople's Committees have been
formed, we strive to develop the support bases and to advance in
the formation of the People's Republic of New Democracy, it has
emerged,then,the New Power and it is being developedby
exercising real state functions.
Insynthesis,thePCPis carrying ona successful and growing
armed struggle,followingthe standards of_Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, the one and only genuine communistideology;
 an
armed struggle which is fulfilled in function of a new democratic
revolution, according to Chairman Mao's New Democracy,with
the aim of doing away with imperialism,to destroy the subsisting
feudal landlords'
property, and confiscating  the  means
of
bureaucratic capitalism; this is an armed struggle that serves world
revolution
n
the
support  of the
international
proletariat,
mainly
of
the
Revolutionary
Internationalist
Movement in which our Party is a member. We base ourselves on
the masses of the country who support us,mainly the poor
peasantry.Wearenotlinkednor we willeverbelinkedoany
superpower or any other power, since we firmly serve the
revolution guided by Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and the guiding
thought which is the applicationof Marxism to our reality. And
todayour immediategoal is: Toexpandtheguerrllawarfae to
conquer power for the people!
LONG LIVE THE ARMED STRUGGLE! DON'T VOTE!
378
=====第378页=====
DON'T VOTE!
LONG LIVE THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF PERU!
LONG LIVE CHAIRMAN GONZALO!
GLORY TO MARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM!
=====第379页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
SINGLE DOCUMENT
DEMANDS
OF
THE
PRISONERS OF
WAR
OF
THE
SHINING
TRENCHES
OF
COMBAT
OF
FRONTON,
LURIGANCHO
AND CALLAO.
LIMA, PERU, 18 JUNE 1986.
1.-Regarding minutesof July_16thandOctober_31stof_1985.,
signed bytherepresentativesofthe Ministryof Justice, INPE,
Judical Power,Ministryof Public on oneside and on theother
side by the representatives of the special prisoners.
2.- Guarantees against the new genocide which the government of
APRA, the navyandotherreactionariesplotagainst the inmats
[on the charge] of "terrorism".
3.- No to the transferof the judicial processes to provinces; nor of
thespecialprisoners. Repealingofthe2ndarticleoftheLaw
24499.
4.- Increase of the alimentary aid to a minimum of I/. 15 00daily
(1), this benefit will be made extensive to all prisons.
5.- DischargeofthepresidentofINPE,Manuel Aquezolofor
being accompliceto thegenocideontheOctober4th_1985. in
Lurigancho.
6.-Deliveryof thebodiesof thekilledonOctober4th1985. to
theirfamilies, complyingwiththeresolutionoftheFirst
Correctional Tribunal of Lima of October 9th 1985.
7.-Immediatetransferofthe16inmatedfor"terrorism"in Canto
380
=====第380页=====
DEMANDS OF PoW of FroNTon, LuRiGAnCHO AND CallaO
Grande to the pavilions where the special prisonersof Lurigancho
are located.
8.- Ceasureof threats,persecution and detentionsof the families
of thespecial inmated by the War Navy, DIRCOTE and APRA
government.
9.- Closureof the prisonof Canto Grandefor being contrary to
the human dignity.
10.-ThatthereductionofSundaysandfestivedays remins
ineffective for the computation of 2 for 1.
11.-Accelerationofthetrials;fortherespectoftherightfor
defense.
12.- AnnulmentoftheregulationofINPEtoprohibitthe
introductionofall kindsoffruitsand plastic containers,for being
contrary to the health of the political prisoners and common ones;
13.- Dischargeof the provocateur employees Guevara, Gonzalez,
Jayo,Aybar andRetesfrom Fronton, as well asthe Chiefof
Security Isabel Guerrero and the mayor Rosa Lermo in Callao.
14.- Suppression of the rubbish dumps in Lurigancho.
15.- Electric power supply 24 hours per day in Fronton.
16.- Reparation of the water,sewer and electric system in Callao
and Lurigancho.
Againstrequisition  forbeing
17.-1
s and  robberyof
massacres
inmates.
381
=====第381页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
18.- Attention, treatment and supply of medicines for the inmates
thathavellenill.vacuationofthesicktothhsitals.
Increase of the health budget 100%.
19.-NototheinterventionoftheWar NavyinFronton, nor
humiliatingbodysearchesofthewarprisonersfamiliesbythe
Navy officials.
20.- Ceasure of the terrible politics of missing persons.
21.- Support to the popular struggle in Peru and for the struggle
ofthelilnd wors
world.
22.Deliveryofcleamatrials,cots,atreseslnen,jam
for the inmates of Peru.
23.-Thattheextensionofthecorrespondingbenefitstothe
special prisoners in the whole country becomes effective.
24.-Noreprislagainstthespecilinmatesnoragainsttr
families and lawyers.
25.-Publicationof thisagreementandof theminutesfrom July
16th and October 31st 1985.
execution of thereof.
382
=====第382页=====
NOTHING
AND
NOBODY
CAN
DEFEAT
US!
PCP - CeNTRaL CoMMiteE - PERU, 1986
With deepaffectionfortheloveoftruth.andLiberty.I hae
nothing in my hands that remains of the LTC. except this ashtray
labor of prisoners of war who now lie on their cowardly murdered
bodies. and theabjectworld,theHistorythemasses.willjudge
these war criminals. You see all the men of the earth in the bench
ofthe accused and will be sentenced as such war criminals who
today must be shaking. Nothing and no one can defeat us,the
river increases its natural cause, the overflow is a Law.
Thereisa logic.Thereactionariesgeneratingdisturbancesand
failing untiltheirfinalruin.Thevillagealsohas itsLaw: fighting-
fail. Returningtofight,we canfailagain. Wewillreturnto
fighting until the final Victory that calls us.Bloodshed are banners
that call for all people to achieve what we have craved, power. We
are condemned to succeed, it's a beautiful sentence. We were born
to win.
This is already a grand reality.
They can grind us. Blow us to smithereens. but they can not
break our communist morality.
We are ready to die.
The moralof the class is at stake. It must be defended.and we
will do it with blood, anguish and tears.
It can not beanyother way.It is theonly way to blowthem to
383
=====第383页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
smithereens. And we will do it in a deep storm.
In desperation the reactionaries are losing more control; no more
than ever we need not do so. Only teach the world the reactionary
nature of the class that they defend, people will simply not exist
as such but strictlytochange the world in theimageand lkeness
of the working class,organized vanguardof the Communist Party
of Peru.
Only the warwill deeplytouchthe peopleuntilthelastfoldof
their souls,from the singing to the cries, and from the cries to the
singing,there is nootherfree way,and wehavevoluntarily
chosen thishard,long andbloodyroadof thevictorious and
invincible people's war thatthe Party andourpeople carry
forward.It is natural that the reactionaries act this way.
We have already been told wisely, the more vile the more deeply
the reactionaries will dig theirown graves: that's how it is, that's
how it will be.
Asa fighterof thisheroic Shining Trenchof Combat whohas
resistedtenaciouslythebombing. ofthereactionarygenocidal
Armed Forces,dishonorofthe nationalheroes. Brave to kill
cowardly to die. Theyknow how tokill but don'tknow howto
die.
Thepeoplewillneverforgtthebloodshedfromitsbest
children.
Beloved people from around the world, your communist children
of war will notfail you,especiallyat this very moment. We wil
hoist high the red flags of Communism.
We have bright prospects.
384
=====第384页=====
NOTHING AND NoBoDY CAN DEFEAT US
Whatcanweo,wlludttoued.helst wordis
that we are winning.
We fight clearly for our cause, for Communism.
We'll talk about other issues on another day.
I reaffirm my commitment to our revolution,to the world
revolution,with thebloodof our people,of our bravefighters
with the bloodofour communist comradesthatflows freely
crumbling the old and creating the new.
Never againwillI seetheirfaces,theirsmilesbutthatlives within
my heart.I will be the bearer of its ideals that are mine,that are
of our people.
I will followyour examples.tofightforour people to serve the
people
wholeheartedly
withoutanypersonaln
motive. with
complete selflessness.
Long live Chairman Gonzalo, guarantee of victory!
Long live the Communist Party of Peru!
Glory to the fallen fighters!
A Fighter - June 19, 1986
NOTE - Letterfrom a fighter, memberof the People's Guerrilla
Army(Ejercito Guerrillero Popular), writtenon June19,1986
("DAY_OF_ HEROISM"), amidthe heroicresistance ofthe
rebellionagainstgenocide,whenthesinisterreactionary armed
forces, commanded bythe genocidal Alan Garcia,assaulted the
shining trenchof combat in Peru's "El Fronton" prison.I hand it
over beforeI die.Wepublishit,as it was drafted,sothathistory
records it.
385
=====第385页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
DAY OF HEROISM
RESOLUTION
PCP - CENTrAL CoMMitEE - PERuU, JuNE 1986
Continuingthe pathofitspredecessor,thereactionary aprista
government since its inception has applied genocideagainst the
people's war,covering it withbombastic demagoguery through
the accomplice supportofelectoralopportunists,confirmed by
Aqomarca, Umaru,
Bellavista
and
Llocllapampa;crimes
committed by the armed forces and policeforces of the Peruvian
State.
Thereactionpointedominouslyagainsttheprisonersof war,
planningtheirgenocidalannihilationthatwasfinalizedon
October4 last year inthe cowardlyandbrutalmurderofthirty
fighters in the Lurigancho prison; unpunishedheinous crimes that
only the triumphant people can punish.
OnJune18,1986atthe ElFronton,Lurigancho and Callao
prisons,the prisonersof war rose inrebellion against the newly
underway genocide, afterreiterating and denouncing
publicly,
before the proper courts and authorities,ofthe carnage
the
governmentand itsarmedforces were plotting;theyrebelled in
defenseof therevolutionandtheir lives,demanding claimsfor
twenty six very fair and rational grievances.
government ledby
Onthenineteenth,thereactionary APRA
Alan Garcia,aftergrotesquely manipulating
gthe farce called the
"PeaceCommission," triggeredthe mostobstinate and dark
operationofexrtion:obliztArmy,Navy,Air rce
and policeforces,underthe Joint Command,consummatdthe
infamous genocide,  killing
hundredsof guerrillas and
most
386
=====第386页=====
DAY OF HEROISM
inthepeople'sbuning blood.Fallon AlanGarcia,hisCabinet,
the Joint Command, the policeand armed forces indelible shame
for the people willnot forgetand thatonly he wouldsanction!
Fighters of the People's Guerrilla Army, prisonersof war, raising
"torebelisjustified,"foughtheroicallyandvaliantlystamped a
landmarkofheroism,valorandcourage whichhistorywillguard
as an exemplary demonstrationof the heroicpeople thatonly
people's war can generate.
Thus, June 19 is immortally stamped as the DAY OF HEROISM,
the bloodof these heroes bearsfruitonthearmedrevolution,
dousing it more,risinglike a monumental glintig
fl ag,
inexhaustible battlecry that brings the inevitable final victory.
The belligerently glorious death of these prisonersof war covers
itself with the blood that's already beenshed,and before this the
communists,combatants and childrenof the people,armed, have
assumedtheirrevocable commitment tofollowtheir shining
example,towards developing the People's Warserving the world
revolutionuntilthunading lightofcommunismstlesaround
the globeundertheundefeatedflagsof Marx,Leninand Mao
Tsetung, the ever living Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
Glory to theallenheroes,ong livethe revolution!
=====第387页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
DEVELOP
THE
PEOPLE'S
WAR,SERVING
）「
THE
WORLD REVOLUTION
"A revolution must go through acivil war.This is a rule. And to
see only the ills of war but not its benefits is a one-sided view. It
is of no use to the people's revolution to speak unilaterally or one-
sided of the destructiveness of the war.'
"It is good if we are attacked by the enemy, since it proves that we
have drawn a clear lineof demarcation between the enemy and
ourselves.Itisstillbeteriftheenemyattacksuswildlyand paints
us as utterly blackand withouta single virtue.It demonstrates
that we have not only drawn a clear line of demarcation between
the enemy and ourselves but achieved a great deal in our work."
Chairman Mao Tse-tung
CONTEXT OF THE SIXTH YEAR.
May 17 markthe sixthanniversaryofthe launchingofthe
People's War in Peru. Six years ago the Communist Party took up
arms to carry out the democratic revolution by overthrowing the
exploitation andoppression ofimperialism, mainly Yankee
imperialism, bureaucratic capitalism andthe subsisting
gsemi
feudalism,in order to conquer powerfor the proletariat and the
people, within the context andat the service ofthe world
revolution. Since then, under the invincible banners of Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism and Guiding Thought,we have march along
the road of surrounding thecitiesfrom the countryside,and have
been wagingarevolutionary wartaking thecountrysideand city
as a singleunitwiththe countrysidetheprincipaltheaterof
armed actionand thecomplementary but necessary.In synthesis,
388
=====第388页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE's WAR, SERViNG THE WORLD REvOLUTION
a People's War, in essence a peasant war led by the Communist
Party, whosecoristhegenratioofrevolutionary base areas.
These yearsof armed strugglecanbesummaizedasllows: 1980
was thebeginningofthearmedstruggle,of guerrilla warfare;
1981and1982sawtheunfoldingofa guerillastruggleand the
birth of the People's Committees,the new political powerof
workers, peasants and petite bourgeoisie, a joint dictatorship
based onthe worker-peasantallianceledbythe proletariat
throughits Party;1983 and1984 were yearsof struggle focusing
andcounter
restoration,
that
is,
of
on
restoration
counterrevolutionary war that try to smash the new politial
power and restore theoldorder,and revolutionary war to defend,
develop and build the newly arising people's power, a hard-fought
struggle wagedbetweenthereactionary ArmedForcesandthe
People's Guerrilla Army;from_1985throughtodaytherehave
been a continuing defense,development and building to preserve
the base areas andexpand the People's War throughout our
mountains from North to South.
Since 1983thePeruvian revolution evolves under the
great
politicalstrategic conceptionof "Building
gBaseAreas"
andin
military
termsofdeveloping
People's
War,
,which
means
principallyguerrillawarfarecomplementedbyguerrllaactions
such as sabotage,selective annihilation and propagandaand
agitation,so as tocarryoutthecentraltask of building,
preserving and developing baseareas and spreading the People's
War throughout the country,taking into account thevariabillity
that thefluidityof guerrilla warfareimposes not juston the new
statepowerbutonllformsofrevolutionaryconstructionand
work. Thisbasicplanof"BuildingBases"formsthecontext for
the present"PlanfortheGreatLeap"basedonthe specific
politicalo"oul,a,s,
the Republicof theoldreactionaryPeruvianstatevs. the New
389
=====第389页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Democratic People's Republic in formation; the old dead-end road
of votes which only serves to preserve the old exploiting order vs.
the new roadofarms which is transforming Peruvian societto
serve thepeople.Thesearetwo poles,oneofthebigbourgoiie
heading up the dictatorshipoftherulingclasses in theserviceof
imperialism, bureaucrat capitalismand semifeudalism,the black
and odious past which is being destroyed,versus the proletarian
pole, represented by its Communist Party in the leadership of the
democratic revolution whose victory will open the way to
socialism and through the course of repeated cultural revolutions,
fused with the great epicof the worldrevolution,someday will
lead to communism,humanity's sole,necessary and an inevitable
goal that can never beabandoned. Through the militarystrategy
of generalizing People's War, thisstrategy has taken the concrete
form of four campaigns, each with its specific content.
ON THE COUNTERREVOLUTIONARY WAR.
Since every war is a struggle between two camps, the development
ofthe People's War inevitably
to the  unleashing of
led
counterrevolutionary war. The Peruvianstate,the dictatorshipof
the big bourgeoisieandlandlordsundertheprotectionof
imperialism, principally
Yankeeimperialism, defended their
threatened existence. Atfirst they tried to minimize the problem
in order to preserve theirphony democraticimage andnot
endangertheinflux ofcapitalintheform of loans and
investment. They sent in their policeforces,which despite their
abuses, outrages and crimessuffered humiliating defeat and were
forced to withdraw from the countryside in the disputed areas and
seekrefugeintheprovincialordepartmental capitals. Thus,all
thepoliceoperations,launchedwithsuchloudandconfusing
propaganda,weresoundly defeatedand thefirst People's
Committeesarose.In thefaceoftheadvanceof thenew state
390
=====第390页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE'S WAR, SERvinG THe WORLD REVoLuTION
send in thereactionaryArmedForcestheclassnecessityofthe
exploitersandpssrsriedthdaandthetakofestoring
Navy and ArFoc,theackboeofthtat,upportedbyte
police forces (the Civil Guard,
Republican
Guard,
and
Investigative Police).
In December1982,a stateofemergency was declared inthe
regionof_Ayacucho, Huancavelica andApurimac, and it was
placed under the Armed Forces'political-military command. This
status was later extended to other areas in the departmentsof
Pasco,HuanucoandSanMartin;itisstillinforceessenally
despite some variations. Military controlreached a new and
important phase with the impositionof a state of emergency and
curfewin LimaandCallaobeginninginFebruary1986,which
subjected the capitalof the Republic and its more than six million
inhabitants to military rule. As a result of these moves,seven and
a halfof Peru's20 million peopleareundermilitaryauthority: a
millionandhalf people live undertheabsoluteandunrestrained
political-militaryauthorityoftheArmedForces,thenewlords
over their lives and property,revivedfeudal tyrants decked out
with noose and knife; while six million people in the very capital
of this much-touted democracy live withoutany guaranteesor
rights, subjecttooverbearingbrutalityanddisguised muer
under a martial law which goes sofar as togive itself theright to
ban one oranotherspecificartistic performanceeven in public
gathering previously authorized by the military.
How have the Armed Forces carried out the counterrevolutionary
war? Basicallytheyhavefollowedthedoctrinesoftheirmaster,
Yankee imperialism,withits theoriesofcounterevolutionary war
based on its own experiences, especiallyinVietnam, and
391
=====第391页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1(1968-1987)
this  fundamental
theoretical  basis
they have
added
the
"antiterroist"xpiecofIlanthichuminAra,
1
as well as advicerom West Germany,Taiwan,Spain,Britain, etc.
On topof all this thythrow inthirewmothsof exprience in
the1965aiullruglandthmoimitedexperiencof
La Convencion. Operations are undertheleadership ofthe
Armed Forces
sJoint Command,  acting
according
to
the
instructionsoftheNationalDefenseCouncilheadedbythe
President of the Republic, whether it is Belaunde or Alan Garcia,
whohavebeen directlyandundeniablyresponsibleforevery
measure carriedout, as well asforthe war's overall political
leadership, which means theybearthe mainresponsibility for the
conduct of the counterrevolutionary war. In short,they have
appliedworldcounterevolutionswell-knownstategyagainst
revolutionary struggle, armed subversion andPeople's War, a
strategy whichhas been defeated manytimes, smashed and
thoroughly and completely beaten by the theoryof People's War,
time and again demonstrating to the world the superiority of the
proletariat strategy over that of imperialism.
Masses Against Masses.
When the Armed Forces came in they had already been studying
the revolutionary warforthree years as wellas advising and
planning the policeactions,so they had certain advantages from
the beginning,andobviouslytheyhad moreand better human
and technical resources than the police.They immediately began
to implement their plan of setting
masses
against
masses,
followingtheoldimperialistdoctrineofusingnativestofight
against natives.First theused pretrainedunits made up hand-
pickedarmyveteranand peasantslinkedtolocaltyrantsand
livestock
rustlers, whomthey had
employedas agents and
infiltratorsamongthepeasants,andhookedtotherefurbished
intelligeneworkthehadbutupreoei
392
=====第392页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE's WAR, SERVING THE WORLD REVOLUTION
0sro
aidedbtitantn
flunkies,theformedvigilantebandundemilitaryauthority
take pti icdot
often acteddisguised aspeasantsorpolice),unleashing white
terror in thecountrysideassasinatingPartymembers,fghrs,
mass leaderand peasantscarryingout realwitchhunts aainst
revolutionarieand theadvanced as well asrobbery,rape,torture,
looting,arsonand slaughter. Thisishowthey carriedout the
sinister policyof burning all, looting all
ll, and killing all.
Later,d
partof the masses,and in this way massesunderdirectvigilante
coercion and control were forced to aid the counterrevolutionary
war. These coerced people drafted from among the masses acted
as guards,arrested and murdered guerrillas,carriedout razing
operations against neighboring communities or towns and even
more distant ones, and took part in search and pursuit operations
againsttheguerrllas.Laterthesepeoplewerereroupedalong
with people from neighboring areas into strategic hamlets under
direct military rule. Then, in addition to being forbidden to come
and go freely,since they are not allowed to go anywhere without
the military,even to work,and subject to constant control, they
were militarizedandorganizedinto"patrols"
and"defense
committees," forced to take uprudimentary weapons,and,sunk
in starvation and poverty,obligated to take part militarily in the
white terror and the counterrevolutionary war. In conclusion,
while thepoliceforceswerealsousedas cannonfodderbythe
Armed Forces,as eventhesoldiers,sailorsandaviators hae
alwaysbeen,these coerced masseshavebeenthemainand real
cannonfodderin this sinisterplanofpitting
masses
against
masses, of using natives to fight natives.
393
=====第393页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
the reactionaryattacksand
operations or to surround the
repressiveforceslikehumanshield.Thesecoerced masses have
suffered2600losss(ncludingviilantes),lmostivetimes more
than the numberof uniformed soldiersand policekilled(without
takingintoaccounthehundredsofinfiltrators,agentsand
informers.)
Genocide.
When their policy of masses against masses proved unable to
contain the People's War, the reactionary Armed Forces reesorted
tothe mostevil,pervertedandcriminalgenocide,one ofthe
greatestinfamiesin thehistoryoftheRepublicof Peru. The
militaryshoweditsgenocidaltendenciesfrom thebeginning, in
Huambo,Iquicha, Huaychao,etc. Belaunde cynicallysaluted and
approvedoftheseincidentsa"theAyacuchopeasantsgallant
answer to terrorism." It should be made clear that he himself had
approvedandauthorizedsuchactionsandnotonlypublicly
praised but calledforgenocide:thisis theself-proclaimd
democrat,humanistand Christian "President"full of respectfor
the Constitution and the law,covered forever in the blood of the
people which began to flow in torrents. Among the victims were
the journalists cowardly murdered in Uchuraccay.
They began to wipe out the peasants and their communities and
small towns in1983 in the departmentof Ayacucho.In Juneof
that year,in Espite,in the province of
Cangallo,they used
helicopters to strife the masses with gun fire, and throw grenades
atvillagers whowere trying toflee through the mountains. In
July, in the townsof Occopeja and Uchuraccay, in the province of
Huanta,againtheyusedhelicopters tostrifethe mases with
bullets,and wiped themout withgrenades.InPacha,atown in
Vinchos,in theprovinceofHuamanga,the majorityofthe
394
=====第394页=====
July,tetu
the two monthsleading uptothe Novembelections,thebodies
of more than800 people werefound,people who hadbeen
brutallyltudt.
In November, in Silvia, in the provinceof La Mar, in a reprisal for
an ambushagainstthe Army, they arrested60 people and
indiscriminatelykilled20ofthem.A monthbefore,in Sillco,in
the province of Huanta, they threw grenades and fired directly on
the massesforthefirsttime. Culminating this slaughter, on
election day,in Socos, in the province of Huamanga,the local
police detachment torturedand murdered more than 50 people
whohadbeentaking partin a wedding party.Officially,37
people were reported dead.
Along withallthisreactionarywhiteterror,theybegantoset up
concentration camps in the department of Ayacucho, massive and
evil torture centers,underthe controlofthe_Armyin the"Los
Cabitos" barracksinthe cityof Ayacucho,in_ Totos(Cangallo)
and Qoisaand Pichari (La Mar),and underthe control of the
Navy in Huanta. In the Totos camp,asof July1983they had
secretly buried more than a hundred people;more than 20of
them had their throats cut, the prisoners were tortured and buried
alive,new prisoners were forced to dig graves more than three
meters deep and then were shoved in, while others were thrown
in with their hands and feet tied. In Totos the torture is especially
brutalandsadistic. To terrifythe people,they cutoff heads and
impale them on stakes.
But the genocide was not confined to Ayacucho. In October 1983,
it spread tothe departmentof Pasco,thecountrys mining center;
there, in Chinche, a hamletof the provinceof Alcides Carrion, 45
peasants were wipedout. On November 13,the dayof he
municipalelections,threehelicopters wereusedto strifewith
395
=====第395页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
machine-gutheopuloiabama,inTaucj province in
the departmentof Huancavelica,killing more than 50 people in
retaliationforanambushthatguerrillashad carriedout against
an Army patrol that day.
During 1984 the genocide became macabre,reaching the heights
of horror. The ArmedForces,mainly, as well as the police,
unleashedtheirevil, rotten, inflamed, blindandrabid hatred
against thepeople, intheirfrustratedeffortsto stop the
revolutionary war byisolating the guerrillasfrom the massesof
peasants, particularly the poor peasants. Once again, in their own
tradition, the armed reaction fed upon the flesh and blood of the
unarmed people.Let's look at some of the "heroism" that serves
to prop up their false glory and unfounded pride.
The genocidal slaughters.
In the department of Ayacuchoat the end of June they killed 150
people in the San Francisco area. July 5th,theykilled 30 peasants
in Chiara; onthe8th,theykilled 40afteran operationinthe
village Rosario;the 12th, they wiped out 30 peoplein
Pomabamba;on the15th, in a reprisal for an action at Apacheta
they killed17; the16th, 25 tortured bodies were found along the
highway to Huamanguilla. August3rd,the tortured bodiesof 37
people werefound in Puramanta;on the18th the corpsesof17
tortured children and adolescents were found in Cocahuichun, in
Via de losLibertadores,and 8bodies,twoof them children,in
Leonpata; the 27th, 19 people were found murdered in Sajrarumi
and 21 in San Francisco. September 1st, 23 peasants were killed in
Churrubamba and Misiquibamba. The same month, in Paraiso, in
Mariscal Caceres province in the department of San Martin, they
killed22 peasants. Inthedepartmentof Huancavelica,between
396
=====第396页=====
onceagainiAacco,theywiedoutstiPtiand
Chullay;inLucmahuaico,Vilcabambainthedepartmentof
Cusco,soldieranvigilantesfromAndahuylaskiled
22
Huancavelica, December6ththepolicekilled38peasantsin
Cuni, near Marcas in the province of Acobamba; the same month
16 bodies were found in Ayahuarcuna, in Ayacucho.
Some actions that took place in June and July in Ayacucho as part
of this sinister waveof genocide in_1984shouldbespecifically
mentioned. In Vinchos,theykilled 40 commissionersof various
people'scommittes.InRemillapatatheyshotachildnineyeas
old and another of 11 together with their mother and their father
who was the Security Commissioner; in Mayopampa they threw a
commissioner into a burning building. These vile murders, so
merciless andferociousthat children are shotbecause they
happen to be the children of members of the new political power,
is a monstrous expression of the hate and fear with which this
new political power fills them. In Balcon 70 Marines came in and
murdered18 peasants,amongthem six childrenwhose bodies
they dumped in their trucks. A third of the dead were children,
this murderof children is a constant policy to terrorize and break
the parents,as wellas a disgusting andoften-used wayof
punishingrevolutionariesespecially. Nevertheless,theMaries
came backagainthe next day,sarcastically and contemptuously
offeringtheirvictimsfood,tryingtobuythemoff Thepeople
quite justly became enraged and drove them away. After an
ambushinPichari,the"glorious"CivilGuardcame inand
stopped a truck carrying passengers, who were taken off and
killed. Local forcesof the People's Guerrilla Army (PGA) buried
these 20 people, but in shameless cynicism the murder was
attributed to the PGA.This is another common trick used by the
reactionaryforcewhooftendisguisethemselvesi eaant
clothesitlo nd
397
=====第397页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
themostfrigtfulimespcallagainchilnandn
blame thellasoatoturthmassithmOe
exampleofthisis themurdeof50peasantsby the Marines in a
place clledAzangaro20minutesfromLuricochadurins
 same period.
Another exampleoftheirterortacticstookplace in San
Francisco,when peasants going down to the jungle to harvest
were indiscriminately wiped out,without evenbeing askedfor
theiridentification papers.In Huamanguillatheykilled nine
peasants,burningone peasantalive. Thatis one of their usual
waysof terrifying people byshowingtheir mercilessness toward
anyone considered a communist or a guerrilla.
A similar example happened in Chuschi, January 10, 1983, where
they tied dynamite to a peasant and blew him up while shouting,
"This is howteroristsdie!"Thisbarbaricpolicyhasbn
implemented since  the  beginning
ofthe ArmedForces'
intervention and continuestoday.In thisblack waveof death
razing became widespread. A small example is theoperationin
Incaraqay,whereafter stealing everything they burned down 500
houses. The extermination made whole towns disappear; July 15,
the Armed Forces backed by vigilantes killed the entire population
of Quinuaandcompletelywipedthetownoff thefaceofthe
earth. But even this was not enough for them. The white terror
continued fattening on the people's flesh. On August 22, 198, in
a reprisal for an ambush, a Marine unit in Silvia arrested 50 youth
at random and shot them at the spotlight; emulating the German
fascists who setEuropeaflameduringWorldWarII,thy
murdered 10 sons and daughters of the people for every Marine
whofellin combat.November10th,Marinesaided bythe
RepublicanGuardfinishedof 4peasantinQuimbrifr
having savagltotuethemiLuisiantllnexamleof
theironnpolicofoenttckandhitr
398
=====第398页=====
DEVELOP THE PEopLE's WAR, SerVinG THe WorLD REvOLUTiON
crimes by exterminating the victims.
Discoveries of common graves.
Another shocking proof of the genocide perpetratedby the Armed
Forces has been the discoveryof common graves,a macabre and
disgusting sight. The inextinguishable death criesof men, women
and childrenshook the national conscience. Thebroken livesof
the people havefueledhistory's enraged clamorforclass justice, a
justice thatonlytheadvancing armedrevolution can and will
bring about, as well as the constant and unsilenceable exposure of
the barbarism with which the Peruvian state defends itself,using
its Armed Forces,under the leadership of whatevergovernment
happens to be on duty, whether it is the Popular Action party of
Belaunde or Alan Garcia's APRA, because what is at stake is their
class dictatorship, their very orderof exploitation and oppression.
In the department of Ayacucho on August 19, 1984, a grave with
10 bodies was found in Via de Los Libertadores, and on the 22nd,
a grave with 30 corpses along the Huanta-Mayo road, 30
kilometers from Huanta. On the 23rd seven common graves with
a total of 89bodies in an advanced state of decomposition were
found in Pucayacu,a discovery whichprofoundly shook public
opinion and unleashed the masses' condemnation and repudiation
ofthe ArmedForces andthe Belaundegovernmentthenin
power. The political military commandof the region was in the
hands ofGeneral Adrian Huaman andtheofficer directly
responsibleforthe massacre was Naval Captain Alvaro Artaza.
Garcia tried to reappoint Huaman as the chiefof Ayacucho, and
Barrantesusedto callhim"thepeasantgeneral."Thetrialof
Captain Alvaro took place within the Navy itself,and the present
APRA government gave him a promotion,closed his case and
sent him to Spain for his own protection.
The same day a common gravewith 30bodies wasfound in
399
=====第399页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Ayahuarcuna (Macacharca); on the 25th other bodies were found
in Quinuaand Muyuri;andthe28tha grave with12 people
whose throats had been cut wasfound in Cocahuischaca, Via de
Los Libertadores. In September peasants exposed the existence of
common graves in Toldorumi, Zamatapampa and Usutapampa in
the province of Victor Fajardo, and in Pichuyrumi and Qarpaqasa
in Cangallo.Theauthoritiesandthedailynewspapers paidlittle
attention to theseexposures by the peasants,justas they ignored
manyothersinordertohidetherealextentofthe genocide.
September13th,three new common graves with 50 dead were
discovered inIribamba;on the14tha grave withfivebodies was
found inLuricochaand anotherin Qasa-Orqo with10 tortured
corpses. On the18th,a grave withfive bodies in Yanaorqo.
October 18th a grave with 25 bodies in Vado Chico (Huanta); on
the 20th, one witheight dea
Capitanpampa,anotherwith
three in Ayahuarcuna and a third withfive corpses in Iribamba;
the 25th, four new graves with 41 bodies in Vado Chico; the 28th,
a grave withfour dead bodies in Laurente (Huanta). November
13tha grave with15_bodiesin Huamanguilla;thel9th, three
graves containing 45 murder victims were found in Las Vegas, at
kilometer25of the Ayacucho-Huantaroad;and the_22nd, three
graves with 10 bodies were found in Neque.
Thegenocidecontinuedin1985,thoughnotwiththe same
intensity. RightupuntilBelaunde left office,common graes
continued to be discovered in Ayacucho: January 11th a grave was
found inPaquec(Huanta)withfourbodies; January 16thfour
graves were uncovered one in Huamanguillawith11bodies,a
second in Qanqana(Huanta) withfive,and in theprovinceof
Huamanga,a third inPava withthreebodiesand afourthin
Pacha with 16. Two graves with 3 bodies were found March 10th
near Huanta. Themassacres continue inthisregion,as these
400
=====第400页=====
9thin ManzanayoqCangallo）theycutthethroatsofeight
anothertiom,oitvieoflo.ul
to spread throughout the departmentof Huanuco: February 2st,
a grave withfivebodieswasfoundinAltoPacae;the22nd they
killed peasants in La Soledad; anothergrave with seven dead was
found the28thin Aucayacu.InMarch,theykilled30people in
Arancay. On June 27th a grave with11bodies wasfound in
Yanajanja
(NuevoProgreso).
Thus, the Action Popular
governmentwhichhadplungedthecountryinto abloodbath
endeditsterminoffice completely soaked in it,covering ex-
presidentBelaundewiththeindelibleshameofgenocide,and
leaving us a valuable lesson: the more thevarious governments,
which byturnheadtheoldstate,talksabout"democray,"
1
"humanrights"and "peace"more hunger,poverty,repression,
terror, murderand even genocide theyfuriously unleash against
the Peruvian people.
How hasthe counterrevolutionary war gone since Garcia's
governmenttookoffice,especially regardingthequestionswe
have beenreferring to?In political-military zone numberfive,a
principal center of operation in the department of Ayacucho, once
again on August 2nd they began an operation that razed villages
Huambalpa, Carhuanca, Vilcashuaman,Vischongo and Cangallo;
the 10th they razed Huamanmarca and murdered seven peasants.
The genocideat Aqomarca August14thshookallof Peru:in a
place calledLlocllapampaeightgraves were found,containinga
totalof 69 corpses;in addition two people were murdered in
Piteq,one in Yuraqera,one in Mayopampa, two in Ahuacpampa
and threeinQeuqeqata,allsavagelykilledbytheArmy,which
would surround thevillage,round up the peasants,separate the
men fci
401
=====第401页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
themoff,theovomofthbodiewithIeburtht
andburytheuidentifiblbitandceofbodiesipts.In
the midstofallthefanfareand demagogicblusterof Garciaabout
"revolution,'
national,
democratic
1
and
people's state,"
"democracy,'
for
human
1
11
'respect
rights,
'not
answering
barbarism with barbarism,
1
1
reconciliation,
"fightingwhile
upholding the law"andother cheap phrases thrown to the wind
by the APRA government,the exposureof Aqomarca tore apart
their lies and revealed their double-dealing, shattered ilusions and
once again unmasked their opportunism.
Then camea greathustleandbustleinparliament,a farceof
and so-called
gestures
presidential
while the
measures,
'opposition"renttheirclothesand madeeasy deals,andthe
T
peoplerepudiatedand condemnedall thisandadvancedfurther
toward becomingclearabout thehighestruling circles.Almost a
year has gone by since then. Commands have beenreshuffed;
Lieutenants
Hurtado, Paz and Rondon have been held
responsible; the various commissions have presented their reports,
etc.,etc. Today Hurtado has been given a promotion and sent
abroadforfurther training, in the UnitedStates or somewhere
under U.S. control;Paz alsogota promotionand Riverawill
undoubtedly get one in 1987. What happened to the investigation,
the indictments the Army was preparing? Buried under silence.
The sentenceof_10dayshardlaborthemilitaryinvestigators
proposedforLieutenant Hurtado,has it been carried out? How
about justice? Just as in the case of Pucayacu, only the triumphant
revolution will bring about justice.
But
this  smokescreen  of
"fighting
while
upholding
the
Constitutionandthelaw" continued. BetweenAugust_28thand
September4th60peasants were murdered in Huamblain
application of the principle
came to light. The"democratic"
402
=====第402页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE'S WAR, SERVING THE WorLD REVOUTION
"fightinwupolteCitdtlaw"wton.
ThevillageofAqomarca,Umaru,Incaraqay,Patin,Tankiwa,
Cochapata,Mayopambaand Manallasaqwere razed between the
first andthe25thofSeptember.Anew genocidetookplace
September2rdand3rd:UmaruandBellavista,66dead,29
murderedinBllavistaonthe2nd.Immediatelyafterwards,on
the 3rd, 37 peasants wiped out, among them 11 children less than
nine yearsold.September13ththeykilledseveeyewitnessesto
the Llocllapampa massacre,includinga childof nine. The_28th
four graves were found with more than 80 bodies, in Totora, near
Sachabamba.
In the departmentof Huanuco,four graves with14 bodies were
found in Huancar (province of Ambo), and in the department of
San Martin a grave with the bodies of seven murdered people was
uncovered in Situyi (province of Mariscal Cáceres).
On October 4th Peruvian society was once again shaken by
another genocide, this time in the very capital of the Republic, in
Lurigancho prison where 30 prisoners of war were murdered and
23 wounded, before the eyes ofseven thousand prisoners.
Followinga preestablishedplan meanttobreakthewillof the
prisonersof warand deala blow to therevolution,the Llapan
Atic, the Republican Guard's anti subversive troops, armed to the
teeth,were unleashedagainstthe BritishPavilion wherethose
convictedof"terrorism" werebeingheld. Wheninsteadof
surrender they were met with heroic resistance, they used
dynamite and explosive charges to open a breach in the walls,
then threw dynamite into the cellblock,alongwithteargas and
incendiary bombs. Afterthe assault,
t,theyfnishedoffthe
wounded,burnedaliveand brutallybeatthesurvivorsandially
burned down the cellblock to hide the evidence oftheir
monstrous criminal genocide.Butdespitetheircynicalefforso
403
=====第403页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP - VOLUME1(198-1987)
further unmasking the APRA governmentand its undeniable guilt
for this new, cold-blooded barbarism.
November 2nd in Uchuyunga, in n the province of La Mar in the
department of Ayacucho, they killed 19 peasants; at the end of the
year, peasants in San Martinexposed the massacres in Aucayac,
Campo Grande,Venenillo,Madre Mia andPalo de Acero. As
1986 began,this situation continued,asthefollowingfactsare
enough to show: January 21st in
Churrupampa,nearHuanta,
seven bodies werefound;in
Uchiza,Huanuco department,30
people wereldinbuay;andinthdemtfPascoi
thehamlets"OchodeDiciembre"and"Independencia"five
peasants wereshotdeadontheirowndoorstepsinretaliation fr
guerrillaraid.In short, Garcia's APRA
a
government is
continuing thesamegenocidetheBlaundegovernmentsartd.
The Disappeared.
Thepolicyofmakingpeople"disappear"hasbeenpartofthe
regime's genocide since the Armed Forces came in; it intensified
greatly at the beginning of 1984 and has continued through today.
Now,especially in the lastfew months, once again there have
been more and more reportsof people turning it up "mising."
I
The"missing" amount to thousands of people but theexposures
and protests bounce up against the official silence which denies or
ignoresthesuitbroughtagainstitandstonewalleveryting
This perverse policy,long practiced byr
reaction, has become
especiallyintensifiedlately.Itsimmediateprecedent was the
policyof"disappearances"carriedoutbythe1970s
sinister
Argentinemilitarygovernmentthatbatheditspeopleinblood
and
ignominiously
made tens of  thousands
even
more
"disappear."Asimilarpolicyisbeingcarriedoutherealso
404
=====第404页=====
 PEOPLE'S WAR, SERViNG THE WORLD REVOLUTION
DEVELOP THE
oftherestrictionsand persecutionstheirfamiliesface,butwho
the bulk of the thousands neverfound.
undoubtedly makeup
They lie wrapped in theshadowof as yetundiscoveredgravesor
the many concentration camps,
in clandestine cemeterie
together witthemaiohexemplaanddahers
of the peopleoftassanofthevolutioTheethousands
of"missing'
upyet anotherhistorically
implacable
makes
accusation thatwill dig the ground outfrom
under the
reactionary Armed Forces and,along with the devastating blows
of the armed people, bring about their destruction and so prepare
theendof thottorderofthePruviantatetheyhold u.
What has been the result of this genocide?The evil and shameful
murder of 8,700Peruvians, 8,700sons and daughters of the
people,including 4700 murderedfromamong the masses,the
poorest and most exploited,especiallyfrom among the peasants as
well as from the neighborhoods and shantytowns of the cities, and
4,000 disappeared, of the same classes, flesh of the same flesh. The
policy of genocide carried out by the Armed Forces has cost the
people,theproletariat,thepeasantryandthepetitebourgeoisie
8,700 of its children, who have fallen murdered, and not at all in
the wayclaimedbyphonyandinconsistentrevolutionaries,or
those opportunists who pretendto berevolutionaries while
preaching the evolution of the existing social order, or those hacks
who openly or secretly scribble in defenseof the system, or those
such as the reaction and itsflunkies who claim that the genocide
is a resultof the People's War. No! The genocide is clearly and
specifically a policy approved and
dordered by thegovernmentof
thePeruvianstate,proposedandimplementedbythe Armed
Forces with the help of the police,an evil and barbarous practice
begunin1983,cruellyandbloodilyintensifiedin1,984and
systematll
and onceagain intensifiedby Garcia andhisreactionary APRA
405
=====第405页=====
COLLECTED WORKSOFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-1987)
But whathasbeethepurposeofthisgenocide?Itis to try to
containthePopl'sWar,whichbythendof1982hadbegunto
establish the new political power in theformof People's
Committeestosmashtheguerrllawar,toseparatethe masses
from therevolutionary war,to destroythenew political power
and hold back itsdevelopment, to hold back the development of
the People's War; to achieve the reactionary politicalobjectives of
the ArmedForces,the Army,NavyandAirForce,institutions
which togetherand through a divisionof genocidal labor among
them killed1,767 sonsand daughtersof the people in1983 and
"disappeared"730,untilthat yearthere wasonly14losses among
the massesandno"missing,"atotalof2497peopleamong the
masses murderedin1983. Howaboutin1984? The spiraling
politicalgenocideagainstthemassereached252deadand
2,881disappeared;a totalof5403sonsand daughtersofthe
masses murdered,thehihest peakof the genocide perpuae so
far by the Armed Forces.
Did they succeed in theirobjectiveof smashing the People's War
of putting an end to it? No, because the People's War,
corresponding its class character, has shown its superiority; it has
provenitself
capable
of confronting  persistent  cruelviolent
offensives and genocideof tremendous proportion, and is more
tempered, of continuing to develop and grow. In these hard times
of forging our steeled heroism the turbulent trumpets of the new
state are beginning tobe born, pregnant with thefuture,the
masses are showing themselvesready and willing to change our
society and they are doing it; the Party,the Communist Partyof
Peru, leading the People's War, is fully demonstrating that is the
vanguardoftheproletariatandthatitadheresstrictlyto
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism and  its  accurate  and
correct
applicationtothspecificconceteconditionof thedemocratic
406
=====第406页=====
DEVELOP THE PEoPLe's WAR, SERViNG THe WoRLD RevOUtiON
be marching unwaveringly toward the foundationof the People's
RepublicofPeru,openingthedoorto socialismand thefinal
goal.
The People's War hasnot been smashed,stoppedorheldback;
rather,as theregimeschieftainshavebeenforced toadmit even
whilecontinuallytryingto minimize it,andastheirearsfntic
maneuvers and measures especially demonstrate, the People's War
is expanding, developing,delivering resounding blows. Thus,the
genocidltetlolicy
ofusing
against  masses
failed andastheir whole
masses
reactionary strategy isfailing.Whathascomeofusing masses
against masseofteociofthtioarrategt
has once again covered the Armed Forcesof the Peruvian state
with the blood of the people, to an extent never before known in
the historyof theRepublic;the genocide theyhaveperpetrated
willturn more and more
against them and spur on  the
concentratedclasshatred withwhichtheircriminal barbarity has
filled the masses.
Their new heights of infamy havebeenregistered forever in the
memories of countless masses who will mete out crushing
punishment to those who are politically and militarily responsible,
nomatter howlong it may take. Thisblood which hasben
cynically and perversely spilt today has become a thundering and
powerfulpublicaccusation againstthePeruvian state andits
Armed Forces and police,its political leadersand chieftainsof
crimes against humanity,and it will more and more become the
unfurled bannerat the centerof therevolutionary storm, waving
and gleaming as the victorious People's War carries outthe
complete and thorough justice denied it today.
What we have seen and experienced in the People's War in Peru
has reaffirmedevenmoredeeplyforustheineluctablelaw
407
=====第407页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
establishedbyChairmanMaoTsetung:"Allreactionariestt
eliminatetherevolutionthrough massslaughter,and they think
the more people theykill the more it will weaken the revolution.
But despitethereaction's subjectivewishes,factsshow that the
more people they kill the stronger the revolution becomes and the
closer the reactionaries come to their doom. This is an ineluctable
law of history."
THE SIXTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE PEOPLE'S WAR.
The applicationofMarxismLeninism-Maoism to the concrete
conditions of Peruvian society leads to the conclusion that
revolutionary violence or violent revolution, the only way to seize
state power and transform the world, musttake the form of
People's War and more specifically a peasant war ledby the
Communist Party of Peru as the representativeof the proletariat,
a war which develops as a single unit waged principally in the
countrysideand complementarilyincities,followingtheroadof
surrounding the cities from the countryside whose essence is the
establishment of base areas, so that the democratic revolution,
culminates intheestablishmentofPeople's Republic, agreat
victory which must befollowedby continuingtherevolution
through socialism and cultural revolutions, under the dictatorship
of the proletariat with thefirm exerciseof itsclassviolence,until
achieving,together withall humanity,glorious communism,the
realm of true freedom. Based on the above, there are four
fundamental questions that arise and must be taken into account:
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism as the ideology of the proletariat; the
Party as the leaderof the revolution,the People's War, which in
our case is specified as a peasant war which follows the road of
surroundingthcitiefromthcoutysideanrevolony
base areas or the New Power. Let us examine the sixth year now
completed on the light of these relevant points.
408
=====第408页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE's WAR, SERViNG THe WORLD REVOLUTION
On Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
Wetaeo
withitsownclasinterestsdifferentfrom and
history,
the proletariatleadinthepeople'softheworldcanattain,
the
communism,
unsurpassable
enew society, without
exploitedorexploiters,withoutoppressedooppressors,without
classes, without a state, without parties, without democacy,
without weaponsand wars,the societyof "greatharmony," the
radical and definitive new society toward which 15 billion years of
matter in motion, that part of eternal matter which we know, and
humanityhaevitablyandistblyadgbulb
propellingtheclassstruggleforwarduntilitreachestheeic
heights of People's War, with gun in the hands of the armed class
and massesof people,and counterrevolutionary war is destroyed
forever, imperialism and reaction are overthrown and swept off
the face of the earth, and in the shadow of the guns of invincible
People's War upon which the dictatorshipof the proletariat rests,
society is transformedinallspheres,destroying andeliminating
all classdifferencesandprivateownershipofthe meansof
production that gives rise to them, ending warforever, and
communism radiates for all humankind.
Since we take the stand of the international proletariat,we based
ourselves inits ideology todayMarxism-Leninism-Maoism, with
Maoism principal asits third stage,the highestpointof the
proletariat'sideologyhasreachedinitshistoricalprocessof
development.It is within this context that we take up the position
and classinterestsofthePeruvianproletariat as part ofthe
international working class, since only onthebasis ofthe
universal doctrineof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism is it possible to
standwiththeproletariatandfghtforitsinterests,hereor
anywhereelse.Thereisonlyoneproletarianideolgy;iis
409
=====第409页=====
E1(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
applicable to thewholeworldand developmnt isa sigle world
through theadvances made by Leninand Chairman Mao Tse-
tung,thebaiutohaalwybetappliatof this
science totheconditionofeachrevolutionconsequentlythe
problem is theapplicationof Marxism-Leninism-Maoism to the
concreteconditionsofthePeruvianrevolution,andspecifically,
theapplicatiooftheuniversallawofviolence,People'sWar,o
the revolutionary war in this country. From thisfusion of
Marxism withour concrete realitythere arises and develops a
Guiding Thought,thatis,heapplicationof Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism to the concrete conditions of the Peruvian revolution. In
short, our starting pointis the outlook oftheinternational
proletariat, Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, and the Guiding Thought
of President Gonzalo. Thesearethebasisofallourpolitial,
theoretical and practical action; withoutthis basis it is not
possible to serve the class firmly and consistently.
Regarding the Party.
First let's look at the need for a party; then later when we take up
its building we'lldealwithits presentrole. Since its very
beginnings Marxism has held that there must be a Party to lead
the struggle toseizestate power;this wasreiterated by Leninism
and emphaticallyreaffirmed by Maoism.Withoutarevolutionary
party of a new type,Marxist-Leninist-Maoist,there can be no
revolution for the proletariat and the people. This is a great truth
that no communist can evade without ceasing to be one,a truth
we Peruvian communists had to confront.The Communist Party
of Peru wasfoundedon October7th,1928on a solid Maxisst-
LeninistbasisbyJoséCarlosMariátegui,whoprovideditwith
basic theses concerningPeruvian society,thelandquestin,
well as
programmaticpointandageneralpoliticllinand
410
=====第410页=====
DEVELOP THE PEoPLE'S WAR, SERVING THE WorLD RevOLUTION
consequentparticulrlines.Butthefounderdiedin1930,les
than two years afterwards;even a first congress remained
pending,sothatthePartdidnothavetimetoconolidaitef
before trendsthathad alreadybeen developingtook a leap,
Mariáteguiandhislinewereopenlyputintoquestion,andthe
line was changed by Ravines. Thusopportunism usurped Party
leadershipandimposeditsauthority inthetwo-line srugle
within the Party with the gravest consequencesfor the class and
the revolution.
This road ledto the parliamentary cretinism manifested in the
1939elections,in theserviceofthe compradorbourgeoise
representedbyPrado.Later,during World WarII,there wasa
phony"foundingcongress"whichadoptedthegeneralpolitical
lineof"nationalunity"
under the guidance ofBrowderite
revisionism, an expression of capitulation to Yankee imperialism's
domination and the domestic rule of the comprador bourgeoisie
and the feudal landlords, under the pretextof thestruggle against
fascism. Subsequently, this
situation ledto the Party's
participation inthe1945elections as partofthe"National
DemocraticFront"withthe APRAparty,withtheexuseof
bringing about a democratic opening; this new electoral adventure
ended whentheballoonthePartyhadbecome blewupafter
Odria's1948coupd'etat.Inthebeginningofthesixtieshe
fractionfoundedby Chairman Gonzalobegan to develop within
the Ayacucho Regional Committee. Byfraction, what is meant is
what Lenin taught:"A section in a party is a groupof like-minded
persons formed for the purpose primarily infl uencing the party in
adefinite direction,forthe purpose of securing acceptancefor
their principles in the party in the purestform. Forthis,real
unanimityofopinionis necessary." Thefractionarose as the
productof thedevelopmentof theclass struggleontheworld
level,
especially the  great  struggle
between Marxism and
revisionism that spread Mao
Tsetung
Thought, as  Chairman
411
=====第411页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Mao's developmentof Marxism-Leninism was known in the mid-
1960s.hiswtiiplnddicoviiete
fraction.
Atthesame timea substantialbasisforit was providedbythe
development ofPeruvian society, the advance ofbureaucrat
capitalism, the sharpening class struggleofthe masses, the
intensificationof political activity and growing propaganda about
armed struggle,and by developments inthe regionitself where
the fraction arose, a region where the decrepitude of semi
feudalism was becoming increasingly stark and where the
peasantry wasbeginning to awakenin a particularlymilitant
fashion reflecting a similarprocesgoing on throughoute
country. WithintheParty atthattimethestrugle
ebetween
Marxism and revisionism deepened.
The fraction headed by the Ayacucho Regional Committee fought
the revisionism of Del Prado and his followers in the IV National
Conference where Del Prado and Company were expelled. From
then onthefaction developedwithinthe Partynationwide. The
developmentof Marxism-Leninism by_Chairman Mao andthe
great lessons and experiencesof the Communist Partyof China
played a vitaland decisive inthisinitial process.Sincethen both
ourinitial commitment to Marxism-Leninism-Maoism andour
application of it to our conditions have developed further.
After the V National Conference in November 1965, in the two-
linestruggle withinthePartythefraction cametofightfor
building thethremagicweaponoftherevolution:thearty,
armed forcesandunitedfront,demandingthatthesetasks ae
fulfilledinthelightofthepoliticallineoftheConferencewhich
had established the building revolutionary armed forces for armed
struggleasthepincipaltask,but in athousand ways the ead
weightofmdptfe
412
=====第412页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE'S WAR, SERVinG THE WORLD REvOLUTION
principlt
thenecessityofanideologicallyunitedandorganizationally
centralizedParty,calledfortheReconstructionof the Party
basedon"theheroicfighter."Thisprocesswascarriedoutin
thre
1. Defining the problem of Reconstruction, guided by the political
strategy of"surrounding the cities from the countryside."
At this point the problem was to build a Party to lead the armed
struggle onthisroad,whichmeantthatthepeasantandland
question acquired tremendous importance and it was vital to put
the Party's centerofgravityinthecountryside.Further,the
decisive questionofideologicalandpoliticallinecenteredon
"basingourselvesonMao Tsetung Thought," as it wassaidin
those days,and on "reclaiming and developing Mariátegui," with
developmentbeing theoutstanding aspectofthis. It was not
enough to reclaim him for twokeyreasons: the development of
Marxism-Leninismby
Chairman
Mao Tsetung,
and the
developmentof bureaucrat capitalism in Peru. This phase took
place during thestruggleagainst Khrushcheviterevisionismand
its manifestations in various spheresof Party lifeand ended with
the
January 1969  VI Conference which
approved"the
Reconstruction of the Party" "on the basisof Party unity around
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought (as was said in those
days now it is Maoism), Mariategui's Thoughtand the general
political line.
1
2. Carrying Out the Reconstruction
This period wasguidedbythe politicalstrategyof"Reconstrct
the Party" in accordance with the Party's basisof unity. October
1968 saw the coup d' etatof Velasco, who tookon the task of
deepeninghedvlopaitlim,ryut
413
=====第413页=====
COLLECTED WORKSOFPCP-VOLUME1(1968-1987)
the corporativizationofPeruviansocietyguidedbyafascist
politicaloutlookand supppressingtherising
gmass movements.
This perioddividesintotwo parts: firstthestruggleagainstright
liquidationism,aormof evisioismwhichsoughttodesry the
Party bycentering itonopen,masses workand pushing it into
legalism；onthestctlypoliticallevelthislneputorward
expropriatingthelandinsteadofconfiscatingitandaboveall
denied the fascist  character of
thegovernment. Whenthese
liquidationists  couldn't  take
overthePatytheyperersely
attemptedtodestroyitandthefractiontookupthe Party's
defense.In February 1970 a split tookplace and thefraction
assumedtheleadershipofthe Party;fromthenonit ledthe
process of Reconstruction.In the second part there was a struggle
against"left"liquidationism,anothervariantof revisionism that
tried to destroy the Party
pyshutting itupbehindfour walls,
denying the importance of peasant work and the possibility of any
mass  work  because, according
to
them, mass work and
organizations are impossible under fascism. They reduced fascism
to simply a question ofviolence,and worse,to an irresistible
violence in the face of which nothing could be done but wait for
better times.They putforward the"relativestabilityofcapitalism"
andconsequentlyofthesocialsystem. Theysaid"thelineis
enough"and that there was no reason to develop Mariategui
further,and called Maoisminto question,braggingabout being
"pure Bolsheviks." This"left"liquidationism was smashed in 1975
at a Central Committee plenum.
During
this peri,oplitl
understanding ofPeruvian
society
deepened, especially
our
understanding of bureaucrat
capitalism, based on  Chairman
nMaoTsetung'sthesis.
This
question is  fundamentalforunderstanding
and leadingt
the
democraticrevolution.Infactthisconceptslammedthedooron
theopportunisttendencytotailafactionofthebigboureoisie
to unite and struggle  with the  national
while
pretending
414
=====第414页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE'S WAR, SERViNG THE WoRLD RevOuTION
bourgeoienupthelaoaativist
plans,"reformsanmanditctiuetobml
usefultoday.Thdolo-ptibulofthartalso
advanced,spilledntheunetandnofMitegui's
thouhtiin
five basic pointstakefomhisworksaswllasthnecessityto
develop it further.The relationship between secret and open work
was delineatedandthe latterwas developedaccording tothe
Leninist criteriaofareasof supportforthe Party's mass work;
thus, mass organizations were created by the Party to develop the
links between the Party and the masses.
3. The Culmination of the Reconstruction
Thisperiodwasguidedbythepoliticalstrategyof"Culminate
and Lay the Basis,"in other words,culminate the reconstruction
andlaythebasisforlaunchingthearmed struggle. Withthe
unfolding ofthe process the Party was approaching
the
conclusion of its Reconstruction and so had to sum up what had
beenachieved,defineandsanctionthegeneralpoliticalline,
continuethebuildingof theParty on a national level withits
centerofgravity in the countryside,definethespecificsofthe
armed struggleand laythe basis to launchit by developing the
workamongthepeasants.Theleftfoughttenaciously toattain
theseobjectives,waging intenseand sharpstruggleagainstright
ism. Thisrightism developedinto a rightopportunistlinethat
firstopposed theCulminationandthenlaunchedan onslaught
againstthegeneralpoliticalline,labelingit"ultraleftist"and
ended up rapidly opposing theinitiationof the armed struggl.
Nevertheless, withfirmness and wisdomtheleft repeatedly
defeated right opportunism,another form of revisionism opposed
in the last instance to revolutionary violence, to armed struggle, o
seize powerfortheproletaaanthepeopleahe
415
=====第415页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
E1(1968-1987)
prolettciioIAih
defeated therightopportunistoppositionto Culminate, with the
approvalofthetollatobulthertudrtheson
"Buildorthpuroolaucithrmsrle"theleft
again resoundinglydefatdtheight inSeptember1978 withthe
approvalofthe"Summation ofthe
eReconstruction, "the
"Mariategui'sgeneral
sanctioning
of
political line  and its
development,
andthedraftingof the"Outlineofthe_Armed
Struggle."ially,tthorouhlyandcompltldefeatedtheight
line atthe May 1979 IX Expanded Central
opportunist
Committee Plenum, when under theslogan "Define and Decide"
the agreement was takento"Iitiatethe ArmedStrugge."
A long chapterof the Party's history had closed and another one
opened: the Reconstruction had been culminated and a new stage
wouldopen,thatof thearmed struggle.Itshould be clearly and
firmly emphasize that during this periodof
eCulmination,
when Chairman Mao died, the Partypledged to the international
proletariatand the revolution that it wouldalways hold high the
bannersof Marx,Leninand Mao,and declaredthat"Tobe a
Marxist today istobeMarxist-Leninist-Mao Tsetung Thought"
(now Marxist-Leninist-Maoist) Thus,whenthe Hua-Deng coup
took place,withthelaterof courseinchargeat theend ofthe
day, the Party condemned it as a counterrevolutionary coup
againstthe dictatorshipofthe proletariatinChina,against the
Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, forthe restoration of
capitalism and against the world revolution.
In sum,then,the Communist Partyof Peru was reconstructed
and became a Party of a new type, Marxist-Leninist-Maoist,and
So once againthere existedtheorganizedvanguardofthe
proletariatcaableofladittotheuoftateowr.In
this
416
=====第416页=====
achievedtheodo,topaiiodofthe
auctioningofthePartyProgrammethegeneralpoliticallineof
the Peruvianrevolutionand thePartystatutswhose norms guide
us today,teolioofiticlutarding
revolutionaryviolence,people's warand theParty,thearmy and
the UnitedFront.Thefollowingdecisionwastaken:"Fore the
First Companyin DeedsLetviolenceflourisconcretizedin
initiating and developingthearmed struggle;let usopen up a new
chapter withleadandoffeourbloodtowriteit,newchapr in
the historyofourParty andpeople,andletusforge the First
Company in deeds!Peru, December3rd,1979." Andthe
Communist PartyofPeru began to lead the people's war going on
today.
On the People's War.
Taking international experienceasitsmagnificentstarting point,
so valuable andrich in positive as well as negative lessons,
principally takingpeople's war as the military theoryof the
proletariat,and taking theconcrete conditionsof the country into
account,theVII_CentralCommittee Plenum sanctionedthe
"Outlineof the Armed Struggle." Inessence thisplanheld that
people's war in Peru must develop as a single revolutionary war in
the countryside and cities, with the countryside the principal
theater of armed actions,following theroad of surrounding the
cities from the countryside. Furthermore,for_social and historic
reasons and especially their impact on military afairs, it took into
account the importanceof the mountains,especially the stretch
that runs from the central to the southern region,as well as that
ofthecapital city.ItalsoanalyzedPeru withinthe contextof
Latin America as a whole, particularly South America,and within
the  context  of  the  international
situation andthe world
revolution. Withthisoutlinein mindthePartypreparedthe
armed struggle dealing with twotypof questions:
417
=====第417页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
1. Questionsof politicalstrategy,whichdefinethecontentand
objectivesof the people's war in the long and shortrun,as well as
its necessary directivesand military plans and thebuildingof the
three instruments the Party, Army and Front and their relation to
the new state power.
2. The launchingofthearmed struggle,whichis a keyand
decisive question, merited the Party
y leadership's very special
hthe"StartingPlan"guidedbythe
attention; it was solved wit
slogan"Launch thearmed struggle!",the concretizationof the
overall politics which were to take militaryform (every plan has
anoverallpolitical linewhichguidesit).Itscontentsincluded,
first,thelaksobdt,wci,tate the
armed struggle, boycott the elections,foment the peasant struggle
for land arms in a hand-and lay thebasisfor newborn things,
especiallypoliticalpower;second,formsofstruggle
guerrilla
fighting,
sabotage,
,armed propagandaandagitation,selective
liquidations;
third,frmofm ltary
organization
armed
detachments,with or without modern arms;fourth,timetable,
starting date and duration ofthe plan, specific simultaneous
actions on specific dates;fifth,theslogans"ArmedStruggle!",
"Workers andPeasants Government!"and "Downwiththe new
reactionary government!"
The first two periodsof the people's warthe periodsof defining
and preparing its beginning were completed. On May17th 1980
not May 18th as the reaction claims to confuse it with the date of
the elections and which others repeat the people's war in Peru
began,enteringitsthirdperiod,thatofactuallybeginningit,
lasting allof1980,through two successfullycompleted campaigns
which laidthebasis to go overto thefourthperiod,"Develop
7th waspoliticlblow,defiantandeachinblow which
and
sickles
418
=====第418页=====
DEVELOP THE
 PEOPLE'S WAR, SERVING THE WORLD REVOLUTION
barrelofu"lially
the poor),tostandup,arms in hand,tolightthebonfireand
shake the Andes,to writeanewhistoryin thefieldsand evry
corner ofour tumultuous geography, to tear down the rotten
wallsoftheoldoppressiveorder,toconquethepeakstosorm
the heavens guns in handand bring abouta new dawn. The
beginning was modest,almost without modernarms;wefought,
advancedandbuiltfrom smalltolarge,theweakinitialfire
became the great turbulent and ragingflames which are now
spreading,throwingof sparksofrevolutionandexplodingthe
people's war forward.
The Peruvian state launched its counterrevolutionary war and its
Armed Forces carried out their infamous genocide and cut down
the livesof the people by the thousands; together with this they
launched their
propaganda,
dreaming of
smashing
the
revolutionary war with ink, paper, liesand tricks. Opportunism
playedits partbysnitching,sendingin"eaders"tostirupthe
against the revolution, propagandizing and agitating
masses
against it and in defenseof bourgeois democracy and the vote in
ofvelvet seatsin parliament. World reaction, the
pursuit
superpowers,especially Yankee imperialism as well asthe social
imperialists, andthe othri
imperialist  powers, gave  eir
immediate support and sent the government their advisors;
among them an outstanding role was played by the Chinese arch
reactionary cliquewhoseblackheads Deng,Li Hsien-nin,et.,
were among the first to stand up as judges to condemn us. As was
to be expected,thereaction opened upitshellsand let loose its
demons plagues and horsemen ofthe apocalypse againstthe
People's
War;soakedin blood,drunk with arrogance,they
bragged of triumphs and victories,crushing defeats,set backs and
retreats,withdrawals,andtheturningbackand defeatofthe
revolution.Butwhatreallyhashappened?Howhasthearmed
419
=====第419页=====
1(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
1
struggle andafterwardsthegenocideunfolded?Whathasreally
been the realityof thelasttwo yearsandof thesixth yearof the
People's War?Thefollowing is the data providedby the Interior
Minister:
1982
1983
1984
1985
Year
1986
1980
1981
891
1123
1760
2050
6758
Actions 219
715
These figuresshow the yearly increaseof our actions,as well as
those of the ArmedForces andtheirpoliceassistants;their
policy's methods and even their genocide have not held back the
growth ofthe armed struggle, atleast asfar as quantityis
concerned, according to the APRA Minister himself. Nevertheless,
the total 6758 is very farfrom correct,firstly becauseof the state's
rather understandable desire to minimize the dimensions of the
people's war,and secondly because they don't take into account
all the variousformsthe revolutionary wartakes,such as armed
propaganda and agitation,for example, nor do they count actions
carriedout in distant andisolated areas. Consider that actions
carried out even in the department of Lima itself aren't reported
for a week,and in general, a coverof silence and lies is used to
maintain the so-calledpublic calm and the prestige of the
repressiveforces. During the six years of People's War 30,000
actions have been carried out inall but twoof the country's 24
departments,leaving outonly Amazonas and Madre de Dios,
while including even the constitutional district of Callao.
These actions developed basically in the Peruvian mountains and
principallycentered in theregionof Ayacucho,Huancavelicaand
Apurimac.Theyalso took place in the coastalregion,in its cities
and especillyinthcouryaial,ndithejuglehighlands
420
=====第420页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOpLE's WAR, SERVInG THE
£WORLDREVOLUTION
Furthermore,
these
whole
country.
military
tthe
throughout
actionshavedevelopeandincreasedinquality:blows waged
against ArmedFoceantguelbases,ambuhesdestruction
of strateta-
level electiveanihilationandintensifiedarmed propaganda and
agitation-allthese show a veryi
important andfar-reaching
qualitativeadvance.Itshouldbe madeclearthat more thahalf of
the six years'actions were carriedoutbetweenJune 184and
today,and a thirdof the1980-1986 totalhave been carried out in
the last year.Thisistheclearand concretereality.Whatarethe
great resultsofthecounterrvolutionary war,its genocideand its
offensivesof '83 -84?Obviously theyfailed;theyhaven'teven
beenable tohold back the developmentof the people's war, let
alone put an end to it.
Table1below,shows thefourformsofstruggle throughwhich
the People's War in Peru is developing. Theprincipalformis
guerrilla warfareand theotherthree are complementary forms of
guerrillaactions:sabotage,selectiveannihilationandarmed
propagandaand agitation.It can beseenthat 45.9%of the total
actions carried out in
nthe countryare guerrillaengagement
(foughtby detachmentsinthe cityandin the countrysideby
platoons and companies),while sabotageonly comprises 11.2%
and selective liquidations scarcely8.2%,and armed propaganda
and agitations reach 34.1%. These figures clear show that guerrilla
warfare isthe essence andheart ofthe People's War inthe
country;itis significantthatthepercentageofguerrilla warfre
reachesitshighestlevel,54.4%, intheregionofAyacuho,
Huancavelica and Apurimac predominantly peasant zones, and
the aim is to develop it in all regions,even, in a specific form, in
Lima.
Clearly,guerllwaareis theverycenterofthearmedactions
and theotheformonlyservetocomplement iand push it
421
=====第421页=====
E1(1968-1987)
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
forward,becauseitistheormthamostdirctlyaimsodesry
the enemy's military organizations,especiallythe Armed Forces.
It is also notable thatarmed propaganda and agitation make up
morethana thirdoftheactions. Thisshows theimportant
People's Wargivestopoliticallyeducatingandmobilizing
gthe
masses;obviouslythisworkis directedprincipallytowardthe
peasantsand in thecitiestowardtheproletariatandalthoughin
the countryside it is mainly carried out in oralform, it is
complemented by campaigns with posters and ilustrated leaflets.
This kind of work is most prominent in new areas, but it is given
greatimportance inal areas,occupying secondplace overall.
Sabotage,foritspart,is inthirdplace,withtheaimof dealing
economic blowstothereaction,especiallyimperialism and the
stateeconomy,bigcapitalandbiglandlords.Inregardtothe
latter,tearingdownthesemifeudalrelationsofproductionis
extremely importanttothe peasantry. Finally,only 8.2%of the
totalis made up ofselective annihilations ofenemies of the
people,
carried out either against those who have been
condemned directly by the masses in people's tribunals or against
incorrigible enemies of therevolution whooweblood debts,
peoplewhohavecarriedoutmassacestotuersnltors,
spies,etc. These actions are carried out withoutany cruelty but
rather as simple and expedient justice, and in the majority of cases
have been approved by the masses. Nevertheless the media has
portrayed them as something monstrous,clumsily distorted them
and exaggerated their number. Clearly,we must underline here
that the monstrosities imputed to the People's War are crimes
cynically carriedout by the Armed Forces themselves who then
attribute them to the revolution.
Inconclusion,thetablemakestheguerrllacharacterofall the
armedrevolutionary actions unmistakably clear and showsthat
guerrillawararetheverysubstanceofPeople'sWariher
422
=====第422页=====
absurd accusationthattriesto pinthelabelof"terrorism"on the
revolutionary wargoingon in this country.Infact,as we have
been sayinsince1980,thosewhorepeatthis liwithoutany
eareonlyparrotingReaganandthe
proof and there is none
tis developing inPeru,while the whole
Peruvian reaction. What
world watches,is simply and completely
ya people'swarand
nobody with an ounce of brains can deny it.
TheregionofAyacucho,Huancavelicaand Apurimac deserves
particularattention.Thisiswherethefractionfirstbecameactive
and in a word was its cradle;furthermore,it is where the first
actions of war tookplace,in Chuschi, and where the heroic
people and aboveallthe poor peasantshave generouslyspilt their
bloodtolighttheflamesofthePeople's Warandkeep tem
burningand ceaselesslyrising. The massesofthisregion have
suffered themostvileandinsatiablegenocide;it is wherethe
reaction has concentratedits ArmedForces and carriedout its
mostelaborateplans;it iswherethereactionarieshave bragged
about their anticipatedtriumph and about  howthe areais
"almost" pacified, only have to eat their words later in the face of
the revolution's new offensives, which never stops them from
once again crowing victory. What is the present situation in this
region and how has the revolutionary war developed there in the
last two years?
Tables 2 and 3 below show that in the last two years 63.4% of the
total actions in the country were carried out in Ayacucho,
Huancavelica and Apurimac, and that furthermore 75.1 % of the
guerrilla actions,43.3% of thesabotage,74.0%of the selective
annihilations and 52.0%of the armed propaganda and agitation
were carriedout in thisregion. So how can it be said that a
slackening of the People's War as taken place there?There is no
whatsoever except the subjective and ever-changing
basis
423
=====第423页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
even
Joint Commandortheolitica-Military Command,despitee
fact that theregion has been under a stateof emergency
continuously since March1982and sporadicallybefore that
duringthepolioprationaeoutsincethbeinningof
1981.Clear and concrete factsshow that thisregion continues to
bethemainbattlefieldbetweenthearmedrevolutionandthe
armed counter-revolution; while the reactionaries dream of
sweeping away thepeople's war itresistsallassaults and
continues to be like a thunderstorm whose centeris Ayacucho.
Almost sincethebeginningof armedaction,more persistently
since the Armed Forces came inand usually in parallel with the
offensives and campaigns, coffeehouse strategists,
reaction's
scribblers,
"Senderologists"
opportunists,
and
mistaken
−
or
vacillating revolutionaries have advisedor pontificated upon the
impossibilityofkeepingthepeople'swa going in therionof
Ayacucho, Huancavelica and Apurimac,saying that we should
abandon theregion and retreat to other areas, in order,as they
sometimes said,to "preserve"thearmed struggle andlaunch it
again under new and better conditions. We should point out that
in general these are the same people who have fought against the
People's War eitheropenly or covertly in the name of "widening
the democratic space" or simply of "defending democracy.
1
We are convinced of the great truth of what Chairman Mao said
about how an area should not be abandoned until it has
repeatedly proved impossible to defend; since the mostferocious
genocide in the history of the Republic has been met head-on and
overcome in this region for several years now,what else needs to
be said? Who would the recommendedretreat have benefited?
Simplyand purelythecounterrevolution; it wouldhave beena
424
=====第424页=====
defiantly
and
proudlyin
develop
Ayacucho,
continues to
firmly
linkedtothe
Huancavelica and Apurimac,
masses,
brimming withheroism,dailywriting new pages in thearmed
revolution which istransforming Peruvian society,andwhich
precisely in recent monthshave beenunleashing
gdevastating
blows evenwithinthecityof Ayacuchoitself,blowing
the
gup
phony showcaseof eace in thecountrys mostmilitarized city, as
was donefor example with the car-bombs in the Republican
Guard barracks and morerecentlyintheCivil Guard'sIX
Command headquarters on theoccasion of the sixth anniversary
of the people's war,ablastwhichshookthecityand threwallthe
repressive Armed Forcesand policeinto confusionand virtual
panic.In conclusion,you can'thidethesun withyourfinger:
Ayacucho, Huancavelica and Apurimac continue to be the great
bonfireof the people's warand the mostdefiantrevolutionary
challenge.These figures show the yearly increase of our actions, as
well as those of the Armed Forces and their police assistants; their
policy's methods and even their genocide have not held back the
growth ofthe armed struggle, atleast as far as quantity is
concerned, according to the APRA Minister himself. Nevertheless,
the total 6758 is very far from correct,firstly because of the state's
rather understandable desire to minimize the dimensions of the
people's war,and secondly because they don't take into account
all the various forms the revolutionary war takes,such as armed
propaganda and agitation, for example, nor do they count actions
carried out in distant andisolated areas. Considerthat actions
carried outeven in the departmentof Lima itself aren't reported
for a week,and in general, a coverof silence and lies is used to
maintain the so-calledpublic calm andthe prestige ofthe
repressiveforces. During the six yearsof People's War_30,000
actions havebeen carriedout inall but twoof thecountry's 24
departments,leaving outonly Amazonas and Madre de Dios,
while including even the constitutional district of Callao.
425
=====第425页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP- VOLUME1(1968-1987)
Theseactions developed basically in the Peruvian mountains and
principallycentered intheregionof Ayacucho,Huancavelicaand
Apurimac.Theyalotookplaceinthecoastalreion,initscities
and especially in thecountry's capital,andin the junglehighlands
andtheimportantcitiesthere;sotherevolutionisf
fighting
throughoutthe  whole  country. Furthermore, these
military
actions have developedandincreasedin quality: blows waged
against Armed Forces anti guerrilla bases,ambushes,destruction
of strategic hamlets, land invasions,devastating sabotage,higher-
level elective annihilations and intensifiedarmed propaganda and
agitation-allthese show a veryimportant andfar-reaching
qualitative advance.It shouldbe madeclearthat more than half of
the six years'actions were carriedout betweenJune 1984 and
today, and a thirdof the1980-1986 total have been carried out in
the lastyear.Thisistheclearandconcretereality.Whatarethe
great resultsof the counterrevolutionary war,its genocide and its
offensivesof '83 -84?Obviously theyfailed;theyhaven'teven
beenable to hold back the developmentof the people's war, let
alone put an end to it.
Table 1 below,shows thefourformsof struggle through which
the People's WarinPeru is developing. The principalformis
guerrilla warfare and the other three are complementary forms of
guerrilla actions: sabotage,selective annihilations and armed
propaganda and agitation.It can beseen that 45.9%of the total
actions carried out in
the country areguerrillaengagement
(foughtby detachments inthecityandin the countryside by
platoonsand companies),while sabotage only comprises_11.2%
and selectiveliquidation scarcely8.2%,and armed propagada
andagitatich.1%Teueclowtuerrila
warfare is theessenceandheartofthePeople'sWarinthe
426
=====第426页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE's WaR, SERVING THe WORLD REvOLutiON
theaim istodevlopitiallegionsveniaspeciirmin
Lima.
Clearly,guerrllawarfareistheverycenteroftharmedactions
and the otherformsonly serve to complement it and push it
forward,becausititheormthamostdirctaimsto destroy
the enemy's military organizations,especially the Armed Forces.
It is also notable that armed propaganda and agitation make up
more than a thirdof the actions. This shows theimportant
People's Wargivestopoliticallyeducatingandmobilizingthe
masses;obviouslythis work is directed principallytoward the
peasantsandinthcitietowardthproletaiatandalthouh n
the countrysideit is mainly carriedoutin oralform, it is
complemented by campaigns with postersand illustrated leaflets.
This kind of work is most prominent in new areas, but it is given
great importance in all areas, occupying second place overall.
Sabotage,forits part,is in thirdplace,withtheaim of dealing
economicblows tothereaction,especiallyimperialismand the
stateeconomy,bigcapitalandbiglandlords.Inregardtothe
latter, tearing down the semifeudalrelations ofproduction is
extremely importanttothepeasantry. Finally,only8.2%ofthe
totalis made up ofselective annihilations of enemies ofthe
people, carried out either a
thosewhohave been
against
condemned directly by the masses in people's tribunals or against
incorrigible enemies oftherevolution who owe blood debts,
people whohave carriedoutmassacres,torturersinfiltrators,
spies,etc. Theseactionsare carriedoutwithoutanycruelty but
rather as simple and expedient justice, and in the majority of cases
have been approved by the masses. Nevertheless the media has
portrayed them as something monstrous,clumsily distorted them
and exaggerated their number. Clearly,we must underline here
that the monstrosities imputed to the People's War are crimes
cynically carriedoutby the Armed Forces themselveswho then
attribute them to the revolution.
427
=====第427页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
Inconclusion,thetablemakestheguerrillacharacterofallthe
armedrevolutionary actions unmistakably clear and shows that
guerrillawarfare,theverysubstanceofPeople's War,istheir
principalaspecandessence;thuitcompletelydisprovesthe
absurd accusation that tries to pin the labelof"terrorism"on the
revolutionary war going on in this country.Infact,as we have
been saying since 1980,those whorepeatthis lie without any
proofand there is none
eareonlyparrotingReaganandthe
Peruvian reaction. What is developing in Peru,while the whole
world watches, is simpl
lyand completely apeople's warand
nobody with an ounce of brains can deny it.
Theregionof Ayacucho, Huancavelica and Apurimac deserves
particularattention.Thisis where thefractionfirst becameactive
and in a word was its cradle;furthermore,it is where thefirst
actions of war tookplace,in_ Chuschi, andwhere the heroic
people and aboveall the poor peasants have generously spilt their
blood tolighttheflamesofthePeople's Warandkeep thm
burningand ceaselesslyrising. The massesofthisregion have
sufferedthe most vile and insatiable
genocide; it is wherethe
reaction has concentratedits Armed Forces and carriedout its
most elaborateplans; it is where thereactionarieshave bragged
about their anticipatedtriumphandabouthowthe areais
"almost"pacified,onlyhavetoatthewordslatrithefaceof
the revolution's new offensives, which never stops themfrom
once again crowing victory. What is the present situation in this
region and how has the revolutionary war developed there in the
last two years?
Tables 2 and 3 below show that in the last two years 63.4% of the
total actions in the country were carriedout in Ayacucho,
Huancavelicaand Apurimac, and thatfurthermore 75.1% of the
guerrllactions43.3%ofthesabotage74.0%oftheselective
428
=====第428页=====
DEVELOP THE PEopLE's WAR, sERvinG THe WOrLD RevOLUTION
annihilation2%ofthrmeproaanantation
were carriedoutinthisregion. Sohow can itbesaid thata
slackeningof thePople's War as takeplacethere?Theeisno
basis  whatsoever except
the
subjective and
ever-changing
statementsof theauhoitieandmilitarchiefwhohaveevr
evenit
Joint Command nor thePolitical-Military Command, despitethe
fact that theregion has been under a state ofemergency
continuously since March1982andsporadicallybefore that
during the policeoperations carriedout sincethebeginningof
1981.Clearandconcrete factsshow thatthisregion continues to
bethemainbattlefieldbetweenthearmedrevolutionandthe
armed counter-revolution; while the reactionaries dream of
sweepingawaythepeople's war itresistsallassaultsand
continues to be like a thunderstorm whose center is Ayacucho.
Almost sincethebeginningofarmed action,more persistenly
since the Armed Forces came in and usually in parallel with the
offensives and campaigns, coffeehouse stratgists,
reaction's
scribblers,
opportunists,
"Senderologists" and mistaken
or
vacillating revolutionarieshave advised or pontificated upon the
impossibilityofkeeping the people's war going in the regionof
Ayacucho, Huancavelica and Apurimac,saying thatwe should
abandon theregion and retreat to other areas,in order,as they
sometimessaid,to"preserve"thearmed struggleand launch it
again under new and better conditions. We should point out that
in general these are the same people who have fought against the
People's War eitheropenly or covertly in the name of "widening
the democratic space" or simply of "defending democracy.
1
We are convinced of the great truth of what Chairman Mao said
about how an area should notbe abandoneduntil it has
repeatedlypovedimpssibtodeend;ithmotious
overcomeintheonorealaowwhateeto
429
=====第429页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
besaid? Who wouldtherecommendedretreathave benefitd
Simplyandpurelythecounterrevolution;it wouldhave beena
great favor to theenemytodismantleand disolvethebestad
most provenbastionsof thepeople's war. But irrefutablefacs
prove thatwhatvemayb saidaganthepeople's war,t
develop defiantly
and
continues to
proudlyinAyacucho,
Huancavelica andApurimac,
firmly
linked tothe masses,
brimming withheroism,daily writing new pages in thearmed
revolutionwhichistransformingPeruvian society,ad which
precisely inrecentmonthshavebeenunleashing devastating
blows evenwiththcityofAyacuchotselfblowinuthe
phony showcaseof peace in the country's most militarized city, as
was donefor example with the car-bombs in the Republican
Guard barracksand morerecentlyintheCivilGuard'sIX
Command headquarters on the occasion of the sixthanniversary
ofthe people's war, ablast whichshook thecityand threwall the
repressive Armed Forces and police into confusion and virtual
panic. In conclusion,you can't hide the sun with your finer:
Ayacucho,Huancavelica and Apurimac continue to be the great
bonfireof thepeople's warand the mostdefiantrevolutionary
challenge.
430
=====第430页=====
Table 1: The Great Leap, Forms of Struggle and Zones
Forms of Struggle of People's
Ayacucho, Huancavelica
Central, North, South
Metropolitan
Countrywide (%)
Other (%)
and Apurimac
(%)
and Huallaga (%)
Lima (%)
War
Guerrilla
45.9
54.4
36.0
12.0
16.8
Warfare
Sabotage
Economic Targets
11.8
8.0
18.6
to
23.7
26.9
Selective
Annihilations
8.2
9.6
9.2
3.8
1.7
Armed Propaganda and
34.1
28.0
36.2
60.1
54.6
Agitation
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Table 2. Distribution of Actions by Region (June 1984-June 1986)
Total Actions
100.%
Ayacucho, Huancavelica and Apurimac
63.4 %
Other Regions
28.2%
Metropolitan Lima
8.4%
Table 3. Forms of Struggle and % by Regions (June 184-June 1986)
Ayacucho,
Forms of Struggle
Countrywide (%)
Huancavelica
Other Regions (%)
Metropolitan Lima (%)
and Apurimac
(%）
Guerrilla
Warfare
100
75.1
22.6
2.3
Sabotage
100
43.3
39.7
17.0
Selective
Annihilation
100
74.0
22.1
3.9
Armed
Propaganda and
100
52.0
33.0
15.0
Agitation
5
=====第431页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
As can be seen in these three tablesthe armed revolution carried
outonly8.4%ofitstotalactionsinMetropolitanLimawhile
carrying out 17% of all sabotage
eand15% ofthe armed
propagandaanditatiothere.Thesedatadisovethsocalled
"retreat"orconcentrationoftherevolutioninLimclaimed
the reactionary press,military chiefs and government authorities,
who seek in this way to give some basis to their claims that the
revolution is suffering hard blows in the Ayacucho region, on the
one hand,and on theother to give some explanationfor the
resoundingactions whichhaveshakenthecapital in the last two
years. An analysisof TableIshows that duringthetwo years
studied 60% of the work in Lima was directed at armed
propagandaand agitation,23.7%at sabotage andonly 3.8% at
selective annihilations. Thus we can seefrom the percentagesof
the forms of people's war in Lima and their proportions in
relation to the restof the country that the endless clichés about
the revolution's retreatare baselessfabrications. The point is that
because of conditions in the capitalactionsthere have big
repercussions the large-scale economic concentrations make large-
scale sabotage possible,such as the Bayer factory or the Hogar
department store;thebig central state institutions there can be
sabotaged,such as the blows dealt to the Government Palace and
the Joint Command;foreignbigshotsvisitthere,so there are
occasions for big blackouts such as the one that greeted the Pope;
obviouslythe centralauthorities are locatedthere,so thereare
opportunitiesfor selective annihilation such as that of Rear
Admiral
Ponce Canessa.
Furthermore, the repercussions
immediately sharpen the contradictions among thereaction the
case of this same Rear Admiral is an example while actions there
are more dificult to hush up due to the concentration of media
and the presenceof international news agenciesandall kinds of
foreignrepesntaties.Thus,thecapitalcannotbneglectedin
people's war,allthemoreif wekeepinmind some intrnational
432
=====第432页=====
experienceti;wed work
increasinglblofwofblownnlt,wih
of workers and theneighborhoodsandshantytowns. Whenall
positiveforcearebroughtintoplay,itis thesecondtions,and
not any so calledretreatofthe workfromotherareas,which
make it possible to wage revolutionary war inthecapital as well
and to raise it to a higher level.
Ambit and expansion. With theslogan"Stoke the bonfire,spread
the flames, unleashes the class struggleof the masses especially in
its armed form and let the repression spur us on," the spread of
the People's War was taken up withthe aimofdrawinga
compass of actionextendingfrom the departmentof Cajamarca
on the border with Ecuador in the northwest down to the
department of Puno on the border with Bolivia in Peru's
southeast,throughout the mountains that are the historic axis of
Peruvian society and its most backward and poor area, in order to
convert this ambit into a great theatre of revolutionary war and
advance this war. Achieving this scope was an important part of
the"GreatLeapPlan"and its concretisation. As canbeseenin
Table 2, 28.2%of the armed actions were carried out in "Other
Regions," that is, outside ofthe regions ofAyacucho-
Huancavelica-Apurimac and Metro Lima, as was 26.2% the
guerrilla warfare,39.7%of the sabotage,22.1%of the selective
annihilation and 33% of the armed propaganda and agitation. In
this way the people's warisfirmly advancing in the country's
central region,vital to the wholeeconomy becauseof its mining,
agricultural products and communication and a transportation
trunk linesandbecauseitisattheheartofthestatesgeopolitical
plans.Intheamwathevolutowiidladvancing
the HuallgaRivbainBotrlarandriceo with
433
=====第433页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP
VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
potential
and
important
economic
a
growing
population,
especiallytheNorth.ThePeople'sWar is alsospreading inthe
an
extremelypoor area,especiallyinhighlyexplosivePuno.This as
come to worry the present government greatly because it is
exactly in the area where theyplan to build their
r"showcaseof
development"  that  the revolution is
hitting
them
and
undermining their plans. Our work there is not something new or
only recently taken up; it is asold as the people's war itself since
from the period of preparing the war this work was conceived and
organized according to a national plan which established regions
classified according to theirimportance,givingeachone its due
attention according to specific conditions; of course these regions
have developed unevenly. Thus the war was not conceived in
terms of one single region but in termsof simultaneous though
development in several regions, with one ofthem
uneven
principal(whichonethat iscouldchange according to necesity,
allwithintheframeworkofastrategicallycentralizedand
tactically decentralized plan.
The undertaking of the work in each region and its impact can be
judged by the following: in July1984, in the Huallaga River Basin,
the department of Huanuco and Mariscal Caceres province in the
department ofSan Martin were declared under a state of
emergencyandplacedunderthe controlof Political Military
Command Number 7. This situation has more or less continued
until today.In the central region in Novemberof that same year a
state ofemergency
declaredin the province of Alcides
was
Carrion
in
Pasco
department,  under the command
just
mentioned, andthislater spread totheimportant mining
provinceofPasco.Inthe Northarmedactions haverocked the
departmentsof Cajamarca, Ancash and especially La Libertad; the
434
=====第434页=====
PEOPLE's WAR, SERViNG THE WORLD REvOLUTION
DEVELOP THE
Armyheadquartered in CommandNumber7haverepliedby
be placed undera stateof emergency and thatthe Armed Forces
come in fully.IntheSouthaboveallinPunowhichasben
thrown into anuproar,policeoutpostshave been assaulted,as
happened for instanceat San Anton, towns suchas San Jose and
Chupa havebeen seized,SAIS(large state-linkedfarms trans)
have been sabotaged and burned down, and 10,000 peasants have
been mobilizedin armedlandinvasions aimedatthese SAIS
which control immense extensionsof land. This has led the police
forces to declare "red zones"in the provinces ofSan Roman,
Azangaro and Melgar; reactionary clamor has mounted in favor o
the proclamation of a state an emergency and the intervention of
the Armed Forces. Poverty,natural calamities and armed action
are combining to make Puno an extremely explosive volcano.
To the preceding,we wouldadd thatsuccessiveguerrillaactions
hapenetrateddeeplyintothe departmentof _Apurimac,tothe
very doorstep of its capital,Abancay. With this, the basic task of
extending our scope throughout the central mountains has been
completed. Today,the People's War is spreadng
practically
extending
throughtheSierras northwardto Cajamarca and
southward to Puno,from one border to theother,from Ecuador
toBolivia.Thisgratgoal waachievedthroughtenacity,striving
andblood;it has opened up new possibilitiesfor the ongoing
Peruvian revolution. Butalthough this would be sufficient, there
is more:fightingnotonly in theSierrasbutalso inthe ugle
highlands,in
twokeyplaces,in
Apurimac atthe strategic
convergenceof
the departmentsof Cuzco,Apurimac, Ayacucho
and Junin,and in the Huallaga River area,a richregionwhere
imperialism and the state plan giant enterprises. Furthermore, the
struggleisunfoldingontheCoast,especiallyinitscentraland
northern regions, and, as we've emphasized, in Metropolitan Lima
itseltci
435
=====第435页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
andinitstremendouconcentationof people,withthemajority
of the Peruvianproletariat as wellas enorrnous masses of the
dshantytowns. Insynthesis,the
poor inits neighborhoods
People's Warhas notonlywonthisexpansionthroughout the
mountainambit;itaithirras,thejuglesandthe
cast, u
the future.
To complete this picture let's look at some outstanding actions. In
the departmentofAyacucho, blows dealt againstthe Armed
Forces anti gurrillbasestherear7intheeion,accordingto
a recent statement by the Ministerof War), in San Jos, de Seque
and Aqomarca for example,hitting the foundationof the APRA
government's pilotprojectfortheregionafterthe genocide of
Aqomarca; attack against 14 strategic hamlets forced groupings of
peasants carriedout bythe present governmentafter th farce of
the so-called"surrender ofSenderistas" atLlochegua whose
destruction means liberating the masses from reactionary, military
control;ambushes carried out againstthe Army,Marines and
police,in SanPedro,Enimontandelsewhere;engagementand
repeated
engagements
mocking the ArmedForces'
even
encirclement,wiping out and wounding soldiers;sabotage of the
setting
ofthemicroregions(governmentlocaleconomic
up
development projects trans.) which are to serve as the basis for
corporativisation; the blowing up of 27 high-tension towers of the
new Corbiza-Ayacuchoelectrical network, sabotaged even before
itsofficial inauguration;car-bombattacksagainst theRepublican
Guard and even the IX Civil Guard Command Headquarters in
the cityof_Ayacuchoitselfas we'vealready mentioned.In
Huancavelica,theblowing upof_sixbridges and35electrical
towers of the Mantaro power lines,the main power network in
Peru; the razing ofthe Cinto andVichincha agricultural
enterprises,whose land wasseiedandlivstockedistributed.In
Apurimac,anew upsugeof armeactions in theeprmnt,
436
=====第436页=====
DEVELOP THE PeopLeE's WaR, SERvinG THE WoRLD REvOLUTION
including even Abancay, the capital city, where the Matara power
plant was sabotaged, as was the plantin Chincheros,and attacks
on police outposts.
InPeru's central region, the  attacks
spread and escalated;
ambushes suchas the one in Michivilicaagainstthe Republican
Guard;sabotage oftheCentromin(state mines trans.) power
substation and its steam-shovels, paralyzing the area's only open-
pit mines; sabotage of the SAIS Tupac Amaru; blowing up of the
railroad bridge which paralyzed the Huancayo train for months
and hindered the shipmentof mineralsfrom Huancavelicaand
Cobriza; sabotage and harassment in Huancayo with exposure of
andbattlesfoughtagainsttheII_Rimancuy.Inthe northern
region, landinvasions undertheslogan"Seizetheland!"
mobilized 160,000 peasants and led to the confiscation of 320,000
hectaresof land,mainly pastureland,and12,000headof cattle,
mostlyfirstclass, whichwere redistributed tothe peasants;
sabotageofthe"Norperu,"the country'sonlyoilpipeline;
sabotageintheAPRA'sheartland, Trujillo,duringthe APRA's
national birthday celebrations presided over by Garcia personally,
right inthe mainplazaof APRA's "capital."IntheSouth and
especially in the convulsed department of Puno,the previously
mentioned actions aimed at solving the land problem, the motive
force ofthe class struggle inthe countryside.Inthe Huallaga
River region,theassaulton the policeoutpostat Aucayacu; the
attackagainstthevigilantebandsatAguaBlanca;razingofthe
big
tea plantation; ambushof
theRepublican Guard atLa
Muyuna; engagement withtheUMOPAR(theCivilGuard's
Mobile Rural Patrol Unit)at Alto Morona and firefight with a 30-
man Army patrol at Patayrrondos.
In thecityofLima,sabotagofembassiesincludingthebiggest
blow againstaforeignrepresentative sofar,therecent atack
437
=====第437页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME1 (1968-1987)
APRA's localoffices; a car-bombinthemiddleof the Plazade
ArmasinfrontoftheGovernmentPalaceduringthevisitof
ArgentinePresidentAlfonsinand thesubsequent burningofthe
Scala store on the same square, which provoked tremendous
shooting and threw the palace uards into great confusion; the car-
bombingsof thepolice headquarters,the Armed Forces Joint
ommand andtheinternationalairport;theusual totalblackouts
such as on December3rd and during last March and July; fires,
such as the Maruy department store,alsorightonthe Plaza de
Armas,with the result thattheentire capital of the Republic was
put under a stateof emergency and a curfew established under
Armed ForcesauthorityfromlastFebruary tothe prent;
selective annihilations, including
hittingthe  chairmanofthe
National Elections Board during the general elections, and Armed
Forcesand policeofficersand recently a Navy RearAdmiral,as
wellas the APRAorganizationalsecretary,whichsharpenedthe
contradictions within the reactionary camp and gave rise to an
enormous political uproar and thunderous threats; and, June 7th,
Army Day,the ceremonialpledgeofallegiancetotheflag
presided over by Garcia was sabotaged by explosive charges, one
of them only20 metersawayfrom theofficial reviewing stands,
thus demonstrating that despite the state of emergency and major
military and mounted police presence for the preceding 24 hours,
the revolution can hit wherever and whomever necessary.
The struggle of the prisonersof war and those who have come to
their direct support merits special mention. Although these
struggles have been waged for several years now,stubbornly and
heroically going up against and overcoming torture,
abuses,
subhuman conditions,murderplots,repisals,assassinationsad
even genocideturninthereactionarydugeon intoluminous
renchefmuof
last year should be given special emphasis.
438
=====第438页=====
DEVELOP THEPEOPLE's WAR, SERVING THE WORLD REvOLUTION
On July13,1985,theprisonersofwar in thetrenchesat El
Fronton,LuriganchoandCallaobeganaunitedstruggleowin
special prisoner status;in daring warrioractionsthey forced the
Belaunde government tosignan agreement andrecognize them
as such,withthhtthasucstatumlies.Ths
took the government by surpriseand dealt ita sounding defeat,
turning theperiodofthe transferofthe presidency to good
political advantage. The government prepared to get revenge. The
government took charge of carrying this out;it
newAPRA
scarcely
yhad takenoffice when itbegan to repudiate the
agreement.Adifficultandcomplicatedstrugglearose,withthe
governmenttrying to manoeuver anddouble deal;when this
failed it, cooked up andhatchedthe October 4th genocide,
deliberatelyunleashedafew daysbeforetheanniversary of the
Party's founding, seeking to infl ict a moral defeat on the prisoners
of war in the trenches and on the revolution. But the Lurigancho
prisonersof war notonlystood up to the genocidalattack with
heroic daring; atthe costoftheir own blood,theyturnedit
around so it backfiredonthegovernmentitself,and withclass
solidarity,especiallythatof theotherimprisonedfighters,they
celebrated October7th with exultantrevolutionary communist
ardor and exemplary optimism. They continuedtheir struggle,
and onceagain correctly pushingaheadthestruggle,on October
31stforcedthereactionary APRA
government  to sign the
agreementithadrepudiated,onlythistimeit was signedby
higher level authorities. But the struggle did not end and reaction
never  ceases  plotting  and
maneuveringagainst the sons and
daughters of the people. The government proposed the prisoners'
transfer to Canto Grande to further its plan to wipe them out; in
the face ofthesethe prisoners launched a campaign called
"UnmasktheReactionariesandResist,"declaringtheirfirm
resolve tooppose thetransferevenat thecostof anew genocide,
and
powerfully
exposing
the
government.
This struggle
439
=====第439页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OFPCP - VOLUME1(1968-1987)
membersof the prisonersof war and the Civil Guard led to the
killingofoneof therelatives and
dthe woundingof 20others,
forcing theMinisterofJusticetodeclarethat"therewillbeno
transferto Canto Grandebecausethe prison is notortrrorists."
Achapter in the campaignagainstthe new genocideclosed but
the problempersisted:inviolationoftheirpublicpromises,
faithful totheir ownreactionary nature,they began to transfer
new prisoners there,while the press clamorsfor more transfers
and the Navy represses visitors. The struggle continued and new
chapters remained to be written, as we'll see when we examine the
infamous June genocide. With their high morale and proven
combativitythe prisonersof warhave taughtand continueto
teach how revolutionaries can and must turn the prisons into
luminous trenchesof combat. The actions carried out between
June 1984 and June 1986 demonstrate a development not only in
quantity butspeciallyinquality,acrosswidescale;they provide
irrefutable proofofthe development of a realPeople's War
through six years of unyielding battle in the countryside and cities
of Peru, "and let the traitors say what they like."
On Building the New State Power
To complete theanalysisof the People's Warin Peru,we must
take up the question of the new state power,the new state,the
buildingofbaseareas,theessenceof surrounding thecities from
the countryside,thequestionofpoliticalpower,the joint New
Democratic dictatorship, which must transform the old society so
that with the culmination of the democratic revolution,socialism
under the dictatorshipof theproletariatadvancesand guarantees
the marchto communism. We'll take upthis point withinthe
contextof thebulnofthetheeintumnts,incethestate is
inextricably linked to the Party and the army.
440
=====第440页=====
DEVELOP THE PeoPLE's WaR, sERVinG THE
:WORLDREVOLUTION
the CommunistPartyofPeruwasreconstitutedsothatitcould
takeupl
consideredaesomeimportantfurtheaspctsofits development
in the courseofthelast six yearsTheParty setitelf thetaskof
its militarizationatthe1979NationalConference, when
preparationtwwcssd.l,ofar
as what needs to be discussed here, we understand the
militarization of the Party as the ensembleof the transformations
changes and adjustments necessarytoleadPeople's War asthe
principalformof struggle givingrise tothenew state and the
joint dictatorshipthatwilltransform societyandreplacetherule
ofimperialism,bureaucratcapitalismand semifeudalism witha
New Democratic  People's
sRepu,tuscat
the
democraticrevolution, and
further, withintheframework of
world imperialism and reaction which are sinking and will sink in
the midst of wars,attacking and seeking to destroy all that is new
and revolutionary, especially everything proletarian, to defend and
develop therevolution in itssocialist stage, preservingthe
dictatorshipof the proletariatand preventing therestorationof
capitalism, tightening the omnipresent  links with the world
revolution by serving as a base areaforthe joint war of the
proletariatand people'sof the world to sweep imperialism and
reactionoff thefaceoftheearth,and continue a long roadof
repeated cultural revolutions until communism.
It is withinthese general outlinesthat we conceive ofthe
developmentof specificPeople's Warfightingagainstanequally
specific counterrevolutionary
war,
taking place within  the
framework of an era of many varied wars in which imperialism is
sinking, in short, a great clash between People's Warand
counterrevolutionary war on a world level,thehighestformof
struggleandthonethtwilldithsu.ookiattings
in thebroadetrmas lon as therearassestheadvanceo
441
=====第441页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
shadowofPoplesWaastheproletaiat'mlitarylewithis
development.
Consequently,
andall
ongoing
Party
our
communist parties face this necessity and these prospects
no
matter what specific forms they may take.
Tobespecificabout themilitarizationoftheParty,ourParty as 
whole hasplungedintothePeople's War,thrwing
gallits
members intoit;inshort,"Our center is to combat,"
 as our
Central Committee decided. Another important question is that
of concentric construction, meaning, in brief, to take the Party as
the axis around whichto build the army,andaround these
instruments,togetherwiththeunleashingofthe massesin
People's War,tobuildthenewstate.Anoutstandingqustionis
"the training of Party members first an foremost as communists,
1
and asfightersand administrators," so as to carry out the three
great tasks demanded by the revolution.
Mass work must be developed throughand for the People's War.
The leadership iskeyandthere must be a GreatLeadership
[Jefatura]. Thetwo-linestruggle mustbefirmlyand consistently
develop,so as to strengthen the Party and other organizations for
the People's War. A vitaland decisivequestionis thefurther
development of the political line: We have achieved a considerably
deep
understanding
ofPeruvian society; ofthe political
conjunctureand principallyofmilitary line, People'sWarand
how toleadit,especiallyregardingthespecificsof warin Peru
and how it unfolds simultaneouslyinthe countryside,and city
without forgetting thatthecountrysideis principal.Finally, as was
inevitable, the  number
 ofParty
members has increased
considerably,with peasants becoming a very high percentage and
a considerable numberof youthand women entering the Party,
which entails some obvious problems but more importantlya
great ftuewll,astogthe.
442
=====第442页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLeE's WAR, SERVING THE
EWORLDREVOLUTION
As thecrowninaspectofouadvances,thePeople's Warhas
ly and clearly grasps Maoism as the
allowed the Party to more firmly
third andhighest stageof Marxismnd takesupthe task of
"Upholding,defendingandapplingMarxism-Leninism-Mais"
and struggletoputitincommandoftheworlvoluion, with
the consciousness thatthiswillserve communism,theproetariat
and theopesed opls;frtrmomoefrlgapite
class outlookandfusing it with thePeople's War has led tothe
further developmentof Guiding Thought. Finally,thePeople's
War itselfhas made it possibletofurthertrain the Party
membership in proletarian internationalism.
Regarding our armed combatants, the People's War, the masses of
people andthePartyhavegivenrisetothePeople's Guerrlla
Army, an army of a new type to carry out the political tasks of the
revolution established by the Partyand take up the political tasks
consecratedby the international experienceof the proletariat: to
fight, to produce and to mobilize the masses, which
means
arming them.It is a peasant army under the absolute leadership
of the Party according to the principle: "the Party commands the
gun, and the gun must never beallowed to command the Party."
Its foundation is work to build it upideologically,with Marxism
Leninism-Maoism and itsapplication,thatis,Guiding Thought,
theParty's generallineand policies;building thearmy politically
is complemented byorganizing the Party within the army,with
Party leadership of all political work within the army as well as of
the army's mass work. Militarily the army is built on the basis of
the theoryof People's War and the Party's military line and plans;
it is organizedin detachments andplatoons inthe city.
Companiesand battalions inthecountryside,alwaysunderthe
double command system,one political andtheotherrnilitary,
guidedtodaybythe slogan:"developthe companies and
streng
443
=====第443页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
People's GurrillaArmyisalsobasedonLeninsgreattesis
regarding thepeople'smilitianditsthrefunctions aspolice,
armyandadministration.Militarytrainingtakeplacewiththe
aimof developingbelicositysothatactionsarethoroughlyand
successfully caried out. The armedforces startedoutas armed
detachments without arms,because as Lenin taught the lack of
arms cannot be used as a pretextfor not organizing an armed
apparatus; later they armed themselves with whatever they could,
including with dynamite, whichis still veryimportant, since
rudimentary and traditional weapons play a fundamental role.
Though we strive to get modern weapons by snatching them from
the reactionaryforces,wefollow Chairman Mao Tsetung'sreat
teaching,
which history
has proven:
"Sincehistory
began,
warshave always been
revolutionary
weapons were deficient,lostbythose withtheadvantae in
weapons ...If one cannot fight unless one has the most modern
weapons, that is the same as disarming neself."
The People's Guerrila_Army,withitsthousandsof combatants,
has proven itself;ithasbeensteeled in theforgeof the people's
war and is the pillar of the new state power. The new power, the
new state in theform ofPeople's Committees,the developing
base areas and the New Democratic People's Republicin
formation, this is the highest achievement of six years of People's
War. Taking into account Chairman Mao Tse-tung's thesis on the
state, we consider this question as very linked to the united front,
especiallytaking intoaccountthespecificconditions in which we
are developingandthetradition oftheopportunist electoral
"fronts" in our country.
Committee has instructed that the People's
The Central
Revolutionary DefenseFrontbebultonly inthecountryside, in
444
=====第444页=====
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE's WAR, SERVING THE 
WORLD REVOLUTION
sRevolutionary
Committees;whilein the cities,the People's
Defense Movement is being built. The Peoples Committees arose
toward theendof1982,firstin Ayacucho,afterthepolice forces
were dealthuliinblowsndwthwfomlae pasft
countryside.Theserutedontcommtthativece
expression totheointdictatorshipoftheworkers,peasanand
petitbourgeoisie,thethree classestakingpartinthearmed
revolution today:theproletariat,thepeasantry andthe petite
bourgeoisie. These people's committees, taken as a system of state,
are the concrete form of the New Democratic dictatorship whose
system of government, in turn, is based
onthe people's
assemblies.Althoughthenationalbourgeoisieinottakin at
in the revolution now,its interests are respected. The Committee
iselectedbya Delegate Assemblyaccording to the three thirds
rule. One-third communists as representatives of the proletariat,
one-third poor peasants as representatives of the peasantry, and
one-third
middle
peasants
and
progressive elements
as
representativesof the petite bourgeoisie. Likeall the formsof the
new state power, the Committees are based on the worker-peasant
alliance under the leadership of the proletariat represented by the
Communist Party and supported by the People's Guerrilla Army.
The Committee is made up of five commissioners,called this to
emphasize thatthey have been commissioned to perform a
specific task and can be recalled at anytime. Within the
frameworkof the programme of the democraticrevolution,the
destruction ofimperialism, bureaucrat capitalism and semi
feudalism,theyorganizethe sociallifeofthe masses inall
spheres: the organization of production, especially agriculture, and
commerce, which are guided toward collective work; justice,
education and recreation,as well as seeing to the progress of the
people'saiationanduaatincollctivandidivdul
445
=====第445页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
People's Commiteandofthebaseaeasforwhichtheyare the
foundationllowthfuditofulwaaiethyae
principallaproductofguerllawarfarefollowingtheradof
surroundingthecitiesromthecountrysideandofthePeole's
they have sufferedthe assaults ofthe
Warasa whole,  and
counterrevolutionary war.Thus anacutestruggle is being waged
around the new state power,between thearmedrevolution and
the armed counterrevolution. Forinstance,thestruggle between
restorationand counter-restoration wagedespecialy duringthe
years1983and1984is verysignificant.Onthissubjectitis
worth pointinoutthatduinthelasttwoyearsthePeopl's
Guerrilla Army carriedout 180 counter-restorations and in
connection with this sharp contention seized 591 towns. In short,
the vortex of the war between the People's Guerrilla Army and
the reactionary Armed Forces and police are the question of the
new state power,the creation,defense and development of the
people'scommitees,thebase aaandthecontinuingadvance in
the formation of the New Democratic People's Republic, the new
state, which radiates and will continue to radiate against wind and
rain, likeablazing,defianttorchcallingonthepeopletosurge
forward with the flaming wavesof the People's War,devouring
the past and vigorously opening the future for the proletariat and
the people forever.
And whathasbeenthe costin lives?Thereactionary policyof
setting masses against masses, of genocide and disappearances has
already cost the livesof11,300of our people. Adding to that the
1,668 deadof theArmedForcesand police,and policeagents,
informers,feudal tyrantsand despots,and the1,738fallen of the
People's Guerrlla Army,thisaddsuptoapproximatelyfifen
thousand dadasofMa196.Thsisttu,otteord
statistictheactiopublishetocovruitssinisteocidl
policies.
446
=====第446页=====
This is thePeoplesWarinPeru.Itsanalysisandcomprehension
caken up:Marxism Leninism-
demand thatfour questions
Maoism, the Party,People's War and the new state power, whose
consideration has brought us to a clear and concrete conclusion:
the People's War in Peru is an authentic People's War which is
turning thecountryupsidedown;the"oldmole"isburrowing
deeply in thebowelsof theoldsocietyand noone can stophim;
thefuturealadydwllamongus,tholdandotnsociety is
sinking hoplessly andthvolutioshall eail.
LONG LIVE THE PEOPLE'S WAR!
DEVELOP THE PEOPLE'S WAR TO_ SERVE THE WORLD
REVOLUTION!
GLORY TO MARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM!
LONG LIVE THE WORLD REVOLUTION!
LONG LIVE CHAIRMAN GONZALO!
14
=====第447页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VoLUME 1 (1968-1987)
HOiST, dEfeND AnD APPLY MARXism-
LENINISM-MAOISM, PRINCIPALLY
MAOISM!
COMMUNIST PArTY OF PEru - COMMuNiST PARTY OF SPAIN - MAY
1ST, 1987
international proletariat,the lasthistoricalclasswhose grandiose
goal is communism, in its heroic process has generated Marxism
as thefirststageofitsinvincibleideology;butclassstruggleand
October's triumphant revolutionary storm raised Marxism upto
Marxism-Leninism;buttherevolution's unceasingforge, the
development of the people's war and of the masses such as never
had been seen before, made concrete in the triumph of the
Chinese Revolution and the Great ProletarianCultural
Revolution,within the context of the turmoiling class struggleat
world levelandthe combatagainst contemporaryrevisionism,
raised up Marxism once more from its second to its third stage,
from
Marxism-Leninism to Marxism-Leninism-Maoism.
Thus,
today to follor the proletariat's ideologyand to be acommunist is
tobeaMarxist-Leninist-Maoist,principallyMaoist,andonly
being so one can serve the proletarian world revolution wherever
one combats, because Maoism as the third stage is universally
validandqtlitsittohoef
to apply it.
At present,theinternationalclass strugglesetsusforth three
contradictions: 1) oppressed nations
imperialist superpowers
S−i
(USA andUSSR) andimperialist
powers;2)
proletariat
bourgeoisie; 3) superpowers against each other,
 superpowers
against imperialistpowers andimperialistpowersone against
another. Of thethree contradictions,thefirst is theprincipalone
448
=====第448页=====
Hoist, defend and Apply Mlm, principaLLy MoisM
and its solution is the development and triumph of revolution of
New Democracy;thesecond one has asitssolutionthesocialist
revolutionand,in perspective,the proletarianculturalrevolution;
the third one is thesource ofimperialistexploitation and
oppressionand of counter-revolutionary wars and of a new rapine
warforworldhegemony;inregard withthis,theimperialist
superpower USA and the socialimperialist superpower USSR are
those that directly and at present contend for that hegemony. It is
in these condtionsthattheproletarianworldrevolution,existing
a revolutionary situation in unequal development,has begun to
developitsstratgicaloffensiveinlongperspectivefordecadesof
the oncoming new century; in which,by meansof the people's
war making concrete the democratic, socialistor proletarian
culturalrevolutions  shall
sweepimperialism andreactionaries
from the face of the Earth.
On account of the above, today more than ever rises the need and
the decisive importance each time more urgentof counting on
Communist Parties, organized vanguardsof the proletariat, based
ontheall-powerfulideologyoftheinternationalproletariat,
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism. Partiesforgedforand amid the
people's war by meanoftheirmilitarization,morskillful every
day in leadingtherevolutionandinexorableinthestrugle
against revisionism ofanykind. Partiesthat can manage the
constructionof theinstrumentsfortherevolution,of the Party
itself, of the revolutionary armed force and of the united front on
behalfoftherevolutionandnotonthebastardelectioneering
opportunism. From Marx to Chairman Mao,passingthrough
Lenin, Marxism has always stood out the decisive andfar-
reaching importanceof theParty;todaythecommuists,holding
onthisreatrutanvrbfoe,litcsitand struggle
foritsdlc,oscious
is no reoltoldbthepoltrthonloehan
449
=====第449页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
authentic revolution.
Such beingthe stateof things,thepeople's war,the military
theory established by Chairman Mao Tsetung, the masses' war led
by the proletariat is a great word of command for the present and
for thefuture, withinthe age of wars in whichthe old and
caducous imperialistand reactionary worldorderissinking and
will sink. The people's war sets usforth two questions: 1)the
people's warhasuniversal validity,thisimpliesthatit is applicable
to a democratic revolution as well as to one of socialist character,
of course keeping in mind the own character of each one of these
types ofrevolutionand even more bearing in mind the specific
conditionsofevery concrete revolution ineach country; 2)the
people's warof universalvalidity is theanswer tothe imperialist
worldwar,
itimplied at present and
in perspective the
transformation of the imperialist counter-revolutionary war into a
revolutionary war, into a people's war, into a war for the conquest
of Political Power for the proletariat and the people (be it a State
of New Democracy or a Stateof Dictatorship of the Proletariat);
thus, for the Communist Parties the prolem lays not in centering
the attention on the imperialist world war but on the people's
war,because onlyfrom the latter will derive thePolitical Power
led by the proletariat.
And today,May First,dayof theinternational proletariat,when
we meditateonits grandioseemancipatingepic andits great
historicalgoal;today when we hail the turmoiling
demolishing revolutionary movementof theoppressed nations
and the inexhaustible and uncessing struggle of the peoples of the
world,we callto Hoist,defendandapply Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, principally Maoism！ since only in this waythe
internationalproletariatthroughitsCommunistPartieswillbe
capable ofleadingthe conquestforPoliticalPower andof
emancipating itself as a class.
450
=====第450页=====
Hoist, DefeND ANd AppLy MlM, PRinCipALLy MaoiSm
GLORY TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROLETARIAT!
LONG LIVE THE PROLETARIAN WORLD REVOLUTION!
LONG LIVE THE PEOPLE'S WAR IN PERU!
HOIST,
DEFEND
AND
APPLY
MARXISM-LENINISM-
MAOISM, PRINCIPALLY MAOISM!
=====第451页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME 1 (1968-1987)
AGREEMENTS BETWEEN PCP AND PCE
COMMUNIsT PARTY OF PERU - COMMUNIsT PARTY OF SPAIN - MAY
1ST, 1987
1.The Communist PartyofPeruandtheCommunistPartyof
Spainagreeoficiallytoestablishrelationsasfraternal Communist
Parties on a commonideology, Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, a
common revolutionary struggle,theproletarian worldrevolution
and also a common goal, communism.
2. Our two Parties making proletarian internationalism concrete,
assumethe developmentof just,correct andsteadyrelations in
theassurancethatvolvnthmllandhlpingachorlie
comrades in arms,we will serve united with otherfraternal and
equal parties so that communism may shineon Earthforthe
good of all mankind.
3.BothPartieswithfullconscienceandtotala
assurance hoist
Marxism-Leninism-Maoism as the true
and
unvanquished
ideology of international proletariat,assuming Maoism as its third
and principal stage;and,solemnly we commitourselves to
strugglefirmlyand tenaciously in order that Marxism-Leninism-
Maoism, principally Maoism, be the command and guide of the
proletarian world revolution.
4. The PCP and the PCE undersign the statement "Hoist,defend
and apply Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, principally Maoism!"
5. The CommunistPartyof Peru hails the Communist Partyof
Spainandbacksitsstruggleforprovidingtheproltariatofthe
Spanish Statewithanoganized vanguardthatmay leaditto the
conquestofliticlower.TheComuitPtofpainhails
452
=====第452页=====
AGREEMENTS BETWEEN PCP AND PCE
the CommunistPartofPeruandbackthepeople'swad
successfullyby it,standing outthemeaningand theimportance
that this war has for the proletarian world revolution.
6. Weapplaud that thefirstmeetingofour Partieshasbeenan
excellent one, which besides being a landmark will inevitably have
transcendence in our tasks and common struggle; and we express
the decision
ntotransformthisbeginning
a
into
fruitful
development
that
tfuture meetings  will
evaluate
and
make
concrete.
7. PCP and PCE deem necessary and of unevadable importance
the regrouping of communists, of firm and consistent followers of
revolution,forthecrumbling of
theoldoppressive order of
imperialismand the reactionaries,fortheproletariat's leadership
throughits Communist Parties and for th
thecrushing
of
revisionismof all types; in synthesis,of those whoare for fighting
unbendingly for communism. PCP and PCE are for the struggle
onbehalfofa Future CommunistInternationalsustainedon
Marxism-Leninism-Maism,
principally
Maoism;
and they
consider the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement as a stag in
thatdirection,whichitwillservesolong asit sustainsistself on
andflludlll
=====第453页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
(1968-1987)
1
PARTY
TO
LIVES
FOR
THE
GIVE
OUR
AND
THE
REVOLUTION
DAY
OF
HEROIC
DECLARATION
ON
THE
RESISTENCE
PRESIDENT GONZALO - JUNE 1987
The everlasting bosomof the people nourished them with sober
food and set them to walk; the class struggle shaped their minds;
and the Party, as the premier and highest socialformation,
elevated their political consciousness, arming them with Marxism-
Leninism-Maoism,
guiding
thought;it
empowered their
combativity,organizingtheminthePeople's GuerrillaArmy, and
fusing them with the massesof poor peasants,stledtheir bodies
and spiritsintheinextinguishableforgeof thePeople's War.
Becoming Prisonersof War,they never benttheir knees, but
continuing tofight,mobilizeand producethroughhard work,
they transformed the sordid dungeonsof theobsolete,putrid
Peruvian State into Luminous Trenches of Combat.
The ruthless,pounding, well aimed blowsof the People's War in
its unstoppable advances have guttedthe reactionary beast,
reverberating likea ceaseless lashingoraninsistentdemand in
the tossing and turningnightmaresof the Aprista government,
alreadyfascistand corporativist,and
headedbythegenocidal
Garcia Perez. They dreamt up the dark and bloodthirsty plans for
adevastating, decisive blowto crushthe People's War. The
rebellionof thePrisoners of War,in defenseof theRevoluion
and of their own lives,unmasksand condemns before the world
those sinister plans for mass murder,and exposes the monstrous
and disgraceful genocide perpetrated through governmental order
and withafreehandbythearmedorcesandepessvboes,
carriedoutwithablindhatredforthepeopleandaperese
454
=====第454页=====
e andfierce resistance ofthe comrades,
homicidalforironlike
fighters andchilrofthaswhoshowedthidlogy,
pitchedbatlThustheeactionarybeastdrnkbloodtoatiety
inorderto imposeits peacofthedeadthlivemiserablyand
cowardly laidwastebecomeimmortal,formingthemonumental
trilogyofShiiTenchofCombatofElFrotoLurigancho
and El Callao,a historical landmarkwhichwillproclaimmore
and more the greatness of the Day of Heroism.
The attempted devastating and decisivestrikeended upfalling on
theheads ofthosewhoengenderedit,sinkingthefascistand
coporativegovrnmentof Apristaalongwithitspresident,who
violatedthenormsofhisown State,precipitating a grave political
crisis and a greatlossofprestige whichtheystillcannot
overcome. Thus the rebellion of the Prisonersof War, at the cost
oftheirown lives,earnedforthe Party andthe Revolution a
magnificent political,military and moral victory; moreover, they
contributedenormouslytosuccessfullysealingoff thegratleap
with a golden seal and laying the foundation for the new plan of
developingbases,whosefirst campaignhasbeenthe greatest
shakeup thePeruvianState has experienced sofar, andthe
greatest repercussion of the People's War, both inside and outside
the country.Thus,theprisonersof war,ashistoricalfigures,go
on winning more battles beyond death,since, living and fighting
within us,conqueringnew victories,wefeeltheirfirmand
indelible
epresence vibrating and shining, showing us today,
tomorrow and foreverhow to giveour lifeforthe Partyand the
Revolution.
Glory to the Day of Heroism!
455
=====第455页=====
COLLECTED WORKS OF PCP - VOLUME
E 1 (1968-1987)
GLORY TO THE DAY OF
HEROISM!
LTC CANTo GRaNDE - JunE 1987
A year ago,on June 19, Dayof Heroism,prisonersof war from
the Shining Trenchesof Combatat El Fronton,Lurigancho,and
Callao prisonsrebelled,raisingtheFundamentalTruthof
marxism-leninism-maoism,President Gonzalo's guidingthought
"Rebellion is Justified,"againstthedeveloping genocidal policy, in
defenseof the Revolution andtheir lives,demandingclaims for
very fair and rational grievances.
The communists andPeople's Guerrilla  Army
fighters and
childrenof themassefoughtheroicallyselingalandmarkof
Heroism,bravery and courage,expressionof the new human
armedwithMarxism-Leninism-Maoism,guidingthoughtthat
only the Communist Partyand thePeople's Waris capableof
generating,through which they concretized the immortal Day of
Heroism, their precious blood bearing fruit of our Great Epic, the
People's War, risinglikethe monumental  glinting
gflag and
inexhaustiblebattle crythatbrings ustotheinevitablefinal
triumph: COMMUNISM.
With thisgloriouaction,ourCommunistParty,wiselyle
President Gonzalo,achieved a greatpolitical,militaryand moral
victory; becomingthe decisive action ofthe Grand Planof
Conquering
gBases that has  plunged
thereactionary APRA
governmentanditshead Alan Garcia in the worstcrisis he could
ever dreamofforcinghim to definehis predicament and develop
his corporateascist plicies andiolatinghim politically.
MilitarizedPartyofNewTypeitsguidingidology Marxist-
456
=====第456页=====
GLORY TO THE DaY OF HeROiSM
Leninist-Maoistapablofwthtandnencidandcontinue
fighting;proofof this is that thesurviving Heroesand the new
prisoners of war have raised Red Flags with hammers and sickles
in thefascist Canto Grande prison,converting the prison intoa
Shining Trench of Combat.
Today wereaffirmour unwavering commitment tofollowthe
shining exampleof the People's Heroes,developing the People's
Warservingthe WorldRevolutionwhilefulfllingthe course
charted by President Gonzalo toconquer theconditionof political
prisoners and prisoners of war. We affirm, with historical
optimism,our decision of HEROIC_RESISTANCE_beforethe
newly planned genocide,towhichwewillfight,resistand defeat,
thereby servingour CommunistPaty,thepeople andthe
people's war in the successful completionof the new Great Plan
ledtodayby
Develop
Bases,
the
politic
of
to
victorious
"CULMINATING
BRIGHTLY
BY
ESTABLISHING
A
HISTORICAL MILESTONE."
LONG LIVE PRESIDENT GONZALO!
GLORY TO THE DAY OF HEROISM!
LONG
LIVE
MARXISM-LENINISM-MAOISM,
GUIDING
THOUGHT!
LONG LIVE THE COMMUNIST PARTY!
WAR
IN
SERVICE
EOFTHE
WORLD
DEVELOP_ PEOPLE'S
REVOLUTION!
FALLEN HEROES,LONG LIVE
ETERNAL GLORY TO THE
THE REVOLUTION!
457
=====第457页=====
PUEBLO
PERUANO
iNO VOTAR!
i VIVA LA GUERRA
POPULAR!

=====第458页=====
A
SOONSAESEACAAOS2ASAA

人
1i5
SONA
IRRE
RRAAR
PARTIDO COMUNISTA DELPERU
=====第459页=====
1
NOVOTARIiBOICOTIP.CP

=====第460页=====
LENIV.
TODO ES ILUSION?
ISALVO EL PODER
=====第461页=====
R
PCP
RPHO
LARLEEUON

SEJUSRIPILA
YIVALA
VIVALA
VIVAEL
CONAUISTA
RASESDE
LOIUAA
GUERPADE
RRND
RCP
ENCHEM
优上E鞋
P
1SDEABRL
ICALUROSA RECEPEION
=====第462页=====
LAFURIA
=====第463页=====

=====第464页=====