MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 17
Marx and Engels 1859-60    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_17.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:31]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
17 
Marx and Engels 1859-60
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me17.htm [09/12/2010 15:05:41]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-961-7 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
V 
Contents 
Preface XI 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
October 1 859-December 1860 
K. Marx. Letter to the Editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung  3 
K. Marx. Statement to the Editors of Die Reform, the Volks-Zeitung 
and the Allgemeine Zeitung  4 
K. Marx. Declaration 8 
K. Marx. Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette 10 
K. Marx. To the Editors of the Volks-Zeitung. Declaration 12 
K. Marx. To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph 14 
K. Marx. To the Editors of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung 16 
K. Marx. To the Editors of Die Reform 18 
K. Marx. Declaration 19 
K. Marx. Herr Vogt 21 
Preface 25 
I. The Brimstone Gang 28 
II. The Bristlers 38 
III. Police Matters 48 
1. Confession 48 
2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten 50 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
3. Cherval  55 
4. The Communist Trial in Cologne 64 
5. Joint Festival of the German Workers' Educational Associa­
tions in Lausanne (June 26 and 27, 1859) 68 
6. Miscellany 72 
IV. Techow's Letter 75 
V. Imperial Regent and Count Palatine 100 
VI. Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung  102 
VII. The Augsburg Campaign Ill 
VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 133 
IX. Agency 184 
X. Patrons and Accomplices 214 
XL A Lawsuit 259 
XII. Appendices 296 
1. Schily's Expulsion from Switzerland 296 
2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten 303 
3. Cherval 304 
4. The Communist Trial in Cologne 305 
5. Slanders 312 
6. The War between Frogs and Mice 313 
7. Palmerston-Polemic 315 
8. Statement by Herr A. Scherzer  .....<,  316 
9. Blind's Article in The Free Press of May 27, 1859 317 
10. Herr Orges' Letters 317 
11. Circular against K. Blind 318 
12. Vögele's Affidavit 319 
13. Wiehe's Affidavit 319 
14. From the Trial Papers 320 
15. Dentu Pamphlets 324 
16. Postscript 327 
a) K. Vogt and La Cimentaire 327 
b) Kossuth 327 
c) Edmond About's La Prusse en 1860 328 
K. Marx. Affairs in France 330 
K. Marx. English Politics 335 
K. Marx. The New Treaty between France and England 341 
F. Engels. Military Reform in Germany 345 
K. Marx. The English Budget 350 
F. Engels. On Rifled Cannon 354 
1 354 
II 357 
III 361 
IV 364 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
K. Marx. Public Feeling in Berlin 367 
K. Marx. Sicily and the Sicilians 370 
K. Marx. Preparations for Napoleon's Coming War on the Rhine .... 373 
1 373 
II 376 
K. Marx. Garibaldi in Sicily.— Affairs in Prussia 381 
F. Engels. Garibaldi in Sicily 386 
K. Marx. The Emperor Napoleon III and Prussia 391 
K. Marx. Interesting from Prussia 397 
F. Engels. The British Volunteer Force 403 
K. Marx. British Commerce 406 
K. Marx. The State of British Manufacturing Industry 410 
1 410 
II 416 
K. Marx. Interesting from Sicily.— Garibaldi's Quarrel with La 
Farina.— A Letter from Garibaldi 421 
F. Engels. British Defenses 425 
K. Marx. Events in Syria.— Session of the British Parliament.—The 
State of British Commerce 429 
F. Engels. Could the French Sack London? 434 
K. Marx. The Russo-French Alliance 439 
K. Marx. The Paper Tax.—The Emperor's Letter 444 
F. Engels. Garibaldi's Movements 449 
K. Marx. The New Sardinian Loan.—The Impending French and 
Indian Loans 453 
F. Engels. The Sick Man of Austria 457 
K. Marx. The Crops in Europe 461 
K. Marx. Corn Prices.— European Finances and War Prepara­
tions.—The Oriental Question 465 
F. Engels. Garibaldi's Progress 471 
F. Engels. Garibaldi in Calabria 476 
K. Marx. British Commerce 479 
K. Marx. Russia Using Austria.—The Meeting at Warsaw 484 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
K. Marx. Affairs in Prussia.— Prussia, France and Italy 488 
F. Engels. Preparations for War in Prussia 493 
K. Marx. Great Britain— A Money Stringency 497 
F. Engels. Austria—Progress of the Revolution 499 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
K. Marx. Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of 
Modern Europe, from the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century to the 
Present Time. In Two Volumes, London, 1857 505 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 531 
Name Index 593 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 638 
Index of Periodicals 663 
Subject Index 671 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Title-page of the first edition of Herr Vogt by Karl Marx 23 
Garibaldi's Expedition to Southern Italy (1860), Garibaldi's 
Advance in Sicily and His Landing on the Calabrian Coast 
(May-August 1860) (map) 470-471 
First page of Marx's manuscript with extracts from Imre Szabo's 
work The State Policy of Modern Europe, from the Beginning of  the 
Sixteenth Century  to the Present  Time 507 

=====第7页=====
Translated  by 
RODNEY LIVINGSTONE 

=====第8页=====

=====第9页=====
XI 
Preface 
Volume 17 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels comprises 
works written between October 1859 and December 1860. The 
first half of the volume is devoted to Marx's long polemic Herr 
Vogt and the letters and statements connected with the so-called 
Vogt Case that he sent to the editors of various newspapers. 
The second half consists of articles written by Marx and Engels for 
the American progressive newspaper New-York Daily Tribune 
between January and December 1860. All these works are linked 
in subject-matter with those published in volumes 16, 18 and 19 of 
the present edition. 
As Marx and Engels had foreseen, the first world economic 
crisis of 1857-58 was followed by a fresh upswing of the 
democratic, proletarian and national liberation movements. An 
ever widening struggle was being waged over the tasks the 
bourgeois revolutions of 1848-49 had left unsolved, one of which 
was the now urgent necessity for the unification of Germany, and 
also of Italy. In this period the international situation, as the 
Italian war of 1859 (France and Piedmont against Austria) had 
shown, was charged with the danger of armed conflict. 
In the complex conditions of the time the activity of the masses, 
particularly that of the proletariat, grew rapidly, and Marx and 
Engels devoted themselves to preparing the working class for the 
forthcoming battles. Besides elaborating revolutionary theory and 
crucial questions of the tactics of proletarian struggle, they 
concentrated more and more of their practical activity on rallying 
the revolutionary forces and setting up an independent political 
party of the working class. Their task now was not only to preserve 
the cadres of experienced proletarian revolutionaries, but also to 

=====第10页=====
XII Preface 
establish closer ties with the broad masses, to give the movement 
its own newspaper (the attempts to turn the London German émigré 
paper Das Volk into such an organ are described in Volume 16) and 
to win more supporters. 
Increasingly Marx and Engels devoted their journalistic writings 
on home and foreign policy to substantiating the position of the 
emerging party of the proletariat. Defending its political and 
moral authority, Marx vigorously rebuffed the ideological enemies 
of the working class, who were trying to slander and discredit the 
active members of the Communist League. A rebuttal of these 
slanderous fabrications was particularly necessary at this crucial 
moment in the development of the working-class movement, when 
the proletarians of many countries had begun to awaken to 
political activity and showed a tendency to set up their own 
political organisations and establish international connections, 
when new forces were entering the working-class movement and 
there was thus a real opportunity for creating a mass proletarian 
party. Its nucleus was to be, as Marx and Engels envisa­
ged, a united and well-tested group of proletarian revolutio­
naries. "The moment is approaching," Marx wrote to Lassalle in 
September 1860, "when our 'small' and yet, in a certain sense, 
powerful party' (insofar as the other parties do not know what 
they want or do not want what they know) must draft a plan of its 
campaign" (see present edition, Vol. 41). 
Marx's long polemical work— Herr Vogt —reflects the struggle 
waged by Marx and Engels against attempts by the ideologists and 
agents of the bourgeoisie to denigrate the proletarian party. Their 
exposure had become an important task and in the circumstances 
of the time was not only a means of self-defence, but also a form 
of active upholding and propagation of communist principles. 
In his letter to Freiligrath of February 29, 1860 Marx wrote that 
he and his associates were being attacked with utter ruthlessness 
by the bourgeois circles of many countries, by the whole official 
world "who in order to ruin us are not just occasionally infringing 
the penal code but have ranged widely over its length and 
breadth..." (see present edition, Vol. 41). One of the spokesmen of 
this "official world" was the German scientist and politician Karl 
Vogt, who had formerly sided with the petty-bourgeois democrats. 
In December 1859 Vogt published a pamphlet entitled Mein  Prozess 
gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, which was full of slanderous statements 
about Marx and his associates. 
In this pamphlet Vogt deliberately falsified facts and invented 
charges against Marx and his associates, distorting the true picture 

=====第11页=====
Preface XIII 
of the activities of the Communist League. Armed with police 
forgeries used in the Cologne communist trial in 1852, Vogt 
even went so far as to accuse Marx and his associates of 
mercenary, if not criminal aims. In principle there was nothing 
new in these insinuations. They were merely a rehash of the 
fabricated charges brought against members of the Communist 
League by Prussian police agents. The same lies had often been 
used by groups of petty-bourgeois emigres hostile to the pro­
letarian revolutionaries. "...At all times and in all places," Marx 
wrote, "the sycophants of the ruling class have always resorted to 
these despicable slanders to denigrate the literary and political 
champions of the oppressed classes" (see this volume, p. 69). 
However, Vogt's slanderous fabrications were on this occasion 
immediately taken up by the bourgeois press of Germany, England, 
Switzerland and other European countries and also found their way 
into the émigré press in the United States. The dissemination of 
anti-communist inventions assumed a massive scale. "Naturally the 
jubilation of the bourgeois press knows no bounds," Marx wrote 
to Engels on January 31, 1860 about the reaction of the bourgeois 
press to the publication of the Vogt pamphlet (see present edition, 
Vol. 41). 
Marx rightly saw this as an attempt by the bourgeoisie to 
discredit the proletarian revolutionaries, to strike a blow at the 
emerging party of the proletariat and undermine its positions 
morally and politically in the eyes of the public. "His [Vogt's] 
attack on me...", Marx wrote to Engels on February 3, 1860, "is 
intended as a grand coup by vulgar bourgeois democracy ... 
against the whole party. It must therefore be answered by a 
grand coup. The defensive is not for us" (see present edition, Vol. 41). 
Marx's exposé Herr Vogt was the answer to this anti-communist 
campaign. The unmasking of Vogt was particularly important for 
Germany, where the proletarian revolutionaries were faced with 
the task of building up their influence among the masses in the 
struggle for the country's democratic unification. 
Marx pursued a dual aim in his writings against Vogt. He 
exposed him both as an individual spreading slander and as "an 
individual who stands for a whole trend" (this volume, p. 26) of 
ideologists whom the bourgeoisie was using to discredit proletarian 
revolutionaries and disorganise the working-class movement. Marx 
was not merely answering the attacks on himself personally, was 
not only defending the proletarian revolutionaries' past activities, 
he was also fighting for the future of the proletarian party. The 
exposure of Vogt was "of decisive importance for the historical 

=====第12页=====
XIV Preface 
vindication of the party and for its future position in Germany", 
Marx wrote to Freiligrath on February 23, 1860 (see present 
edition, Vol. 41). The importance Marx attached to defending the 
party, which was still only in the process of formation, from 
slander by its enemies is shown by the fact that he put aside his 
work on Capital for nearly a year in order to write the pamphlet. 
Herr Vogt is a complex, highly satirical work. The wealth of 
information it contains, the importance of the problems raised, the 
vast quantity of thoroughly researched and skilfully presented 
material, make it one of the finest examples of Marx's polemical 
writings and one of the most important of his historical works. He 
succeeded in creating a broad canvas portraying the period, the 
prevailing political systems, the home and foreign policies of the 
ruling classes, the bourgeois court, the police and the venal press. 
At the same time, he levelled revealing criticism at the anti-
proletarian trends of bourgeois liberalism and bourgeois and 
petty-bourgeois democracy. 
In dealing with the formation and development of the 
international communist movement, Marx refuted Vogt's allega­
tions that the Communist League was a narrow conspiratorial 
organisation pursuing aims that were not revolutionary at all. In 
Chapter IV of the work ("Techow's Letter") he gave a brief but 
succinct description of the emergence and activities of this first 
international communist organisation of the proletariat. In this 
and other chapters (Chapter III, "Police Matters", and Chapter 
VI, "Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung") he portrayed the 
historical setting in which the League operated, its connections 
with working-class circles and its role in the propagation of 
communist ideas, and also the struggle waged by the proletarian 
trend against sectarian elements. Discussing the reasons for the 
split in the Communist League, Marx pointed out the harm done 
by the adventurist and conspiratorial tactics of the Willich-
Schapper sectarian group, their incompatibility with the true aims 
of the proletarian party, and particularly stressed the demoralising 
and disorganising consequences of the voluntarist and conspirator­
ial trends for the working-class movement. 
Herr Vogt is the first work in Marxist literature to pinpoint the 
basic elements of the initial phase in the process of combining 
scientific communism with the working-class movement. It 
pioneers the idea of the continuity of the various stages of this 
process, the various steps in the struggle for a proletarian party. 
Along with Marx's Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in 
Cologne and The Knight of the Noble Consciousness, and Marx and 

=====第13页=====
Preface XV 
Engels' The Great Men of the Exile (see present edition, Vols. 11, 
12), Herr Vogt marks the beginning of the Marxist historiography 
of the communist movement. 
The portrait of the main character in the pamphlet is 
generalised. Marx used Vogt as an example to show that the 
anti-revolutionary, anti-proletarian prejudices of the unstable 
elements among the bourgeois intellectuals brought them into the 
camp of reaction and allowed the ruling classes, particularly those of 
such a corrupt state as Bonapartist France, to exploit them for 
counter-revolutionary purposes. Marx exposed Vogt as a petty 
politician and ridiculed him as one of the cowardly leaders of the 
leftist petty-bourgeois group in the Frankfurt National Assembly 
and a member of the imperial regency, set up by the rump of the 
Frankfurt Parliament at the closing stage of the 1848-49 revolution. 
Marx showed that Vogt's whole political activity was in fact 
counter-revolutionary. According to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, he 
was "the 'faithful warner' against revolution" (this volume, p. 55). 
This exposure of Vogt had a great impact because he had been 
widely regarded as a democratic and even radical politician. 
Marx considered Vogt mainly as a political figure, but some of 
his sharply satirical observations illuminated the nature of Vogt's 
philosophical views as a spokesman of German vulgar materialism. 
The pamphlet's focal point is the exposure of Vogt as a paid 
agent of Napoleon III (Chapter VIII, "Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His 
Studies"; IX, "Agency"; and X, "Patrons and Accomplices"), as 
"one of the coundess mouthpieces through whom the grotesque 
ventriloquist in the Tuileries spoke in foreign tongues" (this 
volume, p. 159). As Marx proved, Vogt performed the function of 
moulding European public opinion in the Bonapartist spirit and 
recruiting members of the liberal and democratic opposition to 
Bonapartism by admitting them to the "French feeding-trough". 
Vogt's Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas (Studies on the 
Present Situation in Europe), published a month before the 
outbreak of the Italian war, left Marx "in no doubt about his 
connection with Bonapartist propaganda" (this volume, p. 116) since 
it was a rehash of the official propaganda hand-outs of the 
Second Empire and was designed to assist the latter in its 
foreign-policy adventures. Subsequently, in 1870, after the fall of 
the Second Empire, when details of the expenditure of secret 
funds in 1859 were released, Vogt's name was found to be on the 
list of recipients. This was incontrovertible documentary proof of 
the charges Marx had brought against him ten years before. 
Marx exposed not only Vogt but also his "patrons and 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
accomplices", the whole circle of paid agents, hack writers and 
journalists, and unprincipled politicians acting in the interests of 
the Second Empire. The pages describing the typical ways in which 
the bourgeois press serves the ruling circles ideologically in their 
struggle against the revolutionary working-class movement, and 
purveys bourgeois influence among proletarians and democrats 
are brilliant political satire. Marx lashed out at the venality of the 
Bonapartist press, whose scribes "one and all take their inspiration 
from one and the same illustrious—money-box" (this volume, p. 211), 
and had some equally hard things to say about the bourgeois press 
of Germany and England. He treated the action of the then liberal 
Daily Telegraph, which had reprinted Vogt's slander and refused to 
publish Marx's denial, as a striking example of how the press and 
journalism as a whole in bourgeois society become a field for 
private money-making, spreading lies and misinformation, de­
rogatory rumours and scandalous gossip to satisfy the tastes of 
the philistine. Marx compares the newspaper to a "great central 
paper cloaca" receiving all the "social refuse" (this volume, 
p. 243). 
The social and national demagoguery of Bonapartism, Louis 
Bonaparte's "leftist" gestures in social and national policy, 
designed to present the police state of the Second Empire as a 
champion of the workers' interests and a defender of oppressed 
nations, were particularly dangerous, Marx wrote. He drew attention 
to the attempts of the Bonapartist Vogt to persuade the Swiss 
artisans that Napoleon III was a "workers' dictator" (this volume, 
p. 191) deeply concerned for the welfare of the working people and 
their protection from exploitation by the bourgeoisie. Marx 
demonstrated the demoralising effect on the working class of this 
brand of social demagoguery, which was later to spread in other 
countries in the form of "police socialism". Taking Vogt's role as an 
accessory to the Bonapartist monarchy as an example, Marx pointed 
to the danger of the democratic and proletarian movements being 
penetrated by all kinds of hostile agents, and to the need for their 
timely identification and exposure. 
Marx's revelations of Vogt's connections with Bonapartist circles 
grew into a general unmasking of the Bonapartist regime. Marx 
and Engels regarded the Second Empire as one of the bastions of 
reaction in Europe and the fight against Bonapartism as one of the 
international proletariat's key tasks. In Herr Vogt (Chapters VIII, IX 
and X) Marx developed and deepened the analysis of Bonapartism 
that he had made in his The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte 
(see present edition, Vol. 11) and quotes from this work. 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
Dealing with Vogt's and other mercenary writers' efforts to 
embellish the foreign policy of the Second Empire, Marx showed 
the reactionary aims and methods of this policy, revealing the 
demagogic essence of the Bonapartist "principle of nationality", 
and the false concept of "natural frontiers", which were used to 
cover up the plans of the ruling circles to exploit the national 
movements in order to establish French hegemony and redraw the 
map of Europe in favour of the Bonapartist camarilla. Marx noted 
that the Bonapartist clique was trying to consolidate the dictatorial 
regime in France by means of "local wars" and combat the 
revolutionary-democratic struggle in Italy and other countries by 
armed force. He showed that the rulers of the Second Empire 
were enemies of all national liberation movements and hypocriti­
cally masked their true position by a pretence of sympathy for the 
Poles,  Hungarians, Italians and other oppressed nations. In Marx's 
view the tendency of some of the national leaders to succumb to 
Bonapartist demagoguery, their readiness to make a deal with 
Bonapartism, presented a grave danger to the revolutionary 
development of these movements. Marx revealed the true nature 
of the policies pursued by the ruling circles of England, and also 
of Tsarist Russia, who were giving Napoleon III diplomatic support 
and thus contributing to the outbreak of the Italian war. 
In Herr Vogt Marx analysed various aspects of international 
relations from the eighteenth century up to the 1850s and 
highlighted the key points of contradiction and conflict between 
the European powers. His interest in these problems is also 
documented by the excerpts, published here in the section "From 
the Preparatory Materials", from the book by the Hungarian 
historian and participant in the 1848-49 revolution Imre Szabö, 
The State Policy of Modern Europe, from the Beginning of the Sixteenth 
Century to the Present Time, which was a source used for several 
passages of Herr Vogt. 
The writings of Marx and Engels against Bonapartism were 
closely linked with their struggle for the unification of Germany, 
and also of Italy, by revolutionary-democratic means. They saw 
Bonapartist France as one of the main obstacles to German and 
Italian unity (see present edition, Vol. 16). In Herr Vogt Marx 
exposed Vogt's pro-Bonaparte stance on this issue as well. 
Marx's pamphlet against Vogt and his associates was also a kind 
of answer to Lassalle, whose view on the ways and means of uni­
fying Germany, and also Italy, was expounded in his pamphlet 
Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preussens (The Italian War 
and the Tasks of Prussia). Lassalle justified the policy of Napoleon 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
III in Italy and supported the dynastic way of uniting Germany 
under Prussian auspices that was being canvassed by the Prus-
sophile bourgeoisie. "Lassalle's pamphlet is an enormous blun­
der," Marx wrote to Engels on May 18, 1859, and in a letter of 
November 26 of the same year he declared even more emphatical­
ly that Lassalle "in point of fact was piping the same tune as 
Vogt" (see present edition, Vol. 40). Not for nothing did Lassalle 
try to dissuade Marx from openly opposing this Bonapartist 
agent. In Herr Vogt Marx indirectly, without naming Lassalle, 
was actually criticising the ideas of Lassalle's pamphlet along 
with die views expressed by other vulgar democrats who shared 
Vogt's opinion. In contrast to the nationalistic ideas of Las­
salle,  who did not believe in die revolutionary-democratic 
forces of Italy and Germany, in contrast to his attempts to justify 
die policy of Bonapartism and the Prussian ruling circles, Marx 
proposed a plan for the revolutionary-democratic unification of 
each of die two countries from below, dirough the revolutionary 
action of the masses. "Lassalle deviated towards a national-liberal 
labour policy, whereas Marx encouraged and developed an 
independent, consistendy democratic policy hostile to national-
liberal cowardice" (V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 21, p. 141). 
The pamphlet Herr Vogt, and Engels' pamphlet Savoy, Nice and the 
Rhine written a short time before (see present edition, Vol. 16),were 
the first works in which die founders of Marxism actually opposed in 
print the tactics advocated by Lassalle. 
An important problem raised by Marx in Herr Vogt was that of 
how to fight die influence of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
ideology on die proletariat, an ideology emanating from circles 
that Marx classified as vulgar democrats (see his letters to Engels, 
January 28 and February 3, 1860, present edition, Vol. 41). In his 
Preface to the pamphlet, referring to German bourgeois and 
petty-bourgeois democracy, he wrote that one of the reasons that 
had prompted him to come out publicly against Vogt was the 
opportunity this offered of exposing die whole trend to which Vogt 
belonged. This was important as a means of securing die indepen­
dence of die emerging proletarian party's ideological and tactical 
principles. The German petty-bourgeois democrats had evolved to 
the right since the revolution of 1848-49 and were steadily dete­
riorating into an appendage of bourgeois liberalism. Some of diem, 
like Vogt, had taken up pro-Bonapartist positions. Marx and En-
gels had criticised the leaders of the petty bourgeoisie in tiieir 
work The Great Men of the Exile (see present edition, Vol. 11). 
In Chapters IV and XII of Herr Vogt ("Techow's Letter" and 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
"Appendices") Marx returns to this subject and ridicules the 
narrowness and political instability of the vulgar democrats, their 
contempt for the true interests of the toiling masses, and the petty 
quarrels between the various groups. 
Brilliant both in its content and form, Herr Vogt is outstanding 
among the best examples of political satire and journalism and 
leaves one in no doubt as to Marx's extensive knowledge of 
literature. Its sparkling aphorisms and literary references add to 
the acerbity of its style. "This is, of course, the best polemical work 
you have ever written," was Engels' comment in a letter to Marx 
of December 19, 1860 (see present edition, Vol. 41), as soon as he 
had read the pamphlet. Franz Mehring, who thought highly of the 
pamphlet's artistic merits, although he did not fully appreciate 
its significance in upholding the principles of the proletarian 
party, wrote that it would afford great pleasure to the literary 
connoisseur. 
Marx's pamphlet is written in a spirit of militant partisanship. It 
has retained its scientific and political significance both as a source 
for studying die history of the international working-class move­
ment and the struggle waged by Marx and Engels to create a 
proletarian party, and as an example of their opposition to 
Bonapartism and other reactionary forces. It remains a model of 
the impassioned defence of the interests of the working class and is a 
classic rebuttal of the opponents of communism. 
The second half of die volume consists of articles by Marx and 
Engels on crucial problems of the social and political development 
of Europe in 1860. With the revolutionary movement again on the 
upswing their writings were of especial significance as a way of 
working out and popularising the tactical principles that should be 
adopted by the working-class and democratic movement. In 1860 
the New-York Daily Tribune was the only newspaper for which 
Marx and Engels wrote on political subjects (the articles on 
military questions that Engels contributed in 1860 to The New 
American Cyclopaedia, The Volunteer Journal, for Lancashire and 
Cheshire, and the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, are published in 
Volume 18 of the present edition, as part of the cycle of works on 
this subject written by Marx and Engels in diose years). Though 
he did not share Marx's beliefs, the editor of the paper realised 
the importance of his articles (see this volume, p. 323-24). 
The journalistic activities of Marx and Engels in this period show 
that they were continuing their studies of the economic contours and 
dynamics of the social and political development of various 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
countries, and the crucial points of international contradictions and 
conflicts. As always they took a particular interest in the unfolding of 
revolutionary events. 
One of the main themes in the journalism of Marx and Engels in 
1860 was the events in Italy. Their articles continue the cycle of 
their works on this subject written during the Italian war (see 
present edition, Vol. 16). The war resulted neither in the uni­
fication of Italy nor in its complete liberation from Austrian dom­
ination. Austria kept its grip on Venice. In return for the 
cession of Lombardy to Piedmont France had been given Savoy 
and Nice. With its national and social problems still unsolved,Italy 
remained one of the main centres of revolutionary ferment in 
Europe. In April 1860 the popular uprising in Palermo (Sicily) 
against the regime of the Neapolitan Bourbons launched a new 
stage in the struggle for the country's unification that took the 
form of a bourgeois-democratic revolution. Marx responded to 
these events with the article "Sicily and the Sicilians", drawing a 
graphic picture of the hardships suffered by the people of the 
island, where all land was owned by a few large landowners, where 
the medieval system of land tenure was still intact, and the tenant 
farmers led an impoverished existence under a crushing burden of 
taxes and exorbitant rent. Marx taunted Europe's official circles for 
their indifference over the brutal reprisals that the Neapolitan 
authorities had taken against the insurgents. But, as Marx noted, the 
people's spirit was not broken. The Sicilians "have battled, and still 
battle, for their freedom" (this volume, p. 370). 
Garibaldi's landing with his famous "thousand" volunteers 
helped to unite the scattered guerrilla bands and develop the 
revolutionary war in Sicily. Marx and Engels followed with great 
sympathy the actions of Garibaldi, around whom all Italy's 
patriotic forces had rallied. "If the insurrection develops much 
vital power, Garibaldi's army will be swelled to more formidable 
dimensions," wrote Marx in his article "Garibaldi in Sicily.— 
Affairs in Prussia" (this volume, p. 382). A high evaluation of the 
actions of Garibaldi's insurrectionist forces is to be found in the 
articles "Garibaldi in Sicily", "Garibaldi's Movements", "Garibal­
di's Progress" and "Garibaldi in Calabria", which Engels wrote at 
Marx's request. Engels spoke of Garibaldi as "the man who has 
borne high the flag of Italian revolution in the face of French, 
Neapolitan, and Austrian battalions" (this volume, p. 386). And in 
another place he said, "The Sicilian insurrection has found a 
first-rate military  chief"  (pp. 389-90). After Garibaldi's landing in 
Calabria Engels wrote that he had "shown himself to be not only a 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
brave leader and clever strategist, but also a scientific general" (this 
volume, p. 476). 
Marx and Engels held that the broad scope of the popular 
movement in Italy offered the opportunity of achieving the 
unification of Italy in a democratic way. They assessed Garibaldi's 
successes as evidence of the superiority of Italy's revolutionary-
democratic forces over the aristocratic and bourgeois monarchist 
camp that had assembled round Piedmont. Marx and Engels also 
considered Garibaldi's victories in the light of their positive inter­
national repercussions, and the revolutionary response that they 
had evoked among the masses in the European countries. The 
operations of Garibaldi's revolutionary army not only disrupted 
the plans of the Italian liberal-monarchist circles and the Savoyan 
dynasty; they also struck at the hopes nurtured by France's 
Bonapartist rulers of bringing Italy under its control. In the article 
"Interesting from Sicily.— Garibaldi's Quarrel with La Farina.—A 
Letter from Garibaldi", Marx joyfully reported the expulsion of 
Piedmont's agent La Farina from a Sicily liberated by Garibaldi's 
forces. Marx believed that if the movement retained "its pure 
popular character", and Garibaldi prevented Piedmont's ruling 
circles from intervening, it might lead to "rescuing Italy, not only 
from its old tyrants and divisions, but also from the clutches of the 
new French protectorate" (this volume, p. 422). 
At the same time Marx and Engels were quite sober in assessing 
the complexity of the situation and the development of events. 
The liberal-monarchist circles of Piedmont were preparing, in the 
event of Garibaldi's campaign proving successful, to snatch the 
fruits of his victory and bring about the unification of Italy by 
dynastic means. Despite the hopes cherished by Marx and Engels, 
this was what happened, in the shape of the creation of the Italian 
monarchy headed by Victor Emmanuel II, the King of Piedmont. 
A number of articles published in this volume are devoted to 
Germany, and more specifically to Prussia, one of the leading 
states of the German Confederation. In considering the principal 
task confronting Germany—the country's national unification— 
Marx and Engels developed ideas that they had already voiced in 
their articles of the Italian war period. The need for the 
unification of Germany sprang from the country's whole internal 
development and answered the demands of economic and social 
progress. In upholding the revolutionary-democratic way of 
solving this problem, Marx and Engels believed that only a 
movement involving the whole people could paralyse the opposi-

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
tion of the Prussian and Austrian counter-revolutionary elements. 
The elimination of the relics of the feudal-absolutist system, they 
concluded, would create favourable conditions for developing the 
productive forces, for social progress and rallying and organising 
the proletariat. "To withstand encroachments from without," 
Marx wrote, "or realise unity and liberty at home, she [Germany] 
must clear her own house of its dynastic landlords" (this volume, 
p. 487). Marx exposed the Prussian ruling circles' schemes for 
uniting the country under their aegis without any changes in its 
internal system by introducing and employing Prussian police and 
bureaucratic practices throughout the country. Opposing these plans 
for the Prussianisation of Germany, Marx wrote that "after the blow 
dealt to Austria [in the Italian war, 1859], Germany stands in need of 
a similar blow being dealt to Prussia, in order to get rid of 'both the 
houses'" (this volume, p. 378). In the article "Public Feeling in 
Berlin" and in other articles Marx dealt with the internal situation in 
Prussia. He ridiculed the sham liberalism of the Prince Regent (the 
future king William), the first years of whose reign—from 
1858—had been proclaimed by the liberals as the beginning of a 
"new era", and regarded the government's manoeuvres as only a 
nominal rejection of "the old reactionary system of mingled 
feudalism and bureaucratism". In reality, he pointed out, the 
Prussian ruling circles had no intention of removing "the 
bureaucratic and police shackles" (this volume, p. 367, 368). 
The articles published in this volume throw light on the 
beginnings of the constitutional conflict in Prussia between the 
liberal majority of the lower Chamber and the government, a 
conflict over the government plan for reorganising the army. The 
Bill was rejected by the Chamber, although it sanctioned the 
allocations "for putting the army into a state fit to encounter the 
dangers apprehended from without". The government launched 
the reform without the consent of the Provincial Diet. Marx and 
Engels saw the far-reaching consequences of this policy of the 
Prussian ruling circles, who were intent on militarising the country 
and creating an army "trained to passive obedience, drilled into a 
mere instrument of the dynasty which owns it as its property and 
uses it according to its caprice" (this volume, pp. 495, 496). 
Marx and Engels denounced the conciliatory tactics of the 
German liberal bourgeoisie and also the bourgeois and petty-
bourgeois democrats. They pointed to the timidity and inconsis­
tency of their opposition to the government, their readiness to 
make concessions, and their actual orientation towards the 
unification of Germany round monarchical Prussia. In his article 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
"Preparations for War in Prussia" Engels pointed out ironically that 
the only retort from these "mock representatives" of the people to 
the government's military reform launched without die sanction of 
the Provincial Diet would be "some low grumbling, pickled with 
fervent assertions of dynastic loyalty, and unbounded confidence in 
the Cabinet" (this volume, p. 495). 
Some of the articles included in this volume fill in the details of 
the picture of the Second Empire presented in Herr Vogt They 
focus on the counter-revolutionary essence of the Bonapartist 
regime, the internal situation in France, and the mainsprings of 
the adventurist foreign policy pursued by its rulers. In his articles 
"Affairs in France", "Events in Syria.—Session of the British 
Parliament.—The State of British Commerce", and others, Marx 
showed that behind the growth of foreign trade and the spread of 
the railways, there were signs of the rapid economic collapse of 
the Second Empire—the fifty per cent increase in the national debt, 
the threat of financial bankruptcy, the decline of agriculture and the 
ruination of the peasantry. "The Empire  itself,"  he wrote, "is the 
great incubus whose burden grows in a greater ratio than the 
productive powers of the French nation" (this volume, p. 333). The 
instability of the Bonapartist regime was becoming increasingly 
apparent and "the rebellious spirit of Gaul is rekindling from its 
cinders". The rulers of the Second Empire, as always, saw the way 
out of the crisis in foreign-policy adventures. This was what gave rise 
to the plan for "some fresh and thrilling crusade, to plunge his 
Empire again into the Lethe of war-hallucinations". This was the 
purpose of Napoleon Ill's colonial expedition to Syria (this volume, 
pp. 431, 430). 
Marx exposed the annexationist plans of the Bonapartist circles 
with regard to the left bank of the Rhine, and also the 
demagoguery of their promises to assist in furthering the 
unification of the North German states around Prussia in return 
for the cession of the Rhineland to France (see "Preparations for 
Napoleon's Coming War on the Rhine", "The Emperor Napoleon 
III and Prussia", "Interesting from Prussia", and others). 
Economic problems and also the internal development of 
Britain, Austria and Russia, and the situation in the colonial world, 
figure among the themes of the journalistic writings included in this 
volume, and the ideas expressed on these questions in previous years 
are developed in many of them. 
In some of his articles Marx analysed the state of the British 
economy and against this background considered the general 
economic condition of the bourgeois world. In two surveys entided 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
"British Commerce" Marx noted that one of the peculiar features 
of the capitalist economy was the involvement of distant regions of 
the globe in world trade and the interdependence of the economic 
processes going on in the world. These problems are also treated 
in Marx's articles on the Anglo-French trade agreement of 1860. 
In his reviews on "The State of British Manufacturing 
Industry" Marx used official data—the reports of the factory 
inspectors—to analyse the mechanism of the industrial system and 
the various forms of the exploitation of the working class. 
Specifically, he pointed out that child labour was being widely used 
in British factories although Britain was at the time an advanced 
industrial country. In breach of laws already passed to restrict rht 
use of child labour, the so-called apprentice system had been revived. 
Agreements were being made between manufacturers and boards of 
guardians for the employment of destitute children who had no 
other means of subsistence. In some industries (at the calico-
printing, dyeing and bleaching factories), Marx observed, the 
working day of women and children of tender age was virtually 
unlimited and they toiled 14-15 hours a day while their real wages 
tended to decrease. The industrial accident rate was appalling and 
safety regulations were applied at by no means all factories (this 
volume, pp. 416-18). 
Marx and Engels were by this time paying more and more 
attention to the situation in Russia. They attached tremendous 
importance to the Russian peasant movement for the abolition of 
serfdom and regarded this movement as a massive reserve for the 
European revolution (see Marx's letter to Engels of January 11, 
1860,  present edition, Vol. 41). In his article "Russia Using 
Austria.— The Meeting at Warsaw" Marx delves into the position 
of the various classes of Russian society on the eve of the 
imminent abolition of serfdom and stresses the likelihood of a deal 
between the Tsarist Government and the nobility in the interests of 
the big landowners and at the expense of the broad masses of the 
peasantry. He wrote that "an understanding ... has been arrived at 
between the existing powers at the cost of the oppressed class" (this 
volume, p. 486). 
The above-mentioned article by Marx, Engels' articles "The Sick 
Man of Austria", "Austria—Progress of the Revolution", and 
others examine the process of the decay of the Austrian Empire, 
torn by internal contradictions and intensification of the national 
liberation struggle of the peoples within its borders. Marx 
associates the final disintegration of the Austrian Empire with 
the German revolution, which, he believed, would have "one 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
of its centers at Vienna and the other at Berlin" (this volume, 
p. 487). 
A number of works by Engels on military subjects have been 
included in the volume. Engels continued his profound study of 
the problems of military theory, specifically analysing the character 
of revolutionary wars, the influence of the advance of military 
technology on tactics and on the methods of warfare, and studying 
the history of the making and perfection of various weapons. In 
his articles on the Italian events Engels analysed the campaigns of 
Garibaldi's volunteers in Sicily and Calabria from the military 
point of view. In a series of articles "On Rifled Cannon" Engels 
considered the development of artillery. His articles "Military 
Reform in Germany", "British Defenses" and "Could the French 
Sack London?" deal with military problems in connection with 
international relations and the mounting military conflicts. The 
article "The British Volunteer Force" discusses the class composi­
tion of volunteer troops. 
* * * 
The volume comprises 45 works by Marx and Engels, including 
Marx's Herr Vogt, 35 articles written for the New-York Daily 
Tribune (some of them were reprinted in its special issues, the 
New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune and the New-York Weekly Tribune) 
and 9 letters and statements that Marx sent to the editors of 
various newspapers. There are 8 works that appear in English for 
the first time— Herr Vogt and 7 letters and statements sent by 
Marx to the newspapers. The other works originally written in 
English had not been reprinted since their publication in 1860. 
One of Marx's statements (written in English) was never published 
in his lifetime. 
In the section "From the Preparatory Materials" there appear 
for the first time in English the passages that Marx copied from 
Szabo's book The State Policy of Modern Europe, from the Beginning of 
the Sixteenth Century to the Present Time. 
In preparing the present volume for the press the sources used 
by Marx were checked and the necessary corrections made. In 
quoting the works of other authors Marx sometimes ran para­
graphs together, omitted authors' italics and introduced his own. 
He also abridged some passages and gave only a general summing 
up of their content. The present volume retains Marx's form of 
quotation. The most substantial changes are indicated in footnotes 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Preiace 
and passages left out of quotations are indicated by omission 
marks in square brackets. For the convenience of the readers some 
additional paragraphing has been introduced; obvious misprints 
have been silendy corrected. 
In studying the historical material quoted in Marx's and Engels' 
articles, it must be borne in mind that they made use of 
newspaper information which in a number of cases proved to be 
inaccurate. 
In cases where an article has no title, the editors have provided 
one which is given in square brackets. 
The volume was compiled and the text prepared by Tatyana 
Yeremeyeva, who also wrote the preface and notes. Chapter XII 
of the pamphlet Herr Vogt and the section "From the Preparatory 
Materials" were prepared by Marina Vaninskaya, who also 
compiled the name index and the indexes of quoted and 
mentioned literature and of periodicals. The subject index was 
compiled by Marien Arzumanov. The editor of the volume was 
Lev Churbanov (Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). 
The publishers express their gratitude to the editors of Marx/ 
Engels, Gesamtausgabe —MEGA, Bd. 18, erste Abteilung (Institute 
of Marxism-Leninism of the CC, Socialist Unity Party of Ger­
many),  for the loan of materials used in preparing the volume. 
The translations were made by Rodney Livingstone and edited 
by Nicholas Jacobs (Lawrence & Wishart), Salo Ryazanskaya, 
Yelena Chistyàkova, Victor Schnittke (Progress Publishers) and 
Vladimir Mosolov, scientific editor (Institute of Marxism-Leninism 
of the CC CPSU). 
The volume was prepared for the press by the editor Lyudgarda 
Zubrilova and the assistant editor Natalya Belskaya (Progress 
Publishers). 

=====第25页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
October 1 859-December 1860 

=====第26页=====

=====第27页=====
3 
Karl Marx 
[LETTER TO THE EDITOR 
OF THE ALLGEMEINE ZEITUNG] 1 
October 19, 1859, 9 Graf ton Terrace, 
Maitland Park, 
Haverstock Hill, London3 
Sir, 
As long as I had a hand in the German press I attacked the 
Allgemeine Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung attacked me. 
However, this does not of course prevent me from assisting the 
Allgemeine Zeitung, as far as it lies in my power, in a case in which 
it has in my view fulfilled the primary duty of the press: that of 
the denunciation of humbug. b The enclosed document would be a 
legal document here in London.0  I do not know whether it is the 
same in Augsburg. I have procured the said document because 
Blind refused to stand by the statement which he had made to me 
and others, which I passed on to Liebknecht, and which allowed the 
latter no doubts about the denunciation contained in the anonymous 
pamphlet. d 
Yours very sincerely, 
Dr. K. Marxe 
Published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, Printed according to the news-
No. 300, October 27, 1859 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The Allgemeine Zeitung of October 27, 1859, in which this letter was 
published, gives the address inaccurately: "I. Grafton Terrace, Quai, Haydpark, 
Haverstock Hill, London." In the issue of November 21, which carried Marx's 
"Declaration" (see this volume, pp. 8-9), the address is given correctly.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
c This refers to the statement by the compositor Vögele to the effect that the 
pamphlet Zur Warnung was written in Blind's hand (see this volume, pp. 
123-25.).—Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 122-24.— Ed. 
e "Editor of the former Rheinische Zeitung" (footnote added by the editors of 
the Allgemeiîie Zeitung). — Ed. 

=====第28页=====
4 
Karl Marx 
[STATEMENT TO THE EDITORS OF DIE REFORM, 
THE VOLKS-ZEITUNG AND THE ALLGEMEINE 
ZEITUNG]2 
London, November 7, 1859 
I see from a copy of Der Freischütz, No. 132, which a friend has 
sent me from Hamburg, that Eduard Meyen has felt obliged to 
place his unequivocally decisive weight into the scales of the Vogt 
affair. 3 The horse-power, or should I say, the donkey-powerb  of 
his logic is concentrated in the great thesis: that because he was a 
friend of Blind, and because Blind failed to send him a copy of 
the anonymous pamphlet, the original document I had sent to the 
Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung must of necessity be a falsehood. In 
his sly litde way he takes good care, of course, not to say this 
direcdy; he says it indirectly. 
Incidentally, I wish that Herr Eduard Meyen would provide 
evidence to prove that my time is valueless enough to be 
squandered in attacks on the German vulgar democrats. 
At the end of 1850 I broke off all relations with the German 
emigration in London, which really did collapse once I had pulled 
from under it die one thing that had held it together: its 
antagonism towards me. The process of dissolution was hastened, 
above all, by the industry of such agents as Meyen who, for 
example, publicly agitated against the Ruge faction on behalf of 
the Kinkel faction. In the nine years that have meanwhile elapsed, 
I have been a constant contributor to the New-York Tribune, a 
paper witih 200,000 subscribers and hence a reading public 
roughly approximate to that of Der Freischütz. Have I ever even so 
much as mentioned the name of a single one of the German 
a This refers to the item marked **, "Der Process Carl Vogt's gegen die 
Augsburger Allg. Ztg.", Der Freischütz, No. 132, November 3, 1859.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English expressions "horse-power" and "donkey-power".—  Ed-

=====第29页=====
Statement to Editors of Reform, Volks-Zeitung & Allgemeine Zeitung 5 
vulgar democrats, or spent even so much as a single word on any 
of the despicable attacks that these men of honour have heaped 
upon my head in the German and especially the German-
American press over the past five years? 
During this time I did indeed attack, although I did not slander, 
"great democrats" of the sort that were dutifully admired by Herr 
Eduard Meyen. Such as the great democrat Lord Palmerston.3  My 
offence was all the more unforgivable because my "slanders" were 
reprinted not merely by English papers of the most diverse 
political tendencies—from the Chartist People's Paper to The Free 
Press of Mr. Urquhart—out also as a pamphlet at least 15,000 
copies of which were produced in London, Sheffield and Glasgow 
without any prompting by me. During that same period, 
moreover, I denounced the great democrat Louis Bonaparte, first 
in a work in German (Der achtzehnte  Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte)^ 
which was confiscated at all the German frontiers, but which 
circulated in considerable numbers in the United States and which 
appeared in extract in die then London organ of Chartism. 3 I 
have continued this "slander" of the "great democrat" Bonaparte 
in die Tribune to this day in die form of analyses of his financial 
system, his diplomacy, his warfare and his idées napoléoniennes. 4 
Louis Bonaparte has sent die New-York Times a public statement 
in gratitude0 for its opposition to these "slanders". Seven years 
ago I even denounced the "great democrat" Stieber in the 
Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial,d  which was pulped at 
the frontier of Baden and Switzerland. Herr Meyen will surely 
give me credit for that. Such slander is democratic nowadays since 
it takes place "with die permission of die high audiorities". But 
my frequent errors in timing are revealed not only by die organ of 
Herr Eduard Meyen, but also by diat of Herr Joseph Dumont in 
Cologne.*" When in 1848 and 1849 I took die liberty of coming out 
for the cause of the Hungarian, Italian and Polish nationalities in 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, who raged and foamed at die mouth 
more than die organ of Herr Joseph Dumont in Cologne? But at 
that time, of course, no Louis Napoleon Bonaparte had given his 
"liberal" blessing to the cause of these nationalities. That the 
a The reference is to Marx's pamphlet Lord  Palmerston  (see present edition, Vol. 
12).—  Ed. 
b The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see present edition, Vol.  11).—  Ed. 
c Instead of Dankschreiben (message of gratitude) Die Reform has Denkschreiben 
(memorandum), presumably a misprint.— Ed. 
d See present edition, Vol.  11.—  Ed. 
*' Kölnische Zeitung. — Ed. 

=====第30页=====
6 Karl Marx 
former editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung have remained true 
to their opinions is known even to the erstwhile Herr Joseph 
Dumont, now Giuseppe Delmonte, from Frederick Engels' pam­
phlet Po and Rhine? which appeared at the start of the war. But as 
for Eduard Meyen's democracy "in its narrower sense", I have 
ignored it for nine years and have only on two occasions, quite 
recently, broken my silence. The first time was to attack Kossuth 
and the second was in criticism of Herr Gottfried Kinkel. I did in 
fact make a number of marginal comments of a purely grammati­
cal nature on Kinkel's aesthetic effusions in the Hermann, and I 
published them in Das Volk. This was the only thing which I did write 
for Das Volk, apart from an article on the Peace of Villafranca under 
the title "Quid pro quo". b But in the eyes of Eduard Meyen, a "good 
democrat" is doubtless just as justified in violating the "despotic" 
rules of syntax as in deserting from the republican camp to that ot 
the royalists. 0 
I now find myself at the end of this epistle in the opposite 
difficulty to Hegel's at the beginning of his Logic? He wanted to 
advance from Being to Nothing, whereas I wish to move from 
Nothing to Being, namely from Eduard Meyen to a real case, the 
case of Vogt. To make it brief I ask Karl Blind the following 
questions: 
1. Did Blind impart to me information about Vogt on May 9 on 
the platform of the Urquhart meeting, information whose 
substance tallies precisely with that contained in the pamphlet Zur 
Warnung? 
2. Did Blind publish an anonymous article in the London Free 
Press of May 27, bearing the title "The Grand Duke Constantine 
to be King of Hungary",6  an article which, apart from the omission 
of the name of Vogt, repeats the substance of the pamphlet Zur 
Warnung? 
3. Did Blind cause the above-mentioned pamphlet to be printed 
at his expense in London in the print-shop of Herr F. Hollinger, 
Litchfield Street, Soho? f 
a See present edition, Vol. 16.— Ed. 
b The reference is to Marx's articles "Kossuth and Louis Napoleon", 
"Gatherings from the Press" and "Quid pro quo" (see present edition. Vol. 
16).—  Ed. 
c An allusion to Gottfried Kinkel's speech before the court martial in Rastatt on 
August 4, 1849.— Ed. 
d G. W. F. Hegel, Die Wissenschaft der Logik, Band I, Abteilung 2, Berlin, 
1833.—  Ed. 
e See this volume, pp.  122-23.—  Ed. 
f See this volume, pp. 116, 122, 123-24.— Ed. 

=====第31页=====
Statement to Editors of Reform, Volks-Zeitung 8c Allgemeine Zeitung 7 
Despite all the efforts of Meyen's democracy to misrepresent 
matters, and despite even that Great Unknown, the "outstanding 
lawyer" of Herr Joseph Dumont, everything still turns on the 
question: Who arranged for the pamphlet Zur Warnung to be 
printed? The only reason why the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung is 
being sued is the fact that this pamphlet was reprinted there. The 
only accusations of which Vogt feels compelled to clear his name 
in the eyes of the world are those contained in this pamphlet. The 
publisher of the pamphlet has, as Robert Peel would have said, 
three courses open to  himself. 3 Either he has knowingly lied. I do 
not believe this of Karl Blind. Or else he subsequently became 
convinced that the information which justified his printing the 
pamphlet was false. In that case he is under an even greater 
obligation to supply an explanation. Or, finally, he holds the proof 
in his hand, but wishes for private reasons of his own to hush the 
whole business up and endures with magnanimous resignation the 
rotten eggs that are hurled not at  himself,  but at me. But must not 
all private considerations lapse in such a vital matter as the need to 
throw light on the relations between the German Imperial Regent 
in partibusb  and the Emperor of the French de facto? 
Karl Marx 
Published in the supplement to Die Re- Printed according to the news-
form,  No. 139, November 19, 1859 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
3 This phrase is in English in the original.— Ed. 
b In partibus infidelium—literally: in parts inhabited by infidels. The words are 
added to the title of Roman Catholic bishops holding purely nominal dioceses in 
non-Christian countries. Here the expression means "only in word".— Ed. 

=====第32页=====
8 
Karl Marx 
DECLARATION 5 
Vogt, who knows the people he has to deal with, executed a 
very cunning manoeuvre when he shifted the source of the 
denunciation of himself from the so-called democratic camp into 
the socialist one. But I for my part have no interest in aiding and 
abetting this quid pro quo, and can therefore not permit Blind's 
declaration 3 in No. 313 of the Allgemeine Zeitung to go unan­
swered. 
1. On May 9, on the platform of the Urquhart meeting, Blind 
communicated to me all the accusations against Vogt contained in 
the pamphlet Zur Warnung. He gave the same details to others, to 
Freiligrath, for instance. Given the complete identity of both style 
and substance between his verbal statement and the printed 
pamphlet, he was naturally regarded as its author de prime  abord. h 
2. In the London Free Press of Mav 27, an anonymous article of 
Blind's appeared with the title '"The Grand Duke Constantine to 
be King of Hungary \c  which in ail essentials anticipated the 
pamphlet Zur Warnung. In that article Blind declared that he 
knew of liberals in Germany and democrats in London who had 
been offered "large bribes" d on behalf of Bonapartist propaganda. 
While Vogt's lawsuit was pending, I received a visit from Mr. 
D. Collet, the responsible editor of The Free  Press,  who asked me at 
Blind's request to make no use of my knowledge concerning the 
a See this volume, pp. 125-26.— Ed. 
b From the very outset.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 122-23.—Ed. 
d Marx uses the English expression.— Ed. 

=====第33页=====
Declaration 9 
authorship of the article in question. I replied to Mr. Collet—who 
found it quite appropriate—that I would not commit myself to 
anything but that my discretion in the matter would rather 
depend on Blind's conduct. 
3. Fidelio Hollinger's declaration is simply ridiculous.3 Fidelio 
Hollinger is aware that he has formally infringed English law by 
publishing the pamphlet without declaring the place of publication. He 
himself therefore issues a testimonial stating that he did not 
commit the peccadillo in question. It so happened that the reprint 
in Das Volkb  was made from the type still standing in Hollinger's 
print-shop. Thus even without the need to call witnesses, a simple 
comparison of the pamphlet and the reprint of it in Das Volk would 
be sufficient to prove to a court that the former "came from 
F. Hollinger's print-shop". The transfer of the trial from Augsburg 
to London would, in general, resolve the entire Blind-Vogt mystère. 
Karl Marx 
November 15, 1859 
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, 
Haverstock Hill, London 
Published in the supplement to the All- Printed according to the news-
gemeine Zeitung, No. 325, November 21, paper 
1859 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See Carl Vogt, Mein  Prozess gegen  die Allgemeine Zeitung,  Genf,  1859, Dokumente, 
S. 38. and also this volume, p. 12f> — Ed. 
h Das Volk, No. 7, June 18, 1859. See also this volume, p. 119.— Ed. 

=====第34页=====
10 
Karl Marx 
PROSECUTION OF THE AUGSBURG GAZETTE 6 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE FREE PRESS 
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, 
H aver stock Hill, 
London, 4th February, 1860 
Sir, 
You will remember that The Free Press of May 27th, 1859, 
published an article headed: "The Grand Duke Constantine to be 
King of Hungary. " In that article Mr. Vogt, of Geneva, although 
not named, was pointed at, in a manner intelligible to the German 
refugees, as a Bonapartist agent, who, on the outset of the Italian 
war, had offered "large bribes" to Liberals in Germany, and 
German Democrats in London. The writer gave vent to his intense 
delight at the indignant repulse those attempts at bribery had met 
with. Mr. Charles Blind I assert to be the author of that notice. 
You can correct me if I am in error. Some time later, there 
circulated in London an anonymous German pamphlet, entitled 
Zur Warnung (a warning), which, in point of fact, may be 
considered a reproduction of the article of The Free  Press,  only that 
it gave fuller details and Vogt's name. Having been reprinted in a 
German London paper, entitled Das Volk* (The People); thence 
the anonymous pamphlet found its way to the columns of the 
Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung b (The Augsburg Gazette), which, 
consequently, was sued by Mr. Vogt for libel. Meanwhile I had 
obtained from Mr. Vögele, a compositor then employed by Mr. 
Hollinger, the publisher of Das Volk, a written declaration c to the 
effect, that the pamphlet was printed in Hollinger's office, and 
drawn up by Mr. Charles  Blind.  This declaration, as I told you at 
the time, was sent over to the Augsburg Gazette. The Augsburg 
* Das Volk, No. 7, June 18, 1859.— Ed. 
b "K. Vogt und die deutsche Emigration in London", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 173 
(supplement), June 22, 1859.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 3, 123-25.— Ed. 

=====第35页=====
Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette 11 
tribunal having declined to decide the case, Mr. Blind at last came 
out in the Augsburg Gazette? Not content with a point-blank denial 
of his authorship of the anonymous pamphlet, he, in terms most 
positive, declared the pamphlet not to have issued from Hollinger's 
printing office. In proof of this latter statement, he laid before the 
public a declaration b signed by Hollinger  himself,  and one Wiehe, 
a compositor, who, as he said, had for eleven months been 
continuously employed by Hollinger. To this joint declaration of 
Blind, Hollinger and Wiehe I replied in the Augsburg Gazette0; but 
Blind,  in his turn, repeated his denial, and again referred to the 
testimony of Hollinger and Wiehe.d  Vogt, who, from the begin­
ning, and for purposes of his own, had designed me as the secret 
author of the pamphlet, then published a brochure" full of the most 
infamous calumnies against  myself. 
Now, before taking any further step, I want to show up the 
fellows who evidently have played into the hands of Vogt. I, 
therefore, publicly declare that the statement of Blind, Wiehe and 
Hollinger, according to which the anonymous pamphlet was not 
printed in Hollinger's office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, is a 
deliberate lie. First, Mr. Vögele, one of the compositors, formerly 
employed by Hollinger, will declare upon oath that the said 
pamphlet was printed in Hollinger's office, was written in the 
hand-writing of Mr.  Blind,  and partly composed by Hollinger 
himself.  Secondly, it can be judicially proved that the pamphlet 
and the article in Das Volk, have been taken off the same types. 
Thirdly, it will be shown that Wiehe was not employed by 
Hollinger for eleven consecutive months, and, especially, was not 
employed by him at the time of the pamphlet's publication. Lastly, 
witnesses may be summoned in whose presence Wiehe himself 
confessed having been persuaded by Hollinger to sign the wilfully 
false declaration in the Augsburg Gazette. Consequently, I again 
declare the above said Charles Blind to be a deliberate liar. 
If I am wrong, he may easily confound me by appealing to an 
English Court of Law. 
Karl Marx 
Published as a pamphlet on February 4, Reproduced from the pamphlet 
1860 
a This refers to Karl Blind's declaration dated "London, November 3" in the 
Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 313, November 9, 1859.— Ed. 
b ibid. See also this volume, p.  126.—  Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 8-9.— Ed. 
d The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 345, December 11, 1859.— Ed. 
e Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess.... —Ed. 

=====第36页=====
12 
Karl Marx 
TO THE EDITORS OF THE VOLKS-ZEITUNG 
DECLARATION 7 
I hereby make it known that I have taken steps preparatory to 
instituting legal proceedings for libel against the Berlin National-
Zeitung in connection with the leading articles in Nos. 37 and 41 a 
regarding Vogt's pamphlet Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine 
Zeitung. I reserve the right to answer Vogt in writing at a later date 
since this requires putting a number of questions to people not at 
present in Europe. 
For the moment then I shall say only this: 
1. To judge by the anthology in the National-Zeitung—strangely 
the book itself has up to now been unobtainable in London either 
from booksellers or the acquaintances to whom Herr Vogt had 
earlier sent his so-called Studien" — Vogt's concoction is merely the 
elaboration of a sketch that he published nine months ago in his 
private Moniteur, the Biel Handels-Courier. 0 At the time I had his 
lampoon published in London without comment. Such a simple 
procedure was sufficient here, where the situations and per­
sonalities are well known, to provide a judgment on the Herr 
Professor. 
2. The pretext which led Herr Vogt to launch his campaign 
against me, like the pretext for the Italian campaign, was an 
"idea". I was alleged to be the author of the anonymous pamphlet 
Zur Warnung. From the enclosed circular 0 in English, which I have 
had published here, you will see that I have taken steps to compel 
a "Karl Vogt und die Allgemeine Zeitung" and "Wie man radikale Flugblätter 
macht", National-Zeitung, Nos. 37 and 41, January 22 and 25, 1860.— Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, Genf und Bern, 1859.— Ed. 
c An allusion to Vogt's article "Zur Warnung" in the Schweizer Handels-Courier, 
No. 150 (special supplement), June 2, 1859.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp.  10-11.—  Ed. 

=====第37页=====
To the Editors of the Volks-Zeitung 13 
Herr Blind and consorts either to concede the falseness of that 
pretext by their silence, or to be convicted of it by an English 
court. 
February 6, 1860 
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, 
H aver stock Hill, London Karl Marx 
Published in the Volks-Zeitung, No. 35, 
February 10, 1860; in the supplement to 
the Kölnische Zeitung, No. 41, February 
10, 1860; in Die Reform, No. 18, February 
11, 1860; in the supplement to the 
Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 48, February 17, 
1860 (with alterations) 3 and in other 
German papers Printed according to the Volks-
Zeitung checked with the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The manuscript of this declaration in the Allgemeine Zeitung written in Jenny 
Marx's hand and a covering note in Marx's handwriting have been preserved.— Ed. 

=====第38页=====
14 
Karl Marx 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY TELEGRAPH 
In your to-day's impression you publish, under the title: "The 
Journalistic Auxiliaries of Austria", a letter full of libellous and 
scandalous imputations against my person. That letter, purporting 
to be written at Frankfort on the Main, but probably indited at 
Berlin, is, in point of fact, but a clumsy amplification of two 
articles contained in the Berlin National-Zeitung d.d. January 22 
and January 25,a which paper will have to give account of  itsb 
calumnies before a Prussian Court of Law. The false pretext, upon 
which Vogt launched his libel against me, c is the assertion that I 
am the author of the anonymous German pamphlet: Zur Warnung 
(a warning), first circulated at London, and afterwards reprinted 
in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung. 6 From the inclosed print e you 
will see that I have provoked my adversaries to bring this point to 
a judicial issue before an English Court of Law. 
In conclusion, if you do not prefer being sued for libel, I 
request you to make in your next number an amende honorable{ for 
the recklessness with which you dare vilifying a man of whose 
a See this volume, p.  12.—  Ed. 
b Marx has "his".— Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess.... —Ed. 
d "K. Vogt und die deutsche Emigration in London", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 
173 (supplement), June 22, 1859.— Ed. 
e See this volume, pp.  12-13.—  Ed. 
i Apology.— Ed. 

=====第39页=====
To the Editor of The Daily Telegraph 15 
personal character, political past, literary productions, and social 
standing, you cannot but confess to be utterly ignorant. 
Your obedient servant, 
Dr. Karl Marx 
February 6, 1860 
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, 
Haverstock Hill, London 
First published in Russian in: K. Marx Printed according to the rough 
and F. Engels, Works, Vol. XXV, Moscow, copy of the English original 
1934 

=====第40页=====
16 
Karl Marx 
TO THE EDITORS 
OF THE AUGSBURG ALLGEMEINE ZEITUNG 
February 21, 1860 
6 Thorncliffe Grove, 
Oxford Road, Manchester 
Personal 
In one of the two letters dated October 16, 1859 which I have 
received from the editors of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, it 
says literally: 
"You may rest assured of our particular gratitude whenever the occasion should 
present itself for us, highly esteemed Sir, to express to you our thanks." 
That I neither desired nor expected either "thanks" or 
"particular gratitude" from the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung is 
made perfectly plain in my reply of October 19. a What I did 
expect, however, in this particular matter, was at least the common 
fairness15 which no English paper, regardless of its shade of 
opinion, ever ventures to refuse. 
The "particular gratitude" and the "thanks" are actually 
expressed in the following manner: 
1. My first declarationc was not printed at all. There appeared 
instead Blind's impertinent statement0 together with two false 
pieces of evidence obtained by conspiracy.6 Die Reform in 
Hamburg published my declaration without delay. 
2. In the case of my reply to Blind I had to resort to douce 
violence1 to secure its insertion.8 And even then it did not appear, 
a See this volume, p.  3.—  Ed. 
b Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 4-7.— Ed. 
d The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 313, November 9, 1859.— Ed. 
e Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
1 Gentle pressure.— Ed. 
g See this volume, pp. 8-9.— Ed. 

=====第41页=====
To the Editors of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung 17 
as I had demanded in all fairness, in the same place as Blind's 
attack, namely in the main portion of the paper. 
3. The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung then printed a second 
declaration by Blind 3 in which he had the effrontery to speak of 
barefaced lies and to appeal yet again to the criminally liable 
testimony of Wiehe and Hollinger. The paper then declared the 
correspondence closed and so denied me the right to reply. 
4. On February 6 I sent my final declaration together with the 
English circular^ to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung. The highly 
esteemed editorial board pushed it to one side and instead 
published Blind's declaration 0 which had only come into being as the 
consequence of my circular. They naturally took good care not to 
publish the billet doux this great diplomat had enclosed. They also 
published Biscamp's declaration, 0 dated three days later than mine 
(viz., London, February 9). Finally, having convinced themselves of 
the fact that my declaration had long since been printed by the 
Kölnische Zeitung, the Volks-Zeitung, etc., they resolve on publica­
tion, 6 but—they also take upon themselves the endearing liberty 
of censoring me and making arbitrary alterations. In Cologne in 
1842-43 I suffered from the twofold Royal Prussian censorship,9 
but never imagined that in the year 1860 I would in addition fall 
victim to the censorship of Herr Dr. Kolb & Co. 
I consider that more specific characterisation of these methods is 
utterly pointless. 
K. Marx 
First published in Russian in: K. Marx Printed according to the original 
and F. Engels, Works, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 
]cj34 Published in English for the first 
time 
a The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 345 (supplement), December 11, 1859.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp.  10-13.—  Ed. 
c Karl Blind, "Gegen Karl Vogt", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 44 (supplement), 
February 13, I860.— Ed. 
d Elard Biscamp, "Erklärung", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 46 (supplement), 
February 15, I860.— Ed. 
e See this volume, pp.  12-13.—  Ed. 

=====第42页=====
18 
Karl Marx 
[TO THE EDITORS OF DIE REFORM] 10 
For Information 
With regard to the effusions of Herr Eduard Meyen in Der 
Freischütz, Nos. 17 to 21, a I would say only this: 
The libel action I am conducting against the Berlin National-
Zeitung will achieve all that is necessary to provide a legal 
clarification of Vogt's pamphlet.15  His associate Eduard Meyen 
cannot lay claim to a like honour. The only thing I can do for 
Eduard Meyen is to assign to him a niche appropriate to his 
dimensions in the pamphlet which is due to appear after the 
conclusion of the court proceedings. 
Karl Marx 
Manchester, February 28, 1860 
Published in Die Reform, No. 29, March Printed according to the news-
7, 1860 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The reference is to Eduard Meyen's article "Carl Vogts Kampf gegen die 
Augsburger Allgem. Zeitung und die Marxianer", Der Freischütz, Nos.  17-21, 
February 9, 11, 14, 16 and 18, I860.— Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess.... —Ed. 

=====第43页=====
19 
Karl Marx 
DECLARATION n 
At the beginning of February 1860 the editorial board of the 
Allgemeine Zeitung were kind enough to publish a declaration by 
myself which began with these words: 
"I hereby make it known that I have taken steps preparatory to 
instituting legal proceedings for libel against the Berlin National-
Zeitung in connection with the leading articles in Nos. 37 and 41 
regarding Vogt's pamphlet Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine 
Zeitung. I reserve the right to answer Vogt in writing at a later 
date." 3 
In the course of February 1860 I brought a libel suit in Berlin 
against F. Zabel, the responsible editor of the National-Zeitung. My 
lawyer, Legal Counsellor Weber, resolved at first on an official 
investigation. With a ruling of April 18, 1860 the Public Prosecutor 
refused to "take action" against F. Zabel, on the grounds that 
there was no public interest involved. On April 26, 1860 his refusal 
was confirmed by the Chief Public Prosecutor. 
My lawyer then began civil proceedings. The Royal Municipal 
Court in a ruling of June 8, 1860 prohibited me from proceeding 
with my lawsuit on the grounds that the genuinely defamatory 
"utterances and statements" of F. Zabel's were merely quotations 
from other persons, and that the "intention to insult" was not 
present. The Royal Court of Appeal for its part declared in a ruling 
of July 11, 1860 that the alleged use of quotation did not affect 
the culpability of the articles, but that the defamatory passages 
contained in them did not refer to my "person". Furthermore, "in 
the present case" the intention to insult "could not be assumed". 
a See this volume, p. 12.— Ed. 

=====第44页=====
20 Karl Marx 
Thus the Royal Court of Appeal confirmed the negative ruling of 
the Municipal Court. In a ruling of October 5, 1860, which I 
received on October 23 of this year, the Royal Supreme Tribunal 
found that "in the present case" no "legal error" on the part of the 
Royal Court of Appeal "could be discerned". The prohibition on suing 
F. Zabel was thus sustained and my claim did not reach the stage 
of being accorded a public hearing. 
My reply to Vogt will appear in a few days. 
Karl Marx 
London, November 24, 1860 
Published in the supplement to the All­
gemeine Zeitung, No. 336, December 1, 
1860 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第45页=====
Karl Marx 
HERR VOGT12 

=====第46页=====
Written between February and November Printed according to the book 
1860 
Published in English for the first 
Published as a book in London in 1860 time 
Signed: Karl Marx 

=====第47页=====
S3on 
KarC  îtlarç. 
$1« #e*f# ft 60, beutle Ött^anUung» 
% FENCHURCH STBEET, Ex. 
I860. 
Title-page of the first edition of Herr Vogt by Karl Marx 

=====第48页=====

=====第49页=====
25 
PREFACE 
Under the date "London, February 6, 1860", I published a 
declaration3  in the Berlin Volks-Zeitung, the Hamburg Reform and 
a number of other German papers, which began with these words: 
"I hereby make it known that I have taken steps preparatory to 
instituting legal proceedings for libel against the Berlin National-
Zeitung in connection with the leading articles in Nos. 37 and 41 
regarding Vogt's pamphlet, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine 
Zeitung. I reserve the right to answer Vogt in writing at a later 
date." 
The present publication will make it clear why I chose to answer 
Karl Vogt in writing, while challenging the National-Zeitung 
through the courts. 
During February 1860 I went ahead with the libel action against 
the National-Zeitung}" On October 23 of this year, after the case 
had gone through four preliminary stages, I received a ruling 
from the Royal Prussian Supreme Tribunal definitively refusing 
me permission to put my case and so dismissing my action before 
it could be heard in open court. Had the latter come to pass, as I 
had a right to expect, I would have been spared the necessity of 
writing the first third of the present pamphlet. A straightforward 
reproduction of the verbatim report of the court proceedings 
would have been quite sufficient and I would have been spared 
the hateful task of having to answer accusations directed at my 
a See this volume, pp.  12-13.—  Ed. 
b See Marx's letters to Legal Counsellor Weber dated February 13, 21 and 24, 
1860 (present edition, Vol. 41), and this volume, pp. 19-20.— Ed. 

=====第50页=====
26 Karl Marx 
own person and therefore of having to speak about  myself.  I have 
always taken such pains to avoid this that Vogt could well expect 
his cock-and-bull stories to have some success. However, sunt certi 
denique fines? Vogt's concoction, summarised by the Nationai-
Zeitung in its own fashion, accused me of a series of dishonourable 
actions which require a literary refutation now that the road to a 
public rebuttal in the courts has been definitively barred. But even 
apart from this consideration, which left me no alternative, I had 
other reasons, since in any case I had to deal with Vogt's tall 
stories about me and my party comrades, for examining them in 
greater detail. On the one hand, there was the almost unanimous 
jubilation with which the so-called liberal German press greeted 
his alleged revelations. On the other hand, the analysis of his 
concoction presented me with the opportunity to dissect an 
individual who stands for a whole trend. 
My reply to Vogt has forced me in a number of places to expose 
a partie honteuse b in the history of the emigration. In doing so I 
am only making use of the right to "self-defence". Moreover, 
except for a few persons, the emigration can be reproached with 
nothing worse than indulging illusions that were more or less 
justified by the circumstances of the period, or perpetrating follies 
which arose necessarily from the extraordinary situation in which 
it unexpectedly found  itself.  I am speaking here, of course, only 
of the early years of the emigration. A comparative history, say 
from 1849 to 1859, of governments and of bourgeois society on 
the one hand and the emigration on the other, would constitute 
the most outstanding apologia of the latter that could possibly be 
written. 
I know in advance that the same astute men who shook their 
heads sagely at the importance of Vogt's "revelations", when his 
concoction first appeared, will now be unable to comprehend why 
I am wasting my time refuting his childish allegations; while the 
"liberal" pen-pushers who gloatingly took up Vogt's common­
places and worthless lies and hastened to hawk them around the 
German, Swiss, French and American press will now find my 
mode of dealing with themselves and their hero outrageously 
offensive. But never mind!c 
The political and legal aspects of the present work require no 
prefatory comment. I would only make one point to avoid possible 
a There are certain limits after all (Horace, Satires, Book I, Satire  1).—  Ed. 
b A disgraceful affair.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 

=====第51页=====
Herr Vogt. —Preface 27 
misunderstandings: men who even before 1848 agreed that the 
independence of Poland, Hungary and Italy has to be upheld not 
only as the right of the nations concerned, but also in the interests 
of Germany and Europe, came to advance wholly opposed ideas 
about the tactics to be adopted by Germany vis-à-vis Louis 
Bonaparte in connection with the Italian war of 1859. 13 This clash 
of opinions sprang from conflicting assessments of the facts of the 
underlying situation which it will be the prerogative of a later age to 
resolve. For my part, I am concerned here only with the opinions 
of Vogt and his clique. Even the views he claimed to uphold, and 
in the fantasy of an uncritical rabble did uphold, actually fall 
outside the scope of my criticism. I deal only with the views he 
really upheld. 
In conclusion I wish to express my sincere gratitude for the 
ready assistance I have received while writing this pamphlet, not 
only from long-standing friends in the party, but also from many 
members of the emigration in Switzerland, France and England 
with whom I had earlier not been at all close and some of whom I 
still do not personally know. 
London, November 17, 1860 
Karl Marx 

=====第52页=====
28 
I 
THE BRIMSTONE GANG14 
Clarin: Malas pastillas gasta;  
hase untado 
Con ungüento de azufre. 
(Calderôn) a 
The "well-rounded character"? as the barrister Hermann so 
delicately described his spherical client, the hereditary Vogt of 
Nough thorough, 15 to the District Court in Augsburg, the "well-
rounded character" begins his enormous travesty of history0 as 
follows: 
"Among the refugees of 1849 the term Brimstone Gang, or else the no less 
characteristic name of the Bristlers,d  referred to a number of people who after 
being scattered throughout Switzerland, France and England gradually congre­
gated in London, and there they revered Herr Marx as their visible leader. The 
political principle of these fellows was the dictatorship of the proletariat, etc." 
(Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung by Karl Vogt, Geneva, December 1859, 
p. 136). 
The "Magnum Opus"16  into which this momentous piece of 
information had found its way appeared in December 1859. Eight 
months earlier, however, in May 1859, our "well-rounded 
character" had published an article in the Biel Handels-Courier 
which must be regarded as an outline of the more extensive 
travesty of history. Let us consider the original text: 
"Ever since the failure of the revolution of 1849," so brags our Commis voyageur 
from Biel, "a clique of refugees has gradually congregated in London, whose 
a He's free with empty phrases; ... he has smeared himself with sulphur ointment 
(El Mâgico prodigioso, Act 2).— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx puns on the phrase abgerundete Natur which can mean 
both "a well-rounded character" (in the physical sense) and "an intellectually 
mature character". In his speech of October 24, 1859 the barrister Hermann used 
the phrase in the latter sense (see Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 17).— Ed. 
c Cf. Johann Fischart, Äffentheurliehe, Naupengeheurliehe Geschichtklitterung.... — 
Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 38-40.— Ed. 

=====第53页=====
Herr Vogt. — I. The Brimstone Gang 29 
members were in those days (!) known among the Swiss emigration as the 'Bristlers' 
or the 'Brimstone Gang'. Their leader is Marx, the former editor of the Rheinische 
Zeitung in Cologne—their slogan, 'Social Republic, Workers' Dictatorship'—their 
business, establishing contacts and hatching plots." 3 (Reprinted in the "Magnum 
Opus",  Section 3, Documents, No. 7, pp. 31, 32.) 
In the course of eight months the clique of refugees known as 
the "Brimstone Gang" "among the Swiss emigration" has been 
transformed for the benefit of a larger public into a mass 
"scattered throughout Switzerland, France and England" and 
known as the "Brimstone Gang" "among the refugees" in general. 
It is the old story of the men in buckram of Kendal green, told so 
merrily by Karl Vogt's prototype, the immortal Sir John  Falstaff, b 
whose zoological reincarnation has forfeited nothing as to sub­
stance. The original text of our Commis voyageur from Biel makes it 
quite obvious that both the "Brimstone Gang" and the "Bristlers" 
were local Swiss flora. Let us try and trace their natural history. 
In February 1860, having learnt from friends that a refugee 
association by the name of "Brimstone Gang" had indeed 
flourished in Geneva in the years 1849-50 and that Herr 
S. L. Borkheim, a well-situated merchant in the City of London, 
could provide more exact information about the origins, growth 
and decline of that ingenious association, I wrote to that 
gentleman, who was not known to me at the time, and after a 
personal meeting I received from him the following sketch which I 
print without making any alterations. 
"London, February 12, 1860 
18 Union Grove, Wandsworth Road 
"Dear Sir, 
"Although, until three days ago, we had not met personally, despite having 
lived for nine years in the same country, and for the most part in the same town, 
you have rightly presumed that I, as a fellow-exile, would not refuse you the 
information you require. 
"Very well then, here is what I know about the 'Brimstone Gang'. 
"In 1849, soon after we rebels had been forced out of Baden,17 a number of 
young men who as students, soldiers or businessmen had been on friendly terms in 
Germany before 1848, or who had become so during the revolution, gathered 
together in Geneva either of their own free will or else because they had been 
directed there by the Swiss authorities. 
"The refugees were not in a very rosy mood. The so-called political leaders 
blamed each other for the failure; the military leaders criticised each other's 
a Karl Vogt, "Zur Warnung", dated May 23, published in the Schweizer 
Handels-Courier, No. 150 (special supplement), June 2, 1859. Sometimes Marx 
ironically refers to this newspaper as the Biel Commis voyageur.—Ed. 
b Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene 4.— Ed. 

=====第54页=====
30 Karl Marx 
retrograde attacking movements, flanking manoeuvres and offensive withdrawals; 
people began to call each other names such as bourgeois republicans, socialists and 
communists; there was a flood of pamphlets, which did nothing to restore peace; 
spies were thought to be everywhere and, in addition to all this, the clothes of the 
majority gradually turned to rags and the signs of hunger could be seen on many 
faces.  In the midst of this misery the young people referred to above held together 
in friendship. They were: 
"Eduard Rosenblum, born in Odessa of German parents; he had studied 
medicine in Leipzig, Berlin and Paris. 
"Max Cohnheim from Fraustadt; he had been an office-boy, and on the 
outbreak of the revolution, he was doing a year as a volunteer in the artillery 
guards. 
"Korn,  a chemist and pharmacist from Berlin. 
"Becker, an engineer from the Rhineland. 
"And  myself,  who, after matriculating from the Werder school in Berlin in 1844, 
had studied in Breslau, 3 Greifswald and Berlin and was serving as a gunner in my 
home town of Glogau when the 1848 revolution began. 
"I think none of us was more than 24 years old. We lived close together, for a 
time indeed in the Grand Pré, all in the same house. Finding ourselves in a small 
country that presented so little opportunity for earning a living, our chief 
occupation was to keep ourselves from being too much depressed and demoralised 
by the general misery of refugee life and political dejection. The climate and the 
surrounding country were glorious—we did not belie our Brandenburg origins 
and accents and found the place 'luv'ly' [fanden die Jegend jottvoll b]. What belonged 
to one of us, the others had too, and if none of us had anything we could always 
find good-natured innkeepers and other friendly souls who took pleasure in 
lending us money on the strength of our young, vivacious faces. We really must 
have looked an honest set of madcaps! I must make specific thankful mention here 
of Bertin, the owner of the Café de l'Europe who was truly indefatigable in 
supplying us on tick, and not only us but also many other German and French 
refugees. In 1856, after six years' absence, I visited Geneva on my way back from 
the Crimea in order, with the piety of a well-intentioned tourist, to repay my debts. 
Our good old fat Bertin was amazed and assured me that I was the first person to 
give him this pleasure, but that he did not regret the 10,000-20,000 francs still 
owing to him from the refugees who were by now long since scattered to the four 
corners of the globe. Never mentioning the money they owed him, he asked with 
special affection about the fate of those I had been closest to. Unfortunately there 
was little I could tell him. 
"I return from this digression to the year 1849. 
"In those days we drank merrily and sang joyfully. I remember seeing refugees 
of every political shade and colour at our table, including Frenchmen and Italians. 
Convivial evenings spent in such dulci jubilo1^ seemed to everyone like veritable 
oases amidst the otherwise barren wastes of refugee life. Even those of our friends 
who sat on the Grand Council of Geneva, or were later to do so, would occasionally 
join our revels for the sake of a little relaxation. 
"Liebknecht, who is now here and whom I have only seen three or four times 
in last nine years, having met him each time by chance in the street, was a 
frequent member of the company. Students, doctors, former friends from school 
and university, touring on holiday, would often drink their way through many 
a The Polish name is Wroclaw.— Ed. 
b Berlin dialect.— Ed. 

=====第55页=====
Herr Vogt. —I. The Brimstone Gang 31 
glasses of beer and many a bottle of that good, cheap Mâcon. Sometimes we would 
spend days and even weeks on the Lake of Geneva without once going on shore; 
we sang old love-songs and, guitar in hand, paid court beneath the windows of the 
villas on both the Savoy and Swiss sides. 
"I shall not conceal the fact that our wild behaviour occasionally brought us into 
collison with the police. On such occasions that dear man, the late Albert Galeer, 
who was a by no means insignificant opponent of Fazy's among the Genevan 
citizenry, would read us a sermon, though in the kindest manner possible. 'You are 
wild lads,' he would say, 'but it is true that to have such a sense of humour amid 
the miseries, of exile shows that you are no weaklings, either in mind or body—a 
certain flexibility is indispensable.' The good-natured man found it hard to rebuke 
us more severely than that. He was a Grand Councillor of the Canton of Geneva. 
"To the best of my knowledge only one duel took place at the time, and that 
was fought with pistols by a Herr R...n and myself.  But the quarrel was not 
political. My second was a Genevan in the artillery who spoke nothing but French, 
and Oskar Galeer acted as adjudicator. He was the Grand Councillor's brother, a 
young man who unfortunately later died prematurely of a nervous disease while 
still a student in Munich. A second duel, also unpolitical in origin, was to have 
taken place between Rosenblum and a refugee lieutenant von F...g from Baden, 
who returned home soon after and, I believe, rejoined the resuscitated Baden 
army. On the morning fixed for the battle the quarrel was settled amicably before a 
blow was struck thanks to the intervention of Herr Engels 19—presumably the same 
man who is now said to be in Manchester and whom I have not seen again since 
those days. This Herr Engels was passing through Geneva and we drank many 
bottles of wine in his entertaining company. The acquaintance with him was very 
welcome to us, if I recollect rightly, especially because we could allow his purse to 
take charge of the proceedings. 
"We were associated neither with the so-called blue or red20 republicans, nor 
with the socialist or communist party leaders. We reserved the right to form our 
own opinions freely and independently (I will not say always correcdy) about the 
political activities of Imperial Regents, members of the Frankfurt Parliament21 and 
other speech-making bodies, about generals of the revolution no less than the 
corporals and Dalai Lamas of communism. For this reason as well as for other 
reasons which diverted us we even founded a weekly paper entitled 
RUMMELTIPUFF 
Organ of Rapscallionocracy* 
"The paper only survived two issues. Later, when I was arrested in France prior 
to being deported to this country, the French police confiscated my papers and 
diaries and I can no longer remember clearly whether it was official ban or lack of 
funds that brought about the paper's demise. 
"To the 'philistines'—and they were to be found in the ranks of the so-called 
bourgeois republicans as well as among the so-called communist workers3—we 
were known as the 'Brimstone Gang'. I sometimes imagine that we must have given 
* "If my memory serves me right, this epithet had been applied to all the 
liberal parties in the Parliament of one of the German petty principalities, or in the 
Frankfurt Parliament. We wished to immortalise it." (Borkheim) 
a This presumably refers to the advocates of Utopian workers' communism.— 
Ed. 

=====第56页=====
32 Karl Marx 
the name to ourselves. At any rate it was only attached to us in its cosy German 
sense. I am on the friendliest terms with fellow-exiles, who are friends of Herr 
Vogt, and with others who were, and probably still are, friends of yours. But I 
rejoice to say that I have never found the members of what I have called the 
'Brimstone Gang' referred to by anyone in a disrespectful tone in connection with 
either political or private matters. 
"This 'Brimstone Gang' is the only one known to me. It existed in Geneva from 
1849 to 1850. The few members who constituted this dangerous band were 
compelled, with the exception of Korn, to leave Switzerland in the middle of 1850, 
as they belonged to the category of undesirable aliens. Our departure meant the 
end of the 'Brimstone Gang'. I know nothing of other 'Brimstone Gangs', or 
whether other groups went by the name anywhere else, nor what goals they might 
have been pursuing. 
"Korn remained, I believe, in Switzerland and is said to have settled down as a 
pharmacist. Cohnheim and Rosenblum went to Holstein before the battle of 
Idstedt 22 in which, I believe, both took part. Later, in 1851, they sailed to America. 
Rosenblum returned to England at the end of the same year and left again in 1852 
for Australia and I have heard nothing more of him since 1855. Cohnheim is said 
to have been for some time now editor of the New-Yorker Humorist. Becker likewise 
emigrated to America in 1850. Unfortunately I have no definite subsequent news 
of him. 
"I myself stayed in Paris and Strasbourg during the winter of 1850-51 and, as I 
mentioned earlier, in February 1851 the French police sent me to England by brute 
force—for three months I was dragged from one prison to the other, 25 in all, and 
for the most part in heavy iron chains while en route. I now live here where, having 
devoted the first year to learning the language, I am engaged in business. My 
interest in the course of political events in my native land is as persistent and lively 
as ever, but I have held aloof from all the activities of the political cliques among 
the refugees. I am doing tolerably well or, as the English would say: Very well, sir, 
thank you.—You have only yourself to blame if I have made you wade through 
this long and at all events not very important story. 
"I remain, Sir, your humble servant, 
Sigismund L. Borkheim" 
Thus far Herr Borkheims letter. In anticipation of its historical 
significance the "Brimstone Gang" took the precaution of carving 
its own civic register into the Book of History. For the first issue 
of the Rummeltipuff is adorned by woodcut portraits of its 
founders. 
The prodigies of the "Brimstone Gang" had taken part in 
Struve's republican putsch of September 1848. They then sat in 
Bruchsal Gaol until May 1849 23 and finally fought as combatants 
in the campaign for the Imperial Constitution, and as a result 
were pushed across the Swiss frontier. At some point in 1850 two 
of their matadors, Cohnheim and Rosenblum, arrived in London 
where they "congregated" around Herr Gustav Struve. I did not 
have the honour of a personal acquaintance with them. But they 
established contact with me politically by attempting to form a 

=====第57页=====
Herr Vogt. — I. The Brimstone Gang 33 
counter-committee24  under Struve's leadership in opposition to the 
London Refugee Committee 25 which was directed at the time by 
Engels, Willich, myself and others. Their manifesto, hostile to us, 
appeared in the Berlin Abend-Post and elsewhere over the 
signatures of Struve, Rosenblum, Cohnheim, Bobzin, Grunich and 
Oswald. 
In the heyday of the Holy Alliance the Charcoal Gang (or 
Carbonari26) was a mine richly productive of police activities and 
aristocratic fantasies. Was it the intention of our Imperial 
Gorgellantua3  to exploit the "Brimstone Gang" in the same way as 
the Charcoal Gang had been exploited for the benefit of ye olde 
Teutonic burghers? If there were a Saltpeter Gang, it would round 
off the policemen's Trinity. Possibly, also, Karl Vogt is averse to 
brimstone because he cannot take the smell of gunpowder. Or is it 
that, like other patients, he cannot endure a medicine specific to 
his disease? It is well known that the magic Dr. Rademacher 
classifies diseases according to their antidotes. 27 The category of 
sulphur diseases would include what Hermann, the barrister in the 
District Court in Augsburg, referred to as his client's "well-rounded 
character",b  what Rademacher calls a "drum-like distension of the 
peritoneum", and what the even greater Dr. Fischart describes as 
"the great vaulted belly from France". 0 Thus all Falstaffian 
natures suffered from the sulphur disease in more than one sense. 
Or can it be that Vogt's zoological conscience has reminded him 
that sulphur is fatal to scab-mites, and that it is therefore utterly 
repugnant to scab-mites that have several times changed skin? 
For, as recent research has shown, only the mite that has shed its 
skin is capable of procreation and has therefore achieved 
self-awareness. What a charming contrast: sulphur on the one 
hand, the self-aware scab-mite on the other! But in any case, Vogt 
was obliged to prove to his "Emperor" d and to the liberal 
Teutonic burghers that all disasters "since the failure of the 
revolution of 1849" stem from the Brimstone Gang in Geneva, 
rather than from the December Gang in Paris.28  To punish me for 
my many outrages, committed over a period of years, against the 
head and members of the "Gang of December 10", Vogt 
a An allusion to Vogt. Gorgellantua or Gurgelgrosslinger= Gargantua. Gorgel-
Iantua occurs in Johann Fischart's adaptation of Rabelais' Gargantua et Pantag­
ruel. —Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  28.—  Ed. 
c Johann Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung..., 
S. 130.— Ed. 
d Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第58页=====
34 Karl Marx 
appointed me the leader of the Brimstone Gang which he has so 
reviled and which I had not heard of before the appearance of his 
"Magnum Opus". To render comprehensible the just indignation 
of this "agreeable companion"3  I may cite here some of the 
passages referring to the "December Gang" from my book Der 
achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, New York, 1852. (Cf. loc. 
cit., pp. 31, 32 and 61, 62. b) 
"This gang29  dates from the year 1849. On the pretext of 
founding a benevolent society, the lumpenproletariat of Paris had 
been organised into secret sections, each section being led by 
Bonapartist agents, with a Bonapartist general 0 at the head of the 
whole. Alongside decayed aristocratic roués with dubious means of 
subsistence and of dubious origin, alongside ruined and adventur­
ous offshoots of the bourgeoisie, were vagabonds, discharged sol­
diers,  discharged jailbirds, escaped galley slaves, rogues, mounte­
banks,  latzaroni? 0 pickpockets, tricksters, gamblers, maquereaus,d 
brothel-keepers, porters, casual labourers, organ-grinders, rag­
pickers, knife-grinders, tinkers, beggars—in short, the whole 
indefinite, disintegrated mass, thrown hither and thither, which 
the French term la bohème; from this kindred element Bonaparte 
formed the core of the Gang of December 10. A 'benevolent 
society'—in so far as, like Bonaparte, all its members felt the need 
of benefiting themselves at the expense of the labouring nation. 
"This Bonaparte, who constitutes himself chief of the lumpen-
proletariat, who here alone rediscovers in mass form the interests 
which he personally pursues, who recognises in this scum, offal, 
refuse of all classes the only class upon which he can base himself 
unconditionally, is the real Bonaparte, the Bonaparte sans phrase, 
unmistakable even when, later on, having become all-powerful, he 
pays his debt to a number of his former fellow-conspirators by 
decreeing their transportation to Cayenne along with the rev­
olutionaries. An old crafty roué, he conceives the historical life of 
the nations and their performances of state [Haupt- und Staatsak­
tionen] as comedy in the most vulgar sense, as a masquerade 
where the grand costumes, words and postures merely serve to 
a Marx applies to Vogt the expression angenehmer Gesellschafter which the latter 
used in reference to Jérôme Napoleon (see Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., Dokumente, 
S. 24).— Ed. 
b The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 
148-49,  150, 195-97). In the extracts quoted here Marx leaves out a number of 
passages and slightly alters others.— Ed. 
c Jean Pierre Piat.— Ed. 
d Pimps.— Ed. 

=====第59页=====
Herr Vogt. — I. The Brimstone Gang 35 
mask the pettiest knavery. Thus on his expedition to Strasbourg, 
where a trained Swiss vulture had played the part of the 
Napoleonic eagle. For his irruption into Boulogne he puts some 
London lackeys into French uniforms. They represent the army.31 
In his Gang of December 10, he assembles 10,000 rogues who 
are to play the part of the people, as Nick Bottom that of the 
lion3.... 
"What the national ateliers were for the socialist workers, what 
the Gardes mobiles^2  were for the bourgeois republicans, the Gang 
of December 10, the party fighting force characteristic of 
Bonaparte, was for him. On his journeys the detachments of this 
gang packing the railways had to improvise a public for him, stage 
public enthusiasm, roar vive l'Empereur, insult and beat up 
republicans, of course under the protection of the police. On his 
return journeys to Paris they had to form the advance guard, 
forestall counter-demonstrations or disperse them. The Gang of 
December 10 belonged to him, it was his work, his very own idea. 
Whatever else he appropriates is put into his hands by the force of 
circumstances; whatever else he does, the circumstances do for 
him or he is content to copy from the deeds of others. But he with 
official phrases about order, religion, family and property in 
public, before the citizens, and with the secret society of the 
Schufteries and Spiegelbergs, the society of disorder, prostitution 
and theft, behind him—that is Bonaparte himself as original 
author, and the history of the Gang of December 10 is his own 
history.... 
"Bonaparte would like to appear as the patriarchal benefactor 
of all classes. But he cannot give to one class without taking from 
another. Just as at the time of the Fronde it was said of the Duke 
of Guise that he was the most obligeant man in France because he 
had turned all his estates into his partisans' obligations to him, so 
Bonaparte would fain be the most obligeant man in France and 
turn all the property, all the labour of France into a personal 
obligation to  himself.  He would like to steal the whole of France in 
order to be able to make a present of her to France, or, rather, in 
order to be able to buy France anew with French money, for as the 
chief of the Gang of December 10 he must needs buy what ought 
to belong to him. And all the state institutions, the Senate, the 
Council of State, the legislative body, the courts, the Legion of 
Honour, the soldiers' medals, the wash-houses, the public works, 
a The reference is to Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream, Act I, Scene 
2.— Ed. 

=====第60页=====
36 Karl Marx 
the railways, the état-major" of the National Guard excluding 
privates, and the confiscated estates of the House of Orleans—all 
become parts of the institution of purchase. Every place in the 
army and in the government machine becomes a means of 
purchase. 
"But the most important feature of this process, whereby France 
is taken in order to be given back, is the percentages that find 
their way into the pockets of the head and the members of the 
Gang of December 10 during the transaction. The witticism with 
which Countess L.,b  the mistress of M. de Morny, characterised the 
confiscation of the Orleans estates: 'C'est le premier vol* de l'aigle', c 
is applicable to every flight of this eagle, which is more like a 
raven. He himself and his adherents call out to one another daily 
like that Italian Carthusian admonishing the miser who, with 
boastful display, counted up the goods on which he could yet live 
for years to come: 'Tu fai conto sopra i beni, bisogna prima far il 
conto sopra gli anni.' ** Lest they make a mistake in the years, they 
count the minutes. 
"A gang of shady characters push their way forward to the 
court, into the ministries, to the head of the administration and 
the army, a crowd of the best of whom it must be said that no one 
knows whence he comes, a noisy, disreputable, rapacious bohème 
that crawls into braided coats with the same grotesque dignity as 
the high dignitaries of Soulouque. One can visualise clearly this 
upper stratum of the Gang of December 10, if one reflects that 
Véron-Crevel *** is its preacher of morals and Granier de 
Cassagnac its thinker. When Guizot, at the time of his ministry, 
utilised this Granier on a hole-and-corner newspaper against the 
dynastic opposition, he used to boast of him with the quip: 'C'est le 
roi des drôles', 'he is the king of the buffoons." 1 One would do 
wrong to recall the Regency34 or Louis XV in connection with 
* Vol means flight and theft. [Note by Marx to The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis 
Bonaparte.] 
** "Thou countest thy goods, thou shouldst first count thy years." [Note by 
Marx to The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.] 
*** In his novel Cousine Bette, Balzac delineates the thoroughly dissolute Parisian 
philistine in Crevel, a character based on Dr. Véron, owner of the Constitutionnel. 
[Note by Marx to The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.] 
3 General  Staff.—  Ed. 
h Lehon.— Ed. 
c "It is the first flight (theft) of the eagle."33—Ed. 
d Quoted in the article by Emile Dupont. "Chronique de l'intérieur", La Voix du 
Proscrit, No. 8, December 15, 1850, p. 118.— Ed. 

=====第61页=====
Herr Vogt. — I. The Brimstone Gang 37 
Louis Bonaparte's court and clique. For 'often already, France has 
experienced a government of mistresses; but never before a 
government of hommes entretenus.'...* a 
"Driven by the contradictory demands of his situation and being 
at the same time, like a conjurer, under the necessity of keeping 
the public gaze fixed on  himself,  as Napoleon's substitute, by 
springing constant surprises, that is to say, under the necessity of 
executing a coup d'état en miniature every day, Bonaparte throws 
the entire bourgeois economy into confusion, violates everything 
that seemed inviolable to the Revolution of 1848, makes some 
tolerant of revolution, others desirous of revolution, and produces 
actual anarchy in the name of order, while at the same time 
stripping its halo from the entire state machine, profanes it and 
makes it at once loathsome and ridiculous. The cult of the Holy 
Coat of Trier 35 he duplicates in Paris with the cult of the 
Napoleonic imperial mantle. But when the imperial mantle finally 
falls on the shoulders of Louis Bonaparte, the bronze statue of 
Napoleon will crash from the top of the Vendôme Column." ,ß 
* The words quoted are those of Madame Girardin. [Note by Marx to The 
Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.] 
a Hommes entretenus: kept men.— Ed. 

=====第62页=====
38 
II 
THE BRISTLERS 
"But, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, 
nor honesty in this bosom of thine; it is all filled 
up with guts and  midriff." 
(Shakespeare)a 
"Bristlers" or "Brimstone Gang" is what it says in the original 
Biel gospel ("Magnum Opus", Documents, p. 31). "Brimstone 
Gang" or else "Bristlers" is what we find in the "Magnum Opus" 
(p. 136).b 
According to both versions the "Brimstone Gang" and the 
"Bristlers" are one and the same gang. The "Brimstone Gang" 
was, as we have seen, dead and buried by the middle of 1850. 
Therefore the "Bristlers" too? Our "well-rounded character" is 
the civilising agent attached to the December Gang, and civilisa­
tion, according to Fourier, is distinguished from barbarism by the 
fact that in it lies simple are replaced by lies composite.0 
Our "composite" Imperial Falstaff informs us ("Magnum 
Opus",  p. 198) that a certain Abt is the "lowest of the low". What 
admirable self-effacement: Vogt puts himself in the positive, but 
his Abt in the superlative, appointing him, as it were, his Field 
Marshal Ney. When Vogt's original gospel appeared in the Biel 
Commis voyageur, d I requested the editors of Das Volk* 1 to reprint 
the original rigmarole without further comment. Despite this they 
followed the reprint with this note: 
"The above rigmarole stems from the pen of a dissolute creature called Abt, 
who,  eight years ago in Geneva, was unanimously found guilty of a variety of 
a Henry IV, Part I, Act III, Scene 3. Marx quotes in English.— Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 31, 136.— Ed. 
c Charles Fourier, Théorie de l'unité universelle. Oeuvres complètes, Vol. 2, Paris, 
1843,  pp. 78-79, and Vol. 5, Paris, 1841, pp. 213-14.— Ed. 
d Marx means Karl Vogt's article "Zur Warnung" in the Schweizer Handels-
Courier, No. 150 (special supplement), June 2, 1859 (see this volume, p. 29).— Ed. 

=====第63页=====
Herr Vogt. — II. The Bristiers 39 
dishonourable actions by a court of honour of German refugees" (Das Volk, No. 6, 
June 11, 1859). 
The editors of Das Volk took Abt for the author of Vogt's 
original rigmarole; they forgot that Switzerland had two Rich-
monds in the field, 38 a Vogt, as well as an Abt. 
In the spring of 1851, then, the "lowest of the low" invented 
the "Bristlers", whom Vogt pilfered from his Field Marshal in the 
autumn of 1859. The sweet habit of plagiarism acquired in 
making books on natural history instinctively clings to him in those 
dealing with his police activities. For a time the President of the 
Workers' Association in Geneva had been a brushmaker [Bürsten­
macher] called Sauernheimer. Abt bisected Sauernheimer's profes­
sion and name, took the beginning of the former and the end of 
the latter and from the two halves thus obtained he ingeniously 
formed the whole: " Bürstenheimer" [Bristier]. This title he originally 
bestowed on Sauernheimer, as well as on his closest friends: Kamm 
from Bonn, a brushmaker by trade, and also Ranickel, a 
bookbinder's apprentice from Bingen. He appointed Sauern­
heimer general and Ranickel adjutant of the Bristlers, while 
Kamm became a Bristler sans phrase. Later, when two refugees 
belonging to the Workers' Association in Geneva, Imandt (who is 
at present professor at the college in Dundee) and Schily (a lawyer, 
formerly of Trier, now in Paris), brought about Abt's expulsion at 
the hands of a court of honour of the Association, Abt published 
an abusive pamphlet 39 in which he elevated the whole Workers' 
Association in Geneva to the rank of "Bristlers". It is clear, then, 
that there were Bristlers in general and Bristlers in particular. 
"Bristlers" in general included the Genevan Wr orkers' Association, 
the same association which Vogt tricked into giving him a 
testimonium paupertatis which was published in the Allgemeine 
Zeitung 3 at a time when he had been driven into a corner, the 
same association on which he fawned during the celebrations in 
memory of Schiller and Robert Blum (1859). "Bristlers" in 
particular were, as I have mentioned, Sauernheimer, who is totally 
unknown to me and who has never been to London; Kamm who, 
having been turned out of Geneva, went to the United States via 
London, where he looked up Kinkel and not me; and finally 
Ranickel, or the Ranickel,' who remained as the adjutant of the 
a This refers to the declaration of the German Workers' Educational 
Association in West Switzerland printed in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 235, August 
23, 1859.— Ed. 
'• The name suggests Ran  unkei —  ranunculus and also, by metathesis, 
Karnickel = (1) rabbit and (2) a fool or Simple Simon. Marx puns below on 
Ran-Igel = hedgehog.— Ed. 
3-130.-. 

=====第64页=====
40 Karl Marx 
Bristiers in Geneva where he "congregated" around our "well-
rounded character". And indeed, in his own person he represents 
the proletariat in Vogt's eyes. As I shall have more to say about 
the Ranickel later on, here are a few preliminary facts about the 
beast. Ranickel took part in Hecker's ill-starred campaign and after 
its defeat he joined the detachment of refugees under Willich in 
Besançon. 40 Still under Willich he went through the campaign for 
the Imperial Constitution after which he fled with him to 
Switzerland. Willich was in his eyes the communist Mohammed 
who would bring about the millennium with fire and sword. A 
vain, long-winded, foppish melodramatic actor, the Ranickel was 
more tyrannical than the tyrant. In Geneva he raged in a red fury 
against the "parliamentarians" in general and, like i second 
Tell, against the "Land- Vogt" in particular, whom he threatened 
to "strangle". But when he was introduced to Vogt by Wallot. a 
refugee from the thirties and a boyhood friend of Vogt's, 
RanickeVs thirst for blood dissolved in the milk of human 
kindness. 3 "That fellow was the Vogt's," as Schiller says. D 
The adjutant of the Bristlers became the adjutant of General 
Vogt, who has only failed to achieve military renown because 
Plon-Plon thought the Neapolitan captain Ulloa (another general 
by courtesy c) bad enough for the task his ''corps de touristes" 
had to perform in the Italian campaign, and so held his Parolles in 
reserve for the great adventure with "the lost drum" that will 
unfold on the Rhine. 41 In 1859 Vogt promoted his Ranickel from 
the proletariat to the middle classes, obtained a business for him 
(objets d'art, bookbinding and stationery) and in addition procured 
for him the custom of the Geneva Government. The adjutant of 
the Bristlers now became Vogt's "maid of all work"/ 1 his Cicisbeo, 
intimate friend, Leporello, confidant, correspondent, gossip-bearer 
and scandal-monger, but above all, after the Fall of our Fat Jack,e 
he acted as his spy and as recruiting officer for Bonaparte among 
the workers. A Swiss paper recently reported the discovery of a 
third species of hedgehog, viz., the Ran or Rhine hedgehog 
[Ran-  oder Rhein-Igel] which combines the qualities of both the 
canine and porcine varieties in itself and which has been found in 
a Marx uses the English phrase "the milk of human kindness" which comes 
from Macbeth. Act I, Scene 5.— Ed. 
b Wilhelm Tell. Act Î, Scene 4.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase. For more about Ulloa see Engels' letter 
written to Marx approximately July 23, 1860, present edition, Vol.  41.—  Ed. 
d Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
e Sir John Falstaff was addressed as Jack by his drinking mates.— Ed. 

=====第65页=====
Herr Vogt. — II. The Bristlers 41 
a hole on the River Arve, the country-seat of Humboldt-Vogt. Was 
this Ran-Igel aimed at our Ranickel? 
N.B.  The only refugee in Geneva with whom I had any contact 
was Dr. Ernst Dronke, a former co-editor of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung 42 and at present a businessman in Liverpool. He was 
opposed to the activities of the "Bristlers". 
The following letters from Imandt and Schily I would only 
preface with the remark that, on the outbreak of the revolution, 
Imandt left university in order to take part as a volunteer in the 
war in Schleswig-Holstein. In 1849 Schily and Imandt led the 
storming of the arsenal in Prüm 43 and from there they forced a 
passage to the Palatinate with their troops and the weapons they 
had seized. There they joined the ranks of the army of the 
Imperial Constitution. Having been expelled from Switzerland in 
the early summer of 1852 they made their way to London. 
"Dundee, February 5, 1860 
"Dear Marx, 
"I am at a loss to understand how Vogt can attempt to connect you with affairs 
in Geneva. It was common knowledge among the refugees there that of all of us 
only Dronke was in communication with you. The Brimstone Gang was before my 
time and the only name I can recall in connection with it is Borkheim. 
"The Bristlers were the Genevan Workers' Association. The name originated 
with Abt. At the time the Association served as nursery for Willich's secret league of 
which I was chairman. When, at my instigation, Abt was found by the Workers' 
Association, to which many refugees belonged, to be a scoundrel and unworthy to 
associate with refugees and workers, he published a lampoon shortly afterwards in 
which he accused Schily and myself of the absurdest crimes. Whereupon we 
revived the whole affair in a different place and before a completely different 
audience. He rejected our demand that he should come forward with proofs to 
back up his libellous allegations, and without its being necessary for Schily or 
myself to say a word in our own defence, Dentzel proposed a motion that Abt be 
declared an infamous slanderer. The motion was approved unanimously for a 
second time, on this occasion by a meeting of refugees consisting almost entirely of 
parliamentarians. I am sorry that my tale is so very meagre, but it is the first time 
in eight years that I have had cause to think back to all that trash. I would not like 
to be condemned to write about it and / shall be most astonished if you can bring 
yourself to immerse your hand in such a brew. 
"Adieu, 
Your Imandt" 
A well-known Russian writer3  who had been on very friendly 
terms with Herr Vogt during his stay in Geneva, wrote to me very 
much along the lines of the concluding words of the above letter: 
a Nikolai Ivanovich Sazonov.— Ed. 

=====第66页=====
42 Karl Marx 
"Paris,  10 Mai 1860 
"Mon cher Marx! 
"J'ai appris avec la plus vive indignation les calomnies qui ont été répandues sur 
votre compte et dont j'ai eu connaissance par un article de la Revue contemporaine, 
signé Edouard Simon? Ce qui m'a particulièrement étonné c'est que Vogt, que je ne 
croyais ni bête, ni méchant, ait pu tomber dans l'abaissement moral que sa 
brochure révèle. Je n'avais besoin d'aucun témoignage pour être assuré, que vous 
étiez incapable de basses et sales intrigues, et il m'a été d'autant plus pénible de lire 
ces diffamations que dans le moment même où on les imprimait, vous donniez au 
monde savant la première partie du beau travail b qui doit renouveler la science 
économique et la fonder sur des nouvelles et plus solides bases... Mon cher Marx, 
ne vous occupez plus de toutes ces misères; tous les hommes sérieux, tous les 
hommes consciencieux sont pour vous, mais ils attendent de vous autre chose que 
des polémiques stériles; ils voudraient pouvoir étudier le plus tôt possible la 
continuation de votre belle œuvre. — Votre succès est immense parmi les hommes 
pensants et s'il vous peut être agréable d'apprendre le retentissement que vos 
doctrines trouvent en Russie, je vous dirai qu'au commencement de cette année le 
professeur —' a fait à Moscovie un cours public d'économie politique dont la 
première leçon n'a pas été autre chose que la paraphrase de votre récente 
publication. 44 Je vous adresse un numéro de La Gazette du  Nord,  où vous verrez 
combien votre nom est estimé dans mon pays. Adieu, mon cher Marx, 
conservez-vous en bonne santé et travaillez comme par le passé, à éclairer le 
monde, sans vous préoccuper des petites bêtises et des petites lâchetés. Croyez à 
l'amitié de votre dévoué..."d 
a "Un tableau de moeurs politiques en Allemagne. Le procès de M. Vogt avec 
la gazette d'Augsbourg", Revue contemporaine, February 15, 1860. For Marx's 
analysis of this article see this volume, pp. 93-94, 112-13.— Ed. 
b The reference is to Marx's work A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy 
(see present edition, Vol. 30).— Ed. 
c Ivan Kondratyevich Babst.— Ed. 
d "My dear Marx, I have learnt with the greatest indignation of the slanders that 
have been circulated about you and of which I was apprised by an article in the Revue 
contemporaine signed by Edouard Simon. What has astonished me most of all is that 
Vogt whom I thought to be neither stupid nor malicious should have morally sunk 
so low as his pamphlet reveals. I need no evidence to persuade me that you are 
incapable of base and sordid intrigues and it was all the more painful to read these 
slanders when, at the very moment they were being printed, you were presenting 
to the learned world the first part of the admirable work which will give new life to 
the science of economics and provide it with new and more solid foundations.... My 
dear Marx, you must ignore all this wretched pettiness; all serious men, all 
scrupulous men are on your side, but they expect something other than sterile 
polemics from you; they would like to study the continuation of your admirable 
work as soon as possible.—Among thinking men your success is enormous, and if it 
gives you pleasure to hear of the echo your works have found in Russia, I can tell 
you that at the beginning of this year Professor— gave a course of public lectures 
on political economy in Moscow, the first hour of which was nothing but a 
paraphrase of your recent publication. I am sending you an issue of La Gazette du 
Nord from which you will be able to see how high your reputation stands in my 

=====第67页=====
Herr Vogt. — II. The Bristiers 43 
Szemere, the former Hungarian Minister, also wrote to me in 
similar vein: 
"Vaut-il la peine que vous vous occupiez de toutes ces bavardises?"3 
I have briefly indicated in the Preface my reasons for immersing 
my hand in Vogt's brew (to use Imandt's forceful expression) 
despite these and similar attempts at dissuasion. 
To return to our Bristlers. The following letter from Schily is 
printed here verbatim, not even omitting the parts that do not 
refer to "nos moutons". I have however shortened the description of 
the Brimstone Gang since it would merely repeat what we already 
know from Borkheim's account, and certain other passages have 
been saved for later as I must to some extent treat "my agreeable 
subject" artistically and not blurt all my secrets out at once. 
"Paris,  February 8, 1860 
46 Rue Lafayette 
"Dear Marx, 
"It was very agreeable to have a direct sign of life from you in the shape of 
your letter of January 31 b  and you will find me all the more ready to give you the 
information you require about these episodes in Geneva as I intended to write to 
you about them proprio motu. c The first thing that struck me, and not only me but 
also all my Geneva acquaintances here with whom I had occasion to discuss the 
matter, was that Vogt, as you write, lumps you together with people who are quite 
unknown to you. And so, in the interests of the truth, I had taken upon myself the 
task of conveying to you the relevant information about the 'Bristlers', the 
'Brimstone Gang', etc. So you can see that both your questions: '(1) Who were the 
Bristlers and what were their activities? and (2) What was the Brimstone Gang, who 
belonged to it, what did they do?' came at a very opportune moment. I must begin 
by pointing out, however, that you are guilty of an error in chronology, for priority 
belongs by rights to the Brimstone Gang. If it was Vogt's wish 'to have a bit of fun' 
and terrify the German philistines by conjuring up the devil or even by calling 
down fire and brimstone on their heads, he should have found rather more 
diabolical figures for his models than those harmless and jolly ale-house geniuses to 
whom we, the senior members of the Geneva emigration, used to refer jokingly 
and without any unfriendly ulterior motive as the Brimstone Gang, a title which 
they too accepted in good part. They were the merry sons of the Muses who had 
taken their examina and done their exercitia practica in the various South German 
putsches, finishing up in the campaign for the Imperial Constitution. After the 
failure they were gathering strength in Geneva in the company of their examiners 
and instructors in revolution for the time when business would be resumed.... It is 
country. Adieu, my dear Marx, keep in good health and labour as in the past for 
the enlightenment of the world without concerning yourself with petty stupidities 
and petty acts of cowardly malice. I remain your devoted friend...." — Ed. 
a "Is it really worth yoitr while to bother your head with all this tittle-tattle?" 
(From Szemere's letter of February 5, 1860.) — Ed. 
b Marx's letter to Schily dated January 31 is not available.— Ed. 
c Of my own accord.— Ed. 

=====第68页=====
44 Karl Marx 
obvious that anyone who either was never in Geneva or arrived there after the 
dissolution of the Gang could not have belonged to it. It was a purely local and 
ephemeral flora (a brimstone flora would be the right name for this corrosive 
substance), though probably because of the Rummeltipuff with its whiffs of 
revolution, it proved to have too strong a scent for Federal Swiss nerves. For Druey 
blew and the flower was scattered to the winds. It was not until a considerable 
period had elapsed that Abt came to Geneva, followed a few years later by Cherval, 
and while both of them smelled, 'each in his own way', it was not, as Vogt alleges, 
in that forgotten bouquet which had long since wilted and been torn apart. 
"The activities of the Gang may be more or less summed up in the words: 
toiling in the vineyard of the  Lord*  In addition they edited the Rummeltipuff with its 
motto: Dwell in the land and thrive on red  wineV h In it they exercised their wit and 
humour on everything under the sun: they denounced false prophets, flayed the 
parliamentarians (inde iraec), and spared neither themselves nor us, their audience, 
but caricatured everyone whether friend or foe with an admirable conscientious­
ness and impartiality. 
"I do not need to tell you that they had no connection with you and never wore 
your Bundschuh. 45 Nor can I conceal from you the fact that that footwear would 
have been little to their taste. These soldiers of the revolution were for the time 
being lounging around in the slippers of the armistice until the revolution itself 
would reanimate them and re-equip them with its own buskin (the seven-league 
boots of resolute progress). 46 And anyone who had been so bold as to disturb their 
siesta with Marxist political economy, workers' dictatorship, etc., would have been 
given a very cool reception indeed. For Heaven knows, the work they did required 
nothing further than a Master of Ceremonies and their economic researches were 
confined almost entirely to the 'jug' and its reddish contents. One of their members, 
Backfisch, an honest farrier from the Odenwald, once expressed the opinion that 
'the right to work was all very well, but the duty to work was one he would prefer 
to be spared....' 
"Let us then replace the sacrilegiously abused tombstone of the Brimstone 
Gang. To prevent anv further desecration of their grave a Hafiz should be 
employed to sing the requiescat in paceß But, failing that, may they herewith accept 
this obituary pro viatico et epitaphio e: 'They knew the smell of powder.' Whereas 
their sacrilegious historiographer has merely managed to smell out brimstone. 
"The Bristlers first emerged at a time when the Brimstone Gang only lived on 
verbally in legend, in the records of Genevan philistines and the hearts of Genevan 
beauties. The brushmakers and bookbinders, Sauernheimer, Kamm, Ranickel, etc., 
came into conflict with Abt. When Imandt, myself and others resolutely took their 
side we too became the targets of his hostility. Abt was then summoned to appear 
before a general assembly of refugees and members of the Workers' Association, 
combined to form a cour des pairs 1 or a haute cour de justices Abt did in fact appear 
a Matthew 20:4.— Ed. 
b A pun on Psalm 37:3. Proverbia (in German): "Dwell in the land and verily 
thou shalt be fed" (lit. "feed thyself honestly" in Luther's version). Schily replaced 
redlich (honestly) with rötlich, literally "reddishly".— Ed. 
c Hence the outcry (Juvenal, Satires, Book I, Satire  1).—  Ed. 
à Rest in peace. Psalms 4:9.— Ed. 
e For their extreme unction and epitaph.— Ed. 
f Court of peers.— Ed. 
s High court.— Ed. 

=====第69页=====
Herr Vogt. — II. The Bristlers 45 
and not only failed to provide proof of the accusations he had hurled at various 
people, but even declared quite openly that he had made them up quite arbitrarily, 
as reprisals for just as arbitrary accusations that his enemies had levelled at him: 
'Tit for tat, reprisals make the world go round!'—was his view of the matter. Having 
made a valiant plea for his system of tit for tat, thoroughly convincing the noble 
peers of the great practical advantages to be derived from it, and after proofs of 
the accusations against him had been brought, he was declared to have confessed 
his malicious slanders, was found guilty of the other misdeeds imputed to him and 
was formally outlawed. In revenge he christened the noble peers, originally only 
the above-named guild-members, the ' Biirstenheimers' [Bristlers], which, as you 
see, is a happy combination of the trade and name of the first-named. You should 
revere him, therefore, as the progenitor of the family of Bürstenheim, without 
however your being in a position to claim to be one of or related to the clan, 
whether the term is applied to the guild or the peerage. For you ought to know 
that those of them that did busy themselves with 'organising the revolution' did so 
not as your supporters but as your opponents. They revered Willich as God the 
Father or as their Pope and anathematised you as the Antichrist or antipope, so 
that Dronke, who was regarded as your only supporter and legatus a latere 3 in the 
diocese of Geneva, was excluded from all councils of the Church except the 
oenological ones, where he was primus inter pares. But the Bristlers, like the 
Brimstone Gang, were the merest Ephemeridae, and Druey had only to give one 
mighty puff and they scattered in all directions. 
"The fact that a pupil of Agassizb should have got involved in these fossils of 
the Geneva emigration and have unearthed such fantastic tales as those served up 
in his pamphlet is the more astonishing since as regards the species of Bristleriana 
he actually possesses a perfect specimen in his own zoological cabinet in the shape 
of a mastodon of the order of ruminants: Ranickel, the very prototype of the 
Bristler. So the rumination seems to have been imperfectly performed, or else not 
properly studied by the above-mentioned pupil.... 
"There you have all you asked for et au delà. 0 But now I too should like to ask 
you something, namely your opinion about the wisdom of introducing an 
inheritance tax pro patria, vulgo: for the state. It would form the state's principal 
source of income, eliminate the taxes which at present burden the poorer classes 
and of course would only apply in cases of sizeable estates.... Besides this 
inheritance tax I am interested in two German institutions: 'the consolidation of 
landed property' and 'mortgage insurance', institutions which I wish were better 
appreciated in this country. At the present time they are not at all understood, for 
the French in general, with but few exceptions, when they gaze across the Rhine 
see nothing but nebulosities and sauerkraut. An exception was provided recently by 
L'Univers 0* which, after lamenting immoderately about the fragmentation of landed 
property, added quite correctly: 'Il serait désirable qu'on appliquât immédiatement 
les remèdes énergiques, dont une partie de l'Allemagne  s'est  servie avec avantage: 
le remaniement obligatoire des propriétés partout où les 7/10 des propriétaires 
d'une commune réclament cette mesure. La nouvelle répartition facilitera le 
a Cardinal, emissary. Dronke was sent to Switzerland as an emissary of the 
Communist League in the summer of 1850.— Ed. 
b Vogt had been an assistant to the Swiss naturalist Agassiz.— Ed. 
c And more besides.— Ed. 
d The full title of the newspaper is L'Univers religieux, philosophique, politique, 
scientifique et littéraire. —Ed. 

=====第70页=====
46 Karl Marx 
drainage, l'irrigation, la culture rationelle et la voirie des propriétés.' 3 On top of 
this comes Le Siècle which is in general somewhat myopic, but which is completely 
blind when it comes to consider German affairs, thanks to a chauvinism which it 
displays as proudly as Diogenes showed off his threadbare cloak—it serves up this 
stuff,  disguised as patriotism, daily to its subscribers. This chauvinist, then, having 
fired off the obligatory salvo at L'Univers, its bête noire, went on to say: 'Propriétaires 
ruraux, suivez ce conseil! Empressez-vous de réclamer le remaniement obligatoire 
des propriétés; dépouillez les petits au profit des grands. O fortunatos nimium 
agricolas —trop heureux habitants des campagnes —sua si bona —s'ils connaissaient 
l'avantage à remanier obligatoirement la propriété.' 13 As if the large landowners 
could out-vote the smallholders where each man had a vote. 
"For the rest I let God's water flow freely over His land, give unto Caesar the 
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's,c and even 'the 
Devil's share',d and remain your old affectionate friend, 
Schily" 
It follows from the foregoing that as there existed a "Brimstone 
Gang" in Geneva in 1849-50, and an association called the 
"Bristlers" in 1851-52, two societies connected neither with each 
other nor with  myself,  the revelations of our parliamentary clown 
about the existence of the "Brimstone Gang or Bristlers" are flesh of 
his flesh, a lie to the fourth power, "like the father that begets it: 
gross as a mountain, open, palpable".6  Just imagine a historian 
shameless enough to report: At the time of the first French 
Revolution there was a group of people known by the name of the 
"Cercle  social" 41 or else by the no less characteristic title of "Jacobins". 
As regards the life and deeds of the "Brimstone Gang or Bristlers" 
that he concocted, our merry joker was careful to keep the costs of 
their production down to a minimum. I shall give but a single 
instance of this: 
"One of the chief occupations of the Brimstone Gang," the well-rounded one 
informs his astounded audience of philistines, "was to compromise people at home in 
Germany in such a way that they were forced to pay money and no longer resist the 
attempts to blackmail them" (a fine how-do-you-do48; "they were forced to no longer 
a "It would be desirable that energetic remedies be introduced immediately, 
such as those that have proved so successful in part of Germany: the compulsory 
reorganisation of land holdings wherever it is demanded by 7/10 of the owners in a 
community. The new distribution of land would facilitate drainage, irrigation, the 
rational exploitation of the land and the planning of  roads."  — Ed. 
b "Rural landowners, follow this advice! Hasten to demand the compulsory 
reorganisation of land holdings; rob the small owners to enrich the large ones. O 
fortvnatos nimium agricolas—too happy country-dwellers—sua si bona—if they only 
knew the advantages of the compulsory reorganisation of land holdings." (The Latin 
expression quoted here is a paraphrase from Virgil's poem Georgies.)—Ed. 
c Matthew  22:21.—  Ed. 
d Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act I, Scene 2.— Ed. 
e ibid., Act II, Scene 4.— Ed. 

=====第71页=====
Herr Vogt. — II. The Bristiers 47 
resist the attempts to blackmail them"), "in exchange for which the gang should 
preserve the secret of their having been compromised. Not just one letter, but 
hundreds were written to Germany by these men" (namely Vogt's homunculi) "and all 
of them contained the naked threat that the person in question would be denounced 
for complicity in this or that act of revolution unless a certain sum of money had been 
received at a specified address by a given date" ("Magnum Opus", p. 139). 
Why did Vogt fail to print even "one" of these letters? Because 
the "Brimstone Gang" wrote "hundreds" of them. If threatening 
letters were as plentiful as blackberries 3 Vogt would swear that we 
should have no threatening letter. If he were summoned to 
appear tomorrow before a court of honour of the Grütli 
Association 49 to give an account of the "hundreds" of "threaten­
ing letters", he would instead of producing a single letter pull a 
bottle of wine from his jerkin, smack his lips, cock a snook and 
with a great belly-laugh worthy of Silenus, he would exclaim like 
his Abt: "Tit for tat, reprisals make the world go round." 
a Adaptation of Falstaff's "if reasons were as plentiful as blackberries" 
(Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene 4).— Ed. 

=====第72页=====
48 
III 
POLICE MATTERS 
"Welch' Neues Unerhörtes hat der Vogt 
Sich ausgesonnen!" 
(Schiller)  * 
"I say quite bluntly," says Vogt, striking the gravest pose of which such a 
buffoon is capable, "I say quite bluntly: Everyone who engages in political 
machinations with Marx and his associates will sooner or later fall into the hands of 
the police. For these machinations are no sooner under way than they are made 
known and betrayed to the secret police and hatched out by them as soon as the 
time appears to be ripe" (these machinations are eggs, it would seem, and the 
police are the broody hens that hatch them out). "The instigators, Marx & Co., are 
of course sitting in London out of reach" (while the police are sitting on the eggs). 
"I would not be at a loss to provide proofs of this assertion" ("Magnum Opus", pp. 166, 
167). b 
Vogt is not "at a loss" [verlegen], Falstaff was never "at a loss" 
either. As "mendacious" [verlogen] as you please, but "at a  loss""? 
Come, your "proofs" [Belege], Jack, your "proofs". 0 
1. CONFESSION 
"Marx himself says on p. 77 of his pamphlet Revelations Concerning the Communist 
Trial in Cologne,6  published in 1853: 'After 1849 just as before 1848, only one path 
was open to the proletarian party—that of secret association. Consequently after 
1849 a whole series of clandestine proletarian societies sprang up on the Continent, 
were discovered by the police, condemned by the courts, broken up by the gaols and 
continually resuscitated by the force of circumstances.' Marx, " Vogt declares, "here 
euphemistically describes himself as 'circumstance'" ("Magnum Opus", p. 167). 
Marx says, then, that "the police have discovered a whole series 
of secret societies since 1849" that were restored to life by the 
a "What new, unheard-of plan has Vogt invented now?" (Wilhelm Tell, Act I, 
Scene  3.)—Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess.... The italics are Marx's.— Ed. 
c Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene 4.— Ed. 
d See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 446.— Ed. 

=====第73页=====
Herr Vogt. —III. Police Matters 49 
force of circumstances. Vogt says it was Marx and not the 
"circumstances" that "resuscitated the secret societies". Thus 
Vogt has furnished proof that whenever Badinguet's police 
discovered Marianne, 50 Marx in collusion with Pietri set it up 
again. 
"Marx himself says." I shall now quote what Marx himself says in 
its proper context: 
"With the defeat of the revolution of 1848-49 the party of the 
proletariat on the Continent lost use of the press, freedom of  speech 
and the right to associate, i.e. the legal instruments of party 
organisation, which it had enjoyed for once during that short 
interval. The social status of the classes they represented enabled 
both the bourgeois-liberal and the petty-bourgeois democratic 
parties to remain united in one form or another and to assert 
their common interests more or less effectively despite the 
reaction. After 1849 just as before 1848, only one path was open 
to the proletarian party—that of secret association. Consequently after 
1849 a whole series of clandestine proletarian societies sprang up 
on the Continent, were discovered by the police, condemned by 
the courts, broken up by the gaols and continually resuscitated by 
the force of circumstances. Some of these secret societies aimed 
directly at the overthrow of the existing state. This was fully 
justified in France.... Other secret societies aimed at organising the 
proletariat into a party, without concerning themselves with the 
existing governments. This was necessary in countries like 
Germany.... There is no doubt that here too the members of the 
proletarian party would take part once again in a revolution 
against the status quo, but it was no part of their task to prepare this 
revolution, to agitate, conspire or to plot for  it.... The Communist 
League, 51 therefore, was no conspiratorial society..." (Revelations, etc.,52 
Boston edition, pp. 62, 63).a 
But our merciless Land- Vogt regards even "propaganda" as a 
crime, except of course for the propaganda organised by Pietri 
and Laity. Our Land- Vogt will even condone "agitation, conspira­
cy and plotting", but only when its central office is in the Palais 
Royal 53 with Hearty Harry, Heliogabalus Plon-Plon. But "prop­
aganda" among proletarians! Fie! 
After the above-quoted passage, so significantly mutilated by our 
Examining Magistrate Vogt, I continue in the Revelations as 
follows: 
a See present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 445-46. Marx introduces additional italics and 
also bold type in quoting.— Ed. 

=====第74页=====
50 Karl Marx 
"It is self-evident that a secret society of this kind" (like the 
Communist League) "[...] could have had but few attractions for 
individuals who on the one hand concealed their personal 
insignificance by strutting around in the theatrical cloak of the 
conspirator, and on the other wished to satisfy their narrow-
minded ambition on the day of the next revolution, and who 
wished above all to seem important at the moment, to snatch their 
share of the proceeds of demagogy and to find a welcome among 
the quacks and charlatans of democracy. Thus a group broke off 
from the Communist League, or if you like it was broken off, a 
group that demanded, if not real conspiracies, at any rate the 
appearance of conspiracies, and accordingly called for a direct 
alliance with the democratic heroes of the hour; this was the 
Willich-Schapper group. It was typical of them that Willich was, 
together with Kinkel, one of the entrepreneurs in the business of the 
German-American Revolutionary Loan" 54 (pp. 63, 64).a 
And how does Vogt translate this passage into his "euphemistic" 
police mumbo-jumbo? Listen: 
"As long as both" (parties) "cooperated, they worked, as Marx himself says, to 
create secret societies and to compromise societies and individuals on the 
Continent" (p. 171). 
Our fat rascal forgets only to quote the page in the Revelations 
where Marx "of course says this  himself". 
"Egli è bugiardo e padre di menzogna." b 
2. THE REVOLUTIONARY CONGRESS IN MURTEN 
"Charles the Bold", our "bold Charles", vulgo Karl Vogt, now 
delivers his account of the defeat of Murten. 55 
"Large numbers of workers and refugees were cajoled and bullied" — namely 
by Liebknecht —"until finally [...] it was agreed that there should be a revolutionary 
congress in Murten. The delegates of the branch societies were to assemble there in 
secret in order to confer about the final organisation of the League and the exact 
moment for the armed uprising. All preparations were made in absolute  secrecy,  the 
summonses were conveyed only by Liebknecht's trusted friends and correspond­
ents.  The delegates converged on Murten from all sides, on foot, by boat and by 
carriage, and were immediately welcomed by gendarmes, who knew in advance 
about the whats, the whys and the hows. The whole company that had been 
arrested in this manner was detained for a while in the Augustinian monastery in 
Fribourg and then transported to England and America. Herr Liebknecht was 
treated with quite exceptional consideration" ("Magnum Opus", p. 168). 
a See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 449.— Ed. 
b " 'Twas said he was a liar and the father of lies" (Dante, The Divine Comedy, 
Inferno, Canto XXIII).— Ed. 

=====第75页=====
Herr Vogt. —III. Police Matters 51 
"Herr Liebknecht" had taken part in Struve's putsch in 
September 1848, then was kept in Baden gaols until the middle of 
May 1849, was freed as a result of the military insurrection in 
Baden, served as a common soldier in the Baden People's 
Artillery, was incarcerated once more as a rebel in the casemates 
in Rastatt by Vogt's friend Brentano; having been freed again 
during the campaign for the Imperial Constitution he joined the 
division commanded by Johann Philipp Becker and finally crossed 
the French border with Struve, Cohnheim, Korn and Rosenblum 
from where they made their way to Switzerland. 
At the time I knew even less about "Herr Liebknecht" and his 
Swiss "revolutionary congresses" than about the drinking-meetings 
with mine host Benz in Kessler Street in Berne where the 
assembled parliamentarians regaled each other with the speeches 
they had made in St. Paul's Church, 56 counted and distributed 
future posts of the Empire among themselves, and helped to while 
away the hard night of exile by listening to the lies, farces, ribaldry 
and rodomontades of Charles the Bold who, not without a touch 
of humour, awarded himself the letters patent of "Imperial Wine 
Bibber" in honour of an old German lay. 
The "lay" begins with these words: 
"Swaz ich trinken's hân gesehen, 
daz ist gar von kinden geschehen: 
ich hân einen swëlch gesehen, 
dem wil ich meisterschefte jenen. 
"Den dûhten bêcher gar entwiht, 
ër wolde näpf noch kophe niht. 
ër tranc ûz grôzen kannen. 
ër ist vor allen mannen 
ein Vorlauf allen swëlhen 
"von ûren und von ëlhen 
wart solcher slünd nie niht getan." 3 
a "The drink and drinking I have seen 
Are fit alone for callow youth, 
But one great tippler has there been 
Fit to wear the crown in truth. 
"Normal cups he had forsworn, 
Pots and jugs he'd laugh to scorn, 
He would guzzle tankards tall, 
The staunchest drinkers he would balk, 
He was the greatest of them all. 
"Neither bison nor the elk 
Could quaff their drink in such a gulp." 
(From the thirteenth-century comic poem "Weinschwelg". Marx quotes in Middle 
High German.)— Ed. 

=====第76页=====
52 Karl Marx 
But to return to the "revolutionary congress" in Murten. 
"Revolutionary congress"! "Final organisation of the League"! 
"Moment for the armed uprising"! "Absolutely secret prepara­
tions"!  "Very secret meeting converging from all sides on foot, by 
boat and by carriage"! "Charles the Bold" evidently did not study 
my analysis of Stieber's methods in the Revelations without 
profit. 
The facts of the matter are simply these: Liebknecht was —early 
in 1850—the President of the Geneva Workers' Association. He 
proposed a union of all the hitherto unconnected German 
workers' associations in Switzerland. The proposal was accepted. 
Whereupon it was decided to send a circular to twenty-four 
different workers' associations, inviting them to Murten to discuss 
the problems of the intended organisation and of establishing a 
joint newspaper. The debates in the Geneva Workers' Association, 
the circular, the discussions of the latter in the other twenty-four 
workers' associations—all this was done in public and the congress 
at Murten was likewise arranged in full view of the public. Had the 
Swiss authorities desired to ban it they could have done so four 
weeks before it was due to be held.^JBut the liberal Herr Druey, 
who was on the look-out for a victim* he could devour and thus 
placate the sabre-rattling Holy Alliance, preferred to have his 
police stage a coup de théâtre. Liebknecht, who as President of the 
Workers' Association had signed the document proclaiming the 
congress, was accorded the honour of being regarded as one of 
the chief ringleaders. He was separated from the other delegates, 
was granted free lodging in the uppermost turret of the tower in 
Fribourg, from where he enjoyed a fine view of the surrounding 
country, and he even had the privilege of walking for an hour 
each day upon the battlements. The only special feature of the 
way he was treated was the fact of solitary confinement. His 
repeated request to be allowed to join the other prisoners was 
repeatedly rejected. Vogt, however, knows full well that the police 
do not put their "moutons"* in solitary confinement, but place 
them as "agreeable companions" among the mass. 
Two months later Liebknecht, together with a certain Gebert, 
was transported by the Fribourg Chief of Police to Besançon, 
where both he and his companion received a compulsory French 
passport to London, with the warning that if they deviated from 
the prescribed route they would be deported to Algiers. As a 
result of this unexpected journey Liebknecht lost most of the 
a Spies.— Ed. 

=====第77页=====
Herr Vogt. — III. Police Matters 53 
personal effects he had in Geneva. Apart from this, however, 
Messrs. Castella, Schaller and the other members of the then 
Fribourg Government are to be commended for their humane 
treatment of Liebknecht and the other prisoners of Murten. These 
gentlemen were mindful of the fact that they themselves had been 
captive or on the run but a few years before and they openly 
expressed the disgust they felt at being obliged to execute the 
orders of the Grand Cophta Druey. 07 The captive refugees were 
not given the kind of treatment that the refugee "parliamen­
tarians" had expected. A certain Herr H., an associate of the 
parliamentarians who is still in Switzerland, felt it incumbent on 
himself to publish a pamphlet in which he denounced the 
prisoners in general and Liebknecht in particular for upholding 
"revolutionary" ideas that exceeded the limits of parliamentary 
reason. And it seems that "Charles the Bold" is still inconsolable 
about the "quite exceptional consideration" accorded to Lieb­
knecht. 
Plagiarism is a general characteristic of all the concoctions of our 
"bold hero", and this one is no exception. For the Swiss liberals 
invariably "liberalised" their acts of expulsion by accusing their 
victims of spying. After Fazy had expelled Struve he denounced 
him publicly as a "Russian spy". Likewise Druey, who accused 
Boichot of being a French mouchard. Tourte slandered Schily in a 
similar manner after he had suddenly had him arrested in the 
street in Geneva and sent to the tour des prisons in Berne. "Le 
commissaire maire federal Monsieur Kern exige votre expulsion" 3 
was the reply of the high and mighty Tourte when Schily asked 
the reason for the brutal treatment meted out to him. Schily: 
"Alors mettez-moi en présence de Monsieur Kern." h Tourte: 
"Non,  nous ne voulons pas que M. le commissaire fédéral fasse la 
police à Genève. "c  The logic of this reply was altogether worthy of 
the letter this same Tourte, who was then Swiss Ambassador in 
Turin, wrote to the President of the Confederation 0 informing 
him that Cavour was working with might and main to prevent the 
cession of Savoy and Nice at a time when this cession was already 
a fait accompli. But it is possible that certain diplomatic railway 
a "The Federal Commissioner, Mayor Kern, demands your expulsion."  — Ed. 
'•' "Very well, then, take me to M. Kern." — Ed. 
c "No, no, we won't have the Federal Commissioner playing policeman in 
Geneva." — Ed. 
d See  Correspondence  Respecting the  Proposed  Annexation of Savoy and Nice  to France..., 
No. 34, p. 34, Hudson to Russell, received February 16, 1860.— Ed. 

=====第78页=====
54 Karl Marx 
connections were responsible for the failure of Tourte's normal 
discernment at the time. Scarcely was Schily locked up in the 
severest solitary confinement in Berne when Tourte began to 
"liberalise" his police brutality by whispering in the ears of 
German refugees (Dr. Fink, for example) that "Schily had se­
cretly been in contact with Kern and had sent him information 
about refugees in Geneva, etc." The Geneva paper Indépendant 
itself included among the notorious sins of the Geneva Govern­
ment of the day "the systematic calumniation of the refugees, 
which has been raised to the level of a principle of state". (See 
Appendix 1.) 
At the very first representations of the German police, Swiss 
liberalism violated the right of asylum by driving out the so-called 
"leaders" — and this right of asylum had just been granted on 
condition that the remnant of the revolutionary army would 
refrain from fighting a last battle on Baden soil. But later, after 
the "leaders", it was the turn of the "misguided led". Thousands 
of Baden soldiers were given passports for home on false 
pretences and when they arrived there they were immediately 
welcomed by gendarmes, who knew in advance about "the whats, 
the whys and the hows". Then came the threats of the Holy 
Alliance and with them the police farce in Murten. But even the 
"liberal" Federal Council38 did not venture to go as far as the 
"bold Charles". Nothing at all about "revolutionary congress", 
"final organisation of the League", "exact moment for the armed 
uprising". The investigation which for propriety's sake had to be 
started, vanished into thin air. 
"Threats of war" from abroad and "political-propagandistic 
tendencies", that was all the "embarrassed" Federal Council could 
stutter by way of excuse in its official report. (See Appendix 2.) 
The grand police actions of "Swiss liberalism" did not cease with 
the "revolutionary congress in Murten". On January 25, 1851 my 
friend Wilhelm Wolff ("Parliamentary  Wolf"  as he was known 
among the "Parliamentary Sheep") wrote to me from Zurich: 
"The recent measures taken by the Federal Council have reduced the number 
of refugees from 11,000 to 500, and the Council will not rest until the remnant has 
been harried out of the country too, leaving only those who possess either a 
considerable fortune or powerful connections." 
The refugees who had fought for the revolution stood in the 
most natural opposition to the heroes of St. Paul's Church who 
had talked it into the grave. The latter did not scruple to deliver 
their opponents into the hands of the Swiss police. 

=====第79页=====
Herr Vogt. — III. Police Matters 55 
Vogt's loyal follower, the Ranickel monstrosity, himself wrote to 
Schily after the latter's arrival in London: 
"Try to keep a few columns open in one of the Belgian newspapers for 
explanations, and do not fail to make the life of those rascally German dogs (the 
parliamentarians) in America miserable for having sold themselves to that goitrous 
diplomat  ( Druey).  " 
It is now apparent what "Charles the Bold" meant when he 
said: 
"I was labouring with all my strength to set limits to all these revolutionary antics 
and to provide the refugees with shelter, either on the Continent or overseas."* 
The following description was to be found, long ago, in No. 257 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung dated 
"Heidelberg, March 23, 1849: Our friend Vogt, 'champion* of the Left, imperial 
jester of the moment, imperial Barrot of the future, the 'faithful vvarner' against 
revolution — he has joined forces with —some like-minded people? By no means! But 
with a few reactionaries of the deepest dye ... and for what purpose? In order to 
convey or to deport to America all those 'characters' living in Strasbourg. Besançon and 
elsewhere on the German frontier.... What Cavaignac's iron rule imposes as a 
punishment these gentlemen would like to mete out in the name of Christian 
charity.... Amnesty is dead, long live deportation] And of course this was accompanied 
by the pia jraus h that the refugees had themselves expressed the desire to emigrate, 
etc. But now the Seeblätter receives word from Strasbourg that these intentions to 
deport them have unleashed an angry storm of protest among all the refugees, etc. 
[...] In fact thev all hope to return to Germany soon, even at the risk (as Herr Vogt 
touchmgly remarks) of having to join some 'mad escapade!" 0 
But enough of "Charles the Bold's" revolutionary congress in 
Murten. 
3. CHERVAL 
"The virtue of this jest will be the incomprehen­
sible lies that this same fat rogue will tell us."d 
In my Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne an 
entire chapter is devoted to the Cherval plot.5'1  In it I show that 
Stieber with Cherval (a pseudonym for Cramer) as his instrument., 
and Carlier, Greif and Fieury as midwives, brought the so-called 
a Carl Vogt, Mein Frozess..., S. 165.— Ed. 
*' Pious deception.— Ed 
< Marx quotes the Neue Rheinische Zeitung from his notebook. There are some 
alterations in the use oi italics as compared with the original.— Ed. 
'* Shakespeare, Henry JV, Part I, Ac! I, Scene 2. Marx quotes in English and 
gives the German translation.— Ed. 

=====第80页=====
56 Karl Marx 
Franco-German September plot in Paris into the world,* with the 
intention of providing the prosecution with just that "factual 
evidence of an indictable offence" against the Cologne prisoners 
the lack of which the "Indictment Board of Cologne" had criti­
cised. 
So decisive were the proofs I delivered to the defence during 
the Cologne trial,60 so convincing the demonstration of a total lack 
of connection between Cherval, on the one hand, and the accused 
at Cologne and  myself,  on the other, that Stieber, who had sworn 
by Cherval on October 18 (1852), forswore him again on October 
23, 1852 (Revelations, p. 29a ). Driven into a corner he abandoned 
the attempt to link Cherval and his plot with us. Stieber was Stieber, 
but even Stieber was a far cry from Vogt. 
I think it is quite unnecessary for me to repeat here the 
information I gave in the Revelations about the so-called Sep­
tember plot. At the beginning of May 1852 Cherval returned to 
London, from where he had moved to Paris on business in the 
early summer of 1850. The Paris police let him escape from them 
a few months after he was sentenced in February 1852. In London 
he was greeted at first as a political martyr and welcomed into the 
German Workers' Educational Society, from which my friends and 
I had resigned as early as mid-September 1850.61  But this delusion 
was short-lived. The truth about his deeds of heroism in Paris 
soon became known and during that same month, May 1852, he 
was publicly expelled from the Society for his infamous conduct. 
The accused in Cologne, who had been imprisoned early in May 
1851,  were still in detention awaiting trial. I realised from a notice 
sent from Paris by the spy Beckmann to his paper, the Kölnische 
Zeitung, that the Prussian police were attempting retrospectively to 
forge a link between Cherval, his plot and the accused in Cologne. 
I accordingly kept on the look-out for reports about Cherval. It so 
happened that in July 1852 the latter offered his services as an 
Orleanist agent to M. de R., b a former Minister during Louis 
Philippe's reign and a well-known eclectic philosopher. The 
connections which M. de R. retained in the Paris Prefecture of 
Police enabled him to obtain extracts from their dossier on 
* I did not learn until after the Revelations were in print that de la Hodde 
(under the name Duprez) as well as the Prussian police agents Beckmann (then 
correspondent of the "Kölnische Zeitung") and Sommer were also involved. 
a See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 420.— Ed. 
b Charles François Marie de Rémusat (see Marx's letter to Engels, July 13, 1852, 
present edition, Vol. 39).— Ed. 

=====第81页=====
Herr Vogt. — III. Police Matters 57 
Cherval. In the French police report Cherval was referred to as 
Cherval nommé Frank, dont le véritable nom est Cramer. 3 For a long 
time he had worked as an agent for Prince Hatzfeldt, the Prussian 
Ambassador in Paris; he was the betrayer of the complot 
franco-allemand and was now simultaneously a spy for the French, 
etc. In the course of the Cologne trial I gave these reports to one 
of the counsel for the defence, Herr Schneider II, and empowered 
him to name my source if need arose. When Stieber said under 
oath during the session of October 18 that the Irishman Cherval, 
who on Stieber's own testimony had served a gaol sentence in 
Aachen in 1845 for forging bills of exchange, was at that moment 
still under arrest in Paris, I informed Schneider II by return of 
post that, under the pseudonym of Cherval, the Rhenish Prussian 
Cramer was "still" in London, was in daily communication with 
Greif,  the Prussian lieutenant of police, and that, as he was a 
condemned Prussian criminal, the English would extradite him as 
soon as they received an application from the Prussian Government. 
To have brought him to Cologne as a witness would have overthrown 
the entire Stieber system. 
Under pressure from Schneider II Stieber finally remembered 
on October 23 having heard that Cherval had fled from Paris, but 
he swore high and low that he had no knowledge of the present 
whereabouts of the Irishman or of his alliance with the Prussian 
police. In fact at that time Cherval was attached to Greif in 
London by a fixed weekly salary. The debates about the "Cherval 
mystery" at the Cologne Assizes, that had been provoked by my 
reports, drove Cherval from London. I heard that he had gone on 
a police mission to Jersey. I had long lost sight of him when by 
chance I came across a report from the Geneva correspondent of 
the Republik der Arbeiter^ which appears in New York, stating that 
Cherval had turned up in Geneva in March 1853 under the name 
of Nugent, and that he had vanished from there once more in the 
summer of 1854. He visited Vogt in Geneva, then, a few weeks 
after my Revelations with the compromising statements about him 
had been published in Basle by Schabelitz. 
Let us now return to the Falstaffian travesty of history. 
According to Vogt, Cherval arrived in Geneva immediately after 
his fictitious escape from Paris and before that he was allegedly 
"sent" by the secret Communist League from London to Paris "a 
a Cherval, called Frank, whose real name is Cramer.— Ed. 
b "Korrespondenzen.  Genf,  den 16. April 1854", Republik der Arbeiter, No. 22, 
May 27, 1854.— Ed. 

=====第82页=====
58 Karl Marx 
few months" prior to the discovery of the September plot (loc. cit., 
p. 172). Hence while the interval between May 1852 and March 
1853 thus disappears altogether, the interval between June 1850 
and September 1851 shrinks to "a few months". What wouldn't 
Stieber have given for a Vogt who could have testified on oath 
before the Assizes at Cologne that the "secret Communist League 
in London" had sent Cherval to Paris in June 1850, and what 
wouldn't I have given to see Vogt sweating on the witness stand 
next to his Stieber! What a fine company they make: the swearing 
Stieber with his bird, the Greif [griffin], his Wermuth [vermouth], 
his Goldheimchen [golden cricket] and his Bettelvogt [beadle]. 
Vogt's Cherval brought with him to Geneva "recommendations 
to all friends of Marx & Co., from whom Mr. Nugent soon became 
inseparable'' (p. 173). He "took up his quarters with the family of a 
correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung" and gained access to 
Vogt probably as the result of my recommendations (in the 
Revelations). Vogt employed him as a lithographer (loc. cit., pp. 
l73[-74]) and entered with him so to speak into a "scientific 
intercourse" as he had done earlier with Archduke John and 
was to do later with Plon-Plon. One day, while he was working in 
the "office" of the Imperial Regent, 62 "Nugent" was recognised by 
an "acquaintance" as Cherval and accused of being an "agent 
provocateur". In fact Nugent was not only working for Vogt in 
Geneva but was also busily engaged in "founding a clandestine 
society". 
"Cherval-Nugent presided, kept the minutes and corresponded with London" (loc. 
cit., p. 175). He had "taken a few not very discerning but otherwise worthy workers 
into his confidence" (ibid.), however "among the members there was also an associate 
of the Marx clique known to everyone as a suspect minion of the German police" 
(loc. cit.). 
"All the friends" of Marx, from whom Cherval-Nugent 
"became inseparable", are now suddenly transformed into "one 
associate", and this one associate promptly dissolves again into "the 
associates of Marx who had remained behind in Geneva" (p. 176), 
with whom Nugent later "continues to correspond from Paris" 
and whom he magnetically "attracts to  himself"  in Paris (loc. cit.). 
Yet another instance, then, of his favourite "transformation" of 
the buckram "cloth" of Kendal green! 
What Cherval-Nugent purposed with his society was the 
"mass production of forged banknotes and treasury bills which when put into 
circulation were expected to undermine the credit of the despots and ruin their 
finances" (loc. cit., p. 175). 

=====第83页=====
Herr Vogt. —III. Police Matters 59 
Cherval, it seems, was trying to emulate the celebrated Pitt who, 
as is well known, set up a factory not far from London during the 
war against the Jacobins to produce false French assignats. 
"Various stone and copper plates had already been engraved for this purpose by 
Nugent  himself;  the gullible members of the secret league had already been 
selected to go to France, Switzerland and Germany with packets of these"—stone 
and copper plates?—no—"these counterfeit banknotes" (the banknotes were, of 
course, put into packets before they were printed) (p. 175), 
but Cicero- Vogt was already standing behind Cherval-Catiline with 
his sword drawn. A peculiar characteristic of all Falstaffs is that as 
well as big bellies they also have big mouths. Just look at our 
Gurgelgrosslinger who has already set limits to "revolutionary 
antics"  in Switzerland and arranged for whole shiploads of 
refugees to find a livelihood overseas, look how he postures, how 
melodramatically he acts, how he magnifies Stieber's Paris skirmish 
with Cherval (see Revelations 3)] Here he lay, and thus he bore his 
point! b 
"The plan of the whole conspiracy" (loc. cit., p. 176) "had been monstrously 
conceived." "All the workers' associations were to have Cherval's project laid at their 
door." There had already been "some confidential inquiries from foreign 
embassies", they were already on the point of "compromising Switzerland, 
especially the Canton of Geneva". 
But the Land-Vogt was vigilant. He carried out his first rescue 
of Switzerland, an experiment he later repeated several times with 
steadily increasing success. 
"/ cannot deny," the weighty man exclaims, "I cannot deny that I contributed 
a substantial part in frustrating these devilish plans; I cannot deny that I made use of 
the police of the Geneva Republic for this purpose; / regret to this day" (disconsolate 
Cicero) "that the zeal of some deluded enthusiasts served to warn the wily ringleader 
and enabled him to evade arrest" [p. 177]. 
But at all events, Cicero-Vogt had "frustrated" the Catiline 
conspiracy, rescued Switzerland, and "contributed" his substantial 
part (wherever he carries that). According to him Cherval 
reappeared in Paris a few weeks later and there "he made no 
attempt to hide  himself,  but showed himself in public like other 
citizens" (loc. cit., p. 176). And we all know how public is the life 
of the citizens of Paris in the counterfeit Empire. 
a See present edition, Vol.  11.—  Ed. 
b Falstaff's words (slightly paraphrased) from Shakespeare's Henry IV, Part I, 
Act II, Scene 4.— Ed. 

=====第84页=====
60 Karl Marx 
While Cherval thus gads about in Paris "in public", poora  Vogt 
always has to hide in the Palais Royal under Plon-Plon's table 
when he visits Paris! 
I rather regret that after Vogt's powerful Zachariad63  I must 
now give the following letter from Johann Philipp Becker. A veteran 
of the German emigration, active as a revolutionary from the 
Hambach Festival 64 to the campaign for the Imperial Constitution, 
in which he fought as commander of the 5th Army Division (the 
Berlin Militär-Wochenschrift, a voice that is by no means partial, 
testified to his military achievement), Johann Philipp Becker is too 
well known to require any recommendation from me. I need only 
say, therefore, that his letter was written to R., b a German 
businessman in London with whom I am on friendly terms, that I 
do not know Becker personally and that he has never been 
connected with me politically. Finally, I should note that I have 
omitted the opening section of his letter which deals with business 
matters as well as most of the passages referring to the "Brimstone 
Gang" and the "Bristlers" since we are already familiar with the 
material they contain. (The original of the letter is in Berlin along 
with other documents connected with my suit.) 
"Paris, March 20, 1860 
"...I recently saw Vogt's pamphlet against Marx.c  I found its contents very 
distressing, all the more so since, as I was living in Geneva at the time, I am 
perfectly familiar with the history of the so-called Brimstone Gang and the 
notorious Cherval. It is evident that the events have been totally distorted and with 
an utter disregard for justice have been falsely connected with the political activities 
of the economist Marx. I do not know Herr Marx personally, nor have I ever had 
any association with him whatever, but I have known Herr Vogt and his family for 
upwards of twenty years and am bound to him by much closer bonds of affection. I 
must bitterly deplore and unreservedly repudiate the frivolous and unscrupulous 
manner in which Vogt has entered the lists on this occasion. It is unworthy of a 
man to include distorted and even imaginary facts as weapons in his armoury. It is 
really very painful to see that Vogt unthinkingly, and apparently suicidally, 
destroys his congenial field of activity, compromises his position and stains his own 
reputation; and this would be the case even if he could be wholly acquitted of the 
charge of being in the pay of Napoleon. On the other hand, how gladly would I 
have seen him use every honest means to clear his name of such grave accusations. 
As it is, his behaviour hitherto in this unedifying business impels me to give you a 
description of the so-called Brimstone Gang-and the worthy Herr Cherval so that 
you may judge for yourself the extent to which Marx may be held responsible for 
their existence and their activities. 
"A word, then, about the rise and fall of the Brimstone Gang, for scarcely 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b Georg Friedrich Rheinländer. — Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, Mein  Prozess.... — Ed. 

=====第85页=====
Herr Vogt. —III. Police Matters 61 
anyone is in a better position than I am to give you this information. During my 
stay in Geneva at that time I had an opportunity to observe the activities of the 
emigrants not only thanks to my position; but in addition, as an older man and 
always mindful of the general cause, I had a particular interest in closely following 
their every move so as to be able whenever possible to forestall and prevent the 
occasional foolish ventures which were so forgivable in people whom misfortune 
had so harassed and even reduced to despair. My 30 years' experience had taught 
"me only too well how richly every emigration is endowed with illusions." 
(What follows has been largely anticipated in the letters of 
Borkheim and Schily.) 3 
"...This company, essentially a company of idlers, was referred to jestingly and 
mockingly as the Brimstone Gang. It was a club which consisted, as it were, of a 
motley crowd brought together by chance; it had neither president nor 
programme, neither statute nor dogma. There is no question of its having been a 
secret society, or of its having had any political or other goal to pursue 
systematically; they merely wanted to show off and that with an openness and 
frankness that knew no bounds. Nor did they have any connection with Marx, who 
for his part could certainly have known nothing of their existence and whose 
socio-political views moreover diverged widely from theirs. And in addition these 
fellows evinced a strong urge to be independent that verged on self-conceit and it 
is extremely unlikely that they would have been willing to subordinate themselves 
to any authority either in theory or in practice. They would have laughed Vogt's 
paternalistic admonitions out of court, no less than they would have ridiculed 
Marx's policy instructions. I was in a position to obtain very precise information 
about everything that went on in those circles since my eldest son b used to meet the 
Big White Chiefs every day.... In all, the whole farce of this gang, devoid of any 
ties, c scarcely outlasted the winter of 1849-50; the force of circumstances scattered 
our heroes to the winds. 
"Who would have thought that after ten years' slumber the long-forgotten 
Brimstone Gang would be set alight once more by Professor Vogt in order to ward 
off imagined aggressors by spreading a foul stench which was then transmitted by 
obliging journalists with great enthusiasm acting as it were as electromagnetic-
sympathetic conductors. Even Herr von Vincke, that liberal par excellence, 
mentioned the Brimstone Gang in connection with the Italian question and used it 
as an illustration in the modest Prussian Chamber. And the otherwise blameless 
citizens of Breslau in their sancta simplicitas have in honour of the Brimstone 
Gang prepared a carnival jest and fumigated the whole city with sulphur fires as the 
symbol of their loyalty. 
"Poor innocent Brimstone Gang! After your blessed end you had willy-nilly to 
turn into a veritable volcano, to become the bogy that frightens timid subjects into 
a wholesome respect for the police, to vulcanise all the fat-heads of the world and 
blacken every overheated brain down to its roots—just as Vogt, in my opinion, has 
burnt his fingers for ever. 
"Now then, as for Cramer, vulgo Cherval. This socio-political and common 
scoundrel came to Geneva in 1853, pretending to be an Englishman by the name 
a See this volume, pp. 29-32, 43-46.— Ed. 
b Gottfried Becker.— Ed. 
c A pun in the original: bandlose Bande. Bandlose means "without ties", Bande 
means "band", "gang".— Ed. 

=====第86页=====
62 Karl Marx 
of Nugent. This was in fact the surname of the woman who accompanied him, 
ostensibly as his wife, and who really was English. He spoke both French and 
English fluently and for a long time carefully avoided speaking German for he 
seemed to be doing everything in his power to pass for a native Englishman. Being 
competent in both lithography and chromolithography, he boasted of having 
introduced this latter art into Geneva. In society he was very adept, he knew how 
to make his presence felt and to show himself to advantage. He soon obtained a 
sufficient amount of work, drawing objects from nature and antiquity for 
professors of the Academy. At first he lived a retired life and later, when he did 
seek company it was exclusively in the circle of French and Italian refugees. At that 
time I founded an office de renseignements 3 and a daily paper Le Messager du Léman 
and I had an assistant called Stecher, h a refugee from Baden who had formerly 
been headmaster in a secondary school. He was a talented draughtsman and strove 
to improve his standing by studying chromolithography. He found a teacher in the 
Englishman Nugent. Stecher was now full of stories about this skilful, kindly and 
generous Englishman and about the pleasant and graceful Englishwoman. Stecher 
also taught singing in the Workers' Educational Association and he occasionally 
brought his teacher Nugent with him. It was there that I first had the pleasure of 
meeting him and that he condescended to speak German; he spoke it so fluently 
and with such a command of the Lower Rhenish dialect that I said to him: 'But 
you can't possibly be an Englishman!' He persisted in his assertion, however, 
explaining that his parents had placed him in a school in Bonn when he was very 
young and that he had remained there until his eighteenth year, during which time 
he had got used to the local dialect. Stecher, who remained enchanted by the 'nice' 
man almost to the last, helped to make the belief that he was an Englishman more 
credible. But this incident made me rather distrustful of the would-be son of 
Albion and I urged caution on my fellow-members in the Association. Some time 
later I met the Englishman in the company of some French refugees and 
approached just as he was boasting of his heroism during the Paris uprisings. This 
was the first occasion on which I learned that he was also interested in politics. This 
made him all the more suspect so I made fun of the 'leonine bravery' he claimed to 
have displayed, to give him the chance to exhibit it against me in the presence of 
the Frenchmen. But as he answered my biting mockery by cringing like a cur I 
judged him contemptible from that moment on. 
"From then on he avoided me whenever he could. In the meantime, with 
Stecher's aid, he organised evening dances in the bosom of the German Workers' 
Association, enlisting additional musical talent free of charge in the shape of an 
Italian, a Swiss and a Frenchman. At these balls I again met the Englishman, this 
time as a veritable maître de plaisir c and completely in his element; uproarious 
merriment and pleasing the ladies suited him much better than his leonine bravery. 
However, he was not politically active in the Workers' Association, where he did 
nothing but hop, skip and jump, drink and sing. In the meantime however I heard 
from Fritz, a goldsmith from Württemberg, that our 'intrepid revolutionary 
Englishman' had founded a League consisting of him (Fritz), another German, a 
few Italians and Frenchmen, making seven members in all. I implored Fritz to have 
nothing to do with this political tightrope-walker, at any rate as far as serious 
matters were concerned, and begged him both to resign from the League at once 
and induce his associates to do likewise. Some time later my bookseller sent me a 
a Information bureau.— Ed. 
b See Appendix 3 (p. 304 of this volume).— Ed. 
c Master of ceremonies.— Ed. 

=====第87页=====
Herr Vogt. — III. Police Matters 63 
pamphlet by Marx dealing with the communist trial in Cologne 3 and in this 
Cherval was unmasked as Cramer and sharply attacked as a scoundrel and a 
traitor. At once I began to suspect that Nugent might be Cherval, above all 
because, according to the pamphlet, he came from the Rhineland and this 
corresponded to his accent. Also he was alleged to be living with an Englishwoman, 
which was the case here too. I at once told Stecher, Fritz and others of my 
suspicions and circulated the pamphlet to this end. Mistrust of Nugent spread 
quickly; Marx's pamphlet had its effect. Soon Fritz came to me explaining that he had 
resigned from the 'League' and that the others would follow his example. He also 
revealed to me the League's secret aim. The 'Englishman' intended to destroy the 
credit of the nations by manufacturing government securities and using the profits 
that would be gained in this manner to start a European revolution, etc. At about 
this time a French refugee called Laya, who had formerly been a lawyer in Paris, 
was giving lectures on socialism. Nugent attended them and Laya, who had 
defended him at his trial in Paris, identified him as Cherval, and told him so. 
Nugent implored Laya not to betray him. I learned of it from a French emigrant 
friendly with Laya and I spread the news at once. Nugent had the effrontery to 
appear once again in the Workers' Association whereupon he was exposed as the 
German Cramer and the Frenchman Cherval and was expelled. Ranickel from 
Bingen is said to have been his most violent assailant on this occasion. To crown it 
all the Genevan police began to show an interest in him because of the League, but 
the manufacturer of government securities had disappeared without a trace. 
"In Paris he engaged in decorating porcelain and since I was in the same line of 
trade I met him in the course of business. But I found him the same irresponsible 
and incorrigible windbag as before. 
"But how Vogt could have dared to connect the Genevan activities of this rogue 
with those of Marx and to describe him as one of his confederates or tools is utterly 
beyond my comprehension, especially as this was supposed to have been at the very 
time that he was the object of such a violent attack by Marx in the pamphlet 
referred to above. It was after all Marx who unmasked him and who drove him from 
Geneva where, according to Vogt, he was actively engaged on Marx's  behalf. 
"When I reflect how it was possible for a scientist like Vogt thus to go astray my 
mind reels. Is it not lamentable to find the praiseworthy reputation brought about 
by a happy coincidence of events so recklessly destroyed in such a wasteful and 
sterile fashion! Would it be surprising if after witnessing such deeds the whole 
world were to receive Vogt's scientific researches with scepticism, suspecting all the 
while that he might have arrived at his scientific conclusions with the same 
recklessness and the same lack of scruple, basing them on erroneous notions rather 
than on positive facts, painstakingly studied? 
"If to become a statesman and a scientist nothing but ambition were required 
even Cramer might become both. Unfortunately, with his Brimstone Gang and his 
Cherval, Vogt has degenerated into a sort of Cherval  himself.  And indeed there are intrinsic 
similarities between the two, brought about by their hankering for material comfort, for the 
safety of their own persons, for the joys of conviviality and for frivolous trifling with serious 
matters.... In anticipation of friendly news from you I send you my warmest 
greetings. 
"Yours, 
/. Ph. Becker 
a Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see present edition, 
Vol. 11).—Ed. 

=====第88页=====
64 Karl Marx 
"P. S. Glancing once more at Vogt's pamphlet I observe to my further surprise 
that the 'Bristlers' too have been duly honoured. So I am adding a few words to 
outline their story... 
"Furthermore, I also saw in the pamphlet that he claims that Nugent-Cherval-
Crämer came to Geneva on a mission for Marx. a I must add therefore that he did not 
drop the pretence of being an Englishman up to the very last moment in Geneva 
and that he never gave the slightest indication that he had ever had any contact whatever 
with any German emigrant, which would in any case have scarcely been reconcilable 
with his wish to preserve his incognito. Even here and now, when the matter must 
have lost its former significance for him, he is reluctant to admit his German origin 
and steadfastly denies all earlier acquaintance with Germans. 
"Hitherto I still believed that Vogt had light-mindedly allowed himself to be 
mystified by others, but now his actions increasingly seem to be motivated by 
malicious perfidy. I am less sorry for him than before and my sympathy is reserved 
now for his worthy and good old father b who will suffer many a bitter moment 
because of this business. 
"I will not only permit you, I actually request you to make known this 
information among your circle of acquaintances in the interest of truth and of the 
good cause. 
"With warm greetings, 
Yours, 
/. Philipp B." (See Appendix 3.) 
4. THE COMMUNIST TRIAL IN COLOGNE 
From the "office" of the Regent of the Empire in Geneva to the 
Royal Prussian Court of Assizes in Cologne. 
"In the Cologne trial Marx played an outstanding part." 
Undoubtedly. 
"In Cologne his confederates were on trial."c Granted. 
The Cologne accused were held in detention for 11/2 years 
pending the trial. 
The Prussian police and the Embassy, Hinckeldey with his entire 
clan, postal and municipal authorities, the Ministries of the 
Interior and of Justice—all made the most strenuous efforts 
during these 1 l/2 years to give birth to a corpus delicti. 
Here then, in his research into my "activities", Vogt has at his 
disposal, as it were, the assistance of the Prussian state and he 
even had authentic material contained in my Revelations Concerning 
the Communist Trial in Cologne, Basle, 1853, a copy of which he 
discovered in the Geneva Workers' Association and which he 
borrowed and "studied". This time, then, young Karl really will 
a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 176.— Ed. 
b Philipp Friedrich Wilhelm Vogt. — Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 169-70.— Ed. 

=====第89页=====
Herr Vogt.— III. Police Matters 65 
settle my hash. But no! For once Vogt is "at a loss", he just sets 
off a few of his home-made smoke-bombs and stink-bombs* 
before beating a hasty retreat, stammering: 
"The Cologne trial is of no particular significance for us"a ("Magnum Opus", p. 
172). 
In the Revelations I was compelled to attack Herr August Willich 
among other people. Willich commenced his defence in the 
Neu'-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung of October 28,  1853**  by describing 
my work as "a masterly critique of the savage procedures adopted by the 
central police of the German Confederation"}' Jacob Schabelitz fils, the 
publisher of the pamphlet, wrote to me from Basle on December 
11, 1852 after receiving the manuscript: 
"Your exposure of the perfidy of the police is unsurpassable. You have erected 
a permanent monument to the present regime in Prussia."0 
He added that his judgment was shared by experts, chief among 
these "experts" being a man who is at present a Genevan friend 
of Herr Karl Vogt. 
Seven years after the publication of the Revelations Herr 
Eichhoff of Berlin, whom I do not know at all, made the following 
statement in court (it is well known that Eichhoff was on trial, 65 
accused of having slandered Stieber): 
"He had made a detailed study of the Cologne communist trial and not only 
adhered to his original opinion that Stieber had committed perjury but had to 
extend it to assert that everything Stieber said during the trial was false.... The 
verdict passed on the accused in Cologne was due entirely to Stieber's testimony.... 
Stieber's whole testimony was perjury from start to finish" (first supplement to the 
Berlin Vossische Zeitung, May 9, 1860). d 
* " Smoke -bombs or stink-bombs are used chiefly in mine warfare. One works with an 
ordinary flare-charge which must however contain rather more sulphur than usual 
and as much feathers, horn, hair and other rubbish as the charge will take. This is put 
in a container and the shell fired with a fuse" (F. C. Plümicke, Handbuch für die 
Königlich Preussischen Artillerie-Offiziere, Erster Teil, Berlin, 1820). 
** I replied with a pamphlet called The Knight of  the Noble  Consciousness,  New York, 
1853.  [See present edition, Vol. 12.] 
a Italics by Marx.— Ed. 
h This refers to August Willich's slanderous article "Doctor Karl Marx und 
seine Enthüllungen", published in the Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker 
Criminal-Zeitung, October 28 and November 4,  1853.—  Ed. 
c See present edition, Vol. 39. Marx gives a summary rather than the exact 
words of the quoted passage.— Ed. 
d Karl Wilhelm Eichhoff [,Erklärung vor dem Criminalgericht 8.-15. Mai 1860], 
Königlich privilegierte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen, No. 108 
(supplement), May 9, 1860.— Ed. 

=====第90页=====
66 Karl Marx 
Vogt himself admits: 
"He"  (Marx) "did everything in his power to provide the defence with the 
materials and instructions necessary for the conduct of their case...." 
It is a known fact that "false documents, manufactured by the agents 
themselves", i. e. Stieber, Fleury, etc., "were presented to the court" (in Cologne) 
"as 'evidence' and that in general an abyss of perfidy was exposed among this police 
rabble that makes one shudder to contemplate" ("Magnum Opus", pp. 169, 170). 
If Vogt can show his hatred of the coup d'état by making 
propaganda for Bonapartism, why should not I reveal "my 
collusion" with the secret police by exposing their abysmal perfidy? 
If the police had genuine proofs, why manufacture false ones? 
But, lectures Professor Vogt, 
"nevertheless the blow only fell on the members of the Marxian League in 
Cologne, only on the Marx party". 
Indeed, Polonius! Had not the blow fallen on another party 
earlier on in Paris; did it not also strike another party later on in 
Berlin (the Ladendorf trial), and yet another in Bremen (League 
of the Dead), 66 etc., etc.? 
As to the verdict passed on the Cologne accused I shall quote a 
relevant passage from my Revelations: 
"The miracles performed by the police were originally necessary 
to conceal the completely political nature of the trial. 'The 
revelations you are about to witness, Gentlemen of the Jury,' said 
Saedt when opening for the prosecution, 'will prove to you that 
this trial is not a political trial.' But now" (at the conclusion of the 
case) "he emphasises its political character so that the police 
revelations should be forgotten. After the 1 72-year preliminary 
investigation the jury needed objective evidence in order to justify 
itself before public opinion. 
"After the five-week-long police comedy they needed 'politics 
pure and simple' to extricate themselves from the sheer mess. Saedt 
therefore did not only confine himself to the material that had led 
the Indictment Board to the conclusion that 'there was no factual 
evidence of an indictable offence'. He went even further. He 
attempted to prove that the law against conspiracy does not 
require any indictable action, but is simply a law with a political 
purpose, and the category of conspiracy is therefore merely a 
pretext for burning political heretics in a legal way. The success of 
his attempt promised to be all the greater because of the decision 
to apply the new [Prussian] Penal Code that had been promul­
gated after the accused had been arrested. On the pretext that this 
code contained extenuating provisions the servile court was able to 

=====第91页=====
Herr Vogt. —III. Police Matters 67 
permit its retroactive application. But if it was simply a political 
trial why a preliminary investigation lasting 1 1/2  years? For 
political reasons" (loc. cit., pp. 71, 72). 
"With the unmasking of the minute-book" forged and planted 
by the Prussian police themselves "the case had advanced to a new 
stage. The jury was no longer free merely to find the defendants 
guilty or not guilty; they must either find the defendants 
guilty—or the government. 
"To acquit the accused would mean condemning the government" (loc. 
cit., p. 70). a 
That the Prussian Government of the day put a similar 
construction on the situation is plain from a communication that 
Hinckeldey sent to the Prussian Embassy in London while the 
Cologne trial was still in progress. In this he said that "the whole 
existence of the political police depended on the outcome of the trial". He 
accordingly asked for a person who could appear in court in the 
guise of the witness H.b  (who had disappeared), for which 
performance he would receive 1,000 talers reward. This person 
had actually been found when Hinckeldey's next letter arrived: 
"The State Prosecutor hopes that thanks to the happy constitution of the jury it will 
be possible to get a verdict of guilty even without further extraordinary measures, 
and he" (Hinckeldey) "therefore asks you not to trouble yourselves further." (See 
Appendix 4.) 
It was in fact the happy constitution of the jury in Cologne which 
inaugurated the Hinckeldey-Stieber regime in Prussia. "A blow 
will be struck in Berlin if the Cologne accused are condemned" 
was the view of the police rabble attached to the Prussian Embassy 
in London, as early as October 1852, even though the police mine 
(the Ladendorf conspiracy) did not explode in Berlin until the end 
of March 1853. (See Appendix 4.) 
The liberal outcry that follows an age of reaction is all the 
louder the greater the cowardice displayed by liberals in putting 
up with the reaction for years on end without protest. Thus at the 
time of the Cologne trial, all my efforts to expose Stieber's system 
of deception in the liberal Prussian press were unavailing. The 
motto of the press, printed on its banner in block letters, ran: 
Reliability is the first duty of the citizen, and in this sign shalt 
thou—live.67 
a See Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (present edition, 
Vol. 11, pp. 454-55, 453). Except for the words "pure and simple", the italics were 
introduced by Marx in Herr  Vogt. —Ed. 
b Hermann Wilhelm Haupt. — Ed. 

=====第92页=====
68 Karl Marx 
5. JOINT FESTIVAL  OF THE  GERMAN WORKERS' 
EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATIONS  IN LAUSANNE 
(JUNE  26 AND 27, 1859) 
Our hero takes  to his  heels  and  with undiminished pleasure  he 
retreats to—Arcadia.  We  meet  him  again  in a  "secluded corner  of 
Switzerland",  in Lausanne,  at a  "Joint Festival"  of a  number  of 
German workers' educational associations which took place 
towards  the end of  June. Here Karl Vogt saved Switzerland  for 
the second time. While Catiline  was  sitting  in London,  our  Cicero 
with the  gay-coloured jacket thundered  in Lausanne: 
"Jam,  jam  intelligis  me  acrius vigilare  ad salutem, quam  te ad  perniciem 
reipublicae." 3 
By happy chance there exists  an  authentic report  on the 
above-mentioned "Joint Festival"  and on the  deed  of valour 
performed during  it by our  "well-rounded character". Written  by 
Herr  G. Lommel with  the  collaboration  of Vogt,  it is entitled  Das 
Centralfest  der Deutschen Arbeiterbildungsvereine  in der  Westschweiz 
(Lausanne 1859), Geneva,  1859,  Markus Vaney,  rue de la  Croix 
d'or.  Let us  compare  the  authentic report with  the  "Magnum 
Opus",  which appeared five months later.  The  report contains 
Cicero-Vogt's speech "delivered  by himself" and in it he  begins  by 
explaining  the  mystery  of his  presence  at this gathering.  He 
appears among  the  workers,  he harangues them, because 
"grave accusations have latterly been made against  him,  accusations which,  if 
they were true, were bound utterly  to destroy  the  confidence placed  in him and 
completely undermine  all his  political activities".  "I have come,"  he goes  on, "I  have 
specifically come here  to protest publicly against  the"  (above-mentioned) "malicious 
underhand dealings" (Report,  pp. 6-7). 
He has  been accused  of Bonapartist intrigues,  he has to  rescue 
his political activities  and as is his  wont  he defends  his  skin with 
his tongue. After indulging  in empty talk  for an  hour  and a half, 
he recollects Demosthenes' admonition that "action, action  and 
once again action  is the  soul  of eloquence".b 
But what  is action?  In America there  is a  small animal called  a 
skunk which  has  only  one  method  of defending itself  at moments 
of extreme danger:  its offensive smell. When attacked  it releases  a 
substance from certain parts  of its  body which,  if it  touches your 
clothes, will ensure that they have  to be  burnt  and, if it  touches 
a "You  will already  be aware that  I attend with greater zeal  to the  salvation  of 
the state than  you to its  destruction" (Cicero, Speeches against Catiline,  I, 4).—  Ed. 
b Demosthenes,  The  Olynthiac, Second Speech, Chapter Four.—  Ed. 

=====第93页=====
Herr Vogt. — III. Police Matters 69 
your skin, will banish you for a period from all human society. 
The smell is so horribly offensive that when hunters see that their 
dogs have accidentallv started a skunk they will hurriedly take to 
their heels in greater panic than if they had found that a wolf or a 
tiger was pursuing them. For powder and lead is an adequate 
defence against wolves and tigers, but no antidote has been found 
to the a posteriori of a skunk. 
That is what action is, says our orator, a naturalised citizen of 
the "Kingdom of Animals",3 and bespatters his supposed perse­
cutors with the following skunk-like effluent: 
"But I would like to warn you of one thing above all else, and that is of the 
machinations of a small group of depraved men whose aims and efforts are all 
directed towards seducing the worker away from his job, implicating him in 
conspiracies and communist intrigues, and finallv, after living from the sweat of his 
brow, driving him cold-bloodedly" (i. e. after he has finished sweating) "'to his 
destruction. Now once again this small group is using everv possible method" (just 
keep it as general as possible!) "to ensnare the workers' associations in its toils. 
Whatever they mav say" (about Vogts Bonapartist intrigues) "you may rest assured 
that their true aim is to exploit the worker for their own selfish ends and finally to 
abandon him to his fate"  I Report,  p. IS. See Appendix). 
The shameless impertinence with which this "skunk" accuses me 
and my friends of "living from the sweat of the workers' brow", when 
we have alwavs sacrificed our private interests in order to defend 
those ot the working class, and have done this gratis, is not even 
original. The mouchards of the December Gang hurled similar 
slanders at Louis Blanc, Blanqui, Raspail, etc. And not only that, 
for at all times and in ail places the sycophants of the ruling class 
have always resorted to these despicable slanders to denigrate the 
literary and political champions of the oppressed classes. {See 
Appendix 5.) 
After this action our "well-rounded character" is incidentally no 
longer able to keep a straight face. The buffoon goes on to 
compare his "persecutors" who are walking about freelv, with the 
"Russians taken prisoner at  Zorndorf ".h68 And he compares himself 
with—who would have guessed it!—Frederick the Great.  Falstaff-
Vogt remembers that Frederick the Great ran away from the first 
battle at which he was present. How much greater then is he who 
ran away without even waiting for the battle.* 
* Kobes I 69  relates in Jacob Venedey's pamphlet Pro domo und pro patria gegen 
Karl Vogt, Hanover, 1860: "He was a witness to the fact that the Imperial Regent, 
;1 An allusion to the title of Karl Vogt's book, Untersuchungen über Thierstaaten, 
in which the author treats his subject as a vulgar materialist.— Ed. 
h (ieorg Lommel, op. cit., S. 19.— Ed. 

=====第94页=====
70 Karl Marx 
Thus far the adventures of the Joint Festival at Lausanne 
according to the authentic report. And "now just look" (as 
Fischart puts it) "at our clammy-handed, parasitically stout, 
slovenly cook and pot holder" a and see what a fine police purée à 
la Eulenspiegel he serves up five months later for the benefit of 
the German philistines. 
" They wanted at all costs to create complications in Switzerland; some sort of blow 
was to be aimed ... at the policy of neutrality. J was informed that the Joint Festival 
of the Workers' Educational Associations was to be used to induce the workers to 
follow a route which they had firmly rejected. It was hoped that the lovely Festival 
would provide an opportunity for forming a secret committee to enter into 
communication with like-minded people in Germany and take God knows what 
steps" (Vogt does not know, even though he was informed). "There were all sorts of 
dark rumours and mysterious talk about the active intervention of the workers in 
German political affairs. I at once resolved to oppose these intrigues and to exhort the 
workers anew to turn a deaf ear to all proposals of this sort. At the conclusion of the 
speech referred to above 1 gave a solemn warning, etc." ("Magnum Opus", pp. 180 
[-81]). 
Cicero-Vogt has already forgotten that at the start of his speech 
he let slip what had brought him to the Joint Festival—not the 
neutrality of Switzerland but the need to save his own skin. His 
speech does not contain a single word about the intended plot 
against Switzerland, the conspiratorial intentions at the Joint 
Festival, the secret committee, the active intervention of the 
workers in German politics or proposals of "this" or any other 
'sort". Not a word about all these Stieberiads. His final warning 
was nothing but the warning of the honest Sikes in the Old Bailey 
who warned the jurymen not to listen to the "infamous" detectives 
who had caught him stealing. 
"The events which immediately followed," Falstaff-Vogt declares ("Magnum 
Opus",  p. 181), "confirmed my forebodings.'' 
Karl Vogt, was not present when we and the four other Imperial Regents forced the 
Government of Württemberg to bring the Parliament to an honourable end with 
sword and bayonet. It is an amusing story. The other four Imperial Regents had 
already entered the carriage to go to the Assembly Room, as agreed, and there 
together with the Rump Parliament [...J to put on a bold front" (it is well known 
that the Rump Parliament had no head). [Venedey says here: die Brust bieten 
(literall), to present the breast). The phrase is an adaptation of the German 
idiomatic expression die Stirn bieten (to present the forehead) which means 'to put 
on a bold front" Marx puns on Venedey's substitution of Brust (breast) tor Stirn 
(forehead) to sires- that the Rump Parliament had no head.] "Karl Vogt slammed 
the carriage-dooi shut and called to tut coachman: 'You go on ahead, the carriage 
is full up. 1 shall follow on!' But Kar! Vogt only appeared [...] after all possible 
danger was over' (ioc. cit., pp. 23, 2ij, 
;1 Johann Fischart. Affentheurliche. Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung..., S. 
73.— 'Ed. 

=====第95页=====
Herr Vogt. — III. Police Matters 71 
What does he mean, forebodings! But Falstaff has already 
forgotten that a few lines before he did not have "forebodings", 
but that he had been "informed", informed of the plans of the 
conspirators, and informed in detaill And what, you vengeful 
angel,3 were the events which immediately followed? 
"An article in the Allgemeine Zeitung imputed tendencies to the Festival and to 
the life of the workers which these" (i. e. the Festival and the life) "did not in the 
least have in mind." (Just as Vogt had imputed tendencies to the Murten Congress 
and the workers' organisations in general.) "This article and a reprint of it in the 
Frankfurter Journal led to a confidential inquiry from the Ambassador of a South 
German state in which the Festival was given the importance" — "imputed" to it by 
the article in the Allgemeine Zeitung and the reprint in the Frankfurter Journal?—by 
no means! — "which it ought to have had if the intentions of the Brimstone Gang had 
not been frustrated." b 
Ought to have had! Yes indeed! 
Although the most superficial comparison of the "Magnum 
Opus"  and the authentic report on the Joint Festival is enough to 
clear up the mystery of Cicero-Vogt's second rescue of Switzer­
land, I nevertheless wished to ascertain whether there was any 
factual basis, however slender, that might have given him the 
"matter" which provided him with his "energy".70  I wrote, 
therefore, to the editor of the authentic report, Herr G. Lommel in 
Geneva. c Herr Lommel must have been on friendly terms with 
Vogt since he not only collaborated with him on the report on the 
Joint Festival in Lausanne but also, in a subsequent pamphlet 
about the Schiller and Robert Blum memorial celebrations in 
Geneva, d he covered up the fiasco that Vogt had brought upon 
himself there. In his reply of April 13, 1860, Herr Lommel, who is 
personally unknown to me, wrote: 
" Vogt's story that he had frustrated a dangerous conspiracy in Lausanne is the 
sheerest  fairy-tale or lie; he only went to Lausanne because it was an opportunity to 
make a speech which he could afterwards print. In the speech, which lasted  1 V2 
hours,  he defended himself against allegations that he was in the pay of Bonaparte. 
I still have the manuscript in safe keeping." 
a An allusion to Goethe's Faust, Erster Teil, Marthens Garten. But instead of 
Goethe's du ahnungsvoller (foreboding) Engel Marx has du ahndungsvoller (vengeful) 
Engel. —Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 181, 182. In the last sentence the italics are 
Vogt's. He is referring to the article in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 215 
(supplement), August 3, 1859.— Ed. 
c Marx to Lommel, April 9, 1860 (present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed. 
d Georg Lommel, Das Centralfest der Deutschen Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der 
Westschweiz,  Genf,  1859.— Ed. 
4-1305 

=====第96页=====
72 Karl Marx 
A Frenchman living in Geneva, when asked about the same 
Vogtian conspiracy, replied bluntly: 
"Il faut connaître cet individu" (namely Vogt), "surtout le faiseur, l'homme 
important, toujours hors de la nature et de la vérité." 3 
Vogt himself declares on p. 99 of his so-called Studien 0 that he 
"had never laid claim to prophetic gifts". But we know from the 
Old Testament that the ass could see what the prophet had 
missed. 0 And so we can understand how Vogt managed to see the 
conspiracy which in November 1859 he had forebodings of having 
"frustrated" in June 1859. 
6. MISCELLANY 
"If my memory does not deceive me," our Parliamentary Clown writes, "the 
circular" (i. e. an alleged address to the proletarians dated London 1850) "was 
indeed written by a follower of Marx's known as Parliamentary  Wolf,  and it was 
allowed to fall into the hands of the Hanover police. Here too we find this same 
channel turning up in the history of the circular 'of the patriots to the men of 
Gotha'" ("Magnum Opus", p. 144). 
A channel turns up! A prolapsus ani,d perhaps, you zoological 
jester? 
As to "Parliamentary Wolf"—and we shall see later on why, like 
a bad dream, Parliamentary Wolf weighs so heavily on the 
memory of our Parliamentary Clown—he published the following 
statement in the Berlin Volks-Zeitung, the Allgemeine Zeitung and 
the Hamburg Reform: 
"Statement. Manchester, February 6, 1860: I see from the letter of a friend that 
the National-Zeitung (No. 41 of this year) has brought the following passage to the 
attention of the public in a leading article based on Vogt's pamphlet: 
"'In 1850 another circular was dispatched from London to the proletarians in 
Germany, written, as Vogt believes he remembers, by Parliamentary  Wolf,  alias 
Casemate  Wolf.  The circular was allowed simultaneously to fall into the hands of 
the Hanover police.' I have seen neither the relevant issue of the National-Zeitung 
nor the Vogt pamphlet and would like therefore to direct my answer solely to the 
passage just cited: 
"1. In 1850 I was living not in London but in Zurich, and I did not move to 
London until the summer of 1851. 
"2. I have never in the whole of my life written a circular addressed either to 
'proletarians' or to anyone else. 
a "One must know this fellow who is above all a charlatan, a self-important, 
unnatural, untruthful man." — Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, Genf und Bern, 1859, S. 99. 
Marx's italics.— Ed. 
c Numbers 22 :  21-33.—  Ed. 
d Prolapse of the rectum.— Ed. 

=====第97页=====
Herr Vogt. — III. Police Matters 73 
"3. As to the insinuation about the Hanover police J  hereby  return this  shamelessly 
invented accusation to its author with contempt. If the remainder of Vogt's pamphlet is 
as full of impudent lies as the part that refers to me it is a worthy fellow to the 
fabrications of Chenu, de la Hodde & Co. 
W. Wolff a 
There you are: just as Cuvier could construct the whole skeleton 
of an animal from a single bone, Wolff has correctly constructed 
Vogt's whole fabrication from a single fragmentary quotation. Karl 
Vogt can indeed stand beside Chenu and de la Hodde as primus 
inter pares. 
The last  "proof"  adduced by Vogt, who is still "by no means at 
a loss", to demonstrate my entente cordiale with the secret police 
in general and "my relations with the Kreuz-Zeitung party in 
particular", consists in the argument that my wife is the sister of 
the retired Prussian Minister Herr von Westphalen ("Magnum 
Opus",  p. 194). Now how to parry the cowardly stratagem of our 
fat Falstaff? Perhaps the Clown will forgive my wife the cognate 
Prussian Minister 15 when he learns of the agnate Scotsmanc  who 
was beheaded in the market-place in Edinburgh as a rebel in the 
war of liberation against James II. It is well known that it is only 
by accident that Vogt still carries his own head around. For at the 
Robert Blum celebrations of the German Workers' Educational 
Association in Geneva (November 13, 1859) he reported 
"how the Left of the Frankfurt Parliament was for a long time undecided who 
to send to Vienna, Blum or him. Finally, the matter was decided by lot, by drawing 
a piece of straw, which fell upon Blum, or rather against him" (Die Schillerfeier zu 
Genf usw., Geneva, 1859, pp. 28, 29). 
On October 13 Robert Blum set out from Frankfurt for Vienna. 
On October 23 or 24 a deputation of the extreme Left in 
Frankfurt arrived in Cologne on the way to the Democratic 
Congress in Berlin.71  I met these gentlemen, among whom were 
several Members of Parliament who had close bonds with the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. These parliamentarians, of whom one was 
summarily shot during the campaign for the Imperial Constitu­
tion, a second died in exile, while the third still lives, whispered all 
sorts of strange and sinister stories in rnv ear about Vogt's 
intrigues in connection with Robert*Blums mission to Vienna. 
a Wilhelm  Wolff.  "Erklärung", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 44 (supplement), 
February 13, 1860. Also published in the Hamburg Reform on February 11, 1860 
and in the Berlin Volks-Zeitung on February 2-1, 1850.— Ed. 
b Ferdinand von Wcsiphülen. Ed. 
' Archibald Campbell Argyli.  — Ed. 
4* 

=====第98页=====
74 Karl Marx 
However, 
Bid me not speak, bid me be silent, 
To keep the secret I am bound.3 
The Robert Blum celebrations of November 1859 in Geneva to 
which we have already referred treated our "well-rounded 
character" most unkindly. On entering the premises, waddling like 
an obsequious Silenus at the heels of his patron, James Fazy, a 
worker was heard to say: There's Harry with Falstaff after him. 
When he told a delightful anecdote designed to present himself as 
the alter ego of Robert Blum, it was only with difficulty that some 
infuriated workers were prevented from storming the podium. 
And when, finally, forgetting how he had frustrated the revolution 
in June, he himself "called yet again for the barricades"b 
{Schillerfeier, p. 29) a mocking echo repeated: "Barricades— 
shmarricades!" Abroad, however, people know so well just what 
value they are to place on Vogt's revolutionary mouthings that the 
"confidential inquiry from a South German Ambassador", c usually 
unavoidable, was unforthcoming on this occasion and no article 
appeared in the Allgemeine Zeitung. 
Vogt's entire Stieberiad from the "Brimstone Gang" to the 
"retired Minister" reveals the sort of Mastersinger of whom Dante 
says: 
Ed egli avea fatto del cul trombetta.* 
* And he made a trumpet of his rear. (Kannegiesser) [Dante, The Divine Comedy, 
Inferno, Canto XXI. Kannegiesser is the name of the German translator.] 
a Mignon's song in Goethe's novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre, Fünftes Buch, 
Kapitel 16.— Ed. 
b The closing line of the poem about Robert Blum which Vogt quoted 
concluding his speech at the Blum celebrations (see Georg Lommel, Die 
Schiller-Feier in  Genf.  Nebst einem Nachtrag enthaltend die diesjährige Todtenfeier für 
Robert Blum,  Genf,  1859, S. 29).— Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 181-82.— Ed. 

=====第99页=====
75 
IV 
TEC HOW'S LETTER 
What else does our "well-rounded character" pull out of that 
"tristo sacco 
Che merda fa di quel, che si trangugia." 
(Dante) * 
A letter from Techow dated London, August 26, 1850: 
"I cannot characterise these activities better" (i.e. of the "Brimstone Gang") 
"than by imparting to you the contents of a letter from a man whom all who have 
ever known him will acknowledge as a man of honour, a letter which I may permit 
myself to publish because it"a (the man of honour or the letter?) "was expressly 
intended for communication" (to whom?) "and the considerations" (whose?) "which 
earlier militated against publication no longer obtain" ("Magnum Opus", p. 141). 
Techow arrived in London from Switzerland at the end of 
August 1850. His letter is addressed to Schimmelpfennig, formerly 
a lieutenant in the Prussian army, who lived in Berne at the time. 
Schimmelpfennig was supposed to "communicate the letter to our 
friends", i.e. the members of the Centralisation, 72 a secret society 
now extinct for nearly a decade, set up by German refugees in 
Switzerland with a rather mixed membership and a strong 
leavening of parliamentarians. Techow was a member of the 
society, but Vogt and his friends were not. How then did Vogt 
come into possession of Techow's letter and who authorised him 
to publish it? 
* "The sordid sack 
That turns to dung the food it swallows." [The Divine Comedy, Inferno, Canto 
XXVIII.] 
a The German er used here can refer either to the man of honour or the 
letter.— Ed. 

=====第100页=====
76 Karl Marx 
Techow himself wrote to me on the subject from Australia on 
April 17, 1860: 
"At any rate, I have never had occasion to give Herr Karl Vogt any authorisation 
in connection with this matter." 
Of the "friends" of Techow to whom the letter was to be 
communicated only two are still living in Switzerland. Both may 
speak for themselves: 
E.a to Schily, April 29, I860, Upper Engadine, Grisons Canton: 
"When Vogt's pamphlet Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung appeared, 
containing a letter from Techow to his friends in Switzerland dated August 26, 
1850,  we, the friends of Techow still living in Switzerland, resolved to write to 
Vogt to express our disapproval of his unauthorised publication of the letter. 
Techow's letter had been addressed to Schimmelpfennig in Berne and the 
intention was to distribute copies of it among friends.... I am glad that we were not 
mistaken in our belief that none of Techow's friends, none of those who had a 
right to see the letter of August 26, had used it after the manner of the man who 
has by accident come into possession of it. On January 22 a letter was dispatched to 
Vogt protesting against the unauthorised publication of Techow's letter, forbidding 
any further misuse of it and demanding the return of the letter. On January 27 Vogt 
replied: 'Techow's letter was intended to be shown to his friends; the friend who 
had it in his possession had handed it over with the express wish that it should be 
published ... and he would only return the letter to the man from whom he had 
received it.'" 
B.c to Schily, Zurich, May 1, 1860 1S: 
"The letter to Vogt was written by me after I had discussed the matter with E.... 
R.d was not among the 'friends' for whom Techow's letter was intended. From the 
contents of the letter, however, it was perfectly clear to Vogt that it had been 
addressed to me among others, but he took good care not to ask me for permission 
to publish it." 
The solution to the riddle is contained in a passage from Schitys 
letter quoted earlier6 and which I have saved up for this moment. 
He writes: 
"I must say something here about Ranickel because it is through him that 
Techow's letter must have fallen into Vogt's hands, a point in your letter which I had 
almost overlooked. This letter was written by Techow to friends he had lived with 
in Zurich: Schimmelpfennig, B. and E. As their friend and Techow's, I was also 
able to read it later on. When I was brutally and summarily expelled from 
Switzerland (without any previous order of expulsion having been made I was 
simply arrested in the street in Geneva and immediately transported from there), I 
was not permitted to go back to my lodgings to arrange my affairs. From the 
prison in Berne I wrote to a reliable man in Geneva, a master shoemaker called 
a Karl Emmermann.— Ed. 
b See Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 142-61.—  Ed. 
c Friedrich von Beust. — Ed. 
d Ranickel.— Ed. 
e See this volume, pp. 43-46.— Ed. 

=====第101页=====
Herr Vogt. —IV. Techow's Letter 77 
Thum, asking him to find one or other of my friends who might be still in Geneva 
(for I did not know whether the same fate had not befallen any of them), who 
could pack up my belongings and send the most valuable of them to me in Berne, 
putting the remainder into safe keeping for the time being. I wanted that person to 
sort out my papers taking particular care to ensure that nothing should be 
forwarded to me which could not survive the transit through France. Thum did as 
I asked him and Techow's letter remained behind. My belongings included a 
number of papers relating to a rebellion of the parliamentarians against the 
Geneva local committee for the distribution of money for the refugees (the 
committee consisted of three Geneva citizens, among them Thum, and two 
refugees, Becker and myself). Ranickel was familiar with these as he had taken the 
side of the committee against the parliamentarians. For this reason I had asked 
Thum as the treasurer and archivist of the committee to take out those papers with 
Ranickel's help. It may now be the case that, having a legitimate reason for being 
present while my papers were being sorted, Ranickel somehow got his hands on 
Techow's letter. Perhaps it was given him by one of the sorters. I do not by any 
means dispute the transfer of the letter into his  possession,  as distinct from the transfer 
of property rights from me to him. On the contrary, I claim the latter quite 
explicitly. / soon wrote to Ranickel from London asking him to send me the letter. However, 
he did not do so and his culpa manifesta* dates from that time. At the beginning it 
was probably only levis but it then mounted, depending on the extent of his 
complicity in the unauthorised publication of the letter, to magna or maxima culpa c 
or even to dolus. I do not doubt for a single moment that his publication of the 
letter was unauthorised and that none of the addressees had given their permission, 
but I shall nevertheless write to E. for confirmation of this. Nor can it be doubted 
that Ranickel assisted in the publication, given his notorious intimacy with Vogt. 
And even though I do not wish in the least to criticise that intimacy, I cannot 
refrain from pointing out the contrast with their earlier relationship. For Ranickel 
had not only been one of the greatest enemies of the parliamentarians in general; 
he had also uttered the most blood-curdling threats in regard to the Imperial 
Regent in particular. 'I'll strangle the fellow,' he would shout, 'even if I have to go 
to Berne to do it', and we had to forcibly restrain him from carrying out his 
regicidal intention. But now that the scales seem to have fallen from his eyes, and 
Saul has turned into Paul, e I am very curious to see how he will worm his way out 
of another obligation: that of becoming the avenger of Europe. I have fought a hard 
struggle, he would say in the days when he was hesitating between Europe and 
America, but now it is at an end. I shall remain and—avenge myself'!! Let 
Byzantium tremble." f 
Thus far Schily's letter. 
Ranickel, then, unearthedg  Techow's letter among the papers 
left behind by Schily. Notwithstanding Schily's request for it from 
a Manifest guilt.— Ed. 
b Slight.— Ed. 
c Great or maximum guilt.— Ed. 
d Evil intent.— Ed. 
e The Acts of the Apostles 9: 15-17.— Ed. 
f "Trema, Bisanzio!" — quoted from Gaetano Donizetti's opera Belisario, Act II, 
Scene 3 (libretto by Salvatore Cammarano).— Ed. 
s Marx uses the verb auf stiebern —an adaptation of the verb aufstöbern (ferret 
out, unearth) —formed by analogy with Stieber, the name of a German police 
agent.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
78 Karl Marx 
London, he retained it. The letter misappropriated in this way was 
handed by "friend" Ranickel to "friend" Vogt, and "friend" 
Vogt, with his characteristic delicacy of conscience, declared 
himself authorised to publish the letter since Vogt and Ranickel 
are "friends". Anyone, therefore, who writes a letter to be 
"communicated" to "friends", necessarily writes for the benefit of 
"friends" Vogt and Ranickel—arcades ambo. 3 
I must apologise if this peculiar sort of jurisprudence leads me 
back to long-past and half-forgotten events. But Ranickel has 
started it and I must follow. 
The "Communist League" was founded in Paris in 1836, 
originally under another name.b  The organisation that gradually 
evolved was as follows: a certain number of members formed a 
"community", the different communities in the same town 
constituted a "district" [Kreis] and a varying number of districts 
were joined together into "leading districts" [leitende Kreise]. At 
the head of the whole stood the "Central Authority" which was 
elected at a congress consisting of deputies from all the districts, 
but which had the right to add to its own numbers and, in 
emergencies, to nominate its successor on a provisional basis. The 
Central Authority was based first in Paris, and then, from 1840 to 
the beginning of 1848, in London. The chairmen of the 
communities and districts and the Central Authority itself were 
elected. This democratic constitution, utterly unsuitable for 
conspiratorial secret societies, was not incompatible, to say the 
least, with the tasks facing a propaganda association. The activities 
of the "League" consisted first of all in founding public German 
workers' educational associations, and the majority of the associa­
tions of this sort, which still exist in Switzerland, England, Belgium 
and the United States, were founded either directly by the 
"League" or else by people who had at one time belonged to it. 
The constitution of these workers' associations is accordingly the 
same everywhere. One day per week was devoted to discussion, 
another to social activities (singing, recitations, etc.). Libraries were 
set up everywhere, and where possible classes in elementary 
education were started for the instruction of the workers. The 
"League" standing behind the public educational associations, and 
guiding them, found them both the most convenient forum for 
a Literally "Arcadians both", i.e. each deserves the other—an expression used 
by Virgil in Bucolics (Eclogues), 7, 4, and later by Byron, who wrote: " 'Arcades 
ambo' id est—blackguards both" (Don Juan, IV, 93).— Ed. 
b The League of the Just.— Ed. 

=====第103页=====
Herr Vogt. — IV. Techow's Letter 79 
public propaganda and also a reservoir whose most useful 
members could replenish and swell its own ranks. In view of the 
itinerant life of German artisans it was only on rare occasions that 
the Central Authority had to send special emissaries. 
As far as the secret doctrine of the "League" is concerned, it 
underwent all the transformations of French and English socialism 
and communism, as well as their German versions (e. g. -Weitling's 
fantasies). After 1839, as is made clear in the Bluntschli report,3 
the religious question came to play the most important role 
alongside the social problem. The various phases undergone by Ger­
man philosophy from 1839 to 1846 were followed with the most 
lively interest in these workers' societies. The secret form of the 
society goes back to its Paris origins. The chief purpose of the 
League—propaganda among workers in Germany—dictated the 
retention of this form in later years. During my first stay in Parisb 
I established personal contact with the leaders of the "League" 
living there as well as with the leaders of the majority of the secret 
French workers' associations, without however becoming a 
member of any of them. In Brussels, where Guizot's expulsion 
order had sent me, I, together with Engels, W. Wolff and others, 
founded the German Workers' Educational Society, 74 which is 
still in existence. At the same time we published a series of 
pamphlets,0 partly printed, partly lithographed, in which we 
mercilessly criticised the hotchpotch of Franco-English socialism or 
communism and German philosophy, which formed the secret 
doctrine of the "League" at that time. In its place we proposed 
the scientific study of the economic structure of bourgeois society 
as the only tenable theoretical foundation. Furthermore, we 
argued in popular form that it was not a matter of putting some 
Utopian system into effect, but of conscious participation in the 
historical process revolutionising society before our very eyes. In 
consequence of these activities the London Central Authority 
entered into correspondence with us and at the end of 1846 they 
sent one of their members, a watchmaker called Joseph Moll, who 
later fell as a soldier of the revolution on the field of battle in 
Baden,d to Brussels to invite us to join the "League". Moll allayed 
a Johann Caspar Bluntschli, Die Kommunisten in der Schweiz nach den bei Weitling 
vorgefundenen Papieren..., Zürich,  1843.—  Ed. 
b From late October 1843 to February 3,  1845.—  Ed. 
c The only one extant is Circular Against Kriege (see present edition, Vol. 
6).—Ed. 
d See Frederick Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 
(present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 225-26).— Ed. 

=====第104页=====
80 Karl Marx 
our doubts and objections by revealing that the Central Authority 
intended to convoke a Congress of the League in London where 
the critical views we had expressed would be laid down in an open 
manifesto as the doctrine of the League. He argued, however, that 
if backward and refractory elements were to be overcome, our 
participation in person was indispensable, but that this could only 
be arranged if we became members of the "League". Accordingly, 
we joined it. The Congress, at which members from Switzerland, 
France, Belgium, Germany and England were represented, took 
place,3 and after heated debate over several weeks it adopted the 
Manifesto of the Communist Partyh  written by Engels and myself, 
which appeared in print at the beginning of 1848 and was later 
translated into English, French, Danish and Italian* On the 
outbreak of the February revolution the London Central Authori­
ty entrusted me with the leadership of the "League". During the 
revolutionary period in Germany, its activities died down of 
themselves, since more effective avenues existed now for the 
realisation of its ends. When, in the late summer of 1849, I 
arrived in London after being expelled from France for a second 
time,  I found that the Central Authority had been reconstructed 
from the ruins and that the links with the reconstituted districts of 
the League in Germany had been re-established. Willich arrived in 
London a few months later and was admitted to the Central 
Authority at my suggestion. He had been recommended to me by 
Engels, who acted as his adjutant in the campaign for the Imperial 
Constitution. To round off the history of the League I would only 
remark that there was a split in the Central Authority on 
September 15, 1850. c Its majority, including Engels and myself, 
transferred the seat of the Central Authority to Cologne, which had 
long been the "leading district" for Central and Southern 
Germany and which,, after London, was the most important centre 
of intellectual activity. 
We resigned from the London Workers' Educational Society at the 
same time. The minority on the Central Authority, however, 
including Willich and Schapper, set up a separate League 75 which 
maintained relations with the Workers' Educational Society and 
also resumed contact with Switzerland and France, which had been 
interrupted since 1848. On November 12, 1852 the accused in the 
Cologne communist trial were condemned. A few days later, at my 
a The Second Congress of the Communist League was held in London between 
November 29 and December 8, 1847.— Ed. 
b See present edition, Vol. 6.— Ed. 
c See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 625-30.— Ed. 

=====第105页=====
Herr Vogt. —IV. Techow's Letter 81 
suggestion, the League was declared dissolved. 3 I included a 
document, relating to the dissolution, dated November 1852, in 
the dossier on my action against the National-Zeitung. The reason 
given there for the dissolution of the League is that with the arrests 
in Germany, i.e. from as early as the spring of 1851, all contact with 
the Continent had in any case ceased to exist and that moreover 
circumstances were no longer favourable for a propaganda society of 
this sort. A few months later, at the beginning of 1853, the 
Willich-Schapper separate League also died a natural death. 
The issues of principle which underlay the split mentioned 
above are set out in my Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial,b 
which contains an extract from the minutes of the meeting of the 
Central Authority of September 15, 1850. The immediate practical 
cause of the split was Willich's efforts to involve the "League" in 
the revolutionary escapades of the German democratic emigration. 
The disagreement was exacerbated by wholly opposed interpreta­
tions of the political situation. I shall cite only one example. Willich 
had conceived the idea that the quarrel between Prussia and 
Austria on the question of the Electorate of Hesse and the 
German Confederation 76 would lead to serious conflicts and create 
an opportunity for the practical intervention of the revolutionary 
party. On November 10, 1850, shortly after the split in the 
"League", he published a proclamation along these lines entitled 
Aux démocrates de toutes les nations 0 over the signatures of the 
Central Authority of the "separate League" as well as those of 
French, Hungarian and Polish refugees. Engels and I, on the 
other hand, as can be seen in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue 
(double issue, May to October 1850, Hamburg, pp. 174, 175), 
maintained on the contrary that "None of this noise will lead to 
anything.... Without a drop of blood having been shed, the parties 
to the dispute", i.e. Austria and Prussia, "will come together on 
the benches of the Federal Diet" 77 in Frankfurt "without there 
being the slightest diminution in their petty mutual jealousies, or 
in their dissensions with their subjects, or in their irritation at 
Russian supremacy".*1 
a See Marx's letter to Engels dated November 19, 1852 (present edition, Vol. 
39). A copy of the letter is to be found in Marx's notebook for  1860.—  Ed. 
b See present edition, Vol.  11.—  Ed. 
c Le Constitutionnel, November 18, 1850. The text of this proclamation is quoted 
by Marx in his letter to Engels dated December 2, 1850 (see present edition, Vol. 
38).—  Ed. 
d See "Review, May to October [1850]" (present edition, Vol. 10, p. 528). The 
italics were introduced by Marx in Herr  Vogt. —Ed. 

=====第106页=====
82 Karl Marx 
Now it may be judged from the following document whether 
WillicKs individuality (whose worth incidentally we do not intend 
to dispute) and the then (1850) still fresh memories of his 
experiences in Besançon enabled him "impartially" to consider 
conflicts which contradictory views had rendered inevitable and 
had constantly renewed: 
"The German Brigade in Nancy 
to 
Citizen Joh. Philipp Becker in Biel, 
President of the German military 
association 'Self-Help'78 
"Citizen, 
"We are writing to inform you, as the elected representative of all German 
republican refugees, that in Nancy a brigade of German refugees has been formed 
which bears the name: 'German Brigade in Nancy.' 
"The refugees who make up the present Brigade are composed partly of 
former members of the Vesle Brigade and partly of units of the Besançon Brigade. 
Factors of a purely democratic nature are responsible for the removal of the latter 
from Besançon. 
"The fact is that in everything that he did, Willich very rarely consulted the 
Brigade. Hence the principles governing the Besançon Brigade were not generally 
discussed and decided by all members, but were decreed a priori by Willich and put 
into effect without the approval of the Brigade. 
"Furthermore, Willich also provided evidence of his despotic nature a posteriori 
in the form of a number of orders worthy of a Jellachich or a Windischgrätz, but 
not a republican. 
"Willich ordered a man called Schön, who wished to resign from the Brigade, 
to take off his new shoes which had been purchased from the savings of the 
Brigade, disregarding the fact that Schön too had contributed his share to these 
savings, which consisted chiefly of the daily 10 sous per capita which the French 
paid by way of subsidy.... Schön wanted to take his shoes with him, but Willich 
forced him to leave them behind. 
"Several valuable members of the Brigade were for trivial offences such as 
absence from roll-call, drill, lateness (in the evening), petty quarrels, etc., ordered 
by Willich, who did not consult the Brigade, to leave Besançon. They could go to 
Africa, he remarked, for they had no right to remain in France, and if they did not 
go to Africa he would see to it that they were extradited to Germany. He claimed 
that the French Government had given him authority to do this, but upon 
subsequent inquiry the Prefecture in Besançon declared this to be untrue. Almost 
every day at roll-call, Willich announced: Whoever does not like it here can go, if he 
wishes, the sooner the better; he can go to Africa, etc. On one occasion he also 
uttered the general threat that anyone who refused to obey his orders could either 
go to Africa or he, Willich, would have him extradited to Germany. This led to our 
making the above-mentioned inquiry at the Prefecture. As a result of these daily 
threats many people were fed up with life in Besançon where, as they said, one was 
constantly provoked into chucking up the whole paltry business. If we wish to be 
slaves, they said, we can go to Russia and we need not have started the fight in 
Germany in the first place. In short, they declared that they could no longer 
endure it in Besançon at any price without coming into serious conflict with 
Willich. They therefore left Besançon, but as at that time there was no other 
brigade which they could join, and as they could not live on the 10 sous on their 

=====第107页=====
Herr Vogt. — IV. Techow's Letter 83 
own, they had no other choice but to sign on for Africa, and this they did. In this 
way Willich reduced thirty worthy citizens to despair and he is to blame for their 
loss to the national cause. 
"Furthermore, Willich was unwise enough always to praise his old colleagues at 
roll-call while denigrating the new ones, and this led to constant friction. On one 
occasion Willich even declared at roll-call that the Prussians were far superior to 
the South Germans in head, heart and body, or as he put it, in physical, moral and 
intellectual abilities. The South Germans, in contrast, were easy-going, or rather, 
stupid was what he wanted to say, but he did not quite dare. In this way Willich 
managed to infuriate the South Germans, who were in a great majority. We have 
left the worst to the end: 
"Two weeks ago the 7th Company allowed a man called Baroggio whom Willich 
had arbitrarily expelled from the barracks to spend an extra night in their room. 
Despite Willich's refusal to permit this they kept him in their room and defended it 
against Willich's supporters, fanatical tailors. Willich then ordered ropes to be 
brought and the rebels to be bound. The ropes really were brought, but although 
Willich had the will to have his order carried through, he did not have the 
power.... It is for these reasons that they have left the Brigade. 
"We have not written this letter in order to accuse Willich. For Willich's 
character and intentions are good, and many of us respect him. But we did not like 
the manner in which he attempts to achieve his ends nor all the means he uses. 
Willich means well. But he believes to be wisdom itself and the ultima ratio and 
thinks that everyone who opposes him, even on petty issues, is either a fool or a 
traitor. In short, Willich acknowledges no opinion other than his own. He is a 
spiritual aristocrat and despot; when he has resolved on a thing, he does not easily 
shrink from using the means necessary to put it into practice. But enough: we know 
Willich now. We know his strengths and his weaknesses; this is why we are no 
longer in Besançon. Incidentally, when we left Besançon we all declared that we 
were leaving Willich, but that we did not wish to resign from the German military 
association 'Self-Help'. 
"This applies to the members of the Vesle Brigade also.... 
"Assuring you of our enduring respect, we conclude with fraternal greetings 
from the Brigade in Nancy. 
"Approved in general assembly, November 13, 1848. 
"Nancy, November 14, 1848 
"In the name and on the instructions of the Brigade, 
B..., Secretary" 
Let us now return to Techow's letter. As with other reptiles, its 
poison is in the tail, namely in the postscript of September 3 
(1850).  It refers to a duel between Herr Willich and my friend, 
Konrad Schramm, who died a premature death. In the duel, which 
took place in Antwerp in the beginning of September 1850, 
Techow and Barthélémy, a Frenchman, acted as Willich's seconds. 
Techow wrote to Schimmelpfennig "for communication to our 
friends": 
"They" (i. e. Marx and his followers) "have let their champion Schramm loose 
against Willich who had attacked him" (Techow means: whom he had attacked) 
"with invective of the most vulgar sort and finally challenged him to a duel." 
("Magnum Opus", pp. 156, 157.) 

=====第108页=====
84 Karl Marx 
My refutation of this stupid piece of gossip was published seven 
years ago in the pamphlet, cited earlier, The Knight of the Noble 
Consciousness, New York, 1853. 
At the time Schramm was still alive. Like Willich he was living in 
the United States. 
Willich's second, Barthélémy, had not yet been hanged; 
Schramm's second, the worthy Polish officer Miskowsky, had not 
yet been burnt to death, 79 and Herr Techow could not yet have 
forgotten the letter he had written for "communication to our 
friends". 
In the above-mentioned pamphlet there is a letter from my 
friend Frederick Engels, dated Manchester, November 23, 1853, at the 
end of which he writes: 
"In the meeting of the Central Authority, when it came to a challenge 
to a duel between Schramm and Willich, 80 I" (Engels) "am supposed" 
(according to Willich) "to have committed the crime of having 'left 
the room' together with Schramm shortly before the scene took 
place, and, therefore, of having prepared the whole scene in advance. 
Previously" (according to Willich) "it was Marx who was alleged to 
have 'egged on' Schramm, now for a change / am supposed to 
have done so. A duel between a Prussian lieutenant, an old hand 
at pistol shooting, and a commerçant, who perhaps had never had a 
pistol in his hand, was truly a remarkable means to 'get rid' of the 
lieutenant. Yet friend Willich maintained everywhere, orally and 
in writing, that we had wanted to get him shot.... Simply, 
Schramm was furious at Willich's shameless behaviour, and to the 
great astonishment of us all he challenged him to a duel. A few 
minutes before, Schramm himself had no inkling that it would 
come to this. Never was an action more spontaneous.... Schramm 
departed" (from the room) "only after being personally addressed 
by Marx, who wanted to avoid any further scandal. 
Fr. Engels" (The Knight, etc., p. 7.) a 
How far I was from foreseeing that Techow would allow himself 
to become a vehicle for this stupid piece of gossip can be seen 
from the following passage of the same pamphlet: 
"Originally, as Techow himself told Engels and me after his return to 
London, Willich was firmly convinced that through Schramm I 
aimed at his removal from this world, and he put this idea in 
writing everywhere. On closer reflection, however, he found it 
impossible that a diabolical tactician like myself could hit on the 
n See present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 492, 493. The italics were introduced by 
Marx in Herr Vogt. — Ed. 

=====第109页=====
Herr Vogt. — IV. Techow's Letter 85 
idea of getting rid of him by means of a duel with Schramm" (loc. 
cit., p. 9).a 
The gossip that Techow imparted to Herr Schimmelpfennig 
for "communication to our friends" was hearsay which he simply 
repeated. Karl Schapper, who took Willich's side when later the 
split in the League occurred and who witnessed the challenge, has 
written this letter to me about it: 
"5 Percy Street, Bedford Square, 
September 27, 1860 
"Dear Marx, 
"Concerning the row between Schramm and Willich: 
"It broke out during a meeting of the Central Authority as the result of a fierce 
argument between the two which arose by chance in the course of the discussion. I 
can still remember very well that you did everything possible to restore calm and to 
settle the affair and that you appeared to be as much taken by surprise by this 
sudden explosion as I myself and everyone else present. 
"Salute, 
Your Karl Schapper" 
Finally, it is worth mentioning that a few weeks after the duel, in 
a letter dated December 31, 1850, Schramm himself accused me of 
being partial to Willith. The disapproval which Engels and I had 
openly expressed, both before the duel and after it, had 
momentarily annoyed him. His letter and other papers of his and 
Miskowsky's concerning the duel, which have come into my hands, 
are available for perusal by his relatives. They should not be 
exposed to the gaze of the public. 
When Konrad Schramm next visited me in London in mid-July 
1857 after his return from the United States, his impetuous, tall, 
youthful frame had already collapsed under the impact of 
galloping consumption, which however had merely heightened the 
effect of his strikingly handsome features. With the sense of 
humour peculiar to him and which never left him for a moment, 
the first thing he showed me, laughing as he did so, was the notice 
of his death which an indiscreet friend had already published in a 
German paper in New York on the basis of a rumour.b  On 
medical advice Schramm went to St. Hélier in Jersey, where 
Engels and I saw him for the last time. Schramm died on January 
16, 1858. At his burial, which was attended by the entire liberal 
population of St. Hélier and the whole of the emigration resident 
a ibid., p. 496. The italics were introduced by Marx in Herr  Vogt. —Ed. 
b See Marx's letter to Engels dated April 9, 1857 (present edition, Vol. 40). The 
paper referred to is Neue  Zeit. —Ed. 

=====第110页=====
86 Karl Marx 
there, the funeral oration was given by one of the best English 
popular orators, G. Julian Harney, who was known earlier as one 
of the Chartist leaders and who had been friendly with Schramm 
during his stay in London. Schramm's ardent, fiery and enterpris­
ing nature, which could never be curbed by mundane concerns, 
was combined with critical understanding, original intelligence, 
ironic humour and naive geniality. He was the Percy Hotspur of 
our party. 
To return to Herr Techow's letter. A few days after his arrival in 
London, he had a long meeting with us late one evening 3 in a 
tavern where Engels, Schramm and myself acted as hosts. He 
describes the meeting in his letter of August 26, 1850 to 
Schimmelpfennig, "for communication to our friends". b I had 
never met him before and only saw him once or twice afterwards, 
and then only briefly. Nevertheless, he at once made a penetrating 
analysis of me and my friends, closely examining our minds, 
hearts and entrails, and hastened to send a letter containing a 
psychological description behind our backs to Switzerland, careful­
ly advising his "friends" that it should be secretly reproduced and 
distributed. 
Techow is much concerned with the state of my "heart". I will 
generously refrain from following him into this territory. "Ne 
parlons pas morale", 0 as the Parisian grisette says when her friend 
starts to talk politics. 
Let us dwell a while on the recipient of the letter of August 26, 
the former Prussian lieutenant Schimmelpfennig. I do not know the 
gentleman personally and have never seen him. I shall quote from 
two letters to convey his character. The first, which I give only in 
extract, was addressed to me by my friend W. Steffen, a former 
Prussian lieutenant and teacher in the Divisional School. It is 
dated Chester, November 23, 1853 81 and he writes: 
"Willich once sent an adjutant called Schimmelpfennig over" (to Cologne). "He 
paid me the compliment of summoning me to him and he was firmly convinced 
that he could assess the whole situation right from the start better than anyone who 
was involved in it from day to day. He therefore formed a very low opinion of me 
when I told him that the officers of the Prussian army would be far from 
considering themselves fortunate to be able to fight under his banner and Willich's 
and that they were certainly not inclined to proclaim Willich's republic at once. He 
became even angrier when no one showed himself foolish enough to offer to 
duplicate the proclamation which he had brought with him in readiness and which 
exhorted the officers to declare themselves in favour of what he called democracy. 
a On August 21, 1850.— Ed. 
b See Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 142-61.—  Ed. 
c "Don't let's talk morality." — Ed. 

=====第111页=====
Herr Vogt. —IV. Techow's Letter 87 
"In a fury, he departed from what he described to me as 'a Cologne enslaved by 
Marx'. He arranged for the duplication of his nonsense elsewhere and dispatched it 
to a large number of officers with the result that the chaste mystery of his cunning 
plan to convert Prussian officers to the republican cause was prostituted by the 
'Spectator' of the Kreuz-Zeitung." 
At the time of this adventure, Steffen, who only came to 
England in 1853, was completely unknown to me. Even more 
revealing is Schimmelpfennig's self-characterisation in the following 
letter to the same Hörfei who was later exposed as a French police 
agent. He was the heart and soul of the Revolutionary Committee 
founded in Paris at the end of 1850 by Schimmelpfennig, Schurz, 
Hafner and other friends of Kinkel in those days and he was on 
terms of intimacy with those two matadors Schurz and Schim­
melpfennig. 
Schimmelpfennig to Hörfei (in Paris, 1851): 
"Here" (in London) "the following events have taken place.... We have written 
to all our friends with any influence" (in America) "asking them to prepare the 
way for the loan" (the Kinkel Loan) "first of all by talking for some time about the 
power of conspiracy, both personally and in the press, and by emphasising that people 
worth their salt will never leave the field of battle—neither the Germans, the French 
nor the Italians." (History does not have no date? 3) "... Our work is now off to a  good 
start. If you drop people who are too obstinate, they will soon think better of it and 
come to accept the conditions imposed. Since the work is now firm and secure, I 
shall tomorrow establish contact with Ruge and Haug.... My own social position, like 
yours, is very  oppressive.  It is vital that our affairs should get moving soon." (Namely 
the business of Kinkel's Revolutionary Loan.) 
"Your Schimmelpfennig" 
This letter of Schimmelpfennig's is to be found in the 
Enthüllungen which A. Ruge published in the Herold des Westens, 
Louisville, September 11, 1853. Schimmelpfennig, who was 
already living in the United States when they appeared, never 
impugned the authenticity of the letter. Ruge's Enthüllungen are 
reprinted from a document entitled "Aus den Akten des Berliner 
Polizeipräsidiums" . It consists of marginal notes by Hinckeldey and 
of papers which were either found by the French police in the 
possession of Schimmelpfennig and Hörfei in Paris, or were 
unearthed at Pastor Dulon's in Bremen, or, lastly, were entrusted to 
the German-American press during the Frogs-and-Mice War 
between Ruge's Agitation Union and Kinkel's Émigré Society, 82 by 
the feuding brothers themselves. Typical is the irony with which 
a Marx ridicules Schimmelpfennig's ungrammatical sentence by alluding to an 
equally ungrammatical statement made by Prince Lichnowski, a reactionary deputy 
of the Frankfurt National Assembly, who said at one of the sessions: "Für das 
historische Recht gibt es kein Datum nicht" ("With regard to historical right there 
does not exist no date") (cf. present edition, Vol. 7, p. 369).— Ed. 

=====第112页=====
88 Karl Marx 
Hinckeldey remarks that Schimmelpfennig abruptly cut short his 
journey through Prussia as missionary on behalf of Kinkel's 
Revolutionary Loan because "he imagined that he was being pursued 
by the police"! The same Enthüllungen contain a letter from Karl 
Schurz, "the representative of the Paris Committee" (i.e. that of 
Hörfei, Hafner, Schimmelpfennig, etc.) "in London", in which we 
find: 
"It was decided yesterday that of the members of the emigration here Bücher, 
Dr. Frank, Redz from Vienna and Techow, who will soon be here, should be asked 
to join the discussions. N.B. Techow should not be informed of this decision for the time 
being, either verbally or in writing, before his arrival." (Karl Schurz to his "dear men" 
in Paris, London, April 16, 1851.) 
It was to one of these "dear men", Herr Schimmelpfennig, that 
Techow addresses his letter of August 26, 1850 for "communica­
tion to our friends". He begins by informing the "dear man" of 
theories which I had been trying to keep a strict secret, but which 
he at once detected at our single encounter by means of the 
proverb "in vino Veritas". 
"I," Herr Techow recounts to Herr Schimmelpfennig, "for communication to 
our friends", "I ... declared finally that I had always imagined them" (i.e. Marx, 
Engels, etc.) "to be above all the nonsense about a communist paradisiacal barn à la Cabet, 
etc."  ("Magnum Opus", p. 150.) a 
Imagined! So Techow did not even know the elementary facts 
about our views, but was nevertheless magnanimous and condes­
cending enough to imagine that they were not exactly "nonsense". 
Leaving scientific works to one side, even if he had read the 
Manifesto of the Communist Party, which he later calls my 
"Proletarian Catechism",b he would have found in it a detailed 
chapter with the title "Socialist and Communist Literature", and at 
the end of this chapter a section entitled "Critical-Utopian 
Socialism and Communism", in which it says: 
"The Socialist and Communist systems properly so called, those 
of Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen and others, spring into existence in 
the early undeveloped period, described above, of the struggle 
between proletariat and bourgeoisie.... The founders of these 
systems saw, indeed, the class antagonisms, as well as the action of 
the decomposing elements in the prevailing form of society. But 
the proletariat offered to them the spectacle of a class without any 
historical initiative or any independent political movement. Since 
the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with the 
a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 150. Marx's italics and bold type.— Ed. 
»» ibid., S. 152.— Ed. 

=====第113页=====
Herr Vogt. — IV. Techow's Letter 89 
development of industry, the economic situation, as they find it, 
does not as yet offer to them the material conditions for the 
emancipation of the proletariat. They therefore search after a 
social science, after social laws, that are to create these conditions. 
Social action is to yield to their personal inventive action, 
historically created conditions of emancipation to fantastic ones, 
and the gradual class organisation of the proletariat to an 
organisation of society specially contrived by these inventors. Future 
history resolves  itself,  in their eyes, into the propaganda and the 
practical carrying out of their social plans.... The significance of 
Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism bears an inverse 
relation to historical development.... Therefore, although the 
originators of these systems were, in many respects, revolutionary, 
their disciples have, in every case, formed mere reactionary sects 
[...J and [...] still dream of experimental realisation of their social 
Utopias, of founding isolated 'phalanstères', of establishing 'Home 
Colonies', of setting up a 'Little Icaria'*—duodecimo editions of the 
New Jerusalem...''' (Manifesto of the Communist Party, 1848, pp. 21, 
22). a 
In the concluding words Cabet's Icaria, or "paradisiacal barn", 
to use Techow's expression, is explicitly referred to as a 
"duodecimo edition of the New Jerusalem". 
Techow's self-confessed total ignorance of the ideas that Engels 
and I had published in print years before our encounter with him 
is the factor that completely accounts for his misunderstanding. A 
few quotations will serve adequately to characterise him: 
"He"  (Marx) "laughs at the fools who blindly repeat his Proletarian Catechism 
after him, just as he laughs at communists like Willich and at the bourgeoisie. The 
only men he respects are aristocrats, those who are pure aristocrats, and are 
conscious of being so. To oust them from power he requires a force which he can find 
only in the proletariat. This is why his system is tailored to fit that force" ("Magnum 
Opus",  p. 152). 
* Phalanstères were Socialist colonies on the plan of Charles Fourier; Icaria was 
the name given by Cabet to his Utopia and, later on, to his American Communist 
colony. [Note, by Engels to the English edition of 1888.] 
"Home Colonies" were what Owen called his Communist model societies. 
Phalanstères was the name of the public palaces planned by Fourier. Icaria was the 
name given to the Utopian land of fancy, whose Communist institutions Cabet 
portrayed. \Note  by Engels to the German edition of 1890.] 
a Here and below Marx quotes from the first German edition of the Manifesto of  the 
Communist Party, published in London in 1848 (see present edition, Vol. 6. pp. 514-15, 
516).  The italics were introduced by Marx in Herr  Vogt. —Ed. 

=====第114页=====
90 Karl Marx 
Techow thus "imagines" that I have written a "Proletarian 
Catechism". He means the Manifesto which criticises and, if he 
likes,  "ridicules" socialist and critical utopianism of every kind. Only, 
this "ridiculing" was not such a simple matter as Techow 
"imagines", but required a fair amount of work, as he could see from 
my book against Proudhon, Misere de la philosophie (1847). a Techow 
further "imagines" that I have "tailored" a "system", whereas, on the 
contrary, even in the Manifesto which was intended directly for 
workers, I rejected systems of every kind and in their place I insisted 
on "a critical insight into the conditions, the line of march and the 
ultimate general results of the real movement of society". b Such an 
"insight" cannot be blindly repeated, nor can it be "tailored" like a 
cartridge pouch. Of rare naivety is the view of the relations between 
aristocracy, bourgeoisie and proletariat, as Techow "imagines" them 
and imputes them to me. 
I "respect" the aristocracy, "laugh" at the bourgeoisie, and I 
"tailor a system" to fit the proletariat, using them to "oust the 
aristocracy from power". In the first section of the Manifesto, 
entitled "Bourgeois and Proletarians" (see Manifesto, p. ll),c  it is 
argued in detail that the economic and, hence too, in one form or 
another, the political sway of the bourgeoisie is the essential 
precondition both of the existence of the modern proletariat and 
of the creation of the "material conditions for its emancipation". 
"The development of the modern proletariat" (see Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Revue, January 1850, p. 15) "is, in general, conditioned by 
the development of the industrial bourgeoisie. Only under its rule 
does the proletariat gain that extensive national existence which 
can raise its revolution to a national one, and does it itself create 
the modern means of production, which become just so many 
means of its revolutionary emancipation. Only its rule tears up the 
material roots of feudal society and levels the ground on which 
alone a proletarian revolution is possible.' ,d I declared accordingly in 
the same "Review" that any revolution in which England did not 
take part was no more than a "storm in a teacup".83  Engels had 
already advanced the same opinion in 1845 in The Condition of the 
Working-Class in England* Hence in countries where an aristocracy 
a See present edition, Vol. 6.— Ed. 
b ibid., p. 497.— Ed. 
c ibid., pp. 495-96.— Ed. 
d Karl Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (see present edition, Vol. 
10, p. 56). The italics were introduced by Marx in Herr  Vogt. —Ed. 
e See present edition, Vol. 4.— Ed. 

=====第115页=====
Herr Vogt. —IV. Techow's Letter 91 
in the Continental sense of the term—and this is what Techow 
meant by "aristocracy"—has still to be "ousted from power", the 
very first prerequisite of a proletarian revolution is in my opinion 
missing, namely the existence of an industrial proletariat on a 
national scale. 
Techow could have found my view of the attitude to the 
bourgeois movement adopted by the German workers in particular 
expressed very clearly in the Manifesto. 
"In Germany they [the Communists] fight with the bourgeoisie 
whenever it acts in a revolutionary way, against the absolute 
monarchy, the feudal landowners and philistinism [Kleinbürgerei]. 
But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the working 
class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile antagonism 
between bourgeoisie and proletariat, etc." (Manifesto, p. 23.) a 
When I stood before a bourgeois jury in Cologne charged with 
"rebellion", I argued along the same lines: "Modern bourgeois 
society still has  classes,  but no longer social  estates.  Its development 
lies in the struggle between these classes, but the latter stand 
united against the estates and their monarchy by the grace of 
God."  ("Zwei  politische  Prozesse,  verhandelt vor den Februar-Assisen 
zu Köln 1849", p. 59.) 84 
What else did the liberal bourgeoisie do in its appeals to the 
proletariat between 1688 and 1848 but "tailor systems and 
phrases" in order to use the proletariat's strength to oust the 
aristocracy from power? So Herr Techow discovers that the core 
of the matter b hidden in my secret theory is bourgeois liberalism of 
the crudest sorti Tant de bruit pour une omelette\ c Since, on the other 
hand, Techow knew perfectly well that "Marx" was no bourgeois 
liberal, he was left finally with no choice but "to go away with the 
impression that his personal supremacy was the goal of all his 
actions". "All my actions", what a temperate description of my 
single interview with Herr Techow! 
Techow further confides to his Schimmelpfennig, "for com­
munication to our friends", that I had expressed the following 
monstrous opinion: 
a Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party (see present 
edition, Vol. 6, p. 519). Marx quotes the German edition of  1848.—  Ed. 
b Marx uses the idiomatic expression des Pudels Kern from Goethe's Faust, Erster 
Teil, Studierzimmer. — Ed. 
c Much ado about an omelette!—an exclamation which Jacques Vallée, Sieur 
des Barreaux, is supposed to have made when a thunderstorm occurred while he 
was eating an omelette on a fast-day.— Ed. 

=====第116页=====
92 Karl Marx 
"In the end it is a matter of complete indifference whether this miserable 
Europe were to be destroyed, a thing which must happen within a short space of 
time without a social revolution, and whether afterwards America would exploit the 
old system at Europe's expense." ("Magnum Opus", p. 148.) a 
My conversation with Techow took place at the end of August 
1850.  In the February 1850 issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Revue, i.e. eight months before Techow culled this secret from my 
lips, I revealed the following views to the German public: 
"Now we come to America. The most important thing to have 
occurred here, more important than the February revolution, is 
the discovery of the Californian gold-mines. Already now, after 
barely eighteen months, one may predict that this discovery will 
have much more impressive consequences than the discovery of 
America  itself....  For the second time world trade is taking a new 
direction ... the Pacific Ocean will have the same role as the 
Atlantic has now and the Mediterranean had in antiquity and in 
the Middle Ages—that of the great water highway of world 
commerce; and the Atlantic will decline to the status of an inland 
sea, like the Mediterranean nowadays. The only chance the 
civilised nations of Europe will then have, not to fall into the same 
industrial, commercial and political dependence to which Italy, 
Spain and Portugal are now reduced, lies in a social revolution." 
(Revue, No. 2, February 1850, pp. [76,] 77.)b 
But the idea that old Europe will be "destroyed within a short 
space of time" and America will accede to the throne the following 
morning, belongs to Herr Techow. The clarity of my own view of 
America's immediate prospects at that time can be seen from 
another passage in the same "Review": "Over-speculation will 
develop very soon, and even if British capital becomes involved on 
a large scale [...] nevertheless this time New York will remain the 
centre of the whole swindle and, as in 1836, will be the first to 
suffer when it collapses." (Revue, double issue, May to October 
1850,  p. 149.) c This prognosis for America, which I made in 1850, 
was fully borne out by the great trade crisis of 1857. As to "old 
Europe", on the other hand, having given an account of the 
revival of its economy, I go on to say: "With this general 
prosperity, in which the productive forces of bourgeois society 
a In this passage Marx left out Vogt's italics and introduced bold type.— Ed. 
b See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 265-66. The word "then" in the last sentence 
was introduced by Marx in Herr  Vogt. —Ed. 
c Here and immediately below Marx quotes, with minor alterations, from 
"Review, May to October [1850]" (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 506 and 510). 
The italics were introduced by Marx in Herr  Vogt. —Ed. 

=====第117页=====
Herr Vogt. —IV. Techow's Letter 93 
develop so luxuriantly ... there can be no talk of a real 
revolution.... The various quarrels in which the representatives of 
the individual factions of the Continental party of Order now 
indulge and mutually compromise themselves, far from providing 
the occasion for revolution, are, on the contrary, possible only 
because the basis of the relationships is momentarily so secure and, 
what the reaction does not know, so bourgeois. All reactionary 
attempts to hold up bourgeois development will rebound off it just 
as certainly as all moral indignation and all enthusiastic proclamations 
of the democrats. A new revolution is possible only in consequence 
of a crisis" (loc. cit., p. 153). 
And in fact European history has only re-entered an acute and, 
if one wishes, revolutionary phase since the crisis of 1857-58. In 
fact it was precisely during the reactionary period from 1849 to 
1859 that industry and trade on the Continent, and along with 
them the material foundations for the political domination of the 
bourgeoisie, developed to an extent unheard of previously. In fact 
during this period "all moral indignation and all enthusiastic 
proclamations of the democrats" rebounded off the realities of 
economic conditions. 
If Techow took the serious side of our discussions so humor­
ously, he made up for it by the seriousness with which he 
responded to their humorous side. With a woebegone face he 
reports to his Schimmelpfennig "for communication to our 
friends": 
"Furthermore, Marx stated: In revolutions officers are always the greatest 
threat; [...] from La Fayette to Napoleon, a series of traitors and treacheries. One 
ought always to have dagger and poison in readiness for them." ("Magnum Opus", 
p. 153.)a 
Even Techow will not wish to claim that the platitude about 
the treasonable activities of "the military" is an original opinion of 
mine. My originality is supposed rather to consist in the "dagger 
and poison" always to be held in readiness. Did Techow not know 
even then that really revolutionary governments, such as the 
Comité du salut public? 5 kept antidotes in readiness for "the 
military" that were very drastic though less melodramatic? The 
dagger and poison really belong to the stock-in-trade of a 
Venetian oligarchy. If Techow were to scrutinise his letter once 
again, he would perhaps notice the irony in the "dagger and 
poison". Vogt's fellow-scoundrel, Edouard Simon, the notorious 
Bonapartist spy, translated the last part of Techow's letter in the 
a In this passage the italics are Vogt's.— Ed. 

=====第118页=====
94 Karl Marx 
Revue contemporaine (XIII, Paris, 1860, p. 528, in his "Le procès 
de M. Vogt, etc.") adding his own gloss: 
"Marx n'aime pas beaucoup voir des officiers dans sa bande. Les officiers sont 
trop dangereux dans les révolutions. 
"Il faut toujours tenir prêts pour eux le poignard et le poison! 
"Techow, qui est officier, se le tient pour dit; il se rembarque et retourne en 
Suisse."3 
According to Edouard Simon, poor Techow was in such a panic 
at the thought of the "dagger and poison" I was holding in 
readiness, that he immediately took to his heels, boarded ship and 
returned to Switzerland. The Imperial Vogt prints the passage 
about "dagger and poison" in bold type, to send a shiver down 
the spine of the German philistines. However, the same merry 
gentleman wrote in his so-called Studien: 
" Today the knife and the poison of the Spaniard are shining in even greater glory—for 
it was the independence of the nation that was at stake" (loc. cit., p. 79). b 
Quite by the way: the Spanish and" English historical sources 
dealing with the period 1807-14 have long since disproved the 
tales about poison invented by the French. But for the tub-
thumping politicians, of course, they survive unscathed. 
I now come, lastly, to the "tittle-tattle" in Techow's letter and 
shall provide a few illustrations of his historical impartiality: 
"The talk centred at first on the question of competition between them and us, 
Switzerland and London. [...] They had to maintain the rights of the old League, which 
because of its own specific party policy of course could not tolerate another league 
operating in the same area" (the proletariat) ("Magnum Opus", p. 143).c 
The rival organisation in Switzerland to which Techow refers 
here and as whose representative he, as it were, approached us, 
was the already-mentioned "Revolutionary Centralisation'". Its Cen­
tral Committee was located in Zurich and its President was a lawyer, 
a former Vice-President of one of the pocket parliaments of 1848 
and a member of one of the provisional governments in Germany 
in 1849.d In July 1850 Dronke went to Zurich86 where, as a 
a "Marx does not much care to see officers in his gang. Officers are too 
dangerous in revolutions. 
"One ought always to have dagger and poison in readiness for them! 
"Techow, who is an officer, did not need to be told twice; he re-embarked and 
returned to Switzerland" (Edouard Simon, "Un tableau de moeurs politiques en 
Allemagne. Le procès de M. Vogt avec la gazette d'Augsbourg", Revue contem­
poraine, t. 13, Paris, February 15, 1860). The italics are Simon's.— Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, S. 79. Marx's italics.— Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S.  143.—  Ed. 
d Samuel Erdmann Tzschirner. — Ed. 

=====第119页=====
Herr Vogt. — IV. Techow's Letter 95 
member of the London "League", he was given a sort of legal 
contract by that lawyer "for communication" to me. I quote from 
it verbatim: 
"Considering the necessity for a union of all truly revolutionary elements, and 
since all members of the Revolutionary Central Committee have acknowledged the 
proletarian character of the next revolution, even though not all were able 
unreservedly to accept the programme adopted in London (the Manifesto of 1848), 
the Communist organisation and the Revolutionary Centralisation have agreed on the 
following points: 
"1. Both parties agree to continue working side by side—the Revolutionary 
Centralisation will strive to prepare for the next revolution by attempting to unite 
all revolutionary elements, the London association will try to prepare for the rule 
of the proletariat by concentrating primarily on the organisation of proletarian 
elements ; 
"2. The Revolutionary Centralisation will instruct its agents and emissaries that, 
when forming branches in Germany, members who seem to be qualified to join the 
Communist organisation should have their attention drawn to the existence of an 
organisation devoted primarily towards the furtherance of proletarian interests; 
"3. and 4. That the leadership in the 'Revolutionary Central Committee' for 
Switzerland will only be entrusted to genuine supporters of the London Manifesto, 
and that there should be a general exchange of information." 
It is evident from this document, which is still in my possession, 
that there was no question of two secret societies "operating in the 
same area" (the proletariat), but of an alliance between two 
societies with different aims operating in different  areas.  It is equally 
evident that the "Revolutionary Centralisation" declared itself 
willing to act as a sort of branch organisation of the "Communist 
League", in addition to pursuing its own ends. 
The proposal was rejected because it was incompatible with the 
principles of the "League". 
"Then it was KinkeVs turn.... To this they replied.... They had never striven for 
cheap popularity, on the contrary! [...] As far as Kinkel was concerned they would 
not have begrudged him his cheap popularity in the least, had he kept quiet. But 
once he had published that Rastatt speech in the Berlin Abend-Post? peace was no 
longer possible. They had known perfectly well that there would be a general 
outcry; they had clearly foreseen that the existence of their present paper" 
(Rheinische Zeitung. Revue) "was at stake. Moreover, their fears had been realised. 
They had been ruined by the whole affair, they had lost all their subscribers in the 
Rhine Province and had to close the paper down. But it would do them no harm" 
(loc. cit., pp. 146-48). b 
First a factual correction. It is not true that the Revue was closed 
down at this point, since one more, double issue came out three 
a Gottfried Kinkel's speech before the court martial in Rastatt on August 4, 
1849,  Abend-Post, Nos. 78 and 79, April 5 and 6, 1850.— Ed. 
h Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 146-48.— Ed. 

=====第120页=====
96 Karl Marx 
months afterwards.3  Nor had we lost,  a single  subscriber  in the Rhine 
Province, as my old friend /. Weydemeyer, a former Prussian 
lieutenant of artillery and, at that time, editor of the Neue Deutsche 
Zeitung in Frankfurt, can testify since it was he who was kind 
enough to collect the subscriptions for us. For the rest, Techow, 
who had only a hearsay acquaintance with the writings of Engels 
and myself,  nevertheless must at least have read our critique— 
which he himself criticises—of Kinkel's speech. Why then send 
this confidential information to his "dear men" in Switzerland? 
Why "reveal" to them what we had ourselves revealed to the 
public five months previously? We wrote in the critique referred 
to: 
"We know in advance that we shall provoke the general wrath 
of the sentimental swindlers and democratic spouters by denounc­
ing this speech of the 'captured' Kinkel to our party. To this we 
are completely indifferent. Our task is that of ruthless criticism ... 
and in maintaining this our position we gladly forego cheap 
democratic popularity. Our attack will by no means worsen Herr 
Kinkel's position; we denounce his amnesty by confirming his 
confession that he is not the man people allege to hold him for, 
and by declaring that he is worthy, not only of being amnestied, 
but even of entering the service of the Prussian state! Moreover, 
his speech has been published" (Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue, 
April 1850, pp. 70,  7l). 87 
Techow asserts that we "compromised" the petits grands hommes h 
of the revolution. However, he does not use the word "compro­
mise"  in the police sense of Herr Vogt. On the contrary, he means 
the operation by means of which we stripped off the offensive 
covering of those sheep who had dressed up in revolutionary 
wolf's clothing, thus preserving them from the fate of the 
celebrated Provençal troubadour c who was torn to pieces by the 
dogs because they took the wolf's pelt seriously which he wore to 
go hunting. 
As an instance of our offensive attacks Techow singles out the 
incidental gloss on General Sigel to be found in Engels' account of 
the "campaign for the Imperial Constitution" (see Revue, March 
1850,  pp. 70-78). d 
a The issue in question— Neue Rheinische Zeitung.  Politisch-ökonomische  Revue, No. 
5-6—appeared in late November 1850.— Ed. 
b Little great men.— Ed. 
c Vidal Peire.— Ed. 
d See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 174-79.— Ed. 

=====第121页=====
Herr Vogt. — IV. Techow's Letter 97 
Now Engels' critique, which is based on documentary evidence, 
should be compared with the following malicious and trite twaddle 
about that same General Sigel, published about a year after our 
meeting with Techow by the London "Emigration Association" 
run by Techow, Kinkel, Willich, Schimmelpfennig, Schurz, 
H. B. Oppenheim, Eduard Meyen, etc. Moreover, this was pub­
lished solely because Sigel belonged to Ruge's "Agitation Union", 
instead of Kinkel's "Emigration Association". 
On December 3, 1851 the Baltimore Correspondent* which was at 
the time a sort of Kinkel Moniteur, published the following 
description of Sigel beneath the title "The Agitation Union in 
London": 
"Let us take another look at these worthy men who regard everyone else as an 
'immature politician'. Sigel, the supreme commander. If anyone ever asks the muse of 
history how such an insipid nonentity was given the supreme command she will be 
even more at a loss for an explanation than in the case of that mooncalf Napoleon. 
The latter is at least 'his uncle's nephew'; Sigel, however, is only 'his brother's 
brother'. His brother15  became a popular officer as a result of his critical remarks 
about the government, remarks which had been provoked by his frequent arrests 
for disorderly behaviour. The young Sigel thought this reason enough in the early 
confusion prevailing at the outbreak of the revolution to proclaim himself supreme 
commander and Minister of War. The Baden artillery, which had often proved its 
worth, had plenty of older and more experienced officers who should have taken 
precedence over this young Lieutenant Sigel, and they were more than a little 
indignant when they had to obey a young, insignificant man whose inexperience was 
only matched by his incompetence. But there was Brentano, who was so mindless and 
treacherous as to permit anything that might ruin the revolution. It is a ridiculous 
fact, but a fact nevertheless, that Sigel promoted himself to the rank of commander-in-
chief and that Brentano approved his nomination in retrospect.... It is certainly 
noteworthy that Sigel left the bravest soldiers of the republican army in the lurch at 
the desperate and hopeless battles in Rastatt and the Black Forest without the 
reinforcements he had promised while he himself drove around Zurich with the 
epaulettes and in the carriage of Prince von Fürstenberg and paraded as an 
interesting unfortunate supreme commander. This is the well-known magnitude of 
this mature politician who, 'understandably proud' of his earlier heroic deeds, 
imposed himself as supreme commander for a second time, on this occasion in the 
Agitation Union. This is the great well-known man, c the 'brother of his brother'."d 
Impartiality requires us to lend an ear also to Ruge's "Agitation 
Union" in the person of its spokesman Tausenau. In an open letter 
addressed "To Citizen Seiden sticker ", London, November 14, 1851, 
a Der Deutsche Correspondent (Baltimore).— Ed. 
b Albert Sigel.— Ed. 
c Presumably an analogy with The Great Unknown, i.e. Sir Walter Scott, who 
was called so because until 1827 his novels appeared anonymously.— Ed. 
d This passage is also quoted in the pamphlet The Great Men of the Exile by 
Marx and Engels (see present edition, Vol. 11, p. 324).— Ed. 

=====第122页=====
98 Karl Marx 
Tausenau writes with reference to the "Emigration Association" 
led by Kinkel, Techow, etc.: 
"...They affirm their conviction that the union of all in the interest of the 
revolution is an urgent patriotic duty. The German Agitation Union shares this 
conviction, and its members have proved this by their sustained efforts to achieve 
unity with Kinkel and his supporters. But as soon as a basis for political 
co-operation seemed to be established it vanished once again, and new disappoint­
ments followed the old ones. High-handed actions in violation of previous 
agreements, separate interests in the guise of conciliation, the systematic 'fixing' of 
majorities, the emergence of unknown quantities as party leaders, attempts to 
impose a secret finance committee are but a few of the devious tricks and chess 
moves that immature politicians always resort to in exile in the belief that they are 
guiding the fortunes of their country, while in reality the very first glow of the 
revolution will dissipate all such vanities and scatter them to the winds.... We were 
denounced officially and in public by Kinkel's supporters; the reactionary German 
press,  which was barred to us, is packed with reports favourable to Kinkel and 
hostile to us. Finally Kinkel made the journey to the United States in order to use 
his project of the so-called German Loan as a means of imposing a union on us, or 
rather a status of subordination and dependence which is the goal of everyone who 
proposes a financial merger between two parties. Kinkel's departure was kept so secret 
that we did not learn of it until we read in the American press about his arrival in 
New York.... All this, and other considerations of the same sort,were compelling 
motives to persuade serious revolutionaries who did not overestimate themselves, 
but who in the knowledge of their previous achievements could with self-confidence 
assert that at any rate clearly defined sections of the people stood behind them, to enter an 
association which seeks in its own way to further the interests of the revolution." 3 
Further it is held against Kinkel that the funds he had collected 
were to be used for the benefit of "a clique", as "his entire 
behaviour here" (in London) "and in America makes plain", as do 
also "the majority of the guarantors nominated by Kinkel 
himself". 
Tausenau concludes by saying: 
"We promise our friends neither interest on their money nor the repayment of 
their patriotic donations; but we know that we shall vindicate their confidence in us 
through our positive achievements" (fair services?) "and scrupulous accounting and 
that one day, when we come to publish their names, the gratitude of the nation will await 
them"  (Baltimore Wecker of November 29, 1851). 
This was the sort of "literary activity" maintained in the 
columns of the German-American press for three years by the 
democratic heroes of the "Agitation Union" and the "Emigration 
Association" who were later joined by the "Revolutionary League 
of Two Worlds"88 founded by Goegg. (See Appendix 6.) 
The refugee row in the American press, incidentally, was 
inaugurated by a paper battle89 between the parliamentarians Zitz 
and Roesler of Oels. 
a This passage is contained in Marx's notebook for 1860.— Ed. 

=====第123页=====
Herr Vogt. — IV. Techow's Letter 99 
One more fact by way of characterising Techow's "dear men". 
Schimmelpfennig, to whom Techow's letter "for communication 
to our friends" was addressed, had set up a so-called Revolu­
tionary Committee in Paris at the end of 1850 (as we have already 
mentioned) together with Hörfei. Hafner, Goegg and others 
(K. Schurz joined in at a later date). 
A few years ago a document written by a former member of the 
Committee to a political refugee here90 was handed to me to use 
as I pleased. The document is still in my possession. 
It says, among other things: 
"Schurz and Schimmelpfennig were in effect the whole Committee. They also 
acquired some sort of associates but they were merely for show. These two 
gentlemen firmly believed at that time that they could soon put their Kinkel, whom 
they had virtually made their property, at the head of affairs in Germany. They 
particularly detested Ruge's sarcasms and the criticism and demonic activity of 
Marx. At a meeting of these gentlemen with their associates they gave us a really 
very interesting description of Marx and conveyed to us an exaggerated impression 
of the pandemonic dangers he represented.... Schurz-Schimmelpfennig proposed a 
motion to destroy Marx. The means they recommended were insinuations and 
intrigues, and the most shameless slanders. A vote in favour and a resolution, if 
one can use these words to describe their childish antics, then took place. The next 
step was the character sketch of Marx published in the literary section of the 
Hamburger Anzeiger* at the beginning of 1851. It was written by L. Hafner on the 
basis of the above-mentioned description by Schurz and Schimmelpfennig." 
In any event there is the most striking affinity between Häfner's 
essay and Techow's letter, although neither the one nor the other 
can equal Vogt's Lousiad. It is important not to confuse the Lousiad 
with the Lusiads of Camoens. The original Lousiad was rather a 
mock heroic epic by Peter Pindar. 91 
a Leopold Häfner's article was published in the Hamburger Nachrichten on 
February 28, 1851.—Ed. 

=====第124页=====
100 
V 
IMPERIAL REGENT AND COUNT PALATINE 
Vidi un col capo sî dï merda lordo, 
Che non parea,  s'era  laico, o cherco, 
Quei mi sgridô: perché se' tu si 'ngordo 
Di riguardar più me che gli altri brutti. 
(Dante)* 
Vogt, repulsed by the Bristiers, experiences a powerful need 
to show why the "Brimstone Gang" had singled him out as the bête 
noire. For this reason Cherval and the "frustrated conspiracy" at 
the Joint Festival in Lausanne are supplemented by the adventure 
of the "fugitive Imperial Regent", an adventure which had no less 
reality than they. Vogt, we must not forget, was at one time 
Governor of the parliamentary island of Barataria. 92 His story goes 
like this: 
"Early in 1850 the Deutsche Monatsschrift of Kolatschek made its appearance. [...] 
Immediately after the publication of the first number, the Brimstone Gang, acting 
through one of its comrades who left for America without delay, issued a pamphlet with 
the title Der flüchtige Reichsregent Vogt mit seinem Anhange und die Deutsche 
Monatsschrift von Adolf Kolatschek, a work which was also mentioned by the 
Allgemeine Zeitung.... The Brimstone Gang's whole system is revealed yet again in 
this pamphlet" (loc. cit., pp. [162-]163). a 
He goes on to explain at tedious length how, in the pamphlet 
referred to, an anonymous article on Gagern which had been 
written by Professor Hagen was "attributed" to the fugitive 
Imperial Regent, Vogt, because 
* I there made out a smeared 
Head—whether clerk or lay was hard to tell, 
It was so thickly plastered with the merd. 
"Why stand there gloating?" he began to yell, 
"Why stare at me more than the other scum?" (Kannegiesser) [The Divine 
Comedy, Inferno, Canto XVIII. Kannegiesser is the name of the German translator.] 
a Here and below Marx quotes from Vogt's Mein Prozess..., S. 162-63. The italics 
are Marx's.— Ed. 

=====第125页=====
Herr Vogt. —V. Imperial Regent and Count Palatine 101 
"the Brimstone Gang knew" that Hagen "was living in Germany at the time, 
that he had been harassed by the Baden police and that he could not be named 
without exposing him to molestation of the most unpleasant sort" (p. 163). 
In his letter of February 6,a  Schily wrote to me from Paris: 
"That Greiner who, to the best of my knowledge, has never been to Geneva, has 
been linked with the Brimstone Gang, is the result of his obituary notice to the 
'fugitive Imperial Regent' for which d'Ester was held responsible and outlawed in 
parliamentary circles until I set matters right in a letter to one of Vogt's friends 
and colleagues." 15 
Greiner was a member of the Provisional Government of the 
Palatinate. Greiner's rule was an "unrelieved horror" (see Vogt's 
Studien, p. 28), that is for my friend Engels, whom he had arrested 
on a trumped-up charge in Kirchheim. Engels has himself given a 
detailed account of the whole tragicomedy in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Revue (February 1850, pp. 53-55).° And that is all I know 
about Herr Greiner. The fact that the fugitive Imperial Regent has 
managed to implicate me in his quarrel with ''Count Palatine" 
reveals "yet again" the "whole system" by means of which our 
ingenious raconteur has composed the story of the life and deeds 
of "the Brimstone Gang". 
What endears him to me, however, is the true Falstaffian 
humour he displayed in causing the Count Palatine to depart for 
America "without delay". The Count Palatine, having let fly his 
pamphlet at the "fugitive Imperial Regent" like a Parthian shot, 
was suddenly overwhelmed with horror. Which caused Greiner to 
flee from Switzerland to France, from France to England. Even 
the Channel did not seem to offer sufficient protection and so he 
fled headlong to a Cunard steamerd in Liverpool where he 
breathlessly cried out to the Captain: "Away, across the Atlantic!" 
And the "stern mariner"e replied: 
"I'll save you from the hands of the Vogt 
But from the might of the storm another must lend his aid." f 
a Marx quotes from Schily's letter of February 8, 1860.— Ed. 
b Ludwig Simon.— Ed. 
c See The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution (present edition, Vol. 10, 
pp. 200-02).— Ed. 
d Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
e Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
f Schiller, Wilhelm Tell, Act I, Scene 1.— Ed. 

=====第126页=====
102 
VI 
VOGT AND THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
"Sîn kumber was manecvalt." 3 
Vogt himself claims that his "purpose" in writing his "Magnum 
Opus"  (p. 162) is to clarify "the development of his personal attitude to 
this clique'" (Marx and Co.)- Curiously enough, he only describes 
conflicts that he has never experienced and only experiences 
conflicts that he has never described. So it is necessary to confront 
his tall stories with a piece of real history. Anyone who leafs 
through the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (June 1, 1848-May 19, 1849) 
will discover that in 1848 Vogt's name does not occur, apart from 
a single exception," 3 either in its leading articles or in its 
correspondence columns. It will be found only in the daily reports 
of the parliamentary debates and to Vogt's immense satisfaction 
the Frankfurt reporterc  never failed to record conscientiously the 
"applause" accorded to him for "the speeches delivered by 
himself".  We saw that whereas the Right wing in Frankfurt had at 
their disposal the united forces of a harlequin like Lichnowski and 
a clown like von Vincke, the Left was forced to rely entirely on the 
sporadic outbreaks of farce from its one and only Vogt. We 
realised that he stood in need of encouragement, 
"that important fellow, 
the children's wonder—Signor Punchinello",d 
a "His griefs were manifold" — an adapted line from Der Edel Stein, a collection 
of fables by Ulrich Bonerius.— Ed. 
b This refers to the article "Ein Aktenstück des Märzvereins" in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, December 29, 1848.— Ed. 
c Gustav Adolph Schlöffei.— Ed. 
d Marx gives these lines in English.— Ed. 

=====第127页=====
Herr Vogt. —VI. Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 103 
and so let the Frankfurt reporter have his head. After the middle 
of September 1848 his reports underwent a change of tone. 
In the debates on the Truce of Malmö, Vogt tried to stir up a 
rebellion with his revolutionary rantings. 3 At the decisive moment 
he did his utmost to prevent the acceptance of the resolutions 
which had been passed by the popular assembly on the Pfingst-
weide and approved by a section of the extreme Left.94  After the 
barricade fighting had been crushed, with Frankfurt openly 
transformed into an army camp and a state of siege proclaimed, 
this same Vogt declared on September 19 that he was in favour of 
urgently discussing Zachariä's resolution endorsing the measures 
already taken by the Imperial Ministry and expressing gratitude to 
the Imperial troops. b Before Vogt rose to speak even Venedey c had 
protested against the "urgency" of these resolutions, declaring that 
such a discussion at such a time was unworthy of the Assembly. 
But Vogt was inferior to Venedey. By way of punishment I 
inserted the word "windbag" into the parliamentary report d after 
the word "Vogt", as a hint to the Frankfurt reporter. 
In the following October Vogt not only neglected his duty of 
waving his harlequin's wooden sword above the heads of the then 
boisterous and fiercely reactionary majority. He did not even dare 
to sign the protest tabled by Zimmermann of Spandau 6 on October 
10 in the name of some 40 deputies, opposing the law for the 
protection of the National Assembly. 95 The law, as Zimmermann 
correctly pointed out, signalled the most shameless interference 
with the popular rights that had been gained in the March 
revolution—right of assembly, freedom of speech and of the 
press.  Even Eisenmann* handed in a similar protest. But Vogt was 
inferior to Eisenmann. When he did venture forth again at the 
founding of the "Central March Association" 96 his name finally 
made its appearance in an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
a Vogt's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 15, 1848, 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden National­
versammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, 95 Bd. 3, S. 2091-94.— Ed. 
b The speeches by Vogt and Zachariä in the Frankfurt National Assembly on 
September 19, 1848, ibid., S. 2188.— Ed. 
' Venedey's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 19, 1848, 
ibid., S. 2187.— Ed. 
d Report on the sitting of the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 20, 
1848,  Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 110, September 23, 1848.— Ed. 
e Zimmermann's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on October 10, 
1848,  Stenographischer Bericht..., Bd. 4, S. 2531.—  Ed. 
f Eisenmann's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly, ibid., pp. 2531 et 
seq.— Ed. 
5-130.-) 

=====第128页=====
104 Karl Marx 
(December 29, 1848), in which the "March Association" was 
designated the "unconscious tool of the counter-revolution", its 
programme was critically torn to shreds and Vogt was represented 
as one half of the two-headed figure whose other half was Vincke. 
More than a decade later both "Ministers of the Future" 
acknowledged their affinity and chose the partition of Germany as 
the motto of their unity. 
That our assessment of the "March Association" was correct was 
not only confirmed by its later "development". The Heidelberg 
"People's League", the Breslau "Democratic Association", the Jena 
"Democratic Association", etc., all rejected its importunate offers 
of love with scorn, and those members of the extreme Left who 
had joined it confirmed our criticism of December 29, 1848, by 
announcing their resignation on April 20, 1849. Vogt, however, in 
the quiet grandeur of his soul, heaped coals of fire on our heads 
as can be seen from the following quotation: 
"Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 243, Cologne, March 10, 1849. 
'The Frankfurt so-called March Association' of the so-called 
'Imperial Assembly' has had the insolence to send us the following 
lithographed letter: 
"'The March Association has decided to compile a list of all newspapers which 
have given us space in their columns and to distribute it to all associations with which 
we are connected in order that with the assistance of this association the 
newspapers indicated will be given preference in being supplied with any relevant 
announcements. In informing you herewith of this list, we believe it is unnecessary to 
draw your attention to the importance of the paid announcements of a newspaper as the 
chief source of income for the whole enterprise. [...] Frankfurt, end of February 
1849. 
The Managing Committee 
of the Central March Association' 
"In the enclosed list of newspapers which have given space in 
their columns to the March Association and to which the 
supporters of the March Association should give preference in 
supplying 'relevant announcements', one finds also the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, which, in addition, is given the honour of an 
asterisk. We hereby announce [...] that our newspaper has never 
given space in its columns to the so-called March Association.... If, 
therefore, the March Association in its lithographed report to 
those newspapers which have really given it space in their columns 
designates our newspaper as one of its organs, this is simply 
calumny against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and absurd boasting 
on the part of the March Association.... 
"To the dirty remark of the profit-greedy competition-goaded 

=====第129页=====
Heu Vogt.—VI Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 105 
patriots about the importance of the paid announcements of a 
newspaper as a saura- of income for the whole enterprise, we, of 
course., do not reply The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has always 
differed from the patriot* not only generally but. also in that it has 
never regarded political movement as a territory for swindlers or a 
source ol income." ' 
Shortly after this brusque rejection of the source of income 
proffered by Vogt and Co. the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was 
tearfully held up as a model of "true German disunity" at a 
meeting of the Central Commercial Association. 1" At the conclusion 
of our reply to this Jeremiad (Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 248) 
Vogt is described as a "provincial academic beer-blusterer and an 
unsuccessful Imperial Barrot".' True, at that time (March 15), he 
had not yet compromised himself on the question of the Emperor. 
But we had made our minds up once and for all about Herr Vogt 
and could therefore regard his future treason as a foregone 
conclusion, even before it was clear to Vogt  himself. 
From then on, incidentally, we abandoned Vogt and Co. to the 
attentions of the young Schlöffet, who was both brave and 
intelligent. He had arrived in Frankfurt from Hungary early in 
March after which he kept us informed of all the storms in the 
Imperial frog-pond. 
Vogt, meanwhile, had sunk so low — he himself had of course 
done more to bring this about than the Neue Rheinische Zeitung — 
that even Bassermann could venture to brand him an "apostate and 
renegade" in the session of April 25, 1849.° 
F, Engels, one of the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, was 
forced to flee because of the part he played in the Elberfeld 
uprising, 9' and 1 myself was driven out of Prussia shortly 
afterwards, after repeated efforts to silence me through legal 
proceedings had failed thanks to the jury, and after the Neue 
Preussische Zeitung, the organ of the coup d'état Ministry, 98 had 
repeatedly denounced the "Chimborazo insolencee  of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, compared to which the Moniteur of 1793 
a Karl Marx, "The March Association" (see present edition, Vol. 9, pp. 
36-37).—  Ed. 
b Marx puns on März (March) and Kommerz (commerce).— Ed. 
c Karl Marx, "The Frankfurt March Association and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung" 
(see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 85). The italics were introduced by Marx in Herr 
Vogt.—Ed. 
d Stenographischer Bericht..., Bd. 8, S.  6303.—  Ed. 
e The Chimborazo is a peak of the Andes. "Chimborazo insolence" means 
"monumental insolence". — Ed. 
5* 

=====第130页=====
106 Karl Marx 
seemed rather pale" (see the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 299). a 
Such "Chimborazo insolence" was highly appropriate in a Prussian 
fortress-town and at a time when the victorious counter-revolution 
sought to intimidate people by means of unashamed brutality. 
On May 19, 1849 the last number of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
(the Red Number) appeared. As long as the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung existed, Vogt had endured in silence. If a parliamentarian 
did lodge a complaint, he did so in all modesty. For example: 
"Sir, the sharp criticism in your newspaper is valued by me no less because it 
observes all parties and all persons with equal strictness" (see No. 219 [supplement]. 
February 11, 1849. Wesendonck's complaint).b 
A week after the demise of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Vogt, 
operating under the mantle of parliamentary immunity, finally 
thought he could seize his long-awaited opportunity to convert the 
"matter" he had accumulated deep in his heart into "energy". 99 
The position was that one of the editors of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Wilhelm  Wolff,  had replaced a retired Silesian deputy 0 in the 
Frankfurt Assembly, which was "in the process of dissolution" at the 
time. 100 
In order to understand the following scene in the parliamentary 
session of May 26, 1849, it must be borne in mind that the 
uprising in Dresden and the local movements in the Rhine 
Province had already been crushed. The Empire was about to 
intervene in Baden and the Palatinate, the main Russian army was 
marching on Hungary and, finally, the Imperial Ministry had 
simply quashed resolutions approved by the Assembly. On the 
agenda were two "Proclamations to the German Nation", the first 
edited by Uhland and emanating from the majority, the other 
stemming from the Committee of Thirty,101  whose members 
belonged to the Centre. Presiding over the Assembly was Reh 
from Darmstadt who later turned into a rabbit d and "detached" 
himself from the Assembly, which was "in complete disarray". I 
quote from the official stenographic report, Nos. 229, 228. Session 
in St. Paul's Church. e 
Wolff from Breslau: "Gentlemen, I have registered my opposition to the 
Proclamation to the Nation, the proclamation that was composed by the majority 
a Karl Marx, "The Kreuz-Zeitung" (see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 437).— Ed. 
b Hugo Wesendonck, "Erklärung. Düsseldorf, 8. Februar 1849".— Ed. 
c Gustav Adolf Stenzel. — Ed. 
d Marx plays on the surname Reh, a homonym of Reh (roe deer).— Ed. 
e Stenographischer Bericht..., Bd. 9, S. 6749.— Ed. 

=====第131页=====
Herr Vogt. —VI. Vogt  and the  Neue Rheinische Zeitung  107 
and that  has  been read aloud here, because  I think  it utterly inadequate  to the 
needs  of the  present time.  I find  it altogether  too  feeble.  It is  good enough  to 
appear  as an  article  in the  newspapers which represent  the  party that  has  devised 
it, but it is not  good enough  for a  Proclamation  to the  German Nation. Since  a 
second Proclamation  has now  been read  out I may  remark  in passing that  I would 
be even more strongly opposed  to it  than  to the  first  one, for  reasons that  I do not 
need  to enter into here."  (A voice from  the  Centre:  "Why  not?")  "I am  speaking 
solely  of the  majority Proclamation.  It is  true that  it is  couched  in such moderate 
terms that even Herr Buss  had  little  to say  against  it, and  that  is without doubt  the 
worst recommendation  for any  proclamation.  No,  gentlemen,  if you  wish  to 
have  any  influence  on the  people  at all you  should  not  address  it in the  manner 
adopted  in this Proclamation.  You  must  not  speak about legality,  the  legal basis, 
etc., but of  illegality just like  the governments, like  the Russians—and  by  Russians  I 
understand  the  Prussians, Austrians, Bavarians  and  Hanoverians." (Commotion 
and laughter.)  "All  these have been subsumed under  the  name Russians." (Loud 
laughter.)  "Yes,  gentlemen,  the  Russicins  are represented  in this Chamber  too. You 
must tell them:  'In the  same  way as you  adopt  the  legal standpoint,  so do we.'  This 
is the  standpoint  of force,  and in  parenthesis  you  ought  to explain legality  by 
saying that  you  will oppose  the  Russian cannon with force, with well-organised 
storming-parties.  // any  proclamation  is to be  issued, issue  one  which begins  by 
outlawing  the  first traitor  to the  people,  the  Imperial Regent." 3 (Interruption: 
"Order!" — Lively applause from  the  gallery.)  "All the  Ministers likewise." (Renewed 
commotion.)  "Oh, I  shall  not let  myself  be intimidated:  he is the  first traitor  to the 
people." 
President:  "I think that Herr Wolff  has  ignored  and  offended against every 
propriety.  He  cannot describe  the  Archducal Imperial Regent  as a  traitor  to the  people 
in this House  and I  must therefore call  him to  order.  I must also request  the 
galleries  for the  last time  not to  intervene further  in the  debate." 
Wolff:  "For my  part,  I accept  the  call  to order  and  declare that  it was my 
intention  to transgress  the  bounds  of order  and to  state that  he and his  Ministers  are 
traitors." (From  all sides  of the  House: "Order. This  is scandalous.") 
President:  "I must  ask you to be  seated." 
Wolff:  "Very well,  / protest.  I wanted  to speak here  in the  name  of the people  and 
to say  what  the  people  is thinking.  I protest against every proclamation framed  in 
these terms." (Great tumult.) 
President: "Gentlemen, will  you  please allow  me to  speak  for a  moment. 
Gentlemen,  the  incident that  has  just taken place  is, I may say, the  first there  has 
been since Parliament  has  been  in session here."  (It was  indeed  the  first  and the  only 
incident  to take place  in that Debating Society.)  "No  speaker  has  ever before 
declared that  it was his  intention  to disrupt  the  order,  the very foundations  of this 
House." (Schlöffel  had replied  to a  similar call  to order,  in the  session  of April  25: 
"I accept  the  call to order,  all the  more  as I  hope that  the  time will soon come when 
this Assembly will  be called  to order  in a  very different way.") h 
"Gentlemen,  I deeply regret that Herr  Wolff,  who has  only just become  a 
member  of this House, should have made  his début  in this manner"  (Reh  looks  at 
the matter from  a theatrical point  of view). "Gentlemen,  I have called  him to  order 
because  he has  permitted himself greatly  to affront  the respect  and  consideration that  we 
owe to the  person  of the  Imperial Regent." 
3 Archduke John.—  Ed. 
b Stenographischer Bericht...,  Bd. 8, S.  6751.—  Ed. 

=====第132页=====
108 Karl Marx 
The debate then proceeded. Hagen and Zachariä made long 
Speeches, the one for and the other against the proclamation of 
the majority. Finally, 
Vogt from dessen rose from his seat: "Gentlemen, allow me a few words, I shall 
not weary you. It is perfectly true that this Parliament is no longer what it was when 
it assembled last year, gentlemen, and we thank Heaven" (our Vogt of "blind faith" a 
thanks Heaven) "that it is  become  so" (is  become,  indeed! b ) "and that those who lost 
faith in the people and who betrayed the cause of the people at the decisive 
moment, have now left this Assembly! Gentlemen, I have asked permission to speak" 
(so the thanksgiving we have just heard was just humbug), "in order to defend the 
crystal-clear stream" (defence of a stream) "that flowed from the poet's soul" (Vogt 
is becoming soulful) "into this proclamation against the unworthy filth that has been 
thrown into it or hurled at it" (but the stream had already been absorbed by the 
proclamation), "to defend these words" (as with everything that Vogt touches, the 
stream has been changed into words) "against the muck that has been heaped up in 
this latest movement and which threatens to engulf and besmirch everything. Yes, 
gentlemen! That" (namely the muck) "is muck and filth" (the muck is filth!) 
"which is being thrown in this way" (in what way?) "at everything pure that can be 
imagined, and I wish to express my deep indignation" (Vogt in deep indignation, 
quel tableau's) "at the fact that this sort of thing" (what sort of thing?) "could have 
happened." d 
And his very speech is—muck.e 
Wolff had not said a single word about Uhland's editing of the 
proclamation. As the President repeatedly declared, he had been 
called to order, he had conjured up the whole storm, because he 
had declared that the Imperial Regent and all his Ministers were 
traitors to the people and had called on Parliament to do likewise. 
But for Vogt the "Archducal Imperial Regent", the "worn-out 
Habsburg" (Vogt's Studien, p. 28) and "all his Ministers" represent 
"everything pure that can be imagined". With Walther von der 
Vogelweide he sang: 
"des fürsten milte ûz ôsterrîche 
fröit dem süezen rëgen gelîche 
beidiu Hute und ouch daz lant." f 
a Vogt of "blind faith" (der "Köhlergläubige" Vogt) — an ironical allusion to 
Vogt's book Köhlerglaube und Wissenschaft..., Giessen, 1855.— Ed. 
b Marx ridicules the ungrammatical verb form used by Vogt: geworden 
wird. —Ed. 
c What a  sight!  — Ed. 
d Stenographischer Bericht..., Bd. 9, S. 6751.—Ed. 
e Variation on a verse from Ludwig Uhland's "Des Sängers Fluch": "Und was er 
spricht, ist Geissei" ("His very speech is a whiplash").— Ed. 
1 "The Prince of Austria's generosity, 
Like gentle rain, bestows felicity 
Both on the people and on the  land."—Ed. 

=====第133页=====
Herr Vogt. —VI. Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 109 
Did Vogt already even at that time, enjoy the "scientific 
relationship" with Archduke John that he later confessed to? (See 
Documents in the "Magnum Opus", p. 25.) 
Ten years later the same Vogt declared in the Studien (pp. 
27[-28]): 
"So much a! least is certain: the National Assembly in France and its leaders at 
the time underestimated the abilities of Louis Napoleon jusi as the leaders of the 
Frankfurt National Assembly underestimated those of Archduke John, and both the 
old foxes made their respective detractors  t>a\  deari\ for their mistake. We are far from 
wanting to equate the two men, The terrible ruthlessness, etc.. etc." (of Louis 
Bonaparte).— All this makes him cut a tar superior figure to the old and worn-out 
Habsburg." a 
During the very same session Wolfj challenged Vogt to a duel 
with pistols—a challenge which was transmitted by deputy Würth 
from Sigmaringen —and when the aforesaid Vogt preferred to 
preserve his skin intact for the Empire,* he threatened to thrash 
him. On leaving St. Paul's Church, however, Wolff discovered 
Charles the Bold flanked by two ladies, and bursting into laughter 
he left him to his fate. Although he is a  wolf,  with a wolf's heart 
and teeth, Wolff is a lamb when he sees the fair sex. His only, 
really quite innocuous, revenge was an article in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Revue (April issue, 1850, p. 73) entitled 
"Nachträgliches aus dem Reich''' in which he wrote about the 
Ex-Imperial Regent as follows: 
"In these critical days the Central March people have been extremely 
industrious. Before withdrawing from Frankfurt they had published an address to 
the various March associations and to the German people: 'Fellow-citizens! The 
eleventh hour has struck!' In order to assemble a people's army they issued a new 
proclamation'to the German nation' from Stuttgart, and lo and behold! the hand 
on the Central March clock had stood still, or like the clock on Freiburg Minster, 
had lost the number XII. However that might be, this proclamation too began with 
the words: 'Fellow-citizens! The eleventh hour has struck!' Oh if only it had struck 
earlier, and had pierced your heads, at least at the time when Karl Vogt, the 
Central March hero, was pacifying the Franconian revolution 102 in Nuremberg to 
his own satisfaction and to the satisfaction of the wailers who were feting him**.... 
* In the pamphlet by Jacobus Venedey already referred to, Kobes I tells the 
following story: "In the same session in which Gagern embraced Gabriel Riesser 
after the latter's speech on the Emperor, ... Karl Vogt embraced Zimmermann in 
St. Paul's Church with mock pathos and noisy exclamations, and so I called out to 
him: 'Stop these roguish pranks.' Vogt thought it expedient to reply in provocative 
and abusive terms and when I challenged him personally, he had the courage, after 
a friend had made a number of journeys between the two of us, to withdraw his 
insult" (loc. cit., pp. 21, 22). 
** Vogt later justified his valiant deeds in Nuremberg with the words: "He had 
been given no guarantees for his own personal safety." 
3 Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, S. 27-28. Marx's italics.— Ed. 

=====第134页=====
110 Karl Marx 
The Regency set up its offices in the government building in Freiburg. The Regent 
Karl Vogt, who was also Foreign Minister and the incumbent of many other 
Ministries, once more took the well-being of the German people 3 very much to 
heart. Having studied their problems in long days and nights he came up with a 
very timely invention, that of 'Imperial Regency passports'. These passports were 
simple, beautifully lithographed and could be obtained gratis by anyone whose 
heart desired one. They only had the one small defect of being recognised as valid 
only in Vogt's Chancellery. It is possible that later on one or other of them will find 
its way into an Englishman's collection of curios." b 
Wolff did not follow Greiner's example. Instead of "departing 
at once for America" as soon as the Revue "had appeared", he 
remained for a year in Switzerland, awaiting the revenge of the 
Land-Vogt. 
a Wolff has: "of the German Empire".— Ed. 
b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, IV. Heft, April 1850, S. 
75, 76.—  Ed. 

=====第135页=====
Ill 
VII 
THE AUGSBURG CAMPAIGN 
Shortly after the citizen of the Canton of Thurgau103 had 
concluded his Italian war, the citizen of the Canton of Bernea 
launched his Augsburg campaign. 
"There" (in London) "it was the Marx clique that had always supplied the 
greater part of the reports" (of the Allgemeine Zeitung), "and ever since 1849 its 
relations with the 'Allgemeine Zeitung' had been continuous" ("Magnum Opus", 
p. 194)> 
Although Marx has only been living in London since the end of 
1849, c i.e. since he was expelled from France for the second time, 
the "Marx clique" appears to have lived in London always, and 
although the Marx clique has "always supplied the greater part of 
the reports of the Allgemeine Zeitung", "its relations" with the 
Allgemeine Zeitung have only been "continuous ever since 1849". 
At all events, Vogt's chronology is divided—and this is not to be 
wondered at since before 1848 the man "had not yet contem­
plated any political activity" (loc. cit., p. 225)—into two great 
periods, viz., the period "always" up to 1849, and the period from 
1849 up to "this" year. 
Between 1842 and 1843 I edited the old Rheinische Zeitung, 
which waged a life-and-death war with the Allgemeine Zeitung. 
From 1848 to 1849 the Neue Rheinische Zeitung revived the 
polemic. What remains, then, of the period "always up to 1849" 
a i.e. Vogt. See his Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, S. 6.— Ed. 
h Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 194. The words "the Marx clique" were italicised 
by Vogt, the rest of the italics are Marx's.— Ed. 
c Marx arrived in London about August 26, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第136页=====
112 Karl Marx 
apart from the fact that Marx had fought against the Allgemeine 
Zeitung "always", while Vogt had been its "constant collaborator" 
from 1844 to 1847? (See "Magnum Opus", p. 225.) 
Now for the second period of world history à la Vogt. 
The reason why I maintained "continuous relations with the 
Allgemeine Zeitung" from London, "continuous ever since 1849", is 
that "from 1852" a certain Ohly had been chief London 
correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung. It is true that Ohly had 
no relations whatever with me, either before or after 1852. I have 
never seen him in my life. Inasmuch as he played any part among 
the London refugees it was as a member of Kinkel's Emigration 
Association. But this has no bearing on the case, for, 
"The former oracle of Altenhöfer, that old Bavarian who had learnt English, 
was my" (Vogt's) "fellow-countryman, the blond Ohly, who having started out as a 
communist, strove to attain a loftier poetic standpoint in politics and literature. At first in 
Zurich, but from 1852 in London, he was the chief correspondent of the Allgemeine 
Zeitung until he ended his days in a madhouse." ("Magnum Opus", p. 195.) 
Edouard Simon, the police spy, has Frenchified this Vogtiad as 
follows: 
"En voici d'abord un qui de son point de départ communiste, avait cherché à 
s'élever aux plus hautes conceptions de la politique." ("Loftier poetic standpoint in 
politics" was beyond the genius even of an Edouard Simon.) "A en croire M. Vogt, 
cet adepte fut l'oracle de la Gazette d'Augsbourg jusqu'en 1852, époque où il 
mourut dans une maison de fous" 3 (Revue contemporaine, Vol. XIII, Paris, 1860, 
p. 529). 
"Operam et oleum perdidi," b Vogt may well say of his 
"Magnum Opus" and his Ohly. Whereas he makes his "fellow-
countryman" the London correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung 
from 1852, until he "ends his days in a madhouse", Edouard 
Simon says that "if we may believe Vogt, Ohly had been the oracle 
of the Allgemeine Zeitung up to 1852 when he" (who, it will be 
noted, is still alive) "died in a madhouse". But Edouard Simon 
knows his Karl Vogt. Edouard knows that once one has resolved 
to "believe" Karl, it is quite irrelevant what one believes, whether 
it is what he says, or the opposite of what he says. 
" Herr Liebknecht," says Karl Vogt, "replaced him" (namely Ohly) "as correspond­
ent of the Allgemeine Zeitung." "Only after Liebknecht had been openly proclaimed 
a "This is a man who, having started out as a communist, strove to raise himself 
to the loftier conceptions of politics. If we may believe Herr Vogt, this adept was 
the oracle of the Augsburg Gazette up to 1852 when he died in a madhouse."—Ed. 
b "I have wasted oil and labour", Plautus, Poenulus, Act I, Scene 2, where it is 
spoken by a whore whose efforts to repair the ravages of time have proved vain. 
Oleum is a pun on Ohly.— Ed. 

=====第137页=====
Herr Vogt. —VII. The Augsburg Campaign 113 
a member of the Marx party,* was he accepted as a correspondent by the Allgemeine 
Zeitung" (loc. cit., p. 169). 
That proclamation was made during the Cologne communist 
trial, i.e. at the end of 1852. 
In fact in the spring of 1851 Liebknecht became a contributor to 
the Morgenblatt where he reported on the Great Exhibition in 
London. 104 Through the mediation of the Morgenblatt he was 
made correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung in September 1855. 
"His"  (Marx's) "comrades do not write a single line of which Marx has not been 
previously informed" (loc. cit., p. 194). 
The proof is simple: "He" (Marx) "has absolute control over his 
people" (p. 195) whereas Vogt is absolutely obedient to his Fazy 
and Co. We are confronted here by a peculiarity of Vogt's 
myth-making. The pygmy standards of Giessen or Geneva, the 
small-town framework and the fug of Swiss taverns are 
everywhere. Naively translating the leisurely provincial cliquism of 
Geneva to one of the great cities of the world, London, he will 
not allow Liebknecht to write "a single line" in the West End of 
which I "have not been previously informed" four miles away in 
Hampstead. And I perform the identical services of a La 
Guéronnière b every day for a whole host of "comrades" scattered 
all over London and writing their reports to the four corners of 
the globe. A delightful profession—and a profitable one! 
With the unmistakable delicacy of the artist, Vogt's mentor, 
Edouard Simon, who does not know London, but is at least 
familiar with conditions in Paris, provides the account of his 
uncouth "friend from the country" with the veneer of the big city: 
"Marx, comme chef de la société, ne tient pas lui-même la plume, mais ses 
fidèles n'écrivent pas une ligne sans l'avoir consulté: La Gazette d'Augsbourg sera 
d'autant mieux servie" (loc. cit., p. 529). That is to say, "Marx as head of the 
society does not write  himself,  but his trusted associates do not write a single line 
without first consulting him. In this way the Augsburger Zeitung is the better 
served." 
Does Vogt appreciate all the subtlety of this correction? 
I had as much to do with Liebknecht's reports to the Allgemeine 
Zeitung from London as I had with Vogt's reports to the 
Allgemeine Zeitung from Paris. Moreover, Liebknecht's reports 
were praiseworthy in every respect—a critical presentation of 
English politics, which he described in exactly the same way in the 
a Vogt has: "of Marx's society".— Ed. 
b La Guéronnière was Chief Censor during the Second Empire in France.— Ed. 

=====第138页=====
114 Karl Marx 
Allgemeine Zeitung as in his reports for the radical German-
American newspapers written at the same time. Vogt  himself,  who 
has anxiously searched through whole years of the Allgemeine 
Zeitung in the hope of discovering something detrimental in 
Liebknecht's letters, confines his critique of their contents to 
stating that the symbol used by Liebknecht to indicate his 
authorship consisted of "two thin slanting lines" ("Magnum Opus", 
p. 196). 
The fact that the lines were on a slant showed of course that the 
reports themselves were not quite straight. But even worse, they 
were "thin"\ If only Liebknecht had chosen instead of two "thin 
lines",  two round blobs of grease for his reports! But even if there 
is nothing reprehensible about his reports apart from these "two 
thin slanting lines", there is still the objection that they were 
printed at all in the Allgemeine Zeitung. And why should they not? 
It is a known fact that the Allgemeine Zeitung allows the most 
widely divergent views to be expressed in its columns, at least on 
such neutral topics as that of English politics, and in addition it is 
the only German paper with a more than local significance in the 
eyes of the world. Liebknecht could without hesitation dispatch his 
London letters to the very newspaper for which Heine wrote his 
"Paris Letters" and Fallmerayer his "Oriental Letters". 105 Vogt 
reports that lewd persons also wrote for the Allgemeine Zeitung. It 
is well known that he himself was a contributor from 1844 to 
1847. 
As far as Frederick Engels and myself are concerned—I mention 
Engels because we work to a common plan and after prior 
agreement—it is true that in 1859 we did enter into a 
"relationship" of a sort with the Allgemeine Zeitung. That is to say 
during January, February and March 1859 I published a series of 
leading articles in the New-York Tribune in which inter alia the 
theory advanced by the Allgemeine Zeitung about a "Central 
European great power" and that paper's claim that it was in the 
Germans' interest to maintain Austria's rule in Italy were subjected 
to searching criticism. Shortly before the outbreak of war, and 
with my agreement, Engels published Po and Rhine, Berlin, 1859, aa 
pamphlet directed specifically against the Allgemeine Zeitung. To 
quote Engels' own words (from his pamphlet Savoy, Nice and the 
Rhine, Berlin, 1860, p. 4) it provided scientific military proof that 
"Germany does not need any part of Italy for its defence and that 
a Karl Marx, "The War Prospect in Prussia", and Frederick Engels, Po and 
Rhine (see present edition, Vol.  16).—  Ed. 

=====第139页=====
Herr Vogt. — VII.  The Augsburg Campaign 115 
France, if only military considerations counted, would certainly 
have much stronger claims to the Rhine than Germany to the 
Mincio". 3 This polemic against the Allgemeine Zeitung and its 
theory of the necessity of Austrian despotic rule in Italy went 
hand in hand with a polemic directed against Bonapartist 
propaganda. For instance, I argued in detail in the Tribune (see 
e.g. February 1859) that the financial and internal political 
problems of the "bas empire" x06 had reached a critical point and 
that only a foreign war could prolong the rule of the coup d'état 
in France and hence the counter-revolution in Europe. 5 I 
demonstrated that the Bonapartist liberation of Italy was a mere 
pretext to keep France in subjection, to subject Italy to the rule of 
the coup d'état, to shift France's "natural frontiers" to Germany, 
to transform Austria into a tool of Russia and to force the nations 
into a war waged by the legitimate counter-revolution against the 
illegitimate counter-revolution. All this took place before the 
ex-Regent of the Empire, Karl Vogt, issued his clarion call from 
Geneva. 
Ever since Wolff's article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue 
(1850),'  I had completely forgotten the "well-rounded character". 
I was reminded of the merry fellow once more in the spring of 
1859,  on an evening in April, when Freiligrath gave me a letter of 
Vogt's to read together with an accompanying political "  Pro­
gramme"  .,07 This was no act of indiscretion since Vogt's circular was 
intended "for communication" to the friends not of Vogt, but of 
the addressee. 
Asked what I found in the "Programme", I replied: "Political 
hot air." I could see at once that the old joker had not changed, 
from his request to Freiligrath to persuade Herr Bucher to become 
political correspondent for the propaganda sheet to be published 
in Geneva. d Vogt's letter was dated April 1, 1859. It was well 
known that in the reports he sent from London to the Berlin 
National-Zeitung since January 1859, Bücher advocated views 
directly antithetical to those in Vogt's Programme. But all cats are 
grey to the man of "critical immediacy". 
After this incident which I did not think of sufficient impor­
tance to mention to anyone, I received a copy of Vogt's Studien 
a See present edition, Vol. 16, p. 572.— Ed. 
h See "The Money Panic in F.urope", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5548, February 
1, 1859 (present edition, Vol. 16).— Ed. 
c Wilhelm  Wolff,  "Nachträgliches aus dem Reich...", Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue, Heft 4, April 1850.— Ed. 
d Presumably Die Neue  Schweiz. — Ed. 

=====第140页=====
116 Karl Marx 
zur gegenwärtigen Lage FAiropas, a woeful document which left 
me in no doubt about hi> connection with Bonapartist propa­
ganda 
On the evening of May 9, 1859 1 found mvself on the platform 
at a public meeting arranged by Da\id Urquhart because of the 
Italian war. Before the meeting had got under way I saw a solemn 
figure approaching me portentoush. From the Hamlet-like 
expression on his countenance I realised at once that "something 
was rotten in the state of Denmark".' It was the homme d'état, Karl 
Blind.  After a few preliminaries he began to talk about Vogt's 
"intrigues" and he assured me with much shaking of the head 
that Vogt was in receipt of Bonapartist subsidies for his 
propaganda, that a South German writer, whose name he could 
"unfortunately" not reveal, had been offered 30,000 guilders as a 
bribe by Vogt —I was in some doubt as to which South German 
writer could possibly be worth 30,000 guilders—that there had 
been attempts at bribery in London, that as early as 1858 there 
had been a meeting between Plön -PI on. Fazy  He Co. in Geneva 
where the Italian war had been discussed and the Grand Duke 
Constantine of Russia had been named as the future King of 
Hungary, that Vogt had also tried to enlist him (Blind) for his 
propaganda, and that he had proofs of Vogts treasonable intrigues 
against his country. Blind then withdrew to his seat at the other 
corner of the platform next to his friend J. Fröbel; the meeting 
began and in a detailed report b D. Urquhart tried to present the 
Italian war as the fruit of Franco-Russian intrigue.* 
* Vogt naturally connects the attacks on Lord Pahnerston by the Marx clique with 
my hostility to this self-important personage and his "friends" ("Magnum Opus", 
p. 212). It would appear, then, that this is a suitable place to comment briefly on 
my relations with D. Urquhart and his party. Urquhart's writings on Russia and 
against Palmerston had interested but not convinced me. In order to arrive at a 
firm view I undertook the laborious analysis of Hansard's Parliamentary Debates and 
the diplomatic Blue Books from 1807 to 1850. The first fruits of these studies were 
a series of leading articles in the New-York Tribune (end of 1853) in which I 
demonstrated Palmerston's involvement with the St. Petersburg Cabinet on the 
basis of his transactions with Poland, Turkey, Circassia, etc. Shortly afterwards I 
had these articles reprinted in The  People's  Paper, the organ of the Chartists edited 
by Ernest Jones, together with additional passages about Palmerston's activities. 108 
In the meantime, The Glasgow Sentinel had also reprinted one of the articles 
("Palmerston and Poland") which attracted the attention of Mr. D. Urquhart. 
After a meeting with me he persuaded Mr. Tucker in London to bring out some of 
a Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, Scene 4.— Ed. 
b David Urquhart's report was discussed in the article "Mr. Urquhart's Address 
on Neutrality" in The Free Press, No. 5, May 27, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第141页=====
Herr Vogt. —VII. The Augsburg Campaign 117 
Towards the end of the meeting Dr. Faucher, foreign-news 
editor of The Morning Star (the organ of the Manchester 
School 111), came up to me to tell me that a new London German 
weekly, Das Volk, had just appeared. Die Neue Zeit, a workers' 
paper published by Herr A. Scherzer and edited by Edgar Bauer, 
had just folded up as the result of an intrigue by Kinkel, the 
publisher of the Hermann. Hearing this news, Biscamp, who had 
been a reporter for Die Neue Zeit up to that time, gave up his 
teaching post in the South of England in order to go to London 
and set up Das Volk in opposition to the Hermann. The German 
Workers' Educational Society and other London societies sup­
ported the newspaper, which like all such workers' newspapers was 
naturally edited and written gratis. Although as a free-trader* 3 he, 
Faucher, did not agree with the general policy of Das Volk, he was 
opposed to there being a monopoly in the German press in 
London and therefore, together with some London acquaintances, 
he had set up a Finance Committee in support of the paper. 
Biscamp had already written to Liebknecht, whom he had not yet 
met, with a request for literary contributions, etc. Finally, Faucher 
asked me to join in the venture. 
Although Biscamp had been living in England since 1852, we 
had not yet made each other's acquaintance. The day after the 
Urquhart meeting Liebknecht brought him to my home. From 
lack of time I could not accept the invitation to write for Das Volk 
for the moment, but I promised to ask my German friends in 
the articles in pamphlet form. These Palmerston pamphlets were later sold in 
various editions in numbers ranging from 15,000 to 20,000. Following my analysis 
of the Blue Book on the fall of Kars —it was published in the London organ of the 
Chartists in April 1856 a—I received a letter of thanks from the Sheffield Foreign 
Affairs Committee.109 (See Appendix 7.) While looking through the diplomatic 
manuscripts in the possession of the British Museum I came across a series of 
English documents, going back from the end of the eighteenth century to the time 
of Peter the Great, which reveal the continuous secret collaboration between the 
Cabinets of London and St. Petersburg, and seem to indicate that this relationship 
arose at the time of Peter the Great. Up to now, all I have published of a detailed 
investigation into the subject has been an introduction with the title Revelations of 
the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century. This appeared first in the Sheffield and 
subsequently in the London Free Press,110  both published by Urquhart. The 
last-named has received occasional contributions from me since its foundation. My 
interest in Palmerston and British-Russian diplomatic relations in general arose, as 
one can see, without my having had the slightest suspicion that the figure of Herr 
Karl Vogt was standing behind that of Lord Palmerston. 
a "The Fall of Kars", The People's Paper, Nos. 205-08, April 5, 12, 19 and 26 
(see present edition, Vol. 14).— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 

=====第142页=====
118 Karl Marx 
England for subscriptions, financial donations and literary con­
tributions. In the course of the conversation we came to speak of 
the Urquhart meeting and this led on to Vogt, whose Studien 
Biscamp had already read and correctly evaluated. I told him and 
Liebknecht of the contents of Vogt's "Programme" and also of 
Blind's revelations, adding, however, with respect to the latter, that 
South Germans were inclined to paint in rather exaggerated 
colours. To my surprise, No. 2 of Das Volk (May 14) printed an 
article with the title "Der Reichsregent als Reichsverräther" [The 
Imperial Regent as Imperial Traitor] 3 (see "Magnum Opus", 
Documents, pp. 17, 18) in which Biscamp mentioned two of the 
facts reported by Blind—the 30,000 guilders, which, however, he 
reduced to 4,000, and the Bonapartist sources of Vogt's funds. For 
the rest his article consisted of witticisms in the manner of Die 
Hornisse, which he had edited in Cassel with Heise in 1848-49. In 
the meantime, as I learned long after the appearance of the 
"Magnum Opus" (see Appendix 8), the London Workers' 
Educational Society had commissioned Herr Scherzer, one of its 
leaders, to invite the workers' educational associations in Switzer­
land, Belgium and the United States to support Das Volk and to 
combat Bonapartist propaganda. Biscamp himself sent a copy of 
the above-mentioned article published in Das Volk on May 14, 
1859 to Vogt, who simultaneously received Herr A. Scherzer's 
circular from his own Ranickel. 
With his familiar "critical immediacy" Vogt at once cast me in 
the role of the demiurge behind these attempts to ensnare him. 
Without hesitation he at once published an outline of his later 
travesty of history b in the oft-quoted "special supplement to No. 150  of 
the 'Schweizer Handels-Courier'". This original gospel which first 
revealed the mysteries of the Brimstone Gang, the Bristlers, 
Cherval, etc., beneath the date Berne, May 23, 1859 (and hence 
more recently than the gospel according to the Mormons 112), bore 
the title Zur Warnung 0 and its content corresponds to that of a 
piece translated from a pamphlet 113 by the notorious E. About.* 
* A word about the Biel Commis voyageur, the local Moniteur of the "fugitive 
Imperial Regent". The publisher and editor of the Biel Handels-Courier is a 
a This refers to the anonymous article "Der Reichsregent". One of the paragraphs 
in it begins with the words "Der Reichsregent als Reichsverräther!" —Ed. 
b See Johann Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengfh^urliche Geschichtklitterung.... — 
Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, "Zur Warnung", Schweizer Handds-Courier, No. 150 (special 
supplement), June 2, 1859; see also Mein Prozess..., Dokumente, S.  31-33.—  Ed. 

=====第143页=====
Herr Vogt. — VII.  The Augsburg Campaign 119 
Vogt's anonymous original gospel Zur Warnung was reprinted, 
as I have already remarked, in Das Volk 3 at my request. 
In the beginning of June I left London to visit Engels in 
Manchester, where a subscription of about £25 was collected for 
Das Volk. This contribution, whose "nature" induced the "curi­
ous"  Vogt to cast his "eyes across the Channel" towards Augsburg 
and Vienna ("Magnum Opus", p. 212), came from Frederick 
Engels, Wilhelm  Wolff,  myself and finally three German 
physicians b resident in Manchester, whose names are recorded in 
one of the legal documents I sent to Berlin. As to the money 
collected in London by the original Finance Committee, Vogt 
should consult Dr. Faucher. 
Vogt informs us on p. 225 of the "Magnum Opus": 
"But it has always been a device of the reactionaries to require the democrats to 
do everything for nothing while they" (that is the reactionaries, not the democrats) 
"claim the right to demand payment and to be paid." 
What a reactionary device on the part of Das Volk, which is not 
only edited and written for nothing but even induces those who 
work on it to payl If that is not proof of the connection between 
Das Volk and the reaction, then Karl Vogt is at his wit's end. 
During my stay in Manchester an event of decisive importance 
took place in London. Liebknecht discovered in the compositor's 
room of Hollinger (who printed "Das Volk") the proof-sheet of the 
anonymous pamphlet against Vogt entitled Zur Warnung. He read 
it through cursorily, immediately recognised Blind's revelations 
and to crown it all learnt from A. Vögele, the compositor, that 
Blind had given the manuscript, which was in his handwriting, to 
Hollinger for printing. The corrections on the proof-sheet were 
also in Blind's handwriting. Two days later Hollinger sent 
Liebknecht the proof-sheet, which he in turn sent to the 
Allgemeine Zeitung. The type for the pamphlet survived and was 
used later for a reprint in Das Volk, No. 7 (June 18, 1859).' 
With the publication of the "warning" by the Allgemeine Zeitung'* 
certain Ernst Schüler, a political refugee of 1838, a postmaster, wine merchant, 
bankrupt and at present solvent once more thanks to the fact that his newspaper, 
which was subsidised by British, French and Swiss advertisements during the 
Crimean war, now numbers 1,200 subscribers. 
a No. 6, June 11, 1859.— Ed. 
h l.ouis Borchardt, Eduard Gumpets and Martin He« ksc her.-- Ed. 
r In the article "Warnung zur gefälligen Verbreitung". — Ed. 
^ "K. Vogt und die deutsche Emigration in London", All gern eine Zritvug, 
No. 17.".,  June 22, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第144页=====
120 Karl Marx 
begins the Augsburg campaign of the ex- Vogt of the Empire. He 
sued the Allgemeine Zeitung for reprinting the pamphlet. 
In the "Magnum Opus" (pp. 227-28) Vogt travesties Milliner's 
" 'Tis me, 'tis me; I am the robber Jaromir". 114 He merely translates 
"to be" into "to have". 
"J have sued because I knew all along that the shallowness, futility and baseness 
of the editorial board which parades as the 'representative of High German 
culture', would be forced into the open. / have sued because I knew all along that 
the connection of its esteemed editors and the Austrian policies they have been 
exalting to the heavens with the Brimstone Gang and the dregs of the revolution, 
could not remain hidden from the public." 
And so on through another four "J have sued's". The suing 
Vogt becomes quite sublime, a or Longinus is right when he says 
that there is nothing in the world that is drier than a man with 
dropsy.b 
"Personal considerations," the "well-rounded character" declares, "were the 
least of my motives when I went for the law." 
In reality matters stood quite differently. No calf could show 
greater reluctance to go to the slaughter than Karl Vogt to go to 
court. While his "close" friends, the Ranickel, Reinach (formerly a 
peripatetic chronique scandaleuse about Vogt) and the garrulous 
Mayer from Esslingen, a member of the Rump Parliament, 
confirmed him in his terror of the court, he was bombarded with 
urgent requests from Zurich to proceed with his "suit". At the 
Workers' Festival in Lausanne the fur-dealer Roos told him in 
front of witnesses that he could no longer have any respect for 
him if he did not take legal proceedings. Nevertheless, Vogt 
resisted: He did not give a rap for the Augsburg and London 
Brimstone Gang and would remain silent. Suddenly, however, he 
spoke. Various newspapers announced the forthcoming trial and 
the Ranickel declared: 
"The Stuttgart people would not leave him" (Vogt) "any peace.  He" (Ranickel) "had 
not given his approval." 
We may note in passing that since the "well-rounded one" 
found himself in a tight corner, an action against the Allgemeine 
Zeitung was undoubtedly the most promising stratagem. Vogt's 
self-apologia in response to an attack on him by J. Venedey, who 
had accused him of Bonapartist intrigues, 115 saw the light in the 
a A pun in the original: der geklagt habende (who has sued) and wird erhaben 
(becomes sublime).— Ed. 
b Cassius Longinus, Chi the Sublime.—Ed. 

=====第145页=====
Herr Vogt. —VII. The Augsburg Campaign 121 
Biel " Handels-Courier" of June 16, 1859, 3 and hence arrived in 
London after the appearance of the anonymous pamphlet, which 
concluded with the threat: 
"11. however, Vogt attempts to deny these accusations, a thing he will hardly 
dart, this revelation will be followed by No. 2.*' 
Vogt had now issued a denial and revelation No. 2 did not 
follow. Secure on this front, mischief could only come from his 
dear friends, whom he knew well enough to rely on their 
cowardice. The more he exposed himself in public by resorting to 
legal action, the more surely he could bank on their discretion, for 
in the person of the "fugitive Imperial Regent" it was in a way the 
entire Rump Parliament that was standing in the pillory. 
Parliamentarian Jacob Venedey tells tales out of school in his Pro 
domo und pro patria gegen Karl Vogt, Hanover, 1860, pp. 27-28: 
'Apart from the letters produced by Vogt in his own account of his lawsuit, I 
have read a further letter of Vogts which reveals, much more clearly than the 
letter to Dr. Loening.' Vogt's position as the accomplice of those who were making 
strenuous efforts to localise the war in Italy. I have copied out a few passages from 
this letter for my own information, but unfortunately 1 cannot publish them 
because the man to whom the letter was addressed only showed them to me on 
condition that I would not publish them, Attempts have been made from personal and 
party considerations to cover up Vogt's part in this affair which in my view cannot be 
justified either from a party point of view or in terms of a man's duty to his country. This 
restraint on the part of many people explains why Vogt can still have the temerity to 
present himself as a German part) leader 77 appears to me, however, that the party to 
which Vogt belonged has by this means become in part responsible for his activities." * 
If then his action against the Allgemeine Zeitung was not risking 
all that much, an offensive in that direction provided General 
Vogt with the most favourable base of operations. It was Austria 
that was denigrating the Imperial Vogt through the Allgemeine 
Zeitung, and moreover, Austria in league with the communists! 
Thus the Imperial Vogt appeared as the interesting victim of a 
* See also p. 4 of the same pamphlet where it is stated: "This practice of 
'making allowances' from party considerations, the want of moral principle implied 
in admitting among themselves that Vogt has been playing a disgraceful game with 
his own country [...] and then permitting Vogt to sue people for slander when they 
have only asserted what all know and think and of which they know and even 
possess the proofs—all this I find quite nauseating, etc." 
a Carl Vogt, "Erklärung", Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 162 (special supple­
ment).  Vogt's statement was dated Geneva, June 10, 1859. He also included it in his 
Mein Prozess..., Dokumente, S. 20-25.— Ed. 
b "Warnung zur gefälligen Verbreitung", Das Volk, No. 7, June 18, 1859.— Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., Dokumente, S. 36.— Ed. 

=====第146页=====
122 Karl Marx 
monstrous coalition of the enemies of bourgeois liberalism. And 
the "Little Germany" press, which was already prejudiced in the 
Imperial Vogt's favour, as a diminisher of the Empire,116 would 
jubilantly bear him aloft on its shield! 
In the beginning of July 1859, shortly after my return from 
Manchester, Blind paid me a visit in consequence of an incident of 
no importance in this context. He was accompanied by Fidelio 
Hollinger and Liebknecht. During this meeting I gave it as my 
opinion that Blind was the author of the pamphlet Zur Warnung. 
He protested the opposite. I repeated what he had told me on 
May 9 a point by point, for in fact his assertions then constituted 
the entire contents of the pamphlet. He admitted all that but 
nevertheless insisted that he was not the author of the pamphlet. 
About a month later, in August 1859, Liebknecht showed me a 
letter he had received from the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung 
who urgently asked him for proof of the allegations made in the 
pamphlet Zur Warnung. At his request I agreed to go with him to 
Blind's home in St. John's Wood, for even if Blind was not the 
author, he at any rate had known as early as the beginning of May 
what the pamphlet did not reveal to the world until the beginning 
of June, and he could, moreover, "prove" what he knew. Blind 
was not there. He had gone to a seaside resort. Liebknecht, 
therefore, wrote to him explaining the purpose of our visit. No 
answer. Liebknecht wrote to him a second time. 117 Finally, the 
following statesman-like document arrived: 
"Dear Herr Liebknecht, 
"Your two letters, which had been wrongly addressed, arrived almost 
simultaneously. As you will understand I have absolutely no wish to meddle in the 
affairs of a newspaper with which I am quite unconnected. All the less in the given 
case,  since, as I have already  stated,  I had nothing whatever to do with the problem in 
question. As to the remarks you cite that were made in the course of a private 
conversation, it is obvious that these were completely misinterpreted. There is evidently a 
misunderstanding here which I shall discuss with you in due course. I am sorry 
that your visit to me with Marx was in vain and 
"I remain, respectfully yours, 
K. Blind 
"St. Leonard's, September 8" 
This cool diplomatic note according to which Blind had 
"nothing whatever to do" with the denunciation of Vogt, 
reminded me of an article which had appeared anonymously in 
a See this volume, p. 116.— Ed. 

=====第147页=====
Herr Vogt. —VII. The Augsburg Campaign 123 
The Free Press in London on May 27, 1859 and which went as 
follows 3: 
<é 
"The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary 
"A Correspondent, who encloses his card, writes as follows:— 
"Sir,— Having been present at the last meeting* in the Music Hall, I heard the 
statement made concerning the Grand Duke Constantine. I am able to give you 
another fact: So far back as last summer, Prince Jérôme-Napoléon detailed to some 
of his confidants at Geneva a plan of attack against Austria, and prospective 
rearrangement of the map of Europe. I know the name of a Swiss senator to whom 
he broached the subject. Prince Jérôme, at that time, declared that, according to 
the plan made, Grand Duke Constantine was to become King of Hungary. 
"I know further of attempts made, in the beginning of the present year, to min 
over to the Russo-Napoleonic scheme some of the exiled German Democrats, as well as 
some influential Liberals in Germany. Large pecuniary advantages were held out to them as 
a bribeP I am glad to say that these offers were rejected with indignation." (See 
Appendix 9.) 
This article—though it does not name Vogt but, as far as the 
German emigration in London was concerned, unmistakably 
points to him—does in effect contain the core of the pamphlet Zur 
Warnung that appeared later on. The author of the "future King of 
Hungary", whom patriotic zeal drove to make an anonymous 
denunciation of Vogt, had of course to grasp the golden 
opportunity that the Augsburg trial had thrown into his lap, the 
opportunity to reveal the treachery in a court of law in full view of 
the whole of Europe. And who was the author of the "future King 
of Hungary"? Citizen Karl  Blind.  The form and content of the 
article had already made that obvious to me in May and this was 
now officially confirmed by Mr. Collet, the editor of The Free Press, 
after I had explained to him the importance of the dispute that 
was pending and after I had shown him Blind's diplomatic note. 
On September 17, 1859, Herr A. Vögele, the compositor, gave 
me a written declaration (printed in the "Magnum Opus", 
Documents, Nos. 30, 31), in which he testifies not that Blind was 
the author of the pamphlet Zur Warnung, but that he (A. Vögele) 
and his employer, Fidelio Hollinger, had set the type for it in the 
Hollinger print-shop, that the manuscript was in Blind's hand and that 
Blind had occasionally been mentioned by Hollinger as the author of the 
pamphlet. 
* This was the meeting held by D. Urquhart on May 9, mentioned above. 
a In the German original the letter is given in Marx's translation. In the present 
edition the original English text is given, which Marx supplies in Appendix 9.— Ed. 
b Marx quotes this sentence in English in brackets after the German translation. 
The italics in this paragraph are Marx's.— Ed. 

=====第148页=====
124 Karl Marx 
Armed with Vögele's declaration and the "future King of 
Hungary", Liebknecht again wrote to Blind asking for "proofs" of 
the denunciations made by that statesman in The Free Press, 
pointing out at the same time that he had now a piece of evidence 
about his involvement in the publication of Zur Warnung. Instead 
of answering Liebknecht, Blind sent Mr. Collet to me. Mr. Collet 
was supposed to ask me in Blind's name to make no public use of 
my knowledge of the authorship of the said article in The Free 
Press. I replied that I could give no such assurance. My discretion 
would keep pace with Blind's courage. 
In the meantime, the date set down for the hearing of the case 
in Augsburg was drawing nearer. Blind remained silent. Vogt had 
attempted in various public announcements to make me as the 
secret source of it all responsible both for the pamphlet and the 
proof of the facts given in it. To ward off this manoeuvre, to 
vindicate Liebknecht and to defend the Allgemeine Zeitung, which 
in my view had performed a good deed in denouncing Vogt, I 
informed the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung via Liebknecht that 
I was prepared to let them have a document regarding the origin 
of the pamphlet Zur Warnung, if I received a written request from 
them. That is how the "lively  correspondence  came about which is at 
present carried on by Marx and Herr Kolb" as Herr Vogt states on 
p. 194 of the "Magnum Opus".* My "lively  correspondence  with Herr 
Kolb"  consisted in two letters from Herr Orges to me, both of the 
same date, in which he asked me for the document I had 
promised, which I then sent him together with a few lines from 
myself.** 
The two letters from Herr Orges, which were in reality just a 
double edition of the same letter, arrived in London on October 
18, 1859, while the court proceedings were due to begin in 
Augsburg on the 24th. I therefore wrote at once to Herr Vögele 
to arrange a meeting next day in the office at the Marlborough 
Street Police Court, where he should give his declaration about the 
pamphlet Zur Warnung the legal form of an affidavit.*** My letter 
* It is true that in No. 319 of the Allgemeine Zeitung, Herr Kolb mentions "a 
very detailed letter from Herr Marx which he has not  printed".  But this "detailed 
letter" has been printed in the Hamburg Reform, No. 139, supplement of November 19, 
1859. The "detailed letter" was a declaration from me intended for publication, and I 
sent it also to the Berlin Volks-Zeitung. [See this volume, pp. 4-7.] 
** My covering note [see this volume, p. 3] and Vögele's declaration can be found 
in the "Magnum Opus", Documents, pp. 30, 31. Herr Orges' letters to me are contained 
in Appendix 10. 
*** An affidavit is a statutory declaration given before a court, which, if false, is 
liable to all the penalties incurred by perjury. 

=====第149页=====
Herr Vogt. — VII.  The Augsburg Campaign 125 
did not reach him in time. Hence, on October 19,* against my 
original intention, I was compelled to send the above-mentioned 
written declaration of September 17 instead of the affidavit.** 
The court proceedings in Augsburg, as is well known, turned 
into a true comedy of errors. The corpus delicti was the pamphlet 
Zur Warnung sent by W. Liebknecht to the Allgemeine Zeitung and 
reprinted by it. The publisher and the author of the pamphlet, 
however, were involved in a game of blind-man's  buff.  Liebknecht 
could not compel his witnesses, who were in London, to appear 
before the court in Augsburg; the editors of the Allgemeine 
Zeitung, embarrassed by this legal impasse, spouted a lot of 
political gibberish; Dr. Hermann regaled the court with the tall 
stories of our "well-rounded character" about the Brimstone 
Gang, the Lausanne Festival, etc.; and the court finally dismissed 
Vogt's suit because the plaintiff had brought the case to the wrong 
court. The confusion reached its climax when the case in 
Augsburg had been concluded and the report on the proceedings 3 
reached London with the Allgemeine Zeitung.  Blind,  who had 
unswervingly preserved his statesman-like silence up to that 
moment, suddenly leaped into the public arena scared by the 
testimony of Vögele, the compositor, which had been produced by 
me. Vögele had not declared that Blind was the author of the 
pamphlet, but only that he had been referred to as such by Fidelio 
Hollinger. However, Vögele did declare categorically that the 
manuscript of the pamphlet had been written in Blind's  hand,  with which 
he was familiar, and that it had been set and printed in Hollinger's 
print-shop. Blind could be the author of the pamphlet even if it had 
neither been written down in Blind's handwriting, nor set up and 
printed in Hollinger's print-shop. Conversely, the pamphlet could 
have been written down by Blind and printed by Hollinger, even 
though Blind was not the author. 
In No. 313 of the Allgemeine Zeitung, beneath the date London, 
* Since I write illegibly my letter of October 19 was regarded by the 
Augsburg Court as dated October 29. Vogt's lawyer, Dr. Hermann, Vogt  himself, 
the dignified Berlin "National-Zeitung" et hoc genus omne [and that whole tribe] of 
"critical immediacy" did not doubt at all that a letter written in London on October 
29 could arrive in Augsburg by October 24. 
** That this quid pro quo was the result of pure chance — namely the belated 
arrival of my letter to Vögele —can be seen from his subsequent affidavit of February 
11, 1860. 
a The report in question, "Prozess Vogt gegen die Redaction der Allgemeinen 
Zeitung", was published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, Nos. 300 and 301, October 27 
and 28, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第150页=====
126 Karl Marx 
November 3 (see "Magnum Opus", Documents, pp. 37, 38), the 
citizen and statesman Blind declared that he was not the author of 
the pamphlet, and as proof he was "publishing" the "following 
document": 
"a) 1 hereby declare that the assertion of the compositor Vögele printed in the 
Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300, to the effect that the pamphlet Zur Warnung 
mentioned there was printed in my print-shop or that Herr Karl Blind was its author, 
is a malicious fabrication. 
"3 Litchfield Street, Soho, 
London, November 2, 1859 
Fidelio Hollinger" 
"b) The undersigned, who has lived and worked in No. 3 Litchfield Street for the 
past eleven months, for his part testifies to the  correctness  of Herr Hollinger's statement. 
"London, November 2, 1859 
J. F. Wiehe, Compositor" 
Vögele had nowhere asserted that Blind was the author of the 
pamphlet. Fidelio Hollinger therefore invents Vögele's assertion so 
as to be able to dismiss it as a "malicious fabrication". On the other 
hand, if the pamphlet was not printed in Hollinger's print-shop, 
how can the same Fidelio Hollinger be certain that Karl Blind was 
not its author? 
And how can the circumstance that the compositor Wiehe "has 
lived and worked for eleven months" (up to November 2, 1859) with 
Hollinger enable him to testify to the "correctness of Fidelio 
Hollinger's statement"} 
My reply3  to Blind's declaration (in No. 325 of the Allgemeine 
Zeitung, see "Magnum Opus", Documents, pp. 39, 40) concluded 
with the words: "The transfer of the trial from Augsburg to London 
would resolve the entire Blind-Vogt mystère." 
Blind,  with all the moral indignation of a beautiful soul cut to 
the quick, returned to the attack in the "supplement to the 
'Allgemeine Zeitung' of December 11, 1859": 
"Having repeatedly" (we must take note of this) "based my testimony on the 
documents signed by Herr Hollinger, the printer, and Herr Wiehe, compositor, I 
declare here for the last time that the allegation (which is latterly put forward 
merely as an insinuation) that I am the author of the pamphlet frequently referred 
to is a downright untruth. The other statements about me contain distortions of the 
crudest  sort.  " 
In a postscript to this declaration the editors of the Allgemeine 
Zeitung remarked that "this discussion is of no further interest to 
the general public" and they therefore request "the gentlemen 
a See this volume, pp. 8-9.— Ed. 

=====第151页=====
Herr Vogt. — VII.  The Augsburg Campaign 127 
concerned to abstain from further replies", a request which our 
"well-rounded character" interpreted as follows at the end of the 
"Magnum Opus": 
"In other words, the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung request Messrs. Marx, 
Biscamp* and Liebknecht, who stand revealed as barefaced liars, not to compromise 
themselves and the Allgemeine Zeitung any further." 
Thus,  for the time being, the Augsburg campaign came to an 
end. 
Reverting to the tone of his Lousiad, Vogt made "Vögele the 
compositor" bear "false witness" to me and Liebknecht ("Magnum 
Opus",  p. 195). He explained the origins of the pamphlet by 
suggesting that Blind 
"may well have conceived various suspicions and have spread them abroad. The 
Brimstone Gang then used them to fabricate a pamphlet and other articles which they then 
attributed to Blind who found himself driven into a corner" (loc. cit., p. 218). 
And if the Imperial Vogt failed to resume his indecisive 
campaign in London, as he had been challenged to do, this was 
partly because London was "a backwater" ("Magnum Opus", 
p. 229), but partly because the disputants "were accusing each other 
of lying" (loc. cit.). 
The man's "critical immediacy" can only approve of the 
intervention of the courts if the parties are not disputing about the 
truth. 
I now pass over three months and resume the thread of my 
story in the beginning of February 1860. Vogt's "Magnum Opus" 
had not yet reached London, but we had received the anthology of 
the Berlin National-Zeitung, which contained the following 
statement: 
"It was very easy for the Marx party to lay the authorship of the pamphlet at 
Blind's door, just because the latter had previously uttered similar views in 
* In a letter dated October 20 from London, Biscamp had written to the editors 
of the Allgemeine Zeitung in connection with the Vogt affair, ending up by offering 
his services as news correspondent. 3 I knew nothing of this letter until I saw it in 
the Allgemeine Zeitung. Vogt has invented a moral doctrine according to which my 
support of a newspaper which has since folded up makes me responsible for the 
subsequent private letters written by its editor. How much more responsible would 
this make Vogt for Kolatschek's Stimmen der Zeit since he was a paid contributor to 
Kolatschek's Monatsschrift. When Biscamp was editing Das Volk, he made the 
greatest sacrifices. He gave up a job he had had for many years in order to take on 
the editorship; he edited the paper gratis in very trying circumstances and finally 
he jeopardised his position as news correspondent for German papers, such as the 
Kölnische Zeitung, so that he could work in accordance with his convictions. 
Everything else did not and does not concern me. 
a The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300 (supplement), October 27, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第152页=====
128 Karl Marx 
conversation with Marx and in the article in The Free Press. By using Blind's 
statements and turns of phrase the pamphlet could be fabricated so that it looked 
like his work." 
Blind,  like Falstaff who thought discretion the better part of 
valour,3 esteemed silence as the whole art of diplomacy, and so he 
began to be silent once again. To loosen his tongue I published a 
circular in English over my signature and dated London, February 
4, 1860. (See Appendix 11.) 
The circular, addressed to the editor of The Free Press, stated 
inter alia: 
"Now, before taking any further step, I want to show up the 
fellows who evidently have played into the hands of Vogt. I, 
therefore, publicly declare that the statement of Blind, Wiehe and 
Hollinger, according to which the anonymous pamphlet was not 
printed in Hollinger's office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, is an 
infamous  lie.  " * 
Having presented the evidence in my possession I end with the 
words: 
"Consequently, I again declare the above said Charles Blind to 
be an infamous liar (deliberate liar). If I am wrong, he may easily 
confound me by appealing to an English Court of Law."b 
On February 6, 1860 a London daily (the Daily Telegraph) — 
to which I shall return in due course—reproduced the anthology 
of the National-Zeitung, under the title "The Journalistic Auxiliaries 
of Austria".' However, I initiated an action for libel against the 
National-Zeitung, gave the Daily Telegraph notice of similar 
proceedings0 and set about assembling the necessary legal 
material. 
On February 11, 1860 the compositor Vögele swore an affidavit 
before the Police Court in Bow Street. He repeated the essential 
contents of his declaration of September 17, 1859, namely that the 
manuscript of the pamphlet was in Blind's handwriting and that 
* In the English original I said "a deliberate lie". The Kölnische Zeitung translated 
this as "infame Lüge" (infamous lie). I accept this translation, even though 
"durchtriebene Lüge" would be closer to the original. 
a Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act V, Scene  4.—  Ed. 
b Marx's circular (letter to the editor of The Free Press dated February 4, 1860, 
see this volume, p. 11) was written in English. The original text is reproduced here 
and in Appendix 11. The last sentence does not occur in the latter.— Ed. 
c Marx gives the title in English and supplies the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp.  14-15.—  Ed. 

=====第153页=====
Herr Vogt. —VII. The Augsburg Campaign 129 
it had been composed in Hollinger's print-shop, partly by him 
(Vögele) and partly by F. Hollinger. (See Appendix 12.) 
Incomparably more important was the affidavit taken out by the 
compositor Wiehe, whose testimony Blind had repeatedly, and 
with growing self-confidence, quoted in the Allgemeine Zeitung. 
Apart from the original (see Appendix 13) I am therefore 
giving here a word-for-word translation3: 
"One of the first days of November last—I do not recollect the exact date—in 
the evening between nine and ten o'clock I was taken out of bed by Mr. 
F. Hollinger, in whose house I then lived, and by whom I was employed as 
compositor. He presented to me a paper to the effect, that, during the preceding 
eleven months I had been continuously employed by him, and that during all that 
time a certain German flysheet 'Zur Warnung' (A Warning) had not been composed 
and printed in Mr. Hollinger's Office, 3, LitchfieH Street, Soho. In my perplexed 
state,  and not aware of the importance of the transaction, I complied with his wish, 
and copied, and signed the document. Mr. Hollinger promised me money, but I 
never received anything. During that transaction Mr. Charles  Blind,  as my wife 
informed me at the time, was waiting in Mr. Hollinger's room. A few days later, Mrs. 
Hollinger called me down from dinner and led me into her husband's room, where 
I found Mr. Blind alone. He presented me the same paper which Mr. Hollinger had 
presented me before, and entreated me h to write, and sign a second copy, as he wanted 
two, the one for  himself,  and the other for publication in the Press. He added that he would 
show himself grateful to me. I copied and signed again the paper. 
"I herewith declare the truth of the above statements and that: 
"1) During the eleven months mentioned in the document I was for six weeks 
not employed by Mr. Hollinger, but by a Mr. Ermani. 
"2) I did not work in Mr. Hollinger's Office just at that time when the flysheet 'Zur 
Warnung' was published. 
"3) I heard at the time from Mr. Vögele, who then worked for Mr. Hollinger, 
that he, Vögele, had, together with Mr. Hollinger  himself,  composed the flysheet in 
question, and that the manuscript was in Blind's handwriting. 
"4) The types of the pamphlet were still standing when I returned to Mr. 
Hollinger's service. J myself  broke  them into columns for the reprint of the flysheet (or 
pamphlet) 'Zur Warnung' in the German paper Das Volk published by Mr. Hollinger, 
3, Litchfield Street, Soho. The flysheet appeared in No. 7, d.d. 18th June 1859, of Das 
Volk. 
"5) I saw Mr. Hollinger give to Mr. William Liebknecht of 14, Church Street, 
Soho,  the proofsheet of the pamphlet 'Zur Warnung', on which proofsheet Mr. 
Charles Blind with his own hand had corrected four or five mistakes. Mr. Hollinger 
hesitated at first giving the proofsheet to Mr. Liebknecht, and when Mr. Liebknecht 
had withdrawn, he, Hollinger, expressed to me and my fellow workman Vögele his 
regret for having given the proofsheet out of his hands. 
Johann Friedrich Wiehe 
a The original English text is given in Appendix 13. The various types of emphasis 
were introduced by Marx.— Ed. 
b In his translation Marx gives the English words "entreated me" in brackets after 
the German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第154页=====
130 Karl Marx 
"Declared and signed by the said Friedrich Wiehe at the Police Court, Bow 
Street, this 8th day of February, 1860, before me, 
Th. Henry, Magistrate of the said court" (Police Court) 
(Bow Street) 
The two affidavits of the compositors Vögele and Wiehe proved 
that the manuscript of the pamphlet had been written in Blind's  hand, 
composed in Hollinger's print-shop and that Blind himself had  corrected 
the proofs. 
And the homme d'état wrote to Julius Fröbel from London on 
July 4, 1859: 
"A violent attack on Vogt has appeared here, accusing him of corruption. J do 
not know who is  responsible  for it. It contains a number of allegations of which we had 
not previously  heard." a 
And the same homme d'état wrote to Liebknecht on September 8, 
1859,  saying that 
"he had nothing whatever to do with the problem in question". 
Not content with these achievements citizen and statesman Blind 
had fabricated a false declaration and contrived to induce the 
compositor Wiehe to sign it by promises of money from Fidelio 
Hollinger and proofs of his own gratitude in the future. 
This,  his own fabrication with a signature obtained by false 
pretences and together with Fidelio Hollinger's false testimony, he 
not only sent to the Allgemeine Zeitung, but in his second 
declaration he even "refers" "repeatedly" to these "documents", and 
hurls the reproach of "downright untruth" at my head with every 
sign of moral indignation. 
I had copies made of the two affidavits of Vögele and Wiehe 
and circulated them in different circles, whereupon a meeting 
took place at Blind's house attended by  Blind,  Fidelio Hollinger, 
and Blind's house-friend Herr Karl Schaible, M.D., a quiet decent 
fellow who plays the role of tame elephant in Blind's political 
operations. 
In the Daily Telegraph of February 15, 1860 there appeared an 
item that was later reprinted in German newspapers and which 
went as follows: 
"The Vogt-Pamphlet 
"To the Editor of The Daily Telegraph 
"Sir, 
"In.consequence of erroneous statements which have been current, I feel I owe 
it to Mr. Blind, as well as to Mr. Marx, formally to declare that neither of them is 
a Marx probably quotes this letter from the National-Zeitung, No. 41, July 4, 
1859.—  Ed. 

=====第155页=====
Herr Vogt. —VII. The Augsburg Campaign 131 
the author of the pamphlet directed some time ago against Professor Vogt, at 
Geneva. That pamphlet originates from me; and on me the responsibility rests. I 
am sorry both with regard to Mr. Marx and Mr. Blind, that circumstances beyond 
my control should have prevented me from making this declaration earlier. 
"London, 14 February, 1860 
Charles Schaihle, M.D." 
Herr Schaible sent me this declaration." I reciprocated his 
politeness by return of post by sending the affidavits of the 
compositors Vögele and Wiehe and wrote that his (Schaible's) 
declaration made no difference either to the false statements that 
Blind had sent to the Allgemeine Zeitung, or to Blind's  conspiracy* 3 
with Hollinger to obtain Wiehe's signature for the false document he 
had fabricated. 
Blind perceived that he was no longer on the firm territory of 
the Allgemeine Zeitung, but under the perilous jurisdiction of 
England. If he wanted to invalidate the affidavits and the "grave 
insults" of my circular based on them, he and Hollinger would 
have to swear counter-affidavits; but felony is no joke. 
Eisele-Blind118  is not the author of the pamphlet, because 
Beisele-Schaibele publicly declares himself its author. Blind has 
only written the manuscript of the pamphlet; he has only had it 
printed by Hollinger, corrected the proofs in his own hand, 
fabricated false statements together with Hollinger in order to refute 
these facts and sent them to the Allgemeine Zeitung. But he is 
nevertheless a wronged innocent, because he was not the author or 
originator of the pamphlet. He acted only as Beisele-Schaibele's 
secretary. It is just for this reason that on July 4, 1859 he did not 
know "who" had brought the pamphlet into the world and on 
September 8, 1859 he had "nothing whatever to do with the problem in 
question". It may therefore reassure him that Beisele-Schaible is the 
author of the pamphlet in the literary sense of the word, but 
Eisele-Blind is its author in the technical sense of the English law, 
and the responsible publisher in the sense of all civilised legislation. 
Habeat sibi! c 
A final word of farewell to Herr Beisele-Schaible. 
The lampoon published by Vogt against me in the Biel 
Handels-Courier, dated Berne, May 23, 1859, bore the title Zur 
Warnung. The pamphlet composed by Schaible and written out 
a On this see Marx's letters to Engels of February 15, 1860 and to Legal Counsellor 
Weber of February 24, 1860 (present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
c So be it! Genesis  38:23.—  Ed. 

=====第156页=====
132 Karl Marx 
and published by his secretary Blind in the beginning of June 
1859,  in which Vogt was arraigned as an agent of Louis 
Bonaparte, and accused in some detail of both "giving" and 
"taking bribes", also bears the title Zur Warnung, Furthermore, it 
is signed X. Although in algebra X represents an unknown 
quantity, it also happens to be the last letter of my name. Were the 
title and the signature on the pamphlet an attempt to make 
Schaible's "warning" look like my reply to Vogt's "warning"? 
Schaible had promised a Revelation No. 2 as soon as Vogt 
ventured to deny Revelation No. 1. Vogt not only issued a denial; 
he instituted an action for libel in reply to Schaible's "warning". 
And Herr Schaible's Revelation No. 2 has not appeared to this 
day. At the head of his pamphlet Schaible had printed the words: 
"For distribution!" And when Liebknecht was obliging enough to 
"distribute" it through the Allgemeine Zeitung, "circumstances 
beyond his control" sealed Herr Schaible's lips from June 1859 to 
February 1860. when they were unsealed again by the affidavits 
taken out in the Police Court in Bow Street. 
However that may be, Schaible, the original denouncer of Vogt, 
has now publicly accepted responsibility for the information given 
in the pamphlet. Hence the Augsburg campaign ends not with the 
victory of the defendant Vogt, but with the appearance on the 
battlefield at long last of the accuser Schaible. 

=====第157页=====
133 
VIII 
DÂ-DÂ VOGT AND HIS STUDIES 
"SINE STUDIO"119 
About a month before the outbreak of the Italian war, Vogt 
published his so-called Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, 
Geneva, 1859. Cui bono?* 
Vogt knew that 
"in the approaching war England would remain neutral" (Studien, p. 4). 
He knew that Russia, 
"in agreement with France, would do everything in its power to injure Austria, 
short of actual hostilities" (Studien, p. 13). b 
He knew that Prussia—but let him say for himself what he 
knows about Prussia. 
"Even the most short-sighted will have realised by now that there is an 
understanding between the Prussian Government and the Imperial Government of France: 
that Prussia will not take up arms to defend Austria's non-German provinces; that 
it will give its approval to all measures necessitated by the defence of the territory 
of the Confederation; but apart from this it will prevent any attempt by the 
Confederation or any of its members to intervene in support of Austria, and in the 
subsequent peace negotiations it will expect to be rewarded in the northern plains of 
Germany for these pains" (loc. cit., pp. [18-]19). 
To sum up: In Bonaparte's imminent crusade against Austria, 
England will remain neutral, Russia will adopt a hostile stance 
towards Austria, Prussia will restrain the bellicose members of the 
Confederation, and Europe will localise the war. As with the 
Russian war earlier on, Louis Bonaparte will now conduct the 
Italian war with the permission of the supreme authorities, he will 
a Who benefits?—Ed. 
b The quotation actually begins with the words "would do everything".— Ed. 

=====第158页=====
134 Karl Marx 
act, as it were, as the secret general of a European coalition. What 
then is the purpose of Vogt's pamphlet? Since Vogt knows that 
England, Russia and Prussia are acting against Austria, what 
compels him to write for Bonaparte? But it appears that, quite 
apart from the old Francophobes with "the now childish Father 
Arndt and the ghost of the wretched Jahn at their head" (loc. cit., 
p. 121), a sort of national movement was convulsing "the German 
people" and was echoed in all kinds of "Chambers and 
newspapers" "while the governments only joined the dominant 
current hesitatingly and with reluctance" (loc. cit., p. 114). It 
appears that the "belief in an imminent threat" moved the 
German "people" to issue a "call for common measures" (loc. cit.). 
The French Moniteur (see inter alia the issue of March 15, 1859) 
looked on at this German movement with "astonishment and 
regret". 3 
"A sort of crusade against France," it declares, "is preached in the Chambers 
and in the press of some of the states of the German Confederation. They accuse 
France of entertaining ambitious plans, which it has disavowed, and of preparing 
for conquests of which it does not stand in need", etc. 
In rebuttal of these "slanders" the Moniteur argues that "the 
Emperor's" attitude towards the Italian question should "rather 
inspire the greatest sense of security in Germany", that German 
unity and nationhood are, so to speak, the hobby-horses of 
Decembrist France, etc. The Moniteur concedes, however (see 
April 10, 1859), that certain German anxieties may appear to have 
been "provoked" by certain Parisian pamphlets—pamphlets in 
which Louis Bonaparte urgently exhorts himself to provide his 
people with the "long-desired opportunity" "pour s'étendre majes­
tueusement des Alpes au Rhin" (to extend its frontiers majestically 
from the Alps to the Rhine). 
"But," the Moniteur asserts, "Germany forgets that France stands under the 
protection of a legislation which does not authorise any preventive control on the 
part of the government." h 
This and similar declarations by the Moniteur produced the very 
opposite effect to the one intended, or so it was reported to the 
Karl of Malmesbury (see the Blue Book On the Affairs of Italy. 
January to May 1859 e). But where the Moniteur failed, Karl Vogt 
might perhaps succeed. His Studien are nothing but a compilation 
a "Partie nor ( officielle. Paris, le 14 mars", Le Moniteur universel, No. 74, March 
15, I85Q.—UV/. 
>' Le Moniteur universel, No. 100, April 10, 1859.— Ed. 
Cowley to Malmesbury, April 10 1859 (extract). Here and below Marx uses 
the English title of the Blue Book.—- Ed. 

=====第159页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 135 
in German of Moniteur articles, Dentu pamphlets 120 and Decem­
brist maps of the future. 
Vogt's tub-thumping about England has only one point of 
interest—as an illustration of the general style of his Studien. 
Following his French sources he transforms the English Admiral, 
Sir Charles Napier, into  "Lord"  Napier (Studien, p. 4). The literary 
Zouaves attached to the Decembrists have learnt from the theatre 
of Porte St. Martin 121 that every distinguished Englishman is a 
Lord at the very least. 
"England has never been able," Vogt declares, "to harmonise with Austria for 
long. Even though a momentary community of interests may have united them for a 
while, political necessity always separated them again immediately. On the other 
hand, England constantly formed close alliances with Prussia", etc. (loc. cit., p. 2.) a 
Indeed! The common struggle of England and Austria against 
Louis XIV lasted with brief interruptions from 1689 to 1713, i.e. 
almost a quarter of a century. In the war of the Austrian 
Succession England fought for about six years together with 
Austria against Prussia and France. It was not until the Seven 
Years'  War122 that England became the ally of Prussia against 
Austria and France, but as early as 1762 Lord Bute left Frederick 
the Great in the lurch and put forward proposals for the 
"partition of Prussia" first to the Russian minister Golitsin and 
then to the Austrian minister Kaunitz. In 1790 England concluded 
a treaty with Prussia against Russia and Austria, but it faded away 
before the year was out. During the Anti-Jacobin War Prussia 
withdrew from the European Coalition with the Treaty of Basle,123 
despite Pitt's subsidies. Austria, on the other hand, urged on by 
England, fought on with brief interruptions from 1793 to 1809. 
As soon as Napoleon was eliminated and even before the 
conclusion of the Congress of Vienna, England concluded a secret 
treaty (of January 3, 1815) with Austria and France against Russia 
and Prussia.124 In 1821, in Hanover, Metternich and Castlereagh 
made a new agreement against Russia.125 Thus whereas the British 
themselves, both historians and parliamentarians, mostly refer to 
Austria as their "ancient ally",b  Vogt has discovered from his 
original source, French pamphlets published by Dentu, that Austria 
and England were always at loggerheads apart from cases of a 
a In this passage the italics are Marx's. The punctuation is slightly altered.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
6-1305 

=====第160页=====
136 Karl Marx 
"momentary community of interests", while England and Prussia 
were constant allies, which probably explains why Lord Lyndhurst 
warned the House of Lords during the Russian war with Prussia 
in mind: "Quern tu, Romane, caveto! ,,a Protestant England has 
antipathies towards Catholic Austria, liberal England towards 
conservative Austria, free-trade England towards protectionist 
Austria, solvent England towards bankrupt Austria. But emotional 
factors have always been alien to English history. It is true that 
Lord Palmerston, during his thirty years' rule of England, 
occasionally glossed over his vassalage to Russia by parading his 
Austrian antipathies. From "antipathy" to Austria, for example, 
he rejected in 1848 Austria's proposal, approved by Piedmont and 
France, for England to mediate in Italy, a proposal according to 
which Austria would have withdrawn to Verona and the line of 
the Adige, Lombardy would have become part of Piedmont, if it 
so decided, Parma and Modena would have fallen to Lombardy, 
while Venice would have formed an independent Italian state 
under an Austrian Archduke and given itself a constitution. (See 
Blue Book on the Affairs of Italy, Part II, July 1849, Nos. 377, 478.) 
These conditions were at any rate better than those of the Treaty 
of Villafranca. 126 After Radetzky had defeated the Italians at all 
points, Palmerston put forward the same terms that he himself 
had earlier rejected. As soon as Russia's interests required the 
opposite approach, however, such as during the Hungarian war of 
independence, he refused the assistance for which the Hungarians 
asked on the basis of the treaty of 1711 127—despite his 
"antipathy" to Austria—and even refused to make any protest 
against Russian intervention on the grounds that 
"the political independence and liberties of Europe are bound up with the 
maintenance and integrity of Austria as a great European Power" (sitting of the 
House of Commons, July 21, 1849).b 
Vogt's story continues: 
"The interests of the United Kingdom ... are everywhere in opposition to them" 
(to the interests of Austria) (loc. cit., p. 2). 
"Everywhere" is at once transformed into the Mediterranean. 
"England wishes at all costs to preserve its influence in the Mediterranean and 
the countries along its coastline. Naples and Sicily, Malta and the Ionian Islands, 
Syria and Egypt are points of support of its policy oriented towards the East Indies. 
At all these points, Austria has set up the greatest obstacles to it" (loc. cit.). 
a "Be on your guard against him, Romans!" (Horace, Satires, Book I, Satire 
4, paraphrased.)—Ed. 
b The Times, No. 20235, July 23, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第161页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 137 
It is amazing to see how much Vogt takes on trust from the 
original Decembrist pamphlets published by Den tu in Paris! The 
English had imagined hitherto that they had been fighting the 
Russians and the French in turn for Malta and the Ionian Islands, 
but never the Austrians. They imagined that France, not Austria, 
had earlier sent an expedition to Egypt and was establishing itself 
at this very moment in the isthmus of Suez; that France, not 
Austria, had made conquests on the North coast of Africa and, 
allied with Spain, had striven to snatch Gibraltar from Britain; that 
England had concluded the treaty of July 1840 referring to Egypt 
and Syria against France and with Austria 128; that in "the policy 
oriented towards the East Indies" England had everywhere encoun­
tered the "greatest obstacles" set up by Russia, not Austria. They 
imagined that in the only serious dispute between England and 
Naples—the sulphur question of 1840—it was a French, not an 
Austrian, company whose monopoly of the Sicilian sulphur trade 
triggered off the conflict.129  And lastly, that on the other side of 
the Channel, there was occasional talk of transforming the 
Mediterranean into a "lac français", but never into a "lac 
autrichien" . However, an important particular has to be consid­
ered in this context. 
In the course of 1858 a map of Europe appeared in London 
entitled L'Europe en 1860 (Europe in I860). 3 This map, which was 
put out by the French Embassy and for 1858 contained several 
prophetic hints—Lombardy-Venice, for example, were annexed 
by Piedmont, and Morocco by Spain—redrew the political 
geography of the whole of Europe with one exception, that of 
France, which apparently remained within its old frontiers. The 
territories designed for it were, with sly irony, donated to 
impossible owners. Thus Egypt fell to Austria and the note in the 
margin of the map read: "François Joseph I, l'Empereur 
d'Autriche et d'Egypte" (Francis Joseph I, Emperor of Austria and 
Egypt). 
Vogt had the map of L'Europe en 1860 before him as a sort of 
Decembrist compass. Hence his dispute between England and 
Austria on account of Egypt and Syria. Vogt prophesies that this 
conflict would "end in the destruction of one of the disputants", 
if, as he remembers just in time, "if Austria  possessed  a navy" (loc. 
cit., p. 2). However, the historical scholarship peculiar to the 
Studien reaches its climax in the following passage: 
a A description of the map was published in The Times, Nos. 23228 and 23229, 
February 12 and 14, 1859.— Ed. 
6* 

=====第162页=====
138 Karl Marx 
"When Napoleon I once attempted to break the English Bank, the latter one day* 
resorted to counting the sums, instead of weighing them out, as it had always done 
previously; the Austrian Treasury finds itself in the same position, or even in a 
much worse one, for 365 days every year" (loc. cit., p. 43). 
It is well known that the Bank of England ("the English Bank" 
is another figment of Vogt's imagination) suspended payments in 
cash from February 1797 until  1821,130  during which 24 years 
English banknotes could not be exchanged for metal at all, 
whether weighed or counted. When the suspension first began 
there was as yet no Napoleon I in France (although a General 
Bonaparte was engaged on his first Italian campaign), and when 
cash payments were resumed in Threadneedle Street, Napoleon I 
had ceased to exist in Europe. Such "studies" even surpass La 
Guéronnière's account of the conquest of Tyrol by the "Emperor" 
of Austria. 
Frau von Krüdener, the mother of the Holy Alliance, used to 
distinguish between the good principle, the "white angel of the 
North"  (Alexander I), and the evil principle, the "black angel of the 
South"  (Napoleon I). b Vogt, the adoptive father of the new Holy 
Alliance, transforms both, Tsar and Caesar, Alexander II and 
Napoleon III, into "white angels". Both are the predestined 
liberators of Europe. 
Piedmont, Vogt claims, "has even gained the respect of Russia" 
(loc. cit., p. 71). c 
What more can be said of a state than that it has even gained the 
respect of Russia. Especially after Piedmont had ceded the naval 
port of Villafranca to Russia, and as the selfsame Vogt points out 
in regard to the purchase of the Jade Bay by Prussia 131: 
"A naval port on alien territory, without organic connections to the land to 
which it belongs, is such ridiculous nonsense that its existence can only acquire 
meaning if it is, as it were, regarded as a target of future aspirations, as a raised 
pennant on which to train one's sights" (Studien, p. 15). 
It is common knowledge that Catherine II had already striven to 
obtain naval ports on the Mediterranean for Russia. 
Tender consideration towards the "white angel" of the North 
leads Vogt into crude exaggerations which violate "the modesty of 
a The italics are Marx's except for the words "one day"; the punctuation is slightly 
altered.— Ed. 
b See J. Turquan, Une illuminée au  XIX e siècle  (la baronne de Krüdener), 1766-1824, 
Paris,  p. 194.— Ed. 
c Marx's italics and bold type.— Ed. 

=====第163页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 139 
nature", insofar as this was still respected by his original source in 
Dentu. In La vraie question. France-Italie-Autriche, Paris, 1859 
(published by Dentu) he read on p. 20: 
"And besides, with what right could the Austrian Government invoke the 
inviolability of the treaties of 1815, when it has itself broken them with the 
confiscation of Cracow whose independence the treaties guaranteed?" * 
He translates his French original in this way: 
"It is strange to hear such language from the mouth of the only government3 
which up to now has insolently violated the treaties [...] by raising its sacrilegious hand, 
without cause, in the midst of peace, against the Republic of Cracow, which had been 
guaranteed by the treaties, and incorporating it without more ado into the Empire" 
(loc. cit., p. 58). 
It was of course out of "respect" for the treaties of 1815 that 
Nicholas destroyed the Constitution and autonomy of the King­
dom of Poland, which were guaranteed by the treaties of 1815. 
Russia had no less respect for the integrity of Cracow when it 
occupied the free city with Muscovite troops in 1831. In 1836 
Cracow was again occupied by the Russians, Austrians and 
Prussians; it was treated like a conquered nation in every respect 
and as late as 1840 it vainly appealed to England and France, 
invoking the treaties of 1815. Finally, on February 22, 1846, 
Russians, Austrians and Prussians again occupied Cracow, to 
incorporate it into Austria.132  Thus all three Northern powers 
violated the treaties and the Austrian confiscation of 1846 was 
only the sequel to the Russian invasion of 1831. Out of courtesy 
towards the "white angel of the North" Vogt forgets the 
confiscation of Poland and falsifies the history of the confiscation 
of Cracow.** 
The circumstance that Russia is "consistently hostile to Austria 
and sympathetic to France'.' leaves Vogt in no doubt about Louis 
Bonaparte's inclination to liberate all nations, just as the fact that 
"his"  (Louis Bonaparte's) "policies- are today in the closest agree­
ment with those of Russia" (p. 30) raises no doubts in his mind 
about Alexander IFs inclination to liberate all nations. 
* "De quel droit, d'ailleurs, le gouvernement autrichien viendrait-il invoquer 
l'inviolabilité de ceux (traités) de 1815, lui qui les a violés en confisquant Cracovie, 
dont ces traités garantissaient l'indépendance?" 
** Palmerston, who fooled Europe with his ridiculous protest, had worked 
unceasingly in the intrigue against Cracow ever since 1831. (See my pamphlet 
Palmerston and  Poland,  London, 1853.) [See present edition, Vol. 12.] 
a The words "only government" were italicised by Vogt. The other italics in this 
passage are Marx's.— Ed. 

=====第164页=====
140 Karl Marx 
Hence in the East Holy Russia must be regarded as the "friend 
of aspirations to freedom" and of "popular and national 
development", just like Decembrist France in the West. This 
slogan was given out for all the agents of December 2. 
"Russia," Vogt found in La foi des traités, les puissances signataires et l'empereur 
Napoléon III, Paris, 1859, a work published by Dentu, "Russia belongs to the family 
of the Slavs, a chosen race.... Astonishment has been expressed at the chivalrous 
concord that has suddenly sprung up between France and Russia. Nothing could 
be more natural: agreement ov principles, unanimity of  purpose,  submission to the law 
of the holy alliance of the governments and  peoples,  not to set traps and constrain others, 
but to guide and support the divine movements of the nations. From this perfect 
concord" (between Louis Philippe and England there was only an entente cordiale, 
but between Louis Bonaparte and Russia there is la cordialité la plus parfaite) "the 
most happy things have resulted: railways, emancipation of the serfs, trading posts in 
the Mediterranean, etc."* 
Vogt immediately latches on to the "emancipation of the serfs" 
and suggests that 
"the present impulse ... may well make Russia the ally of aspirations to freedom, 
rather than their enemy" (loc. cit., p. 10). 
Like his Dentu original, he attributes the impulse for the 
so-called emancipation of the serfs in Russia to Louis Bonaparte 
and for this purpose he transforms the Anglo-Turkish-French-
Russian war, which provided the impulse, into a "French war" (loc. 
cit., p. 9). 
It is well known that the call to emancipate the serfs first rang 
out, loud and persistently, under Alexander I. Tsar Nicholas was 
occupied with emancipation of the serfs throughout his life; in 
1838 he created a Ministry of Domains for this very purpose; in 
1843 he instructed this Ministry to make the necessary prepara­
tions and in 1847 he even issued decrees favourable to the 
peasantry about the disposal of land belonging to the nobilitym 
which he only reversed in 1848 from fear of the revolution. 
Hence, if the emancipation of the serfs has assumed more substantial 
dimensions under the "benevolent Tsar", as Vogt genially calls 
Alexander II, this would appear to be the result of economic 
developments which even a Tsar cannot subdue. Besides, the 
emancipation of the serfs as the Russian Government sees it, would 
* "La Russie est de la famille des Slaves, race d'élite... On  s'est  étonné de 
l'accord chevaleresque survenu soudainement entre la France et la Russie. Rien de 
plus naturel: accord des principes, unanimité du but ... soumission à la loi de 
l'alliance sainte des gouvernements et des peuples, non pour leurrer et contraindre, mais 
pour guider et aider la marche divine des nations. De la cordialité la plus parfaite 
sont sortis les plus heureux effets: chemins de fer, affranchissement des  serfs,  stations 
commerciales dans la Méditerranée, etc." La foi des traités, etc., Paris, 1859, p. 33. 

=====第165页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 141 
increase the aggressive power of Russia a hundredfold. It is simply 
intended to perfect autocratic rule by tearing down the barriers 
which the big autocrat has hitherto encountered in the shape of 
the many lesser autocrats of the Russian nobility, whose might is 
based on serfdom, as well as in the shape of the  self-
administrating peasant communes, whose material foundation, 
common ownership of land, is to be destroyed by the so-called 
emancipation. 
The Russian serfs happen to interpret the emancipation 
differently from the government, and the Russian nobility 
understands it in yet a third sense. Hence the "benevolent Tsar" 
discovered that a genuine emancipation of the serfs is incompati­
ble with his own autocratic rule, just as the benevolent Pope Pius 
IX discovered in his day that the emancipation of Italy was 
incompatible with the existence of the Papacy. The "benevolent 
Tsar", therefore, regards wars of conquest and the traditional 
foreign policy of Russia, which, as the Russian historian Karamzin 
remarks, is "immutable",3  as the only way to postpone the 
revolution within. In his work La vérité sur la Russie, 1860, Prince 
Dolgorukov has subjected to devastating criticism the tissue of lies 
about the millennium that is supposed to have dawned under 
Alexander II, myths zealously disseminated throughout Europe 
since 1856 by writers in the pay of Russia, loudly proclaimed in 
1859 by the Decembrists and blindly repeated by Vogt in his 
Studien. 
According to Vogt, even before the outbreak of the Italian war 
the alliance forged between the "white Tsar" and the "Man of 
December" for the express purpose of liberating the subject 
nationalities, had shown its worth in the Danubian principalities, 
where the unity and independence of the Romanian nation were 
confirmed by the election of Colonel Cuza as ruler of Moldavia 
and Wallachia. 134 
"Austria protested with might and main, France and Russia applauded" (loc. cit., 
p. 65). 
In a memorandum135  (printed in the Preussisches Wochenblatt, 
1855) drawn up in 1837 for the Tsar of the time b by the Russian 
Cabinet, we can read: 
"Russia prefers not to annex immediately states with alien elements.... In any 
event it seems more fitting to allow countries whose acquisition has been resolved 
a H. M. KapaM3HHt, Hcmopin rocydapcmea  Pocciücnaeo,  T. XI, Cn6., 1824, crp. 23 
(N. M. Karamzin, The History of the Russian State, Vol. XI, St. Petersburg, 1824, 
p. 23).—  Ed. 
b Nicholas I.— Ed. 

=====第166页=====
142 Karl Marx 
upon to exist for a time under separate, but entirely dependent leaders, as we have 
done in Moldavia and Wallachia, etc."3 
Before Russia annexed the Crimea it proclaimed its independence. 
In a Russian proclamation of December 11, 1814, it is stated 
inter alia: 
"The Emperor Alexander, your protector, appeals to you, Poles: Arm 
yourselves for the defence of your country and the maintenance of your political 
independence." b 
And above all the Danubian principalities! Ever since Peter the 
Great's invasion of the Danubian principalities, Russia has 
laboured in the cause of their "independence". At the Congress of 
Niemirov (1737) the Empress Anne demanded that the Sultan 
should concede the independence of the Danubian principalities 
under Russian protection. At the Congress of Foc§ani (1772) 
Catherine II insisted on the independence of the principalities 
under European  protection.™ 6 Alexander I continued these efforts 
and put the seal on them by transforming Bessarabia into a 
Russian province (by the Peace of Bucharest, 1812m ). Nicholas 
even gladdened the hearts of the Romanians through Kiselev by 
bestowing on them the Reglement organique, which established the 
most hideous form of serfdom while the whole of Europe 
applauded him for this code of liberty, which is still in force. 138 By 
his quasi-unification of the Danubian principalities under Cuza, 
Alexander II only went one step further in the century-and-a-
half's policy of his forbears. Vogt now discovers that this 
unification under a Russian vassal means that "the principalities 
will constitute a dam blocking the advance of Russia towards the 
South" (loc. cit., p. 64). 
Since Russia has been applauding the election of Cuza (loc. cit., 
p. 65) it is as clear as daylight that the benevolent Tsar must be 
doing all he can to block his own "path to the South" even though 
"Constantinople remains an eternal goal of Russian policy" (loc. 
cit., p. 9). 
There is nothing new in proclaiming Russia the protector of 
liberalism and of national aspirations. Catherine II was celebrated 
as the standard-bearer of progress by a whole host of French and 
a "Zur Signatur der russischen Politik", Preussisches Wochenblatt, No. 23, June 
9, 1855. Marx gives a summary rather than the exact words of the passage in 
question.— Ed. 
b The source used by Marx has not been established. The text of the 
proclamation can be found in D'Angeberg's Recueil des traites, conventions et actes 
diplomatiques concernant la Pologne. —Ed. 

=====第167页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 143 
German Enlighteners. The "noble" Alexander I (Le Grec du Bas 
Empire 3 as Napoleon meanly described him) in his day played the 
hero of liberalism throughout Europe. Did he not make Finland 
happy by bestowing on it the blessings of Russian civilisation? Did 
he not in his magnanimity give France not only a Constitution, but 
even a Russian Prime Minister, the Duc de Richelieu? Was he not 
the secret head of the "Hetairia", 139 while simultaneously at the 
Congress of Verona, he urged Louis XVIII through his hired 
agent Chateaubriand to campaign against the Spanish rebels?140 
Did he not use Ferdinand VII's confessor to incite Ferdinand to 
send an expedition to quell the rebellious Spanish-American 
colonies, while at the same time he promised the President of the 
United States of North America6  his assistance against the 
intervention of any European power on the American continent? 
Did he not send Ypsilanti to Wallachia as the "leader of the Holy 
Hellenic Host", and use the same Ypsilanti to betray the host and 
arrange for the assassination of Vladimirescu, the Wallachian rebel 
leader? Before 1830 Nicholas, too, was eulogised in every lan­
guage, in verse and in prose, as the hero who would liberate the 
subject nationalities. In 1828-29, when he undertook a war against 
Mahmood II, for the liberation of the Greeks, after Mahmood had 
refused to allow a Russian army to move in to suppress the Greek 
uprising, Palmerston speaking in the British Parliament declared 
that the enemies of Russia, the liberator, were necessarily the 
"friends" of the greatest monsters in the world: Dom Miguel, 
Austria and the Sultan. Did not Nicholas in paternal solicitude 
give the Greeks a president, namely Count Capo d'Istria, a 
Russian general? But the Greeks were not Frenchmen and they 
murdered the noble Capo d'Istria. And although Nicholas had 
mainly appeared in his role as guardian of legitimacy ever since 
the July 1830 revolution, he did not cease for a moment to work for 
the "liberation of the subject nationalities". A few illustrations will 
suffice. The constitutional revolution in Greece in September 1843 
was led by Katakasi, the Russian minister in Athens and formerly 
the responsible supervisor over Admiral Heiden at the time of the 
disaster at Navarino. 141 The centre of the Bulgarian rebellion in 
1842 was the Russian consulate in Bucharest. There in the spring 
of 1842, the Russian general Duhamel received a Bulgarian 
a Greek of the Byzantine Empire; figuratively, confidence-trickster. See 
Emmanuel Las Cases, Memorial de Sainte-Hélène..., t. 2, Paris, 1824, p. 407, and 
François René Chateaubriand, Congrès de Vérone, Vol. I, Paris, 1838, pp. 
186-87.—  Ed. 
b James Monroe.— Ed. 

=====第168页=====
144 Karl Marx 
deputation whom he presented with a plan for a general 
insurrection. Serbia was to act as reserve for the revolt and the 
Russian general Kiselev was to become Hospodar of Wallachia. 
During the Serbian uprising (1843) Russia used its Embassy in 
Constantinople to drive the Turks to resort to violence against the 
Serbs,  and then made use of this pretext to appeal to the 
sympathy and fanaticism of Europe against the Turks. Italy, too, 
was by no means excluded from the liberation plans of Tsar 
Nicholas. La Jeune Italie, which was for a time the Paris organ of 
the Mazzini party, recounts in an issue in November 1843: 
"The recent disturbances in the Romagna and the movements in Greece were 
more or less connected with each other.... The Italian movement failed because the 
real democratic party refused to join it. The Republicans would not aid in a 
movement instigated by Russia. Everything was prepared for a general insurrection 
in Italy. The movement was to commence in Naples, where it was expected that a 
section of the army would take the lead or make common cause with the patriots. 
After the outbreak of the revolution, Lombardy, Piedmont and the Romagna 
would rise and an Italian Empire was to be established under the Duke of 
Leuchtenberg, the son of Eugène Beauharnais and the son-in-law of the Tsar. 
'Young Italy' 142 frustrated this plan."* 
The Times of November 20, 1843 commented as follows on this 
information from La Jeune Italie: 
"If that great end—the establishment of a new Italian Empire the head of 
which would be a Russian Prince—could be attained, so much the better; but there 
was another—an immediate, though perhaps not quite so important advantage to 
be gained by any outbreak in Italy—the causing of alarm to Austria and the 
withdrawal of her attention from the fearfulb projects of Russia on the Danube." 
After Nicholas had made an unsuccessful approach to "Young 
Italy" in 1843, he sent Mr. von Butenev to Rome in March 1844. 
Butenev proposed to the Pope0  in the name of the Tsar that 
Russian Poland should be ceded to Austria in exchange for 
Lombardy, which was to become a North Italian kingdom under 
Leuchtenberg. The Tablet of April 1844, which was at that time 
the English organ of the Roman Curia, commented as follows: 
"The bait for the Roman Curia contained in this beautiful plan lay in the fact 
that Poland would fall into Catholic hands, while Lombardy would remain in the 
possession of a Catholic dynasty as before. But the diplomatic veterans of Rome 
perceived that while Austria can barely maintain its hold on its own possessions and 
in all human probability will be forced sooner or later to relinquish its Slav 
a Here and below Marx probably drew on the item "Express from Paris", The 
Times, No. 18458, November 20, 1843. The italics are Marx's.— Ed. 
b In the original Marx gives the word "fearful" in brackets after its German 
equivalent.— Ed. 
c Gregory XVI.— Ed. 

=====第169页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 145 
provinces, the cession of Poland to Austria, even if this part of the proposal were 
seriously intended, would be nothing more than a loan to be repaid at a later date. 
Whereas North Italy with the Duke of Leuchtenberg would in fact fall under 
Russian protection and before long would infallibly come beneath the Russian 
sceptre. The warmly recommended plan was consequently put aside for the 
present." 3 
Thus far The Tablet of 1844. 
The only factor that has served as a justification for the 
existence of Austria as a political entity since the middle of the 
eighteenth century has been its resistance to the advance of Russia 
in Eastern Europe, a resistance conducted in a helpless, inconsist­
ent and cowardly, but obstinate manner. This resistance leads 
Vogt to the discovery that "Austria is the source of all discord in 
the East" (loc. cit., p. 56). With "a certain childlike innocence" so 
becoming to his tubbiness, he explains the alliance of Russia and 
France against Austria as the result of the latter's ingratitude for 
the services rendered it by Nicholas during the Hungarian 
revolution, to say nothing of the liberating predilections of the 
"benevolent Tsar". 
"In the Crimean war Austria went to the very edge of hostile, armed neutrality. 
It is self-evident that such an attitude, which moreover bore all the marks of fabity 
and scheming, was bound to be bitterly resented by the Russian Government and 
impel it to draw closer to France" (loc. cit., pp. 10, 11). 
According to Vogt, Russia pursues a sentimental policy. The 
gratitude Austria expressed to the Tsar at Germany's expense 
during the Warsaw Congress in 1850 and in the march on 
Schleswig-Holstein 143 does not satisfy the grateful Vogt. 
The Russian diplomat Pozzo di Borgo in his celebrated dispatch 
from Paris in October 1825,144 having listed Austria's intrigues to 
frustrate Russia's plans for intervention in the East, goes on to say: 
"Our policy obliges us, therefore, to present our most terrifying face towards 
this state" (Austria) "to convince it by our preparations that if it ventures any 
movement against us we shall unleash upon it the greatest storm it has ever 
experienced." 
He goes on to threaten war from without and revolution from 
within, and having hinted at a possible peaceful solution in the 
suggestion that Austria should annex any Turkish "provinces that 
appealed to it" and having described Prussia as a subordinate ally 
of Russia, he continues: 
a "The Papacy and the Great Powers", The Tablet, No. 205, April 13, 1844. Marx 
gives a summary rather than the exact words of the passage in question. He may have 
used some other source too.— Ed. 

=====第170页=====
146 Karl Marx 
"If the Viennese court had yielded to our good purposes and intentions, the plan of the 
Imperial Cabinet would long since have achieved fulfilment—a plan which 
embraces not only the annexation of the Danubian principalities and Constan­
tinople, but even provides for the expulsion of the Turks from Europe." 
It is well known that in 1830 a secret treaty was concluded 
between Nicholas and Charles X. Its terms laid down that France 
would permit Russia to take possession of Constantinople and 
would receive the Rhine provinces and Belgium in return. Prussia 
would be given Hanover and Saxony, and Austria would receive a 
part of the Turkish provinces on the Danube. Under Louis 
Philippe, at Russia's suggestion, this plan was again laid before the 
Russian Cabinet by Mole. A little while after, Brunnow went to 
London with the document where it was shown to the English 
Government as proof of France's treachery and helped to set up 
the anti-French coalition of 1840. 
Let us now see how, according to the ideas of Vogt, who 
obtained his inspirations from his original Paris sources, Russia 
was supposed to exploit the Italian war in agreement with France. 
It might be thought that the "national" composition of Russia and 
especially the "Polish nationality  " might well create certain difficul­
ties for a man for whom "the principle of nationality was the 
Lodestar". 3 However: 
"The principle of nationality stands high in our estimation, but the principle of 
free self-determination stands even higher" (loo cit., p. 121). 
When Russia annexed by far the largest portion of Poland 
proper by virtue of the treaties of 1815, it gained a position which 
extended so far westward, and drove as it were a wedge not only 
between Austria and Prussia, but also between East Prussia and 
Silesia, that even at the time Prussian officers (such as Gneisenau) 
pointed out that such frontiers could not be tolerated in relation 
to so powerful a neighbour. However, it was not until 1831, when 
the defeat of Poland put the whole territory at the mercy of 
Russia, that the true significance of the wedge became clear. The 
subjugation of Poland was no more than a pretext for constructing 
the grandiose chain of fortresses at Warsaw, Modlin and 
Ivangorod. Its real purpose was complete strategic control of the 
basin of the Vistula, and the establishment of a base from which to 
launch attacks to the North, South and West. Even Haxthausen, 
who enthused about the orthodox Tsar and all things Russian, 
regards this as a very definite danger and a threat to Germany. 
a Carl Vogt, Studien..., Einleitung, S. ix.— Ed. 

=====第171页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 147 
The Russian fortifications on the Vistula pose a greater threat to 
Germany than all the French fortresses put together, especially if 
and when Polish national resistance were to cease completely and 
Russia were able to use Poland's war potential as its own force of 
aggression. Hence Vogt comforts Germany with the thought that 
Poland has become Russian from an act of free self-determination. 
"There can be no doubt," he says, "that thanks to the great efforts of the 
Russian people's party, the gulf that yawned between Poland and Russia has been 
narrowed significantly and it perhaps requires only a small impulse to close it 
completely" (loc. cit., p. 12). 
This small impulse was to be provided by the Italian war. 
(However, in the course of this war Alexander II became 
convinced that Poland had not yet reached such Vogtian heights.) 
The idea was that owing to the law of gravity  Poland,  which had 
been absorbed into Russia by an act of "free self-determination", 
would as a central body attract the detached limbs of the former 
Kingdom of Poland, which were now wasting away under foreign 
rule.  To facilitate this process of attraction Vogt counsels Prussia 
to seize the opportunity and rid itself of its "Slav appendage" (loc. 
cit., p. 17), that is Posen (loc. cit., p. 97) and probably also West 
Prussia since only East Prussia is recognised to be a "genuine 
German land". The limbs detached from Prussia would, of course, 
at once revert to the central body absorbed by Russia and the 
"genuine German land" of East Prussia would be transformed 
into a Russian enclave. On the other hand, as far as Galicia is 
concerned, which is also shown as a part of Russia on the map of 
L'Europe en 1860, its separation from Austria lay directly in line 
with the war to free Germany from the non-German possessions 
of Austria. Vogt recollects that 
"before 1848 the picture of the Russian Tsar could be seen more frequently in 
[...] Galicia than that of the Austrian Emperor" (loc. cit., p. 12) and "in view of the 
uncommon skill displayed by Russia in weaving its intrigues, Austria would have 
serious cause for anxiety here" (loc. cit.). 
It is perfectly self-evident, however, that in order to rid itself of 
the "internal enemy" Germany should simply allow the Russians 
"to advance troops to the frontier" (p. 13) to lend their support to 
these intrigues. While Prussia is detaching itself from its Polish 
provinces, Russia using the Italian war should separate Galicia 
from Austria, just as in 1809 Alexander I had received a piece of 
Galicia in payment for his purely theatrical support of Napoleon I. 
It is well known that Russia successfully reclaimed parts of Poland 

=====第172页=====
148 Karl Marx 
that had originally gone to Austria and Prussia, partly from 
Napoleon I and partly from the Congress of Vienna. According 
to Vogt, in 1859 the time had come for the whole of Poland to be 
united with Russia. Vogt demands not the emancipation of the Polish 
nationality from Russians, Austrians and Prussians, but the 
absorption by Russia and the annihilation of the entire former Kingdom 
of Poland.  Finis Poloniae! 145 This "Russian" conception of the 
"reconstruction of Poland", which was rife throughout Europe 
immediately after the death of Tsar Nicholas, was denounced as 
early as March 1855 by David Urquhart in his pamphlet The New 
Hope of  Poland.3 
But Vogt had not yet done enough for Russia. 
"The extraordinary civility," says our agreeable companion, "indeed the almost 
brotherly feelings with which the Russians treated the Hungarian revolutionaries 
formed too great a contrast with the behaviour of the Austrians for it not to have 
had repercussions. Russia did indeed crush the party" (N.B.: according to Vogt the 
Russians crushed not Hungary but the party), "but treated it with forbearance and 
courteousness, and thereby laid the foundations for an attitude which may be 
characterised by saying that when faced with two evils one must choose the lesser 
of the two, and that in the present  case,  Russia is not the greater" (loc. cit., pp. 12, 13). 
With what "extraordinary civility, forbearance, courteousness", 
and indeed almost "brotherly feelings" does Plon-Plon's Falstaff 
conduct the Russians to Hungary, making himself into the 
"channel" for the illusion which destroyed the Hungarian 
revolution of 1849. It was Görgey's party which disseminated the 
belief in a Russian prince as the future King of Hungary, a belief 
which broke the will of the Hungarian revolution to resist.* 
Without having particular support in any one race the 
Habsburgs naturally based their dominion over Hungary before 
1848 on the dominant nationality—the Magyars. We may remark 
in passing that Metternich was the great protector of the 
nationalities. He misused them by playing them off against each 
other, but he needed them in order to misuse them. He therefore 
* According to the Polish Colonel Lapinski, who fought against the Russians in 
the Hungarian revolutionary army up to the fall of Komorn,b  and later in Circassia, 
"it was the Hungarians' misfortune that they did not know the Russians" 
(Theophil Lapinski, Feldzug der Ungarischen Hauptarmee im Jahre 1849, Hamburg, 
1850,  p. 216). "The Viennese Cabinet was completely in the hands of the Russians 
... it was on their advice that the leaders were murdered ... while the Russians did 
everything to gain the sympathies of all, Austria was ordered by them to make itself 
even more hated than ever in the past" (loc. cit., pp. 188, 189). 
a Marx gives the English title and supplies the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
b Komârom. — Ed. 

=====第173页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 149 
preserved them. We may compare the situation in Posen and 
Galicia. After the revolution of 1848-49 the Habsburg dynasty, 
having used the Slavs to subdue the Germans and Magyars, tried 
to follow in the footsteps of Joseph II and to impose the rule of 
the German element in Hungary by force. The fear of Russia 
prevented the Habsburgs from embracing their rescuers, the Slavs. 
Their overall reactionary policy in Hungary was aimed more 
against their saviours, the Slavs, than against their defeated 
enemies, the Magyars. Hence, as Szemere has shown in his 
pamphlet Hungary, 1848-1860, London, 1860, fighting against its 
own saviours, the Austrian reaction therefore drove the Slavs 
back under the wing of the Magyars. Austrian rule over Hungary 
and the rule of the Magyars in Hungary coincided, therefore, 
both before and after 1848. Russia is in a quite different position, 
whether it rules Hungary directly or indirectly. Taking the racial 
and religious affinities together, Russia would immediately have 
the non-Magyar majority of the population at its disposal. The 
Magyar race would instantly succumb to the union of the Slavs, 
who are akin to the Russians ethnically, and the Wallachians, 
who are akin to them religiously. Russian domination in Hun­
gary, therefore, is synonymous with the destruction of Hungarian 
nationality, i.e. of a Hungary historically bound up with Magyar 
rule.* 
Vogt, who proposes that the Poles by an act of "free 
self-determination" should be absorbed by Russia, also wants to 
drown the Hungarians in a sea of Slavs by subjecting them to Russian 
rule.** 
But Vogt has still not done enough for Russia. 
* General Moritz Perczel, famous for his part in the Hungarian revolutionary 
war, withdrew from the group of Hungarian officers around Kossuth in Turin 
while the Italian campaign was still in progress. In a public declaration he 
explained the reasons for his resignation—on the one hand, there was Kossuth, 
who merely acted as a Bonapartist bogyman, on the other hand, there was the 
prospect of a Russian future for Hungary. In his reply (from St. Hélier, April 19, 
1860) to a letter from me in which I inquired for further information about his 
declaration, he said inter alia: "I shall never consent to act as a tool to rescue 
Hungary from the claws of the Double Eagle merely to force it into the deadly 
embrace of the Northern Bear." 
** Mr. Kossuth was never in any doubt about the correctness of the views set 
forth in the present work. He knew that Austria can maltreat Hungary, but not 
annihilate it. "The Emperor Joseph II," he writes to the Grand Vizier Reshid 
Pasha from Kütahya, February 15, 1851, "the only man of genius produced by the 
Habsburg family, exhausted the extraordinary resources of his rare intellect and of 
the then still common notions of the power of his House, in the attempt to 
Germanise Hungary, and integrate it within the state as a whole. But Hungary 

=====第174页=====
150 Karl Marx 
Among the "non-German provinces" of Austria on behalf of 
whom the German Confederation should not "take up its sword" 
against France and Russia, which "stands whole-heartedly on the 
side of France", are not only Galicia, Hungary and Italy, but in 
particular Bohemia and Moravia, as well. 
"Russia," Vogt says, "provides the firm centre around which the Slav 
nationalities increasingly strive to congregate" (loc. cit., pp. 9-10). 
Bohemia and Moravia belong to the "Slav nationalities". As 
Muscovy developed into Russia, so must Russia develop into Pan-
Slavonia. "With the Czechs ... at our side we shall succumb to every 
enemy" (loc. cit., p. 134). We, i.e. Germany, must attempt to rid 
ourselves of the Czechs, i.e. of Bohemia and Moravia. "No 
guarantee for non-German possessions of the rulers" (loc. cit., 
p. 133). "No non-German provinces in the Confederation any longer" 
(loc. cit.) but only German provinces in France! Hence we must not 
only "give the present French Empire a free hand [...] as long as it 
does not violate the territory of the German Confederation" (Preface, 
p. 9), but we must also allow Russia "a free hand" as long as it 
only violates "non-German provinces in the Confederation". Russia will 
help Germany develop its "unity" and "nationhood" by advancing 
troops to the "Slav appendages" of Austria exposed to Russia's 
"intrigues". While Austria is kept busy in Italy by Louis Bonaparte 
and Prussia forces the sword of the German Confederation back 
into its sheath, the "benevolent Tsar" will "be able secretly to 
support" revolutions in Bohemia and Moravia "with money, arms 
and munitions" (loc. cit., p. 13). 
And "with the Czechs at our side we must succumb to every 
enemy"! 
emerged from the struggle with renewed vigour.... In the last revolution Austria 
only raised itself from the dust in order to collapse once again at the feet of the 
Tsar, its master, who never gives his aid but only sells it. And Austria had to pay 
for this aid dearly" {Correspondence of Kossuth, p. 33). On the other hand, he 
maintains in the same letter that only Hungary and Turkey together can frustrate 
the Pan-Slavist intrigues of Russia. He writes to David Urquhart from Kiitahya, 
January 17, 1851  : " We must crush Russia, my dear Sir! and, headed by you, we will! I 
have not only the resolution of will, but also that of hope! and this is no vain word, 
my dear Sir! no sanguine fascination; it is the word of a man, who is wont duly to 
calculate every chance: of a man though very weak in faculties, not to be shaken in 
perseverance and resolution, etc." (loc. cit., p. 39.) a 
a The letter was quoted in the article "Data by Which to Judge of Kossuth", 
The Free Press, No. 5, May 27, 1859. Marx quotes the original English text and 
gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第175页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 151 
How magnanimous of the "benevolent Tsar", then, to relieve us 
of Bohemia and Moravia with all their Czechs which as "Slav 
nationalities must" naturally "congregate around Russia". 
Let us examine how our Vogt of the Empire protects the 
Eastern German frontier by incorporating Bohemia and Moravia 
in Russia. Bohemia Russian! But Bohemia lies in the middle of 
Germany, separated from Russian Poland by Silesia, and from the 
Galicia and Hungary Russified by Vogt, by a Moravia also 
Russified by Vogt. Thus Russia acquires an expanse of German 
federal territory 50 German miles long and 25-35 miles broad. 3 Its 
Western frontier will advance westwards by a full 65 German 
miles.  Since the distance between Egerb  and Lauterburg in Alsace is 
no more than 45 German miles as the crow flies, North Germany will 
be totally separated from South Germany by the French wedge in the 
West and even more by the Russian wedge in the East, and the 
partition of Germany would be  complete !  The direct route from Vienna 
to Berlin would pass through Russia, and the same would apply even 
to the direct route from Munich to Berlin. Dresden, Nuremberg, 
Regensburg and Linz would be our frontier towns bordering on 
Russia; our position vis-à-vis the Slavs would, at least in the South, be 
the same as it was before Charlemagne (while in the West Vogt does 
not allow us to go back as far as Louis XV), and we could simply erase 
1,000 years of our history. 
What could be accomplished with the aid of Poland, could be 
accomplished even better with the aid of Bohemia. If Prague were 
transformed into a fortified encampment, with secondary for­
tresses at the confluence of the Moldau and the Eger c with the Elbe, 
the Russian army in Bohemia could calmly stand and wait for the 
German army which, divided from the outset, would approach 
from Bavaria, Austria and Brandenburg. Falling upon the smaller 
German units it would be able to destroy them while allowing the 
larger ones to run up against the fortresses. 
Let us look at a linguistic map of Central Europe, taking, for 
example, a Slav authority, the "slovansky zemëvid" of Safafik. 146 
According to this the Slav-language frontier runs from the 
Pomeranian coast near Stolp via Zastrow south of Chodziehen d  on 
the Netze, and advances westwards to Meseritz. However, from 
there it suddenly curves south-east. Here the massive German 
a A German mile is equal to 7,420 metres.— Ed. 
b Modern name: Cheb.— Ed. 
c Now the Vltava and the Ohfe.— Ed. 
d Modern names: Stölpchen (Stölpgen), Jastrow and Colmar.— Ed. 

=====第176页=====
152 Karl Marx 
territory of Silesia drives a deep wedge between Poland and 
Bohemia. In Moravia and Bohemia the Slavonic language again 
protrudes far to the west, although it is greatly eroded by the 
advance of German from all directions and the whole area is 
interspersed with German towns and linguistic islands, just as in 
the north, the whole Lower Vistula and the best part of East 
and West Prussia are German and push forward uncomfor­
tably towards Poland. Between the most westerly point of the 
Polish tongue and the most northerly point of Bohemian, the Lusa-
tian orWendish linguistic enclave lies in the middle of German-
speaking territory, but in such a way that it almost cuts off 
Silesia. 
For the Russian Pan-Slavist Vogt, who has Bohemia to play with, 
there is no doubt where the natural frontier of the Slav Empire 
lies. It goes from Meseritz directly to Lieberose and Lübben, then 
south of where the Elbe passes through the mountains on the 
Bohemian frontier, after which it follows the Western and 
Southern frontier of Bohemia and Moravia. Everything to the east 
of this is Slav: the few German enclaves and other interlopers on 
Slav soil can no longer withstand the development of the great 
Slav nation. And anyway they have no right to be where they are. 
Once this "Pan-Slavist state of affairs" has been brought about, a 
similar rectification of the frontiers will become inevitable in the 
south. Here too a German wedge has of its own accord thrust 
itself between the North and South Slavs and occupied the valley 
of the Danube and the Styrian Alps. Vogt cannot tolerate this 
wedge and, being consistent, he therefore has Russia annex 
Austria, Salzburg, Styria and the German parts of Carinthia. In 
this construction of the Slav-Russian Empire, Vogt has already 
demonstrated, Austria notwithstanding, that according to the 
well-tested axioms of the "principle of nationality" small numbers 
of Magyars and Romanians as well as various groups of Turks 
must fall to Russia (for the "benevolent Tsar" also contributes to 
the "principle of nationality" by his subjugation of Circassia and 
the extermination of the Crimean Tartars!)—as a punishment for 
being wedged between the North and South Slavs. 
In this operation, we Germans lose—nothing more than East 
and West Prussia, Silesia, parts of Brandenburg and Saxony, the 
whole of Bohemia, Moravia and the rest of Austria apart from 
Tyrol (part of which falls to the Italian "principle of nationali­
ty")—and our national existence to boot! 
But let us just consider the first stage, according to which 
Galicia, Bohemia and Moravia become Russian] 

=====第177页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 153 
In such circumstances German Austria, Southwest Germany and 
North Germany can never act in concert, except—and this would 
inevitably come about—under Russian leadership. 
Vogt makes us Germans sing what his Parisians sang in 1815: 
"Vive Alexandre, 
Vive le roi des rois, 
Sans rien prétendre, 
Il nous donne des lois." 3 
Vogt's "principle of nationality", which he desired to realise in 
1859 through the alliance between the "white angel of the North" 
and the "white angel of the South", should according to his views 
prove its worth by the absorption of Polish nationality, the 
disappearance of Magyar nationality and vanishing of German 
nationality in—Russia. 
I have not mentioned his original source in Dentu's pamphlets 
on this occasion because I was reserving a single conclusive 
quotation as proof that everything that he either hints at or blurts 
out stems from slogans issued by the Tuileries. In the Pensiero ed 
Azione's issue of May 2-16, 1859, in which Mazzini forecasts events 
that later took place, he remarks inter alia that the first condition 
of the alliance agreed between Alexander II and Louis Bonaparte 
was:  "abbandono assoluto della Polonia" (absolute abandonment of 
Poland by France, which Vogt translates as "completely closing the 
gulf yawning between Poland and Russia"). 
"Che la guerra si prolunghi e assuma ... proporzioni europee, l'insurrezione 
delle provincie oggi turche preparata di lunga mano e quelle dell' Ungheria, 
daranno campo all'Allianza di rivelarsi... Principi russi governerebbo le provincie 
che surgerebbo sulle rovine dell'Impero Turco e dell'Austria.. Constantino di Russia 
è già proposto ai malcontenti ungheresi." (See Pensiero ed Azione, May 2-16, 1859.) 
("If the war be prolonged so as to assume ... European proportions, the 
insurrection of the Turkish provinces, prepared a long time since, and that of 
Hungary, would enable the alliance to assume palpable forms.... Russian princes 
would govern the states established on the ruins of the Turkish Empire and 
Austria.... Constantine of Russia is already proposed to the Hungarian malcon­
tents.  ") b 
a "Long live Alexander, 
Long live the king of kings; 
He gives us laws and never 
Asks for the least of things." 
(Le Peuple de 1850, No. 26, September 27).— Ed. 
b From Mazzini's manifesto entitled "La Guerra". Marx translated it into 
English and published it with a brief introduction in the New-York Daily Tribune 
(see present edition, Vol. 16, p. 357).— Ed. 

=====第178页=====
154 Karl Marx 
But Vogt's Russophile posture is only secondary. He is merely 
repeating one of the catch-phrases issued by the Tuileries and his 
aim is merely to prepare Germany for manoeuvres agreed 
between Louis Bonaparte and Alexander II if certain contingen­
cies of the war against Austria should eventuate. In fact, he merely 
echoes slavishly the Pan-Slavist phraseology of his original Paris 
pamphlets. His true task is to sing the Lay of Ludwig 147: 
"Einan kùning wèiz ih, hèizit hêr Hlùdowîg 
ther gêrno Gode" (i.e. the nationalities) "dionôt." 3 
We saw earlier how Vogt praised Sardinia by pointing out that 
"it had even gained the respect of Russia  ". We now have the parallel 
assertion. 
"There is no mention of Austria," he says, "in" (Prussia's) "declarations ... in 
the event of an imminent war between North America and Cochin China the 
wording would be the same. But the German mission of Prussia, its German 
obligations, the old Prussia—that is where the emphasis is put for preference. 
France" (in accordance with his statement on p. 27 that "France is now summed up 
[...] exclusively in the person of its ruler") "therefore bestows praise through the 
'Moniteur' and the rest of the press.— Austria fumes" (Studien, p. 18). 
"The fact that Prussia correctly interprets its 'German mission' 
follows from the praise bestowed on it by Louis Bonaparte in the 
Moniteur and the rest of the Decembrist press." What brazen 
impudence! We remember how from a feeling of tenderness 
towards the "white angel of the North" Vogt made Austria the 
sole offender against the treaties of 1815 and the sole state to 
confiscate Cracow. He now performs the same labour of love for 
the benefit of the "white angel of the South". 
"This ecclesiastical state against whose republic" (republic of an ecclesiastical 
state!) " Cavaignac, the representative of the doctrinaire republican party [...] and 
the military counterpart of Gagern" (a fine parallel!),"perpetrated the abominable 
act of massacre" (to commit massacre against the republic of a state!), "a crime 
which, however, did not help him to reach the presidential chair" (loc. cit., p. 69). 
So it was Cavaignac and not Louis Bonaparte who perpetrated 
"the abominable act of massacre" against the Roman Republic] 
Cavaignac did indeed send a navy to Civitavecchia in November 
1848 for the personal protection of the Pope. But it was only in 
the following year, on February 9, 1849, several months after 
Cavaignac had failed to get the presidential chair, that the 
temporal rule of the Pope was abolished and the republic proclaimed 
in Rome. So Cavaignac could not possibly murder a republic that 
a "I know of a king, he is called Lord Ludwig 
who gladly serves God" (i.e. nationalities).— Ed. 

=====第179页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 155 
did not yet exist while he was in power. On April 22, 1849 Louis 
Bonaparte sent General Oudinot with 14,000 men to Civitavecchia 
after he had tricked the National Assembly into giving him the 
funds necessary for the expedition against Rome by solemnly 
declaring several times over that his intention was merely to resist 
an invasion of the Roman states planned by Austria. It is well 
known that the Paris catastrophe of June 13, 1849148  arose from 
the resolution moved by Ledru-Rollin and the Montagne to exact 
vengeance for the "abominable act of massacre against the Roman 
Republic" which was also an "abominable breach of the French 
Constitution" and an "abominable violation of the resolution of 
the National Assembly", from Louis Bonaparte, who was responsi­
ble for all these abominations, by instituting proceedings for 
impeachment against him. We see how "abominably" the base 
sycophant of the coup d'état, how brazenly Karl Vogt falsifies 
history in order to elevate the mission of Lord "Hlùdowîg" to 
liberate the subject nationalities in general and Italy in particular 
beyond all doubt. 
Vogt remembers from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung that alongside 
the class of the lumpenproletariat it is the class of peasant 
smallholders that in France constitutes the sole social basis of the 
bas empire. He now adjusts this as follows: 
"The present Empire has no party among the educated, no party [...] in the 
French bourgeoisie—only two masses belong to it, the army and the rural 
proletariat,3 which cannot read or write. But this constitutes 9/10 of the population 
and embraces the mighty organised instrument with whose aid resistance can be 
smashed, and the herd of mortgage helots who own nothing but their vote" (p. 25). 
The non-urban population of France, including the army, 
amounts to scarcely 2/s  of the total population. Vogt transforms 
less than 2/s into 9/io- Moreover, he transforms the whole 
non-urban population of France, of which around l/5 consists of 
well-to-do landowners and another 1/5 of people with neither land 
nor other possessions, lock, stock and barrel into smallholders, 
"mortgage helots". Finally, he abolishes all reading and writing in 
France outside the cities. Just as he earlier distorted history, so 
now he falsifies statistics in order to enlarge the pedestal of his 
hero.  Having done this he installs his hero on this pedestal. 
"Thus France is now indeed summed up exclusively in the person of its ruler, 
of whom Masson" (also an authority) "said 'he possesses great qualities as a 
statesman and a sovereign, an unshakable will, sure sense of tact, vigorous 
resolution, a stout heart, a bold, noble spirit and utter ruthlessness' " (loc. cit., 
P- 27). 
a Vogt in his Studien has Landvolk (rural people).— Ed. 

=====第180页=====
156 Karl Marx 
"wie saeleclîche stât im an 
allez daz, daz êr begât! 
wie gâr sîn lîp ze wünsche stât! 
wie gênt îm so gelîche inein 
die fînen keiserlîchen bein." 
(Tristan)* 
Vogt snatches the censer from Masson's hands in order to swing 
it himself.  To Masson's catalogue of virtues he adds "cold 
calculation", "bold planning", "serpentine cunning", "tenacious 
patience" (p. 28) and then, as the Tacitus of the antechamber, he 
stammers: "The origins of this reign are monstrous", which is 
certainly—nonsense. Above all he has to melodramatise the 
grotesque figure of his hero into a great man and so "Napoleon le 
Petit" 149 becomes a "man of destiny" (loc. cit., p. 36). 
"Even if present circumstances" Vogt exclaims, "lead to a change" (what a modest 
word: a changel) "in the government" (of this man of destiny), "we shall not be 
behindhand with our warmest congratulations, even though we can see no prospect of 
this for the time being!" (loc. cit., p. 29.) 
How serious the warm fellow is with his congratulations in pettoh 
can be seen from the following: 
"Hence with a lasting peace the internal situation becomes more and more 
untenable day by day, because the French army is much more closely involved with 
the parties of the educated than is the case, for example, in the German states, in 
Prussia and Austria; because these parties find an echo, above all among the 
officers, so that one fine day the only active pillar of the power that the Emperor 
holds in his hands might slip away" (loc. cit., pp. [26-]27). c 
So the "internal situation" became "more and more untenable day by 
day" with a "lasting peace". This is why Vogt had to assist Louis 
Bonaparte to violate the peace. The army, the "only active pillar" of 
his "power", threatened to "slip away". This is why Vogt had to 
prove that it was Europe's task to bind the French "army" to 
Louis Bonaparte once again by means of a "localised" war in Italy. 
And indeed at the end of 1858 it looked as though things were 
going to end dreadfully 15° with Badinguet, as the Parisians unre-
spectfully call the "nephew of his uncle". The general trade 
crisis of 1857-58 had paralysed French industry.* The government 
* It is in fact the industrial prosperity that has sustained the regime of Louis 
Bonaparte for so long. As the result of the discoveries in Australia and California 
a "Everything he does, how divinely it becomes him! What a perfect body he 
has! How evenly those royal legs move together!" (Gottfried von Strassburg, Tristan 
und Isolde.) Marx quotes according to an entry he made in his notebook entitled 
Vogtiana (I860).— Ed. 
b Up his sleeve.— Ed. 
c The italics and bold type are Marx's.— Ed. 

=====第181页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 157 
manoeuvres to prevent the crisis from becoming acute made the 
malady chronic, so that the stagnation in French trade dragged on 
until the outbreak of the Italian war. On the other hand, grain 
prices fell so low between 1857 and 1859 that a loud cry went up 
at various congrès agricoles to the effect that French agriculture was 
being ruined by low prices and the heavy burdens imposed on it. 
Louis Bonaparte's absurd attempt to raise grain prices artificially 
by a fiat designed to force the bakers throughout France to set up 
granaries only reveals the helpless confusion of his government. 
The foreign policy of the coup d'état exhibited nothing but a 
series of unsuccessful attempts to play Napoleon—mere trials, 
invariably crowned by official withdrawals. For example, his 
intrigue against the United States of America, his manoeuvres to 
revive the slave trade, 151 the melodramatic threats directed against 
England. The insolence with which Louis Bonaparte at that time 
ventured to treat Switzerland, Sardinia, Portugal and Belgium— 
even though in Belgium he could not even prevent the fortifica­
tion of Antwerp—only throws the fiasco of his policy vis-à-vis the 
great powers into even starker  relief.  In the British Parliament 
"Napoléon le Petit" became a standard expression and The Times 
heaped ridicule on the "Man of Iron" in its articles at the end of 
1858,  by describing him as the "Man of Gutta-Percha". In the 
meantime, Orsini's hand-grenades 152 had burst like a thunderbolt, 
illuminating the internal situation in France. It turned out that 
Louis Bonaparte's regime was just as insecure as it had been in the 
first days after the coup d'état. The Lois de sûreté publique^ 53 
revealed his total isolation. He had to abdicate to his own generals. 
In an unprecedented development, France was divided into 5 
General Captaincies, in the Spanish manner. With the introduction 
of the Regency Pélissier was in fact recognised as the highest 
authority in France. 154 Moreover, the renewed terreur intimidated 
no one. Instead of presenting a terrible appearance, the Dutch 
nephew of the battle of Austerlitz only looked grotesque. 155 
Montalembert was able to play Hampden in Paris, Berryer and 
Dufaure to disclose the hopes of the bourgeoisie in their 
summings-up and in Brussels Proudhon to proclaim Louis-
Philippism with an acte additionnel, 156 while Louis Bonaparte himself 
disclosed the growing power of Marianne to the whole of Europe. 
and their effects on the world market, French export trade had more than 
doubled, a hitherto unprecedented advance. And in general the failure of the 
February revolution may be attributed in the last analysis to California and 
Australia. 

=====第182页=====
158 Karl Marx 
In the course of the uprising in Chalon 157 the officers, on hearing 
that a republic had been proclaimed in Paris, cautiously inquired 
at the Prefecture whether a republic had actually been proclaimed, 
instead of just falling upon the insurgents, an event which 
demonstrated in a striking manner that even the army regarded 
the restored Empire as a pantomime, whose closing scene was 
drawing near. Scandalous duels of the arrogant officers in 
Paris coincided with scandalous deals on the Stock Exchange in 
which the top leaders of the Gang of December 10 were involved. 
The Palmerston Government in England fell because of its alliance 
with Louis Bonaparte!158  And lastly, a treasury that could only be 
replenished by resorting to exceptional subterfuges! Such was the 
situation of the bas empire at the end of 1858. The Brummagem 3 
Empire would collapse, or else the absurd farce of a Napoleonic 
empire within the frontiers of the treaties of 1815 would have to 
cease. But for this a localised war was essential. The mere prospect 
of a war with Europe would then have sufficed to produce an 
explosion in France. A child could understand what Horsman said 
in the British Parliament: 
"We know that France will support the Emperor as long as our vacillation 
allows him success in his foreign policy, but we have grounds to believe that it will 
abandon him as soon as we show resolute opposition." 
All depended on localising the war, i.e. on conducting it with the 
supreme sanction of Europe. To begin with, France itself had to be 
prepared gradually for the war with the aid of a series of hypocritical 
peace negotiations and their repeated failure. Louis Bonaparte came 
to grief even here. Lord Cowley, the English Ambassador in Paris, 
had gone to Vienna with proposals drawn up by Louis Bonaparte 
and approved by the (Derby) Cabinet in London. In Vienna (see the 
Blue Book quoted aboveb), under English pressure, the proposals 
were unexpectedly accepted. Cowley had just returned to London 
with the tidings of a "peaceful solution" when suddenly the news 
came that Louis Bonaparte had abandoned his own proposals and 
had supported the convocation of a congress suggested by Russia to 
discipline Austria. The war became possible only through the 
intervention of Russia. If Russia had no longer needed Louis 
Bonaparte in order to carry out its own plans—either to enforce them 
with French  assistance  or to use the French to  beat  Austria and Prussia into 
passive instruments of Russia—Louis Bonaparte would have fallen 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b This refers to Correspondence Respecting the Affairs of Italy (see this volume, 
p. 134).— Ed. 

=====第183页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 159 
then. But despite Russia's covert support, despite the promises of 
Palmerston, who had given his blessing at Compiègne to the 
conspiracy of Plombières, 159 everything depended on the attitude of 
Germany, since on the one hand the Tory Cabinet was still at the 
helm in England, and on the other hand the silent rebellion of 
France against the Bonapartist regime would have been driven out 
into the open by the prospect of a European war. 
Vogt himself lets slip that he sang his Lay of Ludwig neither 
from a lively sympathy for Italy, nor from fear of the timid, 
conservative despotism of Austria, which was as clumsy as it was 
brutal. On the contrary, he believed that if Austria, which, it 
should be noted, was forced to start the war, should gain the 
advantage in Italy at first, 
"the revolution would certainly be unleashed in France, the Empire would be overthrown 
and the future would be different" (loc. cit., p. 131). He believed that "the Austrian 
armies would in the last resort be unable to withstand the liberated forces of the 
French people" (loc. cit.) and that "the victorious armies of Austria, by provoking 
revolutions in France, Italy and Hungary, would themselves create the enemy who 
would crush them". 3 
But the issue for him was not the liberation of Italy from 
Austria, but the enslavement of France by Louis Bonaparte. 
What further proof is required that Vogt was merely one of the 
countless mouthpieces through whom the grotesque ventriloquist 
in the Tuileries spoke in foreign tongues? 
It will be remembered that at the time when Louis Bonaparte 
first discovered his mission to liberate the subject nationalities in 
general and Italy in particular, France presented a spectacle 
unprecedented in its history. The whole of Europe marvelled at 
the stubborn obstinacy with which it rejected the "idées napoléon­
iennes". h People still remember very well the enthusiasm with which 
even the "chiens savants" 0 of the Corps législatif welcomed Morny's 
assurances of peace d; the irritated tone in which the Moniteur 
lectured the nation, now for its immersion in material interests, 
now for its lack of patriotic vigour and its doubts about 
Badinguet's talents as a general and his wisdom as a politician e; 
a Marx's italics.— Ed. 
b An allusion to N.-L. Bonaparte's book Des idées napoléoniennes, Paris, 1839. 
— Ed. 
c "Trained dogs".— Ed. 
d This refers to Morny's speech at the opening of the Legislative Assembly on 
February 8, 1859, Le Moniteur universel, No. 40, February 9, 1859.— Ed. 
e "Partie non officielle. Paris, le 4 mars", Le Moniteur universel, No. 64, March 5, 
1859.—  Ed. 

=====第184页=====
160 Karl Marx 
the soothing official messages to all the chambers of commerce 
throughout France and the imperial assurance that "étudier une 
question n'est pas la créer". 3 At the time, the English press, 
astonished at the extraordinary spectacle, was crammed full of 
well-meaning nonsense about the transformation of the French 
into a peace-loving people, the Stock Exchange treated the issue of 
"war" or "not war" as a "duel" between Louis Bonaparte, who 
wanted war, and the nation, which did not, and bets were placed 
as to who would prevail, the nation or "his uncle's nephew". To 
give an idea of the situation as it was at the time I shall simply 
quote a few passages from the London Economist, which, as 
the organ of the City, as the spokesman of the Italian war and 
as the property of Wilson (the recently deceased Secretary of 
the Treasury for India and a tool of Palmerston), was highly 
influential: 
"Alarmed at the colossal uproar which has been created, the French 
Government is now trying the soothing system" (The Economist, January 15, 1859). 
In its issue of January 22, 1859, in an article entitled "The Prac­
tical Limits of the Imperial Power in France", The Economist says: 
"Whether the Emperor's designs for a war in Italy are or are not carried out to 
their completion, one fact at least has become conspicuous enough,—that his plans 
have received a very severe and probably unexpected check in the chilling attitude 
assumed by popular feeling in France and the complete absence of any sympathy 
with the Emperor's scheme.... He proposes a war [...] and the French people show 
nothing but alarm and discontent;—the Government securities are depreciated, the 
fear of the tax-gatherer subdues every gleam of political or martial enthusiasm, the 
commercial portion of the nation is simply panic-struck, the rural districts are 
dumb and dissatisfied, fearing fresh conscriptions and fresh imposts;—the political 
circles which have supported the Imperial régime most strongly, as a pis aller 
against anarchy, b discourage war for exactly the same reason for which they 
support that régime [...] it is certain that Louis Napoleon has found an extent and 
depth of opposition throughout all classes in France to a war, even in Italy, which 
he did not anticipate." * 
* Lord Chelsea, who deputised for Lord Cowley in Paris during the latter's 
absence, writes: "The official disavowal" (in the Moniteur of March 5, 1859) "of all 
warlike intentions on the part of the Emperor, this Imperial message of peace, c has 
been received by all classes of Paris with feelings of what may be called exultation" 
(No.  88 of the Blue Book On the Affairs of Italy. January to May 1859). [Marx quotes in 
English and gives the German translation in brackets.] 
a "To study a question is not to create it." — Ed. 
b Pis aller means "last resort". The Economist has "as against the alternative of 
anarchy".— Ed. 
c "Partie non officielle. Paris, le 4 mars", Le Moniteur universel, No. 64, March 5, 
1859.—  Ed. 

=====第185页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 161 
Faced with this mood of the French people that section of the 
original Dentu pamphlets was launched which "in the name of the 
people" peremptorily called on the "Emperor" "at last to assist 
France in the majestic extension of its frontiers from the Alps to 
the Rhine" and no longer to resist the "nation's pugnacious spirit 
and desire to bring about the liberation of the subject 
nationalities". Vogt plays the same tune as the prostitutes of 
December. At the very moment when Europe stood amazed at 
France's obstinate longing for peace, Vogt made the discovery that 
"today, the fickle nation" (the French ) "appears to be filled with a 
warlike passion" (loc. cit., pp. 29, 30), and Lord Hlùdowîg was only 
following the "dominant trend of the age" which was intent on 
the "independence of the nationalities" (loc. cit., p. 31). Naturally, 
he did not believe a single syllable of what he was writing. In the 
Programme in which he called upon democrats to co-operate in his 
Bonapartist propaganda he makes it crystal clear that the Italian 
war was unpopular in France. 
"I cannot  foresee  any immediate threat to the Rhine; but one could arise in  the future. A 
war there or against England would make Louis Napoleon almost popular; the Italian 
war does not possess this popular aspect" ("Magnum Opus", Documents, 
p. 34).* 
If now one portion of the original Dentu pamphlets sought to 
rouse the French nation from its "peace lethargy" with the aid of 
the traditional visions of conquest and to put the private wishes of 
Louis Bonaparte into the mouth of the nation, the other portion, 
with the Moniteur in the vanguard, had the task of convincing 
Germany in particular of the Emperor's repugnance to foreign 
conquests and of his ideal mission as the Messiah who would bring 
freedom to the subject nationalities. The proofs of the disinterest­
edness of his policy on the one hand and of his desire to free the 
subject nationalities on the other are easy to remember because 
they are constantly repeated and revolve round only two axes. 
Proof of the disinterestedness of Decembrist policies—the Crimean 
war. Proof of his desire to free the subject nationalities—Colonel 
Cuza and the Romanian nationality. The tone was set by the 
* N. B. In his Studien he echoes the Moniteur and the original Dentu pamphlets 
to the effect that "it is a peculiar whim of fate which compels this man" (Louis 
Bonaparte) "to place himself in the forefront as the liberator of the subject 
nationalities" (p. 35), that one "must agree to assist this policy as long as it keeps 
within the framework of the liberation of subject nationalities" and must wait "until 
this liberation has been brought about by this man of destiny" (p. 36). In his Programme 
for the democrats, on the other hand, he says: "We can and must warn against such 
a helper" ("Magnum Opus", Documents, p. 34). 

=====第186页=====
162 Karl Marx 
Moniteur. See the Moniteur of March 15, 1859 on the Crimean war. 
The Moniteur of April 10, 1859 writes about the Romanian 
nationality: 
"In Germany as in Italy it" (France) "desires that the nationalities recognised by 
the treaties should continue to exist and become even stronger. In the Danubian 
principalities he" (the Emperor) "has endeavoured to help the legitimate wishes of 
these provinces to triumph so that an order based on national interests might be 
established in this part of Europe too." 
See also the pamphlet published by Dentu at the beginning of 
1859 with the title Napoléon HI et la question roumaine. With regard 
to the Crimean war: 
"Lastly, what compensation has France requested for the blood it has shed and 
the millions it has expended in the East in the service of an exclusively European 
cause?"  (La vraie question, Dentu, Paris, 1859, p. 13.) 
This theme, played with endless variations in Paris, was 
translated so well into German by Vogt that E. About, that gossipy 
magpie of Bonapartism, appears to have translated Vogt's German 
translation back into French. See La Prusse en 1860. Here too we 
are again pursued by the Crimean war and Romanian nationality 
under Colonel Cuza. 
"But this much at least is clear," Vogt announces, echoing the Moniteur and 
Dentu's original pamphlets, "that France did not conquer a single square foot of 
land" (in the Crimea) "and that after such a victorious campaign the uncle would 
not have rested content with the meagre gain of having proved his superiority in 
the art of warfare" (Studien, p. 33). "Here we can see an essential difference 
between the present and the old Napoleonic policies" * (loc. cit.). 
* Incidentally, "Napoléon le Petit" also copied the catchword "liberation of 
subject nationalities" from the real Napoleon. In May 1809, for example, Napoleon 
issued a proclamation from Schönbrunn to the Hungarians, in which he says inter 
alia: "Hungarians! The moment is come to recover your independence.... I 
ask nothing of you. I only desire to see you a free and independent nation. Your 
union with Austria has been your bane, etc." a On May 16, 1797 Bonaparte concluded 
a treaty with the Republic of Venice whose first article states: "In future peace and 
understanding shall govern relations between France and the Venetian Republic." He 
revealed his intentions in concluding this peace three days later in a secret dispatch to 
the French Directory which opens with these words: "You receive herewith the treaty 
that I have concluded with the Republic of Venice and under the terms of which 
General Baraguay d'Hilliers has occupied the city with 5,000-6,000 men. In making 
this peace I had a number of aims in mind." As the final aim he mentions: "To silence 
all the talk in Europe since it will now seem as if our occupation of Venice is merely a 
temporary operation which the Venetians themselves urgently requested." Two days 
later, on May 26, Bonaparte wrote to the Venice municipality: "The treaty concluded 
a "Proclamation Addressed to the Hungarians by Napoleon I. From Schoen-
brunn, in May, 1809" (see Bartholomäus Szemere, Hungary, from 1848 to 1860, 
London, I860).— Ed. 

=====第187页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 163 
As if Vogt had to prove to us that "Napoleon le Petit" is not the 
real Napoleon! With just as much justification Vogt could have 
prophesied in 1851 that the nephew, who had nothing to set 
against the first Italian campaign and the expedition to Egypt but 
the Strasbourg adventure, the expedition to Boulogne and the 
sausage review of Satory, 160 could never emulate the 18 Brumaire, 
to say nothing of acquiring the Imperial Crown. There was after 
all "an essential difference between the present and the old 
Napoleonic policies". Yet another difference was between waging 
a war against a European coalition and waging one with the 
permission of a European coalition. 
The "glorious campaign in the Crimea" in which England, 
France, Turkey and Sardinia in concert "captured" half a Russian 
fortress after two years, and in exchange lost a whole Turkish 
fortress (Kars) to the Russians, and at the conclusion of peace 
were forced humbly to "request" the enemy at the Paris Congress 161 
for "permission" to evacuate their troops without interference and 
ship them home—that was indeed anything but "Napoleonic". It 
in Milan can be signed by the municipality in the meantime—the secret articles by 
three of its members. I shall always do everything in my power to provide you with 
proofs of my desire to consolidate your liberties and to see this unfortunate Italy at last 
occupy the place it deserves on the world stage, free and independent of  all alien rule." A 
few days later he wrote to General Baraguay d'Hilliers3 : "On receipt of this letter 
present yourself to the Provisional Government of Venice and point out to them that 
in accordance with the principles which now unite the Republics of France and 
Venice, and with the immediate protection granted to Venice by the French Republic, 
it is essential to place its sea power on a footing that will inspire respect. On this  pretext 
you will take possession of everything, while at the same time you will do all in your 
power to remain on good terms with the Venetians and to recruit all the sailors of the 
Republic to our service—while constantly speaking in the name of Venice. In  brief,  you 
must manage matters so that you can transport the entire stock of ships and naval 
supplies in the harbour of Venice to Toulon. By virtue of a secret article in the treaty, 
the Venetians are obliged to provide the French Republic with naval supplies to the 
value of 3 million for the Toulon navy, but it is my intention to take possession on 
behalf of the French Republic of all the Venetian ships and all their naval supplies for 
the benefit of Toulon" (see  Correspondance secrète  et confidentielle de Napoléon, 7 vols., 
Paris,  1817). These commands were carried out to the letter; and as soon as Venice 
had been plundered of all its naval and war supplies, Napoleon, without the slightest 
hesitation, handed over his new ally, the liberated Republic of Venice, whom he had 
solemnly sworn to defend at whatever the risk, to the despotic yoke of Austria. 
a Napoléon Bonaparte, "Au chef de division commandant la marine française 
dans le golfe Adriatique. Montebello, le 25 prairial, an 5 (13 juin 1797)", 
Correspondance inédite..., v. 5, livre 1, pp. 304-05. Baraguay d'Hilliers is named by 
mistake here.— Ed. 

=====第188页=====
164 Karl Marx 
was glorious only in Bazancourfs novel. 3 But the Crimean war 
proved all sorts of things. Louis Bonaparte betrayed his ostensible 
allies (the Turks) in order to gain the alliance of the ostensible 
enemy. The first success of the Paris peace was the sacrifice of the 
"Circassian nationality" and the extermination of the Crimean 
Tartars by the Russians, and likewise the destruction of the 
national hopes that the Poles and Swedes had pinned to a West 
European crusade against Russia. A further moral of the Crimean 
war was: Louis Bonaparte could not afford a second Crimean war, 
could not afford to lose an old army and gain new national debts 
in exchange for the knowledge that France was rich enough "de 
payer sa propre gloire" ? that the name of Louis Napoleon figured 
in a European treaty, that "the conservative and dynastic press of 
Europe" unanimously acknowledged "the ruling virtues, the 
wisdom and the moderation of the Emperor"—a fact which Vogt 
counts to Louis Bonaparte's credit (loc. cit., p. 32)—and that at 
the time the whole of Europe paid him all the honour due to a 
genuine Napoleon, on the express condition that Louis Bonaparte, 
following the example of Louis Philippe, should quietly stay within 
"the limits of practical reason", i.e. of the treaties of 1815, and not 
forget for a single moment the fine line that distinguishes a 
buffoon c from the hero he represents. The political combinations, 
the ruling powers and the social conditions that provided the leader 
of the December Gang with the opportunity to play at being 
Napoleon, first in France and then even beyond French territory, do 
in fact belong to his epoch, and not to the annals of the Great French 
Revolution. 
"This fact at any rate is established, that present French policy in the East has 
fulfilled the aspirations of one nationality" (the Romanian) "for unification" 
(Studien, pp. 34-35). 
Cuza, as we have mentioned, is keeping the place open for 
either a Russian governor or a Russian vassal. On the map of 
L'Europe en 1860 a Grand Duke of Mecklenburg figures as that 
vassal. Russia naturally allowed Louis Bonaparte all the honour for 
this Romanian emancipation, reserving all its advantages for  itself. 
Austria stood in the way of further benevolent intentions. Hence 
the Italian war had the function of remodelling Austria, changing it 
from an obstacle into an instrument. 
a L'Expédition de Crimée jusqu'à la prise de Sébastopol, t. I-II, Paris, 1857.— -Ed. 
b "To pay for its own fame".— Ed. 
c Marx uses the word Pickelhäring, the name for the buffoon in Old German 
comedies.— Ed. 

=====第189页=====
Herr Vogt. —VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 165 
The ventriloquist in the Tuileries was already playing the tune 
of "Romanian nationality" on his innumerable mouthpieces as 
early as 1858. One of Vogfs authorities, Mr. Kossuth, was thus in a 
position to give an answer as early as November 20, 1858 in a 
lecture in Glasgow 3: 
"Wallachia and Moldavia receive a Constitution, hatched in the caverns of secret 
diplomacy.... It is in reality no more nor less than a charter granted to Russia for 
the purpose of disposing of the Principalities." 
Thus the "principle of nationality" was abused by Louis 
Bonaparte in the Danubian principalities so as to mask the fact 
that they were being handed over to Russia, just as in 1848-49 the 
Austrian Government had abused the "principle of nationality" to 
strangle the Magyar and German revolution with the aid of the 
Serbs,  Slovenes, Croats, Wallachians, etc. 
Good care is taken both by the Russian consul in Bucharest and 
by the rabble of Moldavian and Wallachian Boyars, most of whom 
are not even Romanian but a motley mosaic of adventurers from 
God-knows-where—a sort of oriental December Gang—that the 
Romanian people should still groan beneath the burdens of a 
villeinage so monstrous that it could only have been set up by 
Russians with their règlement organique and could only be sustained 
by an oriental demi-monde. 
Vogt, in the attempt to deck out the wisdom quarried from his 
original Dentu sources with his own eloquence, says: 
"Austria already had enough on her hands with one Piedmont in the South; it 
had no need of another in the East" (loc. cit., p. 64). 
Piedmont annexes Italian lands. So are the Danubian prin­
cipalities, the least warlike of the Turkish lands, to annex 
Romanian territory, that is, conquer Bessarabia from Russia, and 
Transylvania, the Banat of Temesvâr and the Bukovina from 
Austria? Vogt not only forgets the "benevolent Tsar", he also 
forgets that in 1848-49 Hungary did not seem in the least inclined 
to part with these more or less Romanian provinces, that it 
' answered their "cry of distress" with a drawn sword, and that on 
the contrary it was Austria which used "propaganda about the 
principle of nationality" as a weapon against Hungary. 
But the historical scholarship of his Studien shows itself in its 
full splendour when Vogt, relying on half-remembered bits from 
a Kossuth actually gave the lecture on November 19 (Kossuth, L'Europe, 
l'Autriche et la Hongrie, Bruxelles, 1859, pp. 54-55).— Ed. 
b Marx gives this sentence in English in brackets after its German equivalent.— 
Ed. 

=====第190页=====
166 Karl Marx 
an ephemeral pamphlet, which he had skimmed through, with 
perfect calm 
"deduces the wretched condition of the principalities ... from the destructive 
poison of the Greeks and Fanariots" (loc. cit., p. 63). 
He had no idea that the Fanariots (so called after a district in 
Constantinople) are these very same Greeks who have lorded it in 
the Danubian principalities under Russian protection since the 
beginning of the eighteenth century. They are, in part, the 
descendants of the limondji (lemonade-sellers) of Constantinople 
that are now once again playing at "Romanian nationality" by 
order of the Russians. 
While the white angel of the North advances from the East, 
destroying the various nationalities for the benefit of the Slav race, 
the white angel of the South advances from the opposite direction 
as the standard-bearer of the principle of nationality, and 
"we must wait until the liberation of the subject nationalities has been brought 
about by this man of destiny" (Studien, p. 36). 
Now while these combined operations of the two angels and 
the "two greatest external enemies of Germany's unity" (Studien, 
2nd edition, Afterword, p. 154) are being conducted "in close 
concert"—what role is assigned to Germany by our Imperial Vogt, 
who is, however, no "Augmentor of the Realm" 3? 
"The most short-sighted persons," Vogt remarks, "must have realised by now 
that there is an understanding between the Government of Prussia and the 
Imperial Government of France, that Prussia will not unsheath its sword to defend 
the non-German provinces of Austria" (including Bohemia and Moravia, of 
course), "that it will give its approval to all measures affecting the defence of the 
territory of the Confederation" (excluding its "non-German" provinces), "but will 
otherwise prevent any intervention of the Confederation or its individual members 
on Austria's  behalf,  so that in the subsequent peace negotiations it will receive its 
reward for these efforts in the North German plains" (Studien, 1st edition, pp. 18-19). 
By proclaiming from the housetops, even before the outbreak of 
the war against Austria, the secret entrusted to him by the 
Tuileries that Prussia was acting in "secret understanding" with the 
"external enemy of Germany", who would reward it with territory 
"in the North German plains", Vogt was of course giving Prussia 
the best possible assistance in achieving its alleged ends. He roused 
a Medieval title bestowed on the German Emperor.— Ed. 

=====第191页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 167 
the suspicions of the other German governments both towards 
Prussia's initial attempts to neutralise them and towards its military 
preparations and its claim to the supreme command during the 
war. 
"Whatever path Germany has to choose in the present crisis," Vogt says, "one 
thing is certain: that as a whole it must pursue one definite path with energy, 
whereas as things are the unhappy Federal Diet, etc." (loc. cit., p. 96). 
By spreading the view that Prussia goes arm in arm with "the 
external enemy" and that this will lead to its devouring the 
Northern plains, Vogt presumably intends to restore the unity in 
the Federal Diet which is so badly lacking. Saxony, in particular, is 
reminded explicitly that Prussia has already once occasioned "the 
loss of some of its finest provinces" (loc. cit., p. 93). The 
"purchase of the Jade Bay" is denounced (loc. cit., p. 15). 
"Holstein was to have been the reward for Prussia's participation" (in the 
Turkish War) "when the notorious theft of the dispatch gave the negotiations a 
different turn" (loc. cit., p. 15). "Mecklenburg, Hanover, Oldenburg, Holstein and 
other miscellaneous appendages ... these fraternal German states are the bait at 
which Prussia greedily snatches"—and does so moreover "at every possible 
opportunity" (loc. cit., pp. 14, 15). 
And as Vogt reveals, on this occasion it has been firmly hooked 
by Louis Bonaparte. On the one side, as the result of its secret 
"understanding" with Louis Bonaparte Prussia must and will 
"reach the coasts of the North Sea and the Baltic at the expense of 
its German brothers" (loc. cit., p. 14). On the other side, 
"Prussia will have obtained a natural frontier only when the watershed of the 
Erzgebirge and the Fichtelgebirge is extended through the white Main and along 
the Main up to Mainz" (loc. cit., p. 93). 
Natural frontiers in the depth of Germany! Formed, moreover, 
by a watershed which passes through a river I It is this sort of 
discovery in the realm of physical geography—to which we may 
add the channel that rose to the surface (see "Magnum 
Opus")—that puts "the well-rounded character" on a par with 
Alexander von Humboldt. At the same time as he was preaching 
to the German Confederation on the confidence it must have in 
the leadership of Prussia, Vogt, not satisfied with the "ancient 
rivalry between Prussia and Austria on German, etc., territory", 
invented another rivalry between these two states which "has so 
frequently broken out on non-European soil" (loc. cit., p. 20). This 
non-European soil is probably on the moon. 
In fact Vogt simply translates into words the map of L'Europe en 
1860 published by the French Government in 1858. The map 
7-1305 

=====第192页=====
168 Karl Marx 
shows Hanover, Mecklenburg, Brunswick, Holstein, the Electorate 
of Hesse together with sundry territories such as Waldeck, Anhalt, 
Lippe, etc., as having been annexed to Prussia, while "l'Empereur  des 
Français conserve ses (!) limites actuelles", the Emperor of the 
French preserves his (!) existing frontiers. "Prussia down to the 
Main" is also a slogan of Russian diplomacy. (See, for example, 
the memorandum of 1837 mentioned above. 3) A Prussian North 
Germany would counterbalance an Austrian South Germany, 
separated by natural frontiers, tradition, denomination, dialect and 
tribal differences. The division of Germany into two parts would be 
completed by simplifying the contradictions within it and the 
Thirty Years' War162 would be declared in permanence. 
According to the first edition of the Studien, Prussia was 
supposed to receive such a  "reward"  for its "efforts" in forcing the 
sword of the German Confederation back into its sheath during 
the war. In Vogt's Studien, as on the French map L'Europe en 1860, 
it is not Louis Bonaparte, but Prussia that seeks and achieves the 
enlargement of its territory and attains natural frontiers as a result 
of the French war against Austria. 
Vogt only reveals Prussia's true task in the Afterword to the 
second edition of his Studien, b which appeared while the Franco-
Austrian war was still in progress. Prussia was to initiate a "civil 
war" (see the 2nd edition, p. 152) so as to establish a "unified 
central power" (loc. cit., p. 153), to incorporate Germany in the 
Prussian monarchy. While Russia advances from the East and 
Austria is held down by Louis Bonaparte in Italy, Prussia is to 
embark on a dynastic "civil war" in Germany. Vogt guarantees the 
Prince Regent 0 that 
"the war that has broken out" in Italy "will last out the year 1859 at the very 
least, whereas the unification of Germany, if prosecuted resoluteiy, will not take as 
many weeks as the Italian campaign months" (loc. cit., p. 155). 
The civil war in Germany will only be a matter of weeks! Apart 
from the Austrian troops which would immediately march on 
Prussia, Italian wr ar or no Italian war, Prussia would meet 
resistance, as Vogt himself explains, from "Bavaria d ... which is 
entirely under Austrian influence" (Studien, 1st edition, p. 90), 
from Saxony, which would be the first to be threatened and which 
a See this volume, p.  141.—  Ed. 
b The Preface to the first edition of the Studien was dated "March 31, 1859", and 
the Afterword to the second edition, "June 6, 1859".— Ed. 
c William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 
A Vogt's italics.— Ed. 

=====第193页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 169 
would no longer have any reason to do violence to its "sympathies 
for Austria" (loc. cit., p. 93), from "Württemberg, Hesse-
Darmstadt and Hanover" (loc. cit., p. 94), in short from 
"nine-tenths" (loc. cit., p. 16) of the "German governments". And 
these governments, as Vogt further demonstrates, would not lack 
support in the event of such a dynastic "civil war", especially if 
initiated by Prussia at a time when Germany was threatened by its 
"two greatest external enemies". 
"The court" (in Baden), says Vogt, "goes along with Prussia, but the people, 
and there is no doubt about that, certainly does not share the predilections of the 
ruling family. The Breisgau, no less than Upper Swabia, is bound much more 
closely to the Emperor and the Imperial state by ties of sympathy, religious 
confession and old memories of the Austrian Forelands, to which it formerly 
belonged, than one would have supposed after such a long separation" (loc. cit., 
pp. 93-94). "With the exception of Mecklenburg" and "perhaps" the Electorate of 
Hesse, "in North Germany the attitude to the theory of incorporation is one of 
mistrust and Prussia's policy is accepted only with reluctance. The instinctive feeling 
of dislike, indeed of  hatred,  aroused by Prussia in South Germany ... has not been 
eliminated or talked out of existence by the full-throated cry of the Imperial party. a 
It lives on in the people, and no government, not even that of Baden, can resist it 
for long. Thus Prussia has no real support either among the German people, or in the 
governments of the German Confederation" (loc. cit., p. 21). 
Thus speaks Vogt. And for that very reason, according to that 
same Vogt, a dynastic "civil war" initiated by Prussia in "secret 
understanding" with the "two greatest external enemies of 
Germany", would only be a matter of "weeks". But there is more 
to come. 
"The Old Prussian provinces go along with the government—the Rhineland and 
Westphalia with Catholic Austria. If the popular movement there does not succeed 
in pushing the government over to Austria's side, the immediate  consequence  would be 
to reopen the gulf between the two parts of the monarchy" (loc. cit., p. 20). 
Thus,  according to Vogt, if the simple non-intervention of 
Prussia on Austria's behalf was enough to reopen the gulf 
between Rhineland-Westphalia and the Old Prussian provinces, 
then clearly, in the eyes of the same Vogt, a "civil war", 
undertaken by Prussia with the aim of expelling Austria from 
Germany, was bound to wrench Rhineland-Westphalia from 
Prussia for good and all. But "what does Germany matter to these 
papists?" (loc. cit., p. 119), or as he really thinks, what do these 
papists matter to Germany? The Rhineland and Westphalia are 
ultramontane "Roman-Catholic" and not "true German" provinces. 
Hence they must be expelled from the territory of the Confedera-
a i.e. the supporters of Austria.— Ed. 
7* 

=====第194页=====
170 Karl Marx 
tion just like Bohemia and Moravia. And this process of expulsion 
is to be accelerated by the dynastic "civil war" recommended to 
Prussia by Vogt. And in fact in its map published in 1858 of 
L'Europe en 1860, which served Vogt as a compass throughout his 
Studien, the French Government, which had annexed Egypt to 
Austria, also showed the Rhine provinces as countries of "Catholic 
nationality" and annexed by Belgium—an ironic formula for the 
annexation of Belgium and the Rhine provinces by France. The 
fact that Vogt goes even further than the map of the French 
Government and throws in Catholic Westphalia as an extra, can 
be explained by the "scientific relations" between the fugitive Regent 
of the Empire and Plon-Plon, the son of the ex-King of 
Westphalia. a 
To sum up: On the one hand, Louis Bonaparte will give Russia 
leave to extend its rule from Posen to Bohemia and from Hungary 
right down to Turkey. On the other hand, he himself will establish 
a united and independent Italy on France's frontier by force of 
arms,  and all that— pour le roi de Prusse h; all that to give Prussia an 
opportunity to bring Germany under its wing by means of a civil 
war and to "secure" the "Rhine provinces for ever" against 
France (loc. cit., p. 121). 
"But, it will be said, the territory of the Confederation is in danger, the 
hereditary foe threatens, his real goal is the Rhine. Then, defend the Rhine and 
defend the territory of the Confederation" (loc. cit., p. 105), 
and in fact defend the territory of the Confederation by ceding 
Bohemia and Moravia to Russia, and defend the Rhine by starting 
a German "civil war" with the aim, among others, of tearing 
Rhineland and Westphalia from Prussia. 
"But, it will be said, Louis Napoleon ... desires to satisfy his Napoleonic thirst for 
conquest by some means or other! We do not think so, we have the example of the 
Crimean campaign before our eyes!" (loc. cit., p. 129.) 
Apart from his scepticism about the Napoleonic thirst for 
conquest and his faith in the Crimean campaign, Vogt has yet 
another argument in petto. The Austrians and the French will 
follow the example of the Kilkenny cats ib3 and keep on biting each 
other in Italy until there is nothing left of them but their tails. 
"It will be a terribly bloody, stubborn and perhaps indecisive war" (loc. cit., 
pp. 127, 128). "Only by exerting its strength to the very utmost will France, together 
with Piedmont, be able to triumph, and it will not recover from ihese efforts for 
decades" (loc. cit., p. 129). 
:1 Jerome Bonaparte.— Ed. 
b For the King of Prussia, i.e. for nothing. — Ed. 

=====第195页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 171 
This prospect of a long-lasting Italian war silences his critics. 
And the method by which Vogt manages to prolong Austria's 
resistance to French arms in Italy and to cripple France's 
aggressive power, is indeed original enough. On the one hand, the 
French are given carte blanche in Italy; on the other hand, the 
"benevolent Tsar" is given leave by manoeuvres in Galicia, 
Hungary, Moravia and Bohemia and by revolutionary machina­
tions within the country and military demonstrations on its 
frontiers 
"to hold down a significant part of the Austrian forces in those parts of the 
monarchy which are exposed to Russian attack or vulnerable to Russian intrigue" 
(loc. cit., p. 11). 
And lastly, by means of a dynastic "civil war" simultaneously 
unleashed in Germany by Prussia, Austria will be compelled to 
withdraw its main forces from Italy to protect its German 
possessions. It is obvious that in such circumstances Francis Joseph 
and Louis Bonaparte will not conclude a Treaty of Campofor-
mio 164 but "will both bleed to death in Italy". 
Austria will not make any concessions to the "benevolent Tsar" 
in the East and accept the long-standing offer of indemnification 
in Serbia and Bosnia. Nor will it guarantee the Rhine provinces to 
France and fall on Prussia in league with Russia and France. Not 
on your life! It will insist on "bleeding to death in Italy". In any 
event, however, Vogt's "man of destiny" would indignantly reject 
such a compensation on the Rhine. Vogt knows that 
"the foreign policy of the present Empire has only one principle, that of 
self-preservation" (loc. cit., p. 31). 
He knows that Louis Bonaparte 
"is intent on pursuing a single idea [...] that of preserving his power" (over France) 
(loc. cit., p. 29). 
He knows that the "Italian war does not increase his popularity 
in France" whereas the acquisition of the Rhine provinces would 
make him and his dynasty "popular". He says: 
"The Rhine provinces are indeed a pet ambition of the French chauvinist and 
perhaps, if one were to go into it, one would discover only a very small minority of 
the nation which did not bear this wish deep in its heart" (loc. cit., p. 121). 
On the other hand, "perceptive Frenchmen", and therefore 
presumably also Vogt's "man of destiny who is as wise as a 
serpent", know that 
"they can only hope to see this realised" (namely France's acquisition of the 
natural frontier of the Rhine) "as long as Germany possesses 34 different 

=====第196页=====
172 Karl Marx 
governments. [...] Let a real Germany come into existence, with unified interests 
and a firm organisation—and the Rhine frontier will be secure for all time" (loc. 
cit., p. 121). 
For this very reason, Louis Bonaparte, who at Villafranca 
offered the Emperor of Austria Lombardy in exchange for a 
guarantee of the Rhine provinces (see the statement by Kinglake 
in the House of Commons, July 12, 1860a), would have 
indignantly rejected Austria's offer of the Rhine provinces in 
exchange for French aid against Prussia. 
Vogt's original Dentu sources likewise not only indulged in 
lyrical effusions on the subject of German unity under the aegis of 
Prussia*: they also spurned every suggestion of ambitions in the 
Rhine provinces with virtuous indignation. 
"The Rhine!... What is the Rhine?—A frontier. Frontiers will soon be 
anachronisms" (La foi des traités, etc., Paris, 1859, p. 36).** 
In the millennium that is to be established by Badinguet on the 
foundations of the principle of nationality, who will be concerned 
about the Rhine frontier, or indeed any frontiers at all! 
"Does France insist on compensation for the sacrifices it is prepared to make in 
the cause of equity, of legitimate influence and in the interest of European 
equilibrium? Does it demand the left bank of the Rhine? Does it so much as lay 
claim to Savoy and the County of Nice?" (La vraie question, etc., Paris, 1859, 
p. 13.)*** 
* "La Prusse est l'espoir de l'Allemagne ... l'esprit allemand a son centre 
à Berlin ... l'esprit allemand cherche l'unité de son corps, la vérité de la 
Confédération. C'est par cet entraînement que s'élève la Prusse... D'où vient-il que, 
lorsque l'Italie réclame l'intégrité, l'unité nationale, ce que l'Allemagne désire, 
celle-ci favorise l'Autriche, négation vivante de toute nationalité?... C'est que la 
Prusse n'est pas encore la tête; c'est que la tête est l'Autriche qui, pesant avec ces 
forces hétérogènes sur l'Allemagne politique, l'entraîne à des contradictions avec 
l'Allemagne véritable" (La foi des traités, etc., p. 34). ["Prussia  is the hope of 
Germany ... the German spirit has its centre in Berlin ... the German spirit seeks 
the unity of its body, a real Confederation. It is this desire that induces Prussia to 
rise....  How does it come about that while Italy demands national integrity and 
unity, which Germany too longs for, the latter can still favour Austria, the living 
negation of all nationality?... The reason is that Prussia is not yet in command; the 
reason is that Austria is still in command and weighing with its heterogeneous 
forces on the political entity called Germany, and brings it into contradiction with 
the real Germany."] 
** "Le Rhin!... Qu'est-ce que le Rhin? Une frontière. Les frontières seront 
bientôt des anachronismes" (loc. cit., p. 36). 
*** "La France stipule-t-elle des dédommagements pour les sacrifices qu'elle est 
prête à faire dans un but d'équité, de juste influence, et dans l'intérêt de l'équilibre 
a The Times, No.  23671,  July 13, I860.— Ed. 

=====第197页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 173 
France's renunciation of Savoy and Nice as proof of France's 
renunciation of the Rhine! Vogt did not translate that into 
German. 
Before the start of the war it was of crucial importance for 
Louis Bonaparte, if he was unable to lure Prussia into an 
understanding, at least to make the German Confederation believe 
that he had done so. Vogt attempts to disseminate this belief in the 
first edition of his Studien. During the war it became even more 
important for Louis Bonaparte to induce Prussia to take steps that 
would provide Austria with proof or apparent proof of such an 
understanding. In the second edition of the Studien, which 
appeared while the war was in progress, Vogt therefore calls on 
Prussia in an Afterword to conquer Germany and initiate a 
dynastic "civil war" which, as the text of his book makes cleas, 
would be "bloody, stubborn and perhaps indecisive" and would 
cost Prussia Rhineland and Westphalia at the very least. And in 
the Afterword to the same book he solemnly assures his readers 
that it wili "only cost a matter of weeks". Vogt's voice is in truth 
not that of the siren. Hence Louis Bonaparte, seconded in his 
knavish plot by bottle-holder a Palmerston, was forced to present 
Prussian proposals he himself had drawn up to Francis Joseph in 
Villafranca; Austria had to use Prussia's modest claims to the 
military leadership of Germany as an excuse for concluding a 
peace* which Louis Bonaparte had to excuse in France by saying 
that the Italian war was threatening to become a general war 
which 
"would bring about German unity and thus accomplish a work which ever since 
Francis I it had been the object of French policy to prevent".** 
européen? Demande-t-elle la rive gauche du Rhin? Élève-t-elle même des prétentions 
sur la Savoie et sur le Comté de Nice?" (La vraie question, etc., p. 13.) 
* A few days after the conclusion of peace in Villafranca the Prager Zeitung 
printed the following official declaration: "This insistence" (Prussia's insistence on 
taking over the supreme command of the federal army under federal control) 
"provides clear proof that Prussia is striving for hegemony in Germany and thus for the 
expulsion of Austria from Germany. Since faithless Lombardy is infinitely less valuable 
than the maintenance of our position in Germany, we sacrificed it so as to achieve peace 
which had become an urgent necessity for us in view of Prussia's attitude." 
** Galignani's Messenger of Paris, which only carries leading articles by way of 
exception and then in response to special official request, states in its issue of July 
22, 1859 [Marx quotes in English]: "To give another province to the King of 
Piedmont, it would not only have been necessary to support a war against 
a Marx uses the English expression.— Ed. 
b "Politische Übersicht, Wien, 13. Juli", Prager Zeitung, No. 165, July 15, 
1859.—  Ed. 

=====第198页=====
174 Karl Marx 
After France had acquired Savoy and Nice as a result of the 
Italian war, and with them a position worth more than an army in 
the event of a war on the Rhine, "German unity under Prussian 
hegemony" and "cession of the left bank of the Rhine to France" 
became interchangeable factors in the probability calculations of 
the 2nd December. The map of L'Europe en I860 published in 
1858 was interpreted by the map L'Europe pacifiée (Europe 
pacified?) which appeared in 1860. According to this map Egypt 
was no longer given to Austria and the Rhine provinces together 
with Belgium were annexed by France in return for the "Northern 
plains" that were now assigned to Prussia.* 
Finally, Persigny made an official pronouncement in Etienne 
that, if only in the "interest of European equilibrium", any further 
centralisation on the part of Germany would entail the advance of 
France to the Rhine.** But neither before nor after the Italian war 
had the grotesque ventriloquist of the Tuileries expressed himself 
with such insolence as through the mouthpiece of the fugitive 
Imperial Regent. 
two-thirds of Europe, but German unity would have been realised, and a work thus 
accomplished, which ever since the time of Francis I it has been the object of 
French policy to prevent."  ["Late"st  Intelligence", Galignani's Messenger, No. 13876, 
July 22, 1859.] 
* Plon-Plon's special organ, L'Opinion nationale, said in an article of July 5, 
1860:  "The day of demanding the return of territories by force is past. The 
Fmperor has too much tact and too accurate a feeling for the trend of public 
opinion for that.... But is Prussia obliged by oath never to think of German unity? 
Can it guarantee never to cast a covetous eye on Hanover, Saxony, Brunswick, 
Hesse, Oldenburg and Mecklenburg? Today the rulers embrace each other and 
their sincerity is certainly genuine. But who knows what the people will demand of 
them in a few years' time? And if, under the pressure of public opinion, Germany 
is unified would it be fair, would it be reasonable not to allow France to expand its 
territory at the expense of its neighbours?... If the Germans were to think it right and 
proper to alter their hitherto existing political constitution and to put a strong 
centralised government in the place of the impotent Confederation, then we cannot 
guarantee that Fravce xvu'd not ''f~ i * it,',' crid [ioiv> f> !cw ind omfeniatiov and 
assurances from t h ) -utr^ " 
** The I' \rerial  P^ck-niff e\ir! H'rsrlf in  s lie Dr i t i nann-rsle' J a •c'iUuve 
anglais'', Pans, ! "-'V) Actoidms; :<> lins a K-v ni'li«.n <"-e • i;ris v.i Be 1?' 'is Vue to 
be puiloined m order to i.iipto\e the t'ioral O psuiut'on or I ,-< t i'\ ->:< e >> i>V,h 
element requires a _,t<\rt*'r adrn'v t'ire of northern *.>]<,> Fa-in'", at-, i ' ' ,;t !\-i 
political and 'aiht \i\  TOI'OÜS  f-rante ' ,TM'S the ;i i .  ,* •, ^< I ',, , .' , if. •; 
continues "\ second f,<t< i i»I %es ml. .,i, anne\ai n" r ! tV IF r ' >>i <>'i<'. < 
and Belgium! "nee essai ,. Fiance do-.it  t s -urd demand 1« i ratio., t! F <• F -l ( .'. • "• : 
liberté) and the souther H ueniuit ;>Fr s an Ü.IJU-IÜ.II  I. le m us p. ' !, iHs* L:t< '•; .s 
This .south'l K cement h ts natr \ondttiul  quanti. > hi. .' I k-  *• . uin i ai.J 

=====第199页=====
Herr Vogt. —VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 175 
Vogt "the New Swiss, citizen of the Canton of Berne and 
member of the Council of States 165 for Geneva" (loc. cit., Preface), 
opens the Swiss section of his Studien with a prologue (loc. cit., pp. 
37-39) in which he calls upon Switzerland to utter a paean of joy at 
the replacement of Louis Philippe by Louis Bonaparte. It is true 
that Louis Bonaparte was demanding that the Federal Council 
should "put controls on the press", but "the Napoleonides seem in 
this respect to have extremely sensitive skins" (loc. cit., p. 36). A 
mere skin disease, so engrained in the family that it is transmitted 
not only in the family blood, but even—teste Louis Bonaparte—by 
the mere family name. However, 
"The persecution of innocent men in Geneva which has been carried out by the 
Federal Council on instructions from, the Emperor against poor devils whose only 
crime was that they were Italians; the establishment of consulates; the harassment 
of the press; the senseless police regulations of every conceivable kind and, finally, 
the negotiations about the cession of the Vallée des Dappes, have all played an 
essential part in obliterating in the minds of the Swiss the memories of those 
services which the Emperor really rendered in the Neuchatel affair, and in particular 
for the very party which has now turned most violently against him" (loc. cit., pp. 
37, 38). 
Magnanimous Emperor, ungrateful party! The Emperor's aim 
in the Neuchatel affair was by no means the creation of a 
precedent for the violation of the treaties of 1815, the humiliation 
of Prussia and the establishment of a protectorate over Switzer­
land. What he was really concerned with was "to render''' 
Switzerland "a real service", in his capacity as "New Swiss, citizen 
of the Canton of Thurgau and artillery captain of Oberstrass". 
The accusation of ingratitude levelled by Vogt against the 
anti-Bonapartist party in Switzerland in March 1859, was extended 
to the whole of Switzerland in June 1860 by another servant of the 
Emperor, M. de Thouvenel. The Times of June 30, 1860 writes that 
"A few days ago a meeting took place between Dr. Kern and M. de Thouvenel 
in the Foreign Ministry in Paris in the presence of Lord Cowley. Thouvenel 
informed the honourable representative of Switzerland that the doubts and 
protestations of the Federal Government were insulting inasmuch as they seemed 
to imply a want of faith in the government of His Imperial Majesty. Such 
treatment was base ingratitude in view of the services which the Emperor Napoleon 
had rendered* the Confederation on many occasions, and in particular in the 
firmness. It stands in need of patient steadfastness, the cold, unbending resolution 
of our northern brothers. The frontiers destined for us by providence, therefore, 
are as essential to our freedom as to our independence." 
:1 Marx gives the English words 'services" and "rendered" in brackets after 
their German equivalents.—  F.d. 

=====第200页=====
176 Karl Marx 
Neuchâtel affair. However that may be, since Switzerland had been so blind as to 
mistrust her benefactor, she must herself bear the consequences." 
Nevertheless Vogt tried to open the eyes of the blind anti-
Bonapartist party in Switzerland as early as March 1859. On the 
one hand, he points to "the real services" which "the Emperor has 
rendered". On the other hand, "the Imperial harassments shrink 
to vanishing point" beside the royal harassments under Louis 
Philippe (loc. cit., p. 39). For example, in 1858 the Federal Council 
"on instructions from the Emperor" expelled some "poor devils 
whose only crime was that they were Italians" 2 (p. 37); in 1838, 
notwithstanding Louis Philippe's threats, it refused to expel Louis 
Bonaparte, whose only crime was to have used Switzerland as a 
base from which to conspire against Louis Philippe.« In 1846, 
despite Louis Philippe's "warlike gestures", Switzerland ventured 
upon the Sonderbund war, 168 for it refused to let itself be bullied 
by the peaceful King; in 1858 it was hardly prudish in its reaction 
to Louis Bonaparte's groping in the Vallée des Dappes. 
"Louis Philippe," Vogt says himself,  "had dragged out a miserable existence in 
Europe, snubbed by everybody, even by the lesser legitimate rulers, because he had 
not dared to conduct a strong foreign policy" (loc. cit., p. 31). However, "Imperial 
policy vis-à-vis Switzerland is without any doubt that of a powerful neighbour who 
knows that in the end he can enforce whatever he likes" (loc. cit., p. 37). 
Therefore, Vogt concludes, with a logic worthy of Grandguillot, 
"from a purely Swiss point of view one can only rejoice heartily ,, (p. 39) 
because instead of "Louis Philippe who was snubbed by every­
body" Switzerland has received a "powerful neighbour who knows 
that with respect to Switzerland he can do whatever he likes". 
This prologue, which establishes the necessary mood, is followed 
by a German translation of the note of the Federal Council of 
March 14, 1859,b  and curiously enough Vogt is full of praise for 
this note in which the Federal Council referred to the treaties of 
1815, 169 though the same Vogt declares that it is "hypocrisy" to 
refer to these treaties. "Get along with your hypocrisy!" (loc. cit., 
p. 112.)* 
* In reality it was not the "treaties" which had protected Swiss neutrality, but 
the fact that the interests of the various neighbouring powers cancelled each other 
out. "The Swiss feel," wrote Captain Harris, the English chargé d'affaires in Berne, 
in a letter to Lord John Russell after an interview with Frey-Hérosé, the Federal 
President, "that ... recent events have fundamentally altered the balance of power 
a In early 1858 Napoleon III demanded that the Swiss Government should 
extradite the political refugees accused of being implicated in the Orsini 
conspiracy.— Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Studien..., S. 80-83.—  Ed. 

=====第201页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 177 
Vogt now goes on to consider "from which side  the first attack on 
Swiss neutrality will corné" (loc. cit., p. 84) and proves, quite 
unnecessarily, that the French army, which had no need to 
conquer Piedmont this time, would march through neither the 
Simplon nor the Great St. Bernard. At the same time he discovers 
a non-existent land route "over the Mont Cenis, via Fenestrelle 
and through the Stura valley" (loc. cit., p. 84). He means the Dora 
valley. From France, then, there is no threat to Switzerland. 
"But respect for Swiss neutrality on the part of Austria cannot be looked for with 
similar confidence, and various factors even suggest that in certain eventualities 
Austria is indeed prepared to violate it" (loc. cit., p. 85). "Of significance in this 
respect is the concentration of a military force in Bregenz and Feldkirch" (loc. cit., p. 86). 
Here the thread which runs through the Studien and leads 
straight from Geneva to Paris becomes visible. 
The Blue Book on The Affairs of Italy. January to May 1859 
published by the Derby Cabinet says that "the concentration of 
an Austrian military force near Bregenz and Feldkirch" was a 
rumour assiduously cultivated by Bonapartist agents in Switzerland 
without a jot of factual evidence to support it (No. 174 of the 
Blue Book in question: letter from Captain Harris to Lord 
Malmesbury, Berne, March 24, 1859). In this connection Hum­
boldt- Vogt also made the discovery that in Bregenz and Feldkirch 
"one is in the immediate vicinity of the valley of the Rhine, which is the 
starting-point for three great Alpine passes with viable roads, viz., the Via Mala, the 
Splügen and the Saint Bernard, the latter leading to the Ticino, the first two to 
Lake Como" (loc. cit., p. 86). 
In reality the Via Mala leads firstly over the Splügen, secondly 
over the Saint Bernard and thirdly nowhere else. 
After all this Polonius chatter designed to direct the apprehen­
sions of the Swiss from the Western to the Eastern frontier, "the 
well-rounded character" at last rolled on to its real task. 
"Switzerland," Vogt announces, "is utterly in the right when it firmly  rejects  the 
obligation not to permit troop movements on this railway" (from Culoz to Aix and 
Chambéry) "and will confine  itself,  should the case arise, to make use of the 
neutralised territory only insofar as it is necessary for the defence of its own 
territory" (loc. cit., p. 89). 
among Switzerland's neighbours, as ever since the Neuchâtel affair, Prussia has 
been indifferent, Austria paralysed, and France incomparably more powerful than 
before." 3 
a Harris to Russell, received January 25, Correspondence Respecting the Proposed 
Annexation of Savoy and Nice to France..., London, 1860, p.  12.—  Ed. 

=====第202页=====
178 Karl Marx 
And he assures the Federal Council that "the whole of 
Switzerland will support the policy indicated in its note of March 14 
to a man". 
Vogt published his Studien at the end of March. It was not until 
April 24 that Louis Bonaparte used the above-mentioned railway 
for troop movements and he did not declare war until even later. 
Thus Vogt, who was privy to the details of the Bonapartist plan of 
war, knew very well "from which side the first attack on Swiss 
neutrality would come". His mission was explicitly to decoy 
Switzerland into condoning an initial violation of its neutrality, 
which would lead logically to the annexation of the neutralised 
territory of Savoy by the December Empire. Patting the Federal 
Council on the back, he attributes to the note of March 14 the 
meaning that it ought to have from the point of view of the 
Bonapartists. The Federal Council stated in its note that Switzer­
land would fulfil its "mission" of neutrality as stipulated in the 
treaties, "faithfully and with complete impartiality". It goes onto 
quote an article of the treaties according to which "no troops 
belonging to any other power may pass through or be stationed there" 
(in the neutralised territory of Savoy). It does not mention at all 
that it would permit the French to use the railway which passes 
through the neutralised territory. Conditionally, as a "measure 
designed to secure and defend the territory of the Confedera­
tion", it reserves the right of the Confederation to a "military 
occupation" of the neutralised territory. The fact that Vogt 
deliberately and on instructions from above distorts the note of the 
Federal Council is not only evident from its own wording; it is 
corroborated also by the statement made in the House of Lords on 
April 23, 1860 by Lord Malmesbury, then British Foreign 
Secretary: 
"When the French troops were about to march through Savoy into Sardinia" 
(more than a month after the Federal Council's note of March 14), "the Swiss 
Government, true to the neutrality upon which depends its independence, [...] at first 
objected that these troops had no right to pass through the neutralised territory."3 
And by what means did Louis Bonaparte and the Swiss party 
allied with him manage to allay the doubts of the Federal Council? 
Vogt, who was aware at the end of March 1859 that French troop 
trains would violate the neutralised territory at the end of April 
1859,  was naturally able to foresee by the end of March the 
euphemism which Louis Bonaparte would use at the end of April 
to palliate his act of violence. He casts doubt on whether the 
a Marx gives the quoted passage in English in a footnote.— Ed. 

=====第203页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 179 
"head of the line from Culoz to Aix and Chambery comes within 
the neutral territory" (loc. cit., p. 89) and shows that "the 
demarcation of neutral territory was not carried out with the 
purpose of cutting off communications between France and 
Chambery", so that morally the railway in question does not come 
within the neutral territory.* 
Let us, on the other hand, listen to what Lord Malmesbury says 
about it: 
"Subsequently, there being some question as to whether the line of railway did 
not avoid the neutralised portion of Savoy, the Swiss Government withdrew their 
objection, and allowed the troops of France to pass. I think that they were wrong 
in doing so.a We thought the maintenance of the neutrality of such European 
consequence ... that we protested at the French Court against the passage of those 
troops to Sardinia on 28 April 1859." 
This protest led to Palmerston accusing Malmesbury of "pro-
Austrian" sympathies, as he "had uselessly offended the French 
Government",15  just as Vogt in his "Magnum Opus" (p. 183) 
accuses Das Volk of 
"doing everything in its power to embarrass Switzerland", on behalf of Austria, 
of course.... "Read the articles which Das Volk published about the question of 
neutrality and the passage of the French troops through Savoy if you wish to have 
tangible evidence of these views, which are fully shared by the Allgemeine 
Zeitung" .** 
* The fact that the railway does come within the neutralised territory was 
explicitly conceded in a note addressed to Captain Harris on November 18, 1859 
by Stämpfli, the President of the Confederation, and Schiess, the Chancellor. It 
says there: "Il pourrait être aussi question d'un autre point qui concerne la 
neutralité de la Savoie ... nous voulons parler du chemin de fer dernièrement 
construit de Culoz à Chambéry, à l'égard duquel on peut se demander s'il devait 
continuer à faire partie du territoire neutralisé." ["A further question could arise 
concerning the neutrality of Savoy ... we refer to the railway recently constructed 
between Culoz and Chambéry, regarding which it may be questionable whether it 
can continue to form part of the neutralised territory."] 
** Vogt accuses Das Volk in particular of having attempted "to bring about a 
conflict between the Swiss Confederation and its more powerful neighbours". 
When the annexation of Savoy actually took place, the Eidgenössische Zeitung, a 
Bonapartist paper, criticised the official journal, Der Bund,  because "its views on 
Savoy and France were a feeble echo of the policy which had aimed at involving 
Switzerland in the conflicts of Europe ever since 1848" (see Der Bund,  Berne, No. 
71, March 12, 1860). ft is evident that the Bonapartist scribes receive the phrases 
readv-made. 
a Marx gives this sentence in English in brackets after its German equivalent.— 
Ed. 
h Marx gives this phrase in English in brackets after its German equivalent.— 
Ed. 

=====第204页=====
180 Karl Marx 
The reader will now have "tangible evidence" that the entire 
section of Vogt's Studien that deals with Switzerland had no other 
purpose than to prepare the ground for the first violation of Swiss 
neutrality by his "man of destiny". It was the first step towards the 
annexation of Savoy and hence of French Switzerland. The fate of 
Switzerland depended on the vigour with which it opposed this 
first step, maintained its rights by availing itself of them at the 
decisive moment and raised the matter at European level at a time 
when the support of the English Government was assured and 
Louis Bonaparte, who was just launching into his localised war, 
would not venture to throw down the gauntlet. Once the English 
Government had become officially committed, it could not back 
out * Hence the mighty efforts of our "New Swiss, citizen of the 
Canton of Berne and member of the Council of States for 
Geneva" to distract attention by representing it as a right to be 
asserted by Switzerland and as a courageous gesture of defiance 
towards Austria to grant permission to the French troops to march 
through the neutralised territory. After all, he had saved 
Switzerland from Catiline-Cherval! 
At the same time as Vogt reiterates and amplifies the denial put 
out in his original Dentu pamphlets with regard to ambitions on 
the Rhine frontier, he avoids making any reference, even the most 
tentative, to the renunciation of Savoy and Nice contained in the 
same pamphlets. Even the names of Savoy and Nice do not appear 
at all in his Studien. Now, as early as February 1859, Savoyard 
delegates in Turin had protested against the Italian war on the 
grounds that the annexation of Savoy by the December Empire 
would be the price of purchasing the French alliance. This protest 
had never reached Vogt's ears. Nor had the terms of the 
agreement reached at Plombières by Louis Bonaparte and Cavour 
in August 1858 (published in one of the first issues of Das Volk a) 
even though they were well known in emigre circles. In the issue 
of Pensiero ed Azione already cited (May 2-16, 1859), Mazzini had 
predicted, literally: 
"But if Austria were to be defeated right at the start of the war and if it were to 
revive the proposals which it had put to the English Government for some time in 
1848,  namely the surrender of Lombardy on condition that it could keep Venice, 
then peace would be accepted. The only conditions to be implemented would be 
* "Had those provinces (Chablais and Faucigny) been occupied by the Federal 
troops ... there can be little doubt they would have remained in them up to this 
moment" (L. Oliphant, Universal Suffrage and Napoleon HI, London, 1860, p. 20). 
a "Mazzini und Monsieur Bonaparte", Das Volk, No. 5, June 4, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第205页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 181 
the enlargement of the Sardinian monarchy and the cession of Savoy and Nice to 
France." * 
Mazzini published his prediction in the middle of May 1859 and 
the second edition of Vogt's Studien appeared in the middle of 
June 1859, but it did not contain a single word about Savoy and 
Nice.  Even before Mazzini and the Savoyard delegates, as early as 
October 1858, a month and a half after the conspiracy at 
Plombières, the President of the Swiss Confederation informed the 
English Ministry in a dispatch that 
"he had reason to believe that a conditional agreement about the cession of 
Savoy had been reached between Louis Bonaparte and Cavour".** 
In the beginning of June 1859 the President of the Confedera­
tion again informed the English chargé d'affaires in Berne of his 
fears about the imminent annexation of Savoy and Nice.*** Vogt, 
the professional saviour of Switzerland, never received the least 
intimation either of the protest of the Savoyard delegates or of 
Mazzini's revelations, or of the anxieties of the Swiss Federal 
Government which persisted from October 1858 to June 1859. 
Indeed, as we shall see later, even in March 1860, when the secret 
of Plombières was circulating in all the streets of Europe, it took 
care to keep out of Vogt's way. "Silence is the virtue of slaves", 3 
the motto of the Studien, refers presumably to their failure to 
mention the threatened annexation. They do, however, contain 
one oblique reference to it: 
"But even assuming,"' Vogt says, "even assuming that the improbable were to 
take place and that territory in Italy, whether to the south or the north, were to be 
the prize for victory.... Undoubtedly, from an extremely narrow German point of view ... 
one might fervently wish that the French wolf will get his teeth into an Italian bone" 
(loc. cit., pp. 129, 130). 
* "Ma dove  1'Austria,  disfatta in sulle prime, affacciasse proposte eguali, a 
quelle ch'essa affacciô per breve tempo nel 1848 al Governo Inglese, abbandono 
della Lombardia a patto di serbare il Veneto, la pace ... sarebbe accettata: le sole 
condizioni dell'ingrandimento della Monarchia Sarda e della cessione della Savoia e 
di Nizza alla Francia, riceverebbero esecuzione. " 
** In the speech mentioned above, Lord Malmesbury said: "There is a despatch 
now in the Foreign Office, dated as long back as October 1858 ... from the President of 
the Swiss Republic, stating that he had reason to believe that some conditional 
agreement had been come to between the Emperor of the French and Count Cavour 
with respect to Savoy." 
*** See No. I of the first Blue Book On the Proposed Annexation of Savoy, etc. 
a Paraphrased dictum from Heinrich Heine's Reisebilder, Zweiter Teil, Italien. 
III. Die Stadt Lucca, Kap. XVII.— Ed. 

=====第206页=====
182 Karl Marx 
Italian territory to the north of course meant Nice and Savoy. 
After the New Swiss, citizen of the Canton of Berne and member 
of the Council of States for Geneva has called on Switzerland 
"from a purely Swiss point of view" (loc. cit., p. 39) to "rejoice with all 
its heart" at having Louis Bonaparte for a neighbour, it suddenly 
occurs to the fugitive Regent of the Empire that "undoubtedly, 
from an extremely narrow German point of view" he would "fervently 
wish" that the French wolf "will get his teeth into the bone" of 
Nice and Savoy, and hence, of French Switzerland.* 
Some time ago a pamphlet appeared in Paris with the title 
Napoléon HI, not Napoléon HI et l'Italie, or Napoléon HI et la 
question Roumaine, or Napoléon HI et la Prusse* but quite simply 
Napoléon III, Napoleon III without any qualification. Couched 
entirely in hyperboles, it is a panegyric on Napoleon III written by 
Napoleon III. The pamphlet was translated by an Arab called 
Dâ-Dâ into his native tongue. b In the Afterword the intoxicated 
Dâ-Dâ is unable to contain his enthusiasm any longer and 
overflows into radiant verse. In the Foreword, however, he is still 
sober enough to confess that his pamphlet had been published at 
the behest of the local authorities in Algiers and was destined for 
distribution among the indigenous Arab tribes beyond the 
Algerian frontiers so that "the idea of unity and nationhood 
under a common leader might take hold of their imagination". 
* The wish which, "from an extremely narrow German point of view", Vogt 
has to force Italian "bones" between the jaws of the "French  wolf"  to give the wolf 
indigestion, will undoubtedly be fulfilled in increasing measure. The semi-official 
Revue contemporaine —Vogt's special patron, incidentally—on October 15, 1860 
carries a report from Turin of October 8 which states inter alia: "Genoa and 
Sardinia would be the legitimate prize for a new (French) war on behalf of Italian 
unity. I may add that the possession of Genoa would be the necessary instrument 
of our influence on the peninsula and the only effective means of preventing the 
sea power whose establishment we had aided from defecting from an alliance with 
us at a later date in order to enter into league with someone else. Only with our knee 
on Italy's throat can we be sure of its  loyalty.  Austria, a good judge on this point, knows this 
very well. We shall apply pressure  less crudely, but more effectively than Austria,—that is the 
only difference." [Quoted from "La situation de l'Italie, Turin, le 8 octobre I860".] 
a Marx refers to the following pamphlets: Arthur La Guéronnière, Napoléon III, 
portrait politique, Paris, 1853 and L'empereur Napoléon HI et l'Italie, Paris, 1859; 
A. Levy, L'empereur Napoléon III et les principautés roumaines, Paris, 1858; and 
Edmond About, La Prusse en 1860, Paris, 1860.— Ed. 
b La Guéronnière, Portrait politique de l'empereur Napoléon HI, trad, en arabe par 
M. Rochaid Dahdah, Paris, I860.— Ed. 

=====第207页=====
Herr Vogt.— VIII. Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His Studies 183 
This common leader who would lay the foundations for "the unity 
of the Arab nation" is, as Dâ-Dâ makes clear, none other than 
"the sun of beneficence, the glory of the firmament,—the 
Emperor Napoleon III". Vogt, although his writing is unrhymed, 3 
is none other than the German Dâ-Dâ. 
That Dâ-Dâ Vogt should employ the word "studies" to describe his 
German paraphrase of the "Moniteur" articles, Dentu pamphlets and 
revised maps of Europe inspired by the sun of beneficence and the 
glory of the firmament, is the best joke that has ever occurred to him 
in the course of his hilarious career. It even surpasses his Regency of 
the Empire, the Imperial Wine-Bibbing and his invention of the 
Imperial passports. The fact that the "educated" German citizen was 
able to accept in good faith "studies" in which Austria fought against 
Britain for the possession of Egypt, Austria and Prussia were waging 
their struggle on non-European terrain, Napoleon I compelled the 
Bank of England to weigh its gold instead of counting it, Greeks and 
Fanariots were racially distinct, a land route went from Mont Cenis 
through Fenestrelle via the Stura valley, etc.,— all this bears witness 
to the high pressure which a ten-year-long reaction had exerted on 
his liberal skull. 
Curiously enough, the same liberal German sluggard who had 
applauded the crude exaggerations of Vogt's German version of the 
original Decembrist pamphlets, leaped up in fury from his sleep 
when Edmond About produced a prudently restrained French 
retranslation of Dâ-Dâ's compilation with the title La Prusse en 1860 
(originally Napoléon III et la Prusse). This chattering magpie of 
Bonapartism, incidentally, has a dash of waggishness. As evidence 
of Bonapartist sympathies for Germany, About points out, e.g., 
that the December Empire no more distinguishes between Dâ-Dâ 
Vogt and Humboldt than it does between Lazarillo Hackländer and 
Goethe! 3 At any rate his bracketing of Vogt with Hackländer suggests 
a more profound study on the part of About than is to be found 
anywhere in the Studien of our German Dâ-Dâ. 
a Marx puns on the word ungereimt, which means "unrhymed" and also 
"without rhyme or reason".— Ed. 
b Edmond About. La Prusse en 1860, Paris, 1860, p. 6.— Ed. 

=====第208页=====
184 
IX 
AGENCY 
"So muosens aile strîten. 
in vîl angestlîchen zîten 
wart gescheiden doch her dan 
... der Vogt da von Berne." 3 
(Klage)* 
In a Programme which Dâ-Dâ Vogt in a fit of great hilarity has 
dated April 1, namely April 1, 1859, c he called upon democrats of 
every shade of opinion to collaborate in a paper which was to 
appear in Geneva and propagate the Decembrist-Russian views of 
his Studien. Circumspect as the Programme naturallv had to be, 
the cloven hoof can occasionally be glimpsed beneath the 
blotting-paper in which it is wrapped. But we shall not dwell on 
this aspect of it. 
At the conclusion of his Programme Vogt asks his readers to 
give him the names of "like-minded comrades" who "would be 
* In Iwein, on the other hand, Hartmann makes the Vogt say, evidently 
alluding to his dispute with the bears of Berne b: 
"von Bern mac wol heizen ich, 
wand ich dâ nîht ze schaffen hân." 
["Von Bern I may be called 
Though no business have I there."] 
This Hartmann is not to be confused with Vogt's friend, the lyrical parliamentary 
mollusc of the same name. 
a "Thus, all to war must go 
In times of grief and woe. 
He had to take leave of that place 
...the Vogt of Berne." 17«— Ed. 
b i.e. the people of Berne.— Ed. 
c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., Dokumente, S. 33-37.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 185 
prepared to support similar aims in newspapers and journals to 
which they had access". At the Joint Festival in Lausanne he 
declared he had formulated a Programme with an invitation to 
"those people who were in agreement with it and were prepared to work for it, in 
exchange for an appropriate remuneration, in organs of the press at their 
disposal" (Centralfest, etc., p. 17).a 
Lastly, in a letter to Dr. Loening he writes: 
"Can you put me in touch with people who could influence newspapers and 
journals in this sense from Frankfurt? I am in a position to offer respectable 
remuneration for the contributions offprints of which I am sent" ("Magnum 
Opus",  Documents, p. 36). 
The "like-minded comrades" of the Programme become "those 
people who" at the Joint Festival of Lausanne, and they in turn are 
transformed into "people", people sans phrase, in the ietter to Dr. 
Loening. Vogt the Treasurer in Chief and Inspector General of 
the German press has had "funds placed at his disposal" (ioc. cit., 
p. 36) with which to commission not only articles 'in newspapers 
and journals", but even "pamphlets" (loc. cit.). It is easy to see 
that an agency on this scale stands in need of quite substantial 
"funds". 
"—er sante nach allen den hêrren 
die in diusken riehen wären; 
er klagete in allen sîn nôt, 
unde bot in ouch sîn golt rôt." 
(Kaiserchronik)b 
But to what purpose were newspapers, journals and pamphlets 
to be "influenced" and "sent to" Vogt by those people who would 
then receive "respectable" remuneration from him? "It is Italy 
that is at stake", that is all; for in order to ward off the danger 
threatening on the Rhine it "appears advantageous" to Herr Vogt 
"to bleed Louis Bonaparte in Italy" (Programme, loc. cit., p. 34). 
No, "it is not Italy that is at stake" (letter to Dr. Loening, loc. cit., 
p. 36). "Hungary is at stake" (letter to Herr H. in N., loc. cit.). No, 
Hungary is not at stake. "What is at stake ... is something that I 
cannot disclose" (loc. cit., Documents, p. 36). 
3 Georg Lommel, Das Centralfest der Deutschen Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der 
Westschweiz,  Genf,  1859, S.  17.—  Ed. 
b "For all the noble lords sent he 
That dwelt in the lands of Germany. 
All them of his great need he told, 
And offered them his bright red gold."171 — Ed. 

=====第210页=====
186 Karl Marx 
As controversial as the question of what is at stake is the 
problem of the source from which these respectable "funds" flow. 
It lies in "a remote corner of French Switzerland" ("Magnum 
Opus",  p. 210). No, "it is Hungarian ladies from the West" (letter 
to Karl Blind, supplement to No. 44 of the Allgemeine Zeitung of 
February 13, I860). 3 On the contrary, it is some masculini "within 
the reach of the German and especially the Austrian police" 
(Centralfest, p. 17). The size of his funds is no less chameleon-like 
than their purpose and source. They amount to "a few francs" 
("Magnum Opus", p. 210). "The funds are small" (Centralfest, p. 
17). The funds are adequate to provide respectable remuneration 
for all those able to exert a Vogtian influence in the German press 
and in pamphlets. To cap it all there are even two accounts of the 
formation of the funds. Vogt has "scraped them together slowly and 
painfully" ("Magnum Opus", p. 210). No, they "have been placed 
at his disposal" (loc. cit., Documents, p. 36). 
"If I am not mistaken," says the "well-rounded character", "to bribe means to 
offer someone money or other advantages to perform actions or make utterances 
contrary to his own convictions" (loc. cit., p. 217). 
Hence anyone whose convictions bid him to allow himself to be 
bought cannot be  bribed,  likewise anyone whose convictions run 
counter to this cannot be bribed. For example, if the department 
of the Paris Ministry responsible for the foreign press offers Swiss 
newspapers copies of the Paris Lithographierte Correspondenz which 
appears daily and costs 250 francs, at half or a quarter of the 
price, or even for nothing, and if it intimates to "editors who are 
well disposed" that they can expect a cash bonus of 50, 100 or 150 
francs each month "depending on their success", this cannot be 
called bribery by any stretch of the imagination. The editors whose 
convictions run counter to the daily Correspondenz and the monthly 
bonus are not compelled to accept the one or the other. And has 
Granier de Cassagnac been "bribed", or La Guéronnière, or 
About, or Grandguillot, or Bullier, or Jourdan of Le Siècle, or 
Martin or Boniface of Le Constitutionnel, or Rochaid Dâ-Dâ 
Albert? Has a remunerative action or utterance ever come into 
conflict with the convictions of any of these gentlemen? Or again, 
did Vogt bribe the agent of a certain Swiss newspaper formerly 
hostile to him when he placed several hundred copies of his 
Studien at his disposal free of charge? In any event it is a strange 
a In Karl Blind's article "Gegen Karl Vogt". —Ed. 

=====第211页=====
Herr Vogt. —IX. Agency 187 
invitation, Vogt's invitation to journalists to work in the spirit of 
their own convictions in organs at their disposal and to be 
rewarded for their efforts by the organ of Herr Karl Vogt in 
Geneva. The fact that Vogt makes no distinction between the fee 
paid by a particular newspaper to its own contributors and the 
secret subsidies which a third party draws from an anonymous 
source and offers to the correspondents of newspapers quite 
unconnected with him and even to the press of a whole 
nation—this quid pro quo shows the extent to which the 
German Dâ-Dâ "familiarised" himself with the morality of De­
cember 2. 
"At the source there sat a youth."a But at which source? 
Instead of the weekly Die Neue Schweiz intended by Vogt, there 
appeared somewhat later in Geneva the Neue Schweizer Zeitung, 
founded by Herr A. Brass, Dâ-Dâ's friend of many years' 
standing. One cool morning in November Herr Brass declared to 
the astonishment of the whole of Geneva that he had 
"written to Vogt spurning the French feeding-trough that Vogt had tried to set 
before him". 
At the same time he declared his willingness to stand by his 
denunciation before a court (Neue Schweizer Zeitung, November 
12, 1859). And the cock or rather the capon that had crowed so 
merrily until that moment suddenly fell silent as soon as he was 
attacked on his own dung-heap. The "New Swiss, citizen of the 
Canton of Berne and member of the Council of States for 
Geneva" now stood publicly accused in the middle of Geneva by 
one of his "notorious" friends of having attempted to bribe him with 
French money. And the Genevan Councillor fell silent. 
It should not be imagined that Vogt could simply ignore the 
Neue Schweizer Zeitung with an air of superiority. The denuncia­
tion of his actions had appeared, as we have said, in the issue of 
November 12, 1859. Shortly after this the same paper published a 
piquant description of Plon-Plon and the Revue de Genève, the 
organ of James Fazy, the dictator of Geneva, immediately retorted 
in a four-column leading article (Revue de Genève, December 6, 
1859).  It protested "au nom du radicalisme genevois", in the 
name of Genevan radicalism. Such was the importance attached to 
the Neue Schweizer Zeitung by James Fazy  himself.  The four-
column leading article of the Revue de Genève shows the 
unmistakable signs of Vogt's helping hand. Brass himself is 
half-excused. He had not contrived the attack on Plon-Plon, but 
a From Schiller's poem "Der Jüngling am Bache". —Ed. 

=====第212页=====
188 Karl Marx 
had merely been led astray. In the authentic Vogtian style the 
corpus delicti is placed at the doorstep of the same L. Hafner 
whom Vogt suspected, in the "Magnum Opus" too (p. 188), of 
spreading "unsavoury pieces of personal gossip about the Em­
peror and Prince Napoleon". There is also Vogt's inevitable 
allusion to "the notorious former Baden lieutenant Clossmann" as 
the Berne correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung (cf. "Magnum 
Opus",  p. 198). Let us dwell for a moment on the protest which 
master and servant, James Fazy and Karl Vogt, published on 
December 6, 1859 in the Revue de Genève "in the name of 
Genevan radicalism" and in vindication of Plon-Plon. 
Brass is accused of attempting "to validate his German opinion 
of France by insulting a Prince of the House of Bonaparte". As 
had long been common knowledge in Geneva, Plon-Plon was a 
liberal of the purest water who during his exile had magnanimous­
ly refused "to play a part of any sort at the court of Stuttgart or 
even Petersburg". Nothing would be more ridiculous than to 
impute to him, as does the libellous article in the Neue Schweizer 
Zeitung, the idea of forming a small sovereign realm here and 
there, an Etruscan kingdom, for instance. 
"Prince Napoleon, who is acutely aware of his own genius and his own talents, 
has too lofty an opinion of himself to stoop to such petty thrones." 
Rather does he prefer "as citizen-prince" (prince-citoyen) to play 
the part of Marquis Posa at the court of his exalted cousin in 
France, "the centre of high civilisation and the fount of general 
inspiration". "His cousin loves and respects him, whatever people 
may say of this." The Prince is not only Bonaparte's Marquis Posa. 
He is "the disinterested friend" of Italy, of Switzerland, in short, 
of the subject nationalities. 
"Prince Napoleon, like the Emperor, is a great economist.... Undoubtedly, if the 
sound principles of political economy ever triumph in France, this will be due in no 
small measure to the influence of Prince Napoleon." 
He was and is "the advocate of the most far-reaching freedom 
of the press", the enemy of all preventive measures on the part of 
the police, the adherent of "ideas of freedom in the broadest 
sense of the word, both in theory and practice". If this Egeria 
finds that the Emperor's malicious entourage has made him deaf 
to his voice, he makes a dignified withdrawal, but "without 
sulking". It is simply "his merits that have exposed him to the 
slanders of Europe". The 
"enemies of France fear him because he relies on the revolutionary support of 
the peoples of Europe to restore to them their nationhood and their liberty". 

=====第213页=====
Herr Vogt. —IX. Agency 189 
Hence he is a misunderstood genius, Marquis Posa, Egeria, an 
economist, the protector of the subject nationalities, a democrat of 
the purest water and—can it be possible?—Plon-Plon is "habile 
comme general et brave comme tout officier fançais" ("a skilful general 
and valiant like every French officer"). 
"He proved this in the Eastern campaign, during and following the battle on the 
Alma." And in the Italian campaign "he ably organised his army corps of 50,000 
men" (the celebrated corps de touristes; I was almost tempted to write corps de ballet) 
"and within a short space of time he made a hard march through mountainous 
country without his men wanting for anything". 
The French troops in the Crimea are known to have said of 
anyone who got into a funk that he was suffering from la maladie 
Plon-Plonienne, and it is likely that Plon-Plon only withdrew from 
the peninsula because of the increasing shortage of provisions. 172 
"We,"  the Revue de Genève concludes triumphantly, "we have portrayed him", 
namely Plon-Plon, "as he really is". 
Three cheers for General Plon-Plon! 
No wonder therefore that Vogt can announce that he received 
his war chest from "democratic hands". Plon-Plon, the Prince 
Rouge* is the ideal of both Vogt and Fazy; he is, as it were, the 
enchanted prince of European democracy. Vogt could not receive 
his money from purer democratic hands than those of Plon-Plon. 
Even if some of the monies made over directly to Mr. Kossuth by 
Plon-Plon's exalted cousin had been transmitted to Vogt through 
Hungarian hands, their "origins would still be monstrous'\ h 
But from the hands of Plon-Plon...! And even if the monies that 
Vogt obtained from Klapka's friend, Countess K., c at the time of 
the Neuchâtel affair might come from more delicate hands, they 
could not possibly come from purer or more democratic ones. A 
well-known French writer has said that "Plon-Plon est voluptueux 
comme Héliogabale, lâche comme Ivan III et faux comme un vrai 
Bonaparte'\ d Plon-Plon's most disastrous achievement is that he 
has turned his cousin into un homme sérieux. Victor Hugo could 
still say of Louis Bonaparte "n'est pas monstre qui veut ,,.e But 
ever since Louis Bonaparte invented Plon-Plon, the business side 
a Red Prince.— Ed. 
b Carl Vogt, Studien..., S. 28.—  Ed. 
c Countess Kârolyi. — Ed. 
d "Plon-Plon is as dissolute as Heliogabalus, as cowardly as Ivan III and as false 
as a real Bonaparte" (Victor Hugo, Napoléon le Petit, paraphrased).— Ed. 
e "One is not a monster because one wishes to be one" (ibid.). — Ed. 

=====第214页=====
190 Karl Marx 
of the Imperial Janus has been concentrated in the hands of the 
man in the Tuileries, and the grotesque side in the man residing 
in the Palais Royal. The false Bonaparte, who is his uncle's 
nephew without being his father's son, 173 appeared authentic when 
compared with this authentic Bonaparte. So that the French still 
say: "l'autre est plus sûr".* Plon-Plon is both the Don Quixote and 
the Hudibras of the bas empire. Hamlet thought it disquieting that 
the dust of Alexander might have been used to stop a bung-hole. b 
What would Hamlet have said if he had seen the disintegrated 
head of Napoleon on the shoulders of Plon-Plon? * 
Although Vogt obtained the main supplies of money for his war 
chest "from the French feeding-trough", it is of course possible that 
to conceal this he also organised ostentatious collections of "a few 
francs" from more or less democratically inclined friends. The 
contradictions about the source, quantity and formation of his 
funds are thus quite easily resolved. 
Vogt's agency did not confine itself to the Studien, the Programm 
and the setting up of a recruitment office. At the "Joint Festival" 
in Lausanne he informed the German workers in Switzerland of 
Louis Bonaparte's mission to liberate the subject nationalities, and 
he did so of course in more radical terms than he had used in the 
Studien, which had been intended for the liberal German 
philistines. In the latter case his penetrating study of the relation 
between "matter and energy" m had led him to the conclusion 
that there could be no question of "undermining and destroying 
the existing governments in Germany" (Studien, Preface, p. VII), 
and he appealed to the "German bourgeois" in particular (loc. cit., 
p. 128) "to take to heart" the consideration that the Bonapartist 
"liberation" of Italy would help to ward off "revolution" in 
Germany. He informed the German workers, on the other hand, 
that "Austria is the on/3! pillar shoring up their" (i.e. the German 
rulers') "existence" (Centralfest, etc., p. 11). c 
* Vogt recounts that as early as 1852 he was supposed to embark on a voyage 
of discovery (Bacchic procession?) with Plon-Plon, to whom he had been 
enthusiastically recommended by a "Proudhonist" because of his "astounding 
studies in natural history" "mais do que promettia a força humana"  ["which  showed 
promise of superhuman strength", Camoens, Lusiads, First Canto] ("Magnum 
Opus",  Documents, p. 24). 
•'• "The other one is safer."—Ed. 
b Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act V, Scene 1.— Ed. 
c Here and below Marx quotes Vogt's speech at the Joint Festival of the 
German Workers' Educational Associations in Lausanne (Georg Lommel, Das 
Centrai fest der Deutschen .Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der Westsckweiz). — Ed. 

=====第215页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 191 
"As I have just pointed out," he said, "Germany does not exist as far as the 
outside world is concerned, it has still to be created, and I am convinced that it can 
only be created in the form of a federation of republics similar to the Swiss 
Confederation" (loc. cit., p. 10). 
He said this on June 26 (1859), while on June 6, in the 
Afterword to the second edition of the Studien he entreated the 
Prince Regent of Prussia 3 to bring Germany beneath the sway of 
the House of Hohenzollern by force of arms and a dynastic civil 
war. Monarchic centralisation by force of arms is, of course, the 
shortest way to a federal republic "similar to the Swiss Confedera­
tion". He further developed the theory of the "external enemy", 
France, with which Germany should ally itself in opposition to the 
"internal enemy", Austria. 
"If I am presented with the choice," he exclaimed, "between the Devil 
(Habsburg) and his grandmother (Louis Bonaparte), / will  choose  the latter, since she 
is an old woman and must die." 
This direct appeal to Germany to throw itself into the arms of 
Decembrist France on the pretext of hatred for Austria seemed to 
him too compromising to be put into print, so in the published 
speech we find this emended version: 
"And if we are obliged to take up sides in the dispute between the Devil and his 
grandmother we think it would be best if the two were to kill and devour each other, 
thus saving us the trouble" {Centralf est, etc., p. 13). 
Finally, whereas in the Studien he raises the standard of Louis 
Bonaparte as the Emperor of the peasants and soldiers, when 
faced with an audience of workers he declares that 
"it is especially the great majority of workers in Paris who have been won over to 
Louis Bonaparte". 
In the view of the French workers 
"Louis Bonaparte is doing everything the Republic should have done since he is 
giving work to the proletariat and ruining the bourgeoisie, etc." (Centralfest, etc., p. 9). 
Thus Louis Bonaparte is a workers' dictator and eulogised as such 
before the German workers in Switzerland by the very same Vogt 
\d\o in the "Magnum Opus" flared up in bourgeois indignation at 
the mere meniion of the words "workers' dictatorship"! b 
The P. ris programme which laid clown the line to be followed 
bv the Deeeribmi, agents in Swir-e'-land on the question of the 
!:<is '•.iloUit.r.rship  <-f the C;in 

=====第216页=====
192 Karl Marx 
annexation of Savoy consisted of three points: (1) For as long as 
possible rumours of the imminent danger were to be 
completely ignored and if necessary they were to be dismissed as 
an Austrian invention. (2) At a more advanced stage it should be 
put about that Louis Bonaparte wished to incorporate the 
neutralised territory into Switzerland. (3) And finally, once the 
annexation had been carried out it should be used as a 
justification for a Swiss alliance with France, i.e. for Switzerland's 
voluntary submission to a Bonapartist protectorate. We shall now 
see how faithfully master and servant, James Fazy and Karl Vogt, 
the dictator of Geneva and the member of the Council of States 
for Geneva created by him, adhered to the terms of this 
programme. 
We have alreadv seen in the Studien that Vogt assiduously 
avoided all mention of the idea on behalf of which his man of 
destiny was embarking on war. The same silence prevails at the 
Joint Festival in Lausanne, in the National Council, 17, at the 
celebrations in memory of Schiller and Robert Blum, in the Biel 
Commis voyageur and, lastly, in the "Magnum Opus". And yet the 
"idea" was even older than the conspiracy of Plombières. 176 As early 
as December 1851, a few days after the coup d'état, one could read 
in Le Patriote savoisien. 
"The official positions in Savoy are already being shared out in the 
antechambers of the Elysée. Its newspapers find the subject a great source of 
amusement." * 
On December 6, 1851 M. Fazy considered Geneva as good as 
lost to the December Empire.** 
On July 1, 1859 Stämpfli, who was President of the Confedera­
tion at the time, had an interview with Captain Harris, the British 
chargé d'affaires in Berne. He repeated his fears that in the event 
of the expansion of Sardinian rule in Italy, the annexation of 
Savoy by France was a settled matter, and he emphasised that the 
annexation of North Savov in particular would completely expose 
one flank of Switzerland and this would entail the loss of Geneva 
in the near future (see the first Blue Book On the Proposed 
* "On se partage déjà les places ... de la Savoie dans les antichambres de 
l'Elysée. Ses journaux plaisantent même assez agréablement là-dessus." 
** "Peut-être le citoyen Thurgovien que nous avons si bien défendu contre 
les menaces de Louis-Philippe, nous fera-t-il la grâce de vouloir bien se constituer 
comme médiateur, et reprendre de nous Genève" ["Perhaps the citizen of Thurgau 
whom we defended so well against the threats of Louis Philippe will do us the 
favour of offering himself as mediator and recover Geneva from us"] (Revue de 
Genève, December 6, 1851).. 

=====第217页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 193 
Annexation of Savoy and Nice, No. I). Harris reported to 
Malmesbury, who for his part instructed Lord Cowley in Paris to 
ask Walewski to explain the nature of the Emperor's intentions. 
Walewski in no way denied that 
"France and Sardinia had more than once discussed the problem of annexation 
and that the Emperor entertained the idea that if Sardinia was to be enlarged and 
become an Italian Kingdom, it was not unreasonable to expect that she should, on the 
other hand, make territorial concessions to France" (loc. cit., No. IV). a 
Walewski's reply was written on July 4, 1859 and hence 
pre-dated the peace of Villafranca. In August 1859 Petétin's 
pamphlet 0 appeared in Paris, preparing Europe for the annexa­
tion of Savoy. That same August, after the summer session of the 
Swiss National Assembly, Herr Vogt slunk into Paris to receive his 
instructions from Plon-Plon. To put people off the scent he 
arranged for his fellow-scoundrels, Ranickel and Co., to spread 
the rumour in Geneva that he had gone for a cure on the Lake of 
Lucerne. 
"ze Paris lebt er mangen tac, 
vil kleiner wîsheit er enpflac, 
sîn zerung was unmâzen grôz;... 
ist ër ein esel und ein gouch, 
daz selb ist ër zuo Paris ouch." c 
In September 1859 the Swiss Federal Council saw the threat of 
annexation looming nearer (loc. cit., No. VI) and on November 12 
it resolved to address a memorandum to this effect to the great 
powers. On November 18 President Stampfli and Chancellor 
Schiess handed an official note to the English chargé d'affaires in 
Berne (loc. cit., No. IX). James Fazy, who had returned in October 
from his abortive journey to Tuscany where he had vainly striven 
to advance the cause of Plon-Plon's Etruscan kingdom, now tried 
to stem the rumours of annexation in his usual loud and 
cantankerous manner and with an affectation of rage: no one has 
ever dreamt of annexation, either in France or in Sardinia. As the 
danger drew nearer, the confidence of the Revue de Genève 
increased accordingly and in November and December 1859 its 
a Cowley to Russell, received July 5, 1860.— Ed. 
b Anselme Petétin, De l'annexion de la Savoie. —Ed. 
c "In Paris many a day he dwelt, 
For learning no great love he felt; 
He ate and drank more than his fill.... 
Since he is ass and fool together, 
He doesn't change in Paris either." 
(Ulrich Bonerius, Der Edel Stein, Berlin, 1816.)—Ed. 

=====第218页=====
194 Karl Marx 
Corybantic cult177  of the Napoleonides surpassed all bounds (see, 
for example, the article on Plon-'Plon quoted above 3). 
With the year 1860 we enter the second phase of the annexation 
affair. 
Issuing denials or just turning a deaf ear was no longer in the 
interest of the Decembrists. The problem now rather was to make 
Switzerland more amenable to the idea of annexation and 
manoeuvre it into a false position. The second point of the 
Tuileries programme had to be put into action, i.e. the alleged 
intention of donating the neutral territory to Switzerland had to 
be publicised as loudly as possible. These efforts of the Swiss 
Decembrists were of course supported by simultaneous man­
oeuvres in Paris. Thus Barocke, the Minister of the Interior, told 
the Swiss Ambassador, Dr. Kern, at the beginning of January 
1860,  that 
"should any change in the ownership of Savoy occur hereafter it should only be 
made with due regard to those provisions of the Treaties of 1815 which stipulated that 
a portion of it sufficient to ensure a good line of defence should be at the same time 
ceded to Switzerland" (see the Blue Book, op. cit., No. XIII). b 
And even on February 2, 1860, on the same day that Thouvenel 
told the British Ambassador, Lord Cowley, that the annexation of 
Savoy and Nice was a "possibility", he informed him at the same 
time that 
"indeed, in the opinion of the French Government, it would be well if in these 
circumstances the districts of Chablais and Faucigny should be united permanently 
to Switzerland" (loc. cit., No. XXVII). C 
The dissemination of this illusion was designed not only to make 
the Swiss more amenable to the idea of the annexation of Savoy by 
the December Empire, but also to blunt their subsequent protest, 
and to compromise them in the eyes of Europe by making them 
the accomplices, albeit the cheated accomplices, of the Decem­
brists.  Frey-Hérosé, President of the Confederation since 1860, 
avoided the pitfall and even informed Captain Harris of his 
misgivings about the supposed advantages of incorporating the 
neutralised territory into Switzerland. For his part, Harris warned 
the Federal Government about the Bonapartist intrigue, so that 
a The leading article in the Revue de Genève, December 6, 1859 (see this 
volume, p. 187).— Ed. 
b Grey to Russell, received January 10, Correspondence Respecting the Proposed 
Annexation of Savoy and Nice to France..., p. 9.— Ed. 
c Cowley to Russell, received February 8, ibid., p. 28.—  Ed. 

=====第219页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 195 
"Switzerland should not appear as a Power eager for annexation or extension of 
territory" (loc. cit., No. XV). a 
On the other hand, Sir James Hudson, the British Ambassador in 
Turin, wrote to Lord John Russell after a lengthy interview with 
Cavour: 
"I have good ground for believing that Switzerland also is anxious to annex to 
herself a portion of Savoy. Consequently, it ought to be clearly understood, that 
when France is blamed for seeking this cession, Switzerland is no less to blame.... 
This question therefore, becoming more complicated by this double attack, renders 
the position of Sardinia more defensible" (loc. cit., No. XXXIV). b 
Finally, as soon as Louis Bonaparte threw away the mask, 
Thouvenel quite unceremoniously revealed the mystery behind the 
slogan of the Swiss annexation of the neutral territory. In a 
dispatch to the French chargé d'affaires in Berne he openly 
derided the Swiss protest against the French annexation of Savoy, 
and how? By using the "plan for the partition of Savoy" foisted on 
Switzerland by Paris (see Thouvenel's dispatch of March 17, 
1860). c 
And what did the Swiss agents of December meanwhile contribute 
to the web of delusion? In January 1860, in the course of 
discussion with the British chargé d'affaires in Berne, James Fazy 
was the first to represent the annexation of Chablais and Faucigny 
to Switzerland not as something promised by Louis Bonaparte, but 
as the desire of Switzerland and of the inhabitants of the 
neutralised districts (loc. cit., No. XXIII). Vogt, who until that 
moment had never dreamt of the possibility of a French 
annexation of Savoy, was suddenly inspired by the spirit of 
prophecy, and The Times, which had never mentioned the name 
Vogt since its inception, suddenly announced in a correspondence 
dated January 30: 
"The Swiss Professor Vogt pretends to know that France will procure for 
Switzerland Faucigny, Chablais, and the Genevese, the neutral provinces of Savoy, 
if the Grand Council of the Republic will let her have the free use of the Simplon" 
(The Times, February 3, 1860)/' 
Even more! At the end of January 1860 James Fazy assured the 
British chargé d'affaires in Berne that Cavour, with whom he had 
had a long interview in Geneva hardly two months previously, was 
foaming with rage at the idea of making any concession to France 
a Harris to Russell, received January 25, ibid., p. 12.— Ed. 
h Hudson to Russell, received February 16, ibid.— Ed. 
' Le Moniteur universel, No. 82, March 22, 1860.— Ed. 
d "Austria", The Times, No. 23533, February 3, I860.— Ed. 

=====第220页=====
196 Karl Marx 
(see the Blue Book,3  op. cit., No. XXXIII). Thus while Fazy plays 
guarantor for Cavour to England, Cavour exculpates himself in 
English eyes by revealing the territorial ambitions of the same 
Fazy (loc. cit., No. XXXIII). And finally, Tourte, the Swiss 
Ambassador in Turin, hastens to the British Ambassador, Hudson, 
as late as February 9, 1860 to assure him that 
"no engagement subsists between Sardinia and France for the cession of Savoy 
to France, and that Sardinia is not in the least disposed to cede or exchange Savoy 
to France" (loc. cit.).b 
The decisive moment was drawing nearer. The Paris Patrie of 
January 25, 1860 began to prepare the way for the annexation of 
Savoy in an article entitled "Les voeux de ta Savoie". In another 
article, on January 27, "Le comté de Nice", it foreshadowed in its 
Decembrist style the annexation of Nice. On February 2, 1860 
Thouvenel announced to the British Ambassador, Cowley, that 
even before the war France and Sardinia had agreed that the 
annexation of Savoy and Nice was a "possibility". However, an 
official note on France's actual decision to absorb Savoy and Nice 
was not given to Lord Cowley until February 5 (see Lord Cowley's 
speech in the House of Lords on April 23, 1860) c and Dr. Kern 
was not told until February 6. And both the British and Swiss 
Ambassadors were explicitly informed that the neutralised terri­
tory was to be absorbed into Switzerland. Prior to these official 
announcements, James Fazy was instructed from the Tuileries that 
Sardinia had already ceded Savoy and Nice to France in a secret 
treaty and that the treaty contained no clause in favour of 
Switzerland. Prior to Thouvenel's official announcements to Lord 
Cowley and Dr. Kern, Fazy was to sugar the Imperial pill and 
present it to his Genevan subjects. On February 3, therefore, he 
arranged for his blindly devoted tool, John Perrier, to organise a 
popular meeting on the premises of the Club populaire of Geneva, 
a meeting which he attended apparently by chance, on the pretext 
that 
"he had just heard (je viens d'entendre) that the treaties were being discussed 
which may have been concluded between France and Sardinia for the cession of 
Savoy. Unfortunately, such a treaty was signed on January 27 by the Sardinian 
Government; but from this positive fact we cannot yet deduce that our security is 
really threatened.... It is true that there is no written reservation made in the treaty 
a Harris to Russell, received February 6, Correspondence Respecting the Proposed 
Annexation of Savoy and Nice to France..., p. 24.— Ed. 
b Hudson to Russell, received February 16, ibid.— Ed. 
« The Times, No. 23602, April 24, I860.— Ed. 

=====第221页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 197 
in favour of our rights over the Sardinian neutralised territory; but we do not 
know whether in the intention of the contracting parties there may not exist some 
reservation in this sense.... It may have been taken into consideration, and, so to 
speak, understood as taken for granted (sous-entendu comme allant de soi). ...We should 
beware of introducing any spirit of premature distrust.... We should rely on 
the sympathy" (for the coup d'état monarchy) "...and abstain from any hostile 
word." 
(See Fazy's "confidential" speech, in its own way a masterpiece 
of demagogy, in the Revue de Genève of February 3, 1860.) The 
British chargé d'affaires in Berne found Fazy's prophetic knowl­
edge remarkable enough for him to send a special dispatch to 
Lord John Russell about it." 
The official treaty relating to the cession of Savoy and Nice to 
France was due to be concluded on March 24, 1860. So there was 
no time to be lost. The Swiss patriotism of the Genevan 
Decembrists had to be officially established before the official 
proclamation of the annexation of Savoy. Signor Vogt therefore 
journeyed to Paris early in March, accompanied by General 
Klapka, who might well be acting de bonne foi, b with the intention 
of bringing his influence to bear on Plon-Plon, the Egeria of the 
Palais Royal, the misunderstood genius, and, in full view of the 
whole of Switzerland, of throwing his personal weight into the scales 
in favour of the incorporation of the neutralised territory into 
Switzerland. From the Lucullan table of Plon-Plon—in the art of 
gastronomy, as is well known, Plon-Plon rivals both Lucullus and 
Cambacérès. so that if Brillat-Savarin were to rise from the grave, 
even he would marvel at Plon-Plon s genius, economics, liberal ideas, 
military talent and personal valour in this field — Arom the Lucullan 
table of Plon-Plon, where as an "agreeable comoanion" he tucked 
in heartily, Falstaff-Vogt called on the Swiss to show their valour 
(see his long letter from Paris in the supplement to the Biel 
Commis voyageur of March 8, 1860). Switzerland should prove that 
"its mil'tia was not there just to parade and piav at being soidiers". The 
"cession of the neutralised territory to Switzerland" was an illusion. "The 
abandonment of Chablais and Faucigny to France was a first steo, to be followed by 
others." "Mounted on the two stilts: nationality and natural frontiers, one can advance 
from the Lake of Geneva to the Aar and right up to Lake Constance and the 
Rhine—if one's legs are strong enough." 
But—and this is the point—Falstaff-Vogt still does not give 
credence to what the French Minister Thouvenel himself had 
a Harris to Russell, received February 9, Correspondence Respecting the Proposed 
Annexation of Savoy and Nice to France....—Ed. 
h In good faith.— Ed. 

=====第222页=====
198 Karl Marx 
officially revealed a month before and what all Europe knew by 
now—that the cession of Savoy and Nice had been agreed on as 
long ago as August 1858 in Plombières, as the price of French 
intervention against Austria. His "man of destiny" had only just 
been driven against his will into the arms of chauvinism by the 
priests and coerced into confiscating the neutralised territory. 
"Evidently," our embarrassed apologist stammers, "evidently the leading circles 
have been looking for a counterweight to the steady growth of the clerical movement 
and hope that this might be found in so-called chauvinism—in that most 
narrow-minded sense of nationality that knows of nothing beyond the acquisition 
of a bit (!) of territory." 
After Vogt, intoxicated by the smells issuing from Plon-Plon's 
kitchen, had laid about him so heartily in the Biel Commis 
voyageur, he romanced wildly in the same mouthpiece on his 
return from Paris about the absolute love of the French to be 
found among the inhabitants of Nice. He thus came into a 
disagreeable conflict with Vegezzi-Ruscalla, one of the chief leaders 
of the Italian National Association and the author of the pamphlet 
La nazionalità di Nizza. And when the same hero who had played 
Winkelried from the safety of Plon-Plon's table came to speak in 
the National Council in Berne, the warlike clarion call turned into 
a diplomatic piping on the flute, which recommended calmly to 
carry on the negotiations with the Emperor who had always been 
amicably disposed towards the Swiss and which warned emphatically 
against any alliance with the East. The President of the Confedera­
tion, Frey-Hérosé, made some strange insinuations regarding Vogt, 
who on the other hand had the satisfaction of seeing his speech 
praised by the Nouvelliste Vaudois? The Nouvelliste Vaudois is the 
organ of Messrs. Blanchenay, Delarageaz and other Vaudois 
magnates, in short of the Swiss Western railway, just as the Neue 
Zürcher-Zeitung is the organ of Zurich Bonapartism and the 
Northeastern railway. To characterise the patrons of the Nouvel­
liste Vaudois it is enough to point out that on the occasion of the 
well-known dispute about the Oron railway five Vaudois govern­
ment councillors were repeatedly and with impunity accused by 
the opposition press of having each received a present of 20 
shares to the value of 10,000 francs from the Paris Crédit 
Mobilier,™ the chief shareholder of the Swiss Western railway. 
A few days after Vogt had set off in the company of Klapka to 
visit the Egeria of the Palais Royal, James Fazy, accompanied by 
a Marx is drawing on data from a letter by Georg Lommel of April 19, 1860. 
There is an entry to this effect in Marx's notebook.— Ed. 

=====第223页=====
Herr Vogt. —IX. Agency 199 
John Verrier, embarked on a journey to the sphinx in the 
Tuileries. 3 It is known that Louis Bonaparte relishes the role of 
sphinx and maintains his Oedipuses just as former kings of France 
maintained their own court jesters. In the Tuileries, Fazy 
interposed himself between Switzerland and the sphinx. As we 
have said, John Verrier was his companion. This John is the very 
shadow of his James, he does everything the latter desires, nothing 
which he does not desire, lives through him and for him, became 
a member of the Grand Council of Geneva through him, prepares 
all festivals and toasts for him and acts, in short, as his Leporello 
and his Fialin. Both returned to Geneva having achieved nothing 
as far as the threat to Switzerland was concerned, and with 
astonishing success, as far as the threat to Fazy's own position was 
concerned. Fazy thundered in public, saying that the scales had 
now fallen from his eyes and that in future he would hate Louis 
Bonaparte as passionately as he had loved him hitherto. A strange 
love,  this nine-year-long passion of the republican Fazy for the 
murderer of two republics! Fazy acted the disillusioned patriot 
with such virtuosity that the whole of Geneva wallowed in 
Fazy-enthusiasm and the demise of Fazy's illusions was felt almost 
more keenly than the loss of the neutralised provinces. Even 
Théodore de Saussure, the head of the aristocratic opposition and 
his enemy of many years' standing, confessed that it was no longer 
possible to doubt the sincerity of James Fazy's Swiss patriotism. 
Having been the recipient of such well-merited popular 
ovations, the tyrant of Geneva hastened to the National Council in 
Berne. Shortly after his departure, his loyal squire, his Paris 
travelling companion, in short, his own John  Verrier,  embarked on 
a voyage of the Argonauts of a very special sort. A band of Swiss 
drunkards (at least this is how they were described in the columns 
of the London Times), chosen from the company of "fruitiers", 
Fazy's democratic bodyguard, set sail unarmed under Verriefs 
leadership for Thonon at which spot of the neutralised territory 
they intended to stage an anti-French demonstration. To this day 
no one can say in what this demonstration consisted or was 
supposed to consist, whether the Argonauts intended to search for 
the Golden Pelt b or to sell their own skins. For no Orpheus 
accompanied Perrier's Argonauts and no Apollonius has sung of 
a An allusion to Karl Grün's pamphlet Louis Bonaparte, die Sphinx auf dem 
französischen Kaiserthron, Hamburg, 1860.— Ed. 
b Marx ironically writes  goldenes  Fell (Golden Pelt) instead of goldenes Vlies (Golden 
Fleece).— Ed. 
8-1305 

=====第224页=====
200 Karl Marx 
their deeds. It seems to have involved a sort of symbolic 
occupation of the neutralised territory by a Switzerland rep­
resented by John Perrier and his band. The real Switzerland now 
found its hands so full with diplomatic excuses and declarations of 
loyalty and indignant repudiations of John Perrier's symbolic 
occupation of Thonon as to make Louis Bonaparte appear the 
soul of magnanimity when he contented himself with the actual 
occupation of Thonon and the rest of the neutralised territory. 
John Perrier was arrested in Geneva with several thousand francs 
in his pockets. On the basis of Perrier's testimony M. Ducommun, 
the Vice-Chancellor of the state and editor of the Revue de Genève, 
a young man without private means, and dependent for his 
incumbency of these two posts on James Fazy, President of the 
State Council and owner of the Revue de Genève, was likewise 
arrested. He confessed to having given Perrier the money which 
had been taken from a fund set up to establish a volunteer 
corps—a fund whose existence had been quite unknown to the 
Geneva radicals up to that moment. The judicial investigation 
ended with the dismissal firstly of Ducommun and then of Perrier. 
On March 24 Nice and Savoy, together with the neutralised 
territory, were officially ceded to Bonaparte by Victor Emmanuel. 
On March 29-30 John Perrier, who had returned from Paris to 
Geneva with Fazy, embarked on his Argonaut adventure, a 
burlesque demonstration which just at the crucial moment made 
any real demonstration impossible. In Berne, James Fazy insisted 
that "he had no knowledge of the incident".* In the former 
neutral territory Laity boasted that if the Swiss had actually 
launched an attack there his Emperor would have at once ordered 
three divisions to march into Geneva. Vogt, finally, was quite in 
* The realisation that with the annexation of North Savoy Geneva had become 
an enclave of France and, in no less measure, the impact of the French fortification 
of the harbour of Thonon, have recently, as everybody knows, greatly roused the 
anti-Decembrist feeling of the ancient Republic. However, the authentic outbreaks 
of popular indignation are accompanied by false ones, inspired from Paris and set 
in motion in part by French police personnel. Thus, for example, we can read in 
the Saturday Review of September 22, 1860: "A party of self-styled Swiss were 
giving vent to gross insults against the Empire at Thonon, when a blundering 
gendarme, in an excess of official zeal, seized them, and insisted on looking at their 
passports. They turned out to be Frenchmen, with papers perfectly en règle.... The 
gravest fact relating to these artificial collisions is, that in one of the earliest and the 
worst of them, a close adherent of Mr. Fazy" (friend Perrier) "was prominently 
implicated. " a 
a Marx gives the last sentence in brackets in English after its German 
equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第225页=====
Herr Vogt. —IX. Agency 201 
the dark about the secret of the journey of the Argonauts, for a 
few days before it took place he made a prophylactic denunciation 
to the Genevan police warning them of a conflict due to be 
engineered from Geneva on the Savoy frontier—but in so doing 
he was laying a false trail. I have in my possession a letter from a 
refugee living in Geneva, a former friend of Vogt's, to a refugee 
living in London. It says inter alia: 
" Vogt was putting it about that I was continuously dashing backwards and 
forwards between West Switzerland and Savoy organising a revolution to the 
detriment of Switzerland and the advantage of powers hostile to it. This was only a 
few days before Perrier's adventure about which Vogt was undoubtedly in the 
know, but of which I was as ignorant as  yourself.  Evidently he attempted to cast 
suspicion on me and to ruin me. Fortunately, he also denounced me to Duy, the 
Director of Police who summoned me and was not a little surprised when I burst 
into laughter at his opening question and said: 'Aha! that well-known intrigue of 
Vogt's!' He then asked for details about my relations with Vogt. My statement was 
also confirmed by a government secretary, a member of the Helvetia, ' who went 
to the Central Assembly in Berne on the following day where he met Vogt's 
brother and criticised Karl's behaviour to him, whereupon Gustav replied 
laconically that he had long since gathered from Karl's letters how things stood 
with his politics." 3 
If, to begin with, silence, denials and sermons of confidence in 
Louis Bonaparte were supposed to blind the Swiss to the 
impending danger, if later on the clamour about the intended 
incorporation of Faucigny, Chablais and the Genevese into 
Switzerland was designed to make the annexation of Savoy by 
France acceptable for the people, and if, finally, the burlesque at 
Thonon was intended to break any serious resistance, then, in 
accordance with the Paris programme, the annexation which had 
actually taken place and the danger that could no longer be 
denied were now to be put forward to induce the Swiss to 
surrender voluntarily, i.e. to enter an alliance with the December 
Empire. 
This task was of such an extreme delicacy that its accomplish­
ment could only be entrusted to James Fazy  himself.  His servant 
Vogt was allowed to warn against an alliance with the East, but only 
Fazy himself could advocate an alliance with the West. He first 
hinted at the necessity of this in the Revue de Genève. On April 18, 
I860 an excerpt from a London letter was circulating in Geneva 
which said, among other things: 
"Our influential fellow-citizens should be warned to be on their guard against 
the advice of /. Fazy, who may well recommend that Switzerland should abandon its 
neutrality. It is highly likely that this advice emanates from the French Government 
a Marx is quoting Georg Lommel's letter of April 19, 1856.— Ed. 
8* 

=====第226页=====
202 Karl Marx 
itself,  whom James Fazy has served zealously down to this very day.... He now 
assumes the posture of a good Swiss who is striving to thwart the designs of the 
French. However, I am told by someone who has always shown himself to be well 
informed that this is all just a snare. As soon as Switzerland has declared that it 
neither can nor will continue to remain neutral, the French Government will take 
notice of this and force it into an alliance as in the days of the First Empire." 
Whereupon Fazy caused this reply to appear in the Revue de 
Genève : 
"The day that Savoy is united with France the neutrality of Switzerland will 
cease of  itself,  so that any advice to that effect from Fazy would be superfluous." 
Three months later, on July 10, James Fazy made a speech in the 
Swiss National Council in which 
"fuming and raging and shaking his clenched fist at the Bonapartist financiers 
and the barons of the Confederation — he denounced them as le gouvernement 
souterrain 3—he marched straight into the Bonapartist camp". 
The official French party of Zurich and the Vaud, seemingly the 
chief victim of his attack, therefore allowed him to continue 
blustering. 
"Europe, and Germany in particular, has left Switzerland in the lurch. Neutrality 
has thereby become impossible; Switzerland must look around for alliances, but where?" 
The old demagogue then muttered something to the effect that 
"France, which was so near and closely related, would one day recognise and 
make good the wrong it had done. It might even become a republic, etc. But the 
financiers and barons of the Confederation who had outlived their day should not 
be allowed to initiate the new policy. Helvetia, the people must do that: Just wait and 
see, the next elections will teach you a lesson. The troops of the Confederation are 
most welcome in Geneva. However, if their presence raises the slightest doubts 
about the existing government of Geneva, then away with them. Geneva is able to 
look after itself and to defend  itself." 
On July 10, then, James Fazy elaborated in the National Council 
upon what he had hinted at in the Revue de Genève of April 
18— the new policy", the alliance between Switzerland and France, i.e. 
the annexation of Switzerland by the Decembrists. Well-informed 
Swiss thought that it was premature for Fazy to drop the 
anti-Bonapartist mask he had been wearing since his return from 
the Tuileries. However, it is precisely Fazy who displays a virtuosity 
in the art of calculated indiscretion that to some extent is reminiscent 
of that of Palmerston. 
It is well known that the most disreputable members of the 
"gouvernement souterrain" moved a vote of censure on Stämpfli in 
a The underground government.— Ed. 

=====第227页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 203 
the National Council, because as Federal President he had grasped 
the situation and at one point had made the correct decision to 
use Federal troops to defend the neutralised territory against 
French violations. The motion of censure was defeated by an 
enormous majority, but Vogt's vote was not among them. 
"Very typical," I was told in a letter from Switzerland at the time, "of Karl Vogt 
was his absence during the discussions in the Swiss Council of States on the motion 
of censure on Stämpfli, the President of the Confederation. As representative of 
the Canton of Geneva under threat from Bonaparte Vogt had perforce to vote for 
Stämpfli, the most energetic defender of this Canton. He is, moreover, both a 
personal friend of Stämpfli's and also greatly indebted to him. Vogt's father and 
two of his brothers earn their bread as employees of the Canton of Berne; a third 
brother was recently given a lucrative post as a senior Federal statistician, thanks to 
Stämpfli's mediation. Consequently it was hardly possible for Vogt to vote against 
his friend, benefactor and man of the people in an open ballot. On the other hand, 
it was even less possible for a Plon-Plonist to approve publicly a policy which was 
fighting Bonapartist aggression to the death. Hence his running away and sticking 
his head in the sand, but this left his broad backside clearly visible and exposed to a 
beating—the usual stratagem and the mundane destiny of the modern  Falstaff." 
The slogan of "Austrianism", which had emanated from the 
Tuileries, and had then been echoed so loudly by James Fazy in 
the Revue de Genève and by his servant Vogt in the Biel Commis 
voyageur, in the Studien and in the "Magnum Opus", etc., now 
finally rebounded on Switzerland. Around the middle of April a 
poster appeared everywhere on the walls of Milan entitled: 
"Conflict between Napoleon and Switzerland." In it we read: 
"Savoy appeared to Switzerland as an appetising tit-bit and, egged on by Austria, 
Switzerland hastened to obstruct the plans of Napoleon III on a matter that is 
exclusively the concern of Italy and France.... England and the other great powers 
of the north, except Austria, are not in the least opposed to the incorporation of 
Savoy. Switzerland alone, spurred on by Austria, which attempts to stir up trouble and 
rebellion in all the states allied to Sardinia, put in its veto.... Switzerland is an 
abnormal state which cannot resist the tide of the great principle of nationality for a 
long time. Germans, Frenchmen and Italians are not capable of submitting to the 
same laws. If Switzerland knows this it should reflect that in the Canton of Ticino it 
is the language of Foscolo and Giusti that is spoken, it should not forget that a 
large part of its population belongs to the great and magnanimous nation that calls 
itself French." 
In short, it appears that Switzerland is an Austrian invention. 
While Vogt was at such pains to rescue Switzerland from the 
clutches of Austria, he charged one of his most trusted accomp­
lices with the task of rescuing Germany. This was the garrulous 
Swabian, Karl Mayer of Esslingen, Rump parliamentarian, a 
would-be great man and at present owner of a bijouterie factory. 
At the ceremony to dedicate the banner of the Neuchâtel German 

=====第228页=====
204 Karl Marx 
Workers' Association, held at The Crown in St. Blaise, the official 
speaker, Rump parliamentarian and jeweller, Karl Mayer of 
Esslingen, called upon Germany 
"just to allow the French across the Rhine because otherwise things would never 
improve in Germany". 
Two representatives of the Workers' Association of Geneva who 
returned in the new year (1860) after attending the ceremony, 
reported the incident. When their account was confirmed by the 
representatives of a number of other West Swiss associations, the 
Genevan headquarters released a circular containing a general 
warning about Bonapartist intrigues among German workers in 
Switzerland. I quote from a report of the circular lying before me: 
"According to a reminiscence of the First Empire when a few Germans also 
tried to uphold Napoleon's dominion of the world truly believing that the colossus 
would not survive the demise of its hero and that then a unified Germany would at 
any rate be one of the provinces into which the Frankish Empire would 
disintegrate, and such a Germany would find it easier to win freedom—it was 
dismissed as political quackery to believe that one could drain a living body of 
blood and trust to the fantastic miracle that fresh blood would be produced to 
replace it. Moreover, the attempt was denounced to deny a great people the 
strength to help itself and the right to determine its own destiny. Finally, it was 
noted that Germany's hoped-for Messiah had just demonstrated in Italy precisely 
what he understood by the liberation of subject nationalities, etc., etc. The circular 
was addressed, as it stated, only to those Germans who were choosing the wrong 
means to achieve a good end, but it refused to become involved with venal 
journalists and ambitious ci-devants." 
Simultaneously, the Aargauer Nachrichten, organ of the Helvetia, 
castigated 
"the logic that the hedgehog should be allowed to enter the mole's burrow so 
that one could better catch hold of it and throw it out again, according to which 
fine logic the Ephialtes of this world should be given a free hand so that 
Leonidases might arise. A certain professor was behaving like Duke Ulrich of 
Württemberg in reverse; for the Duke attempted to return home from exile by 
making use of the Bundschuh, 180 after the Riding Boot did not want to have 
anything to do with him, while the above-mentioned professor had ruined his 
relations with the Shoe and so was trying to patch things up with the Boot, etc." 
This denunciation of Professor Vogt was significant because it 
appeared in an organ of the Helvetia. By way of compensation, as 
it were, he was given a favourable reception in L'Espérance, a 
paper founded in 1859 in Geneva by the French Treasury and 
which .appeared in large format and with no expense spared. It 
was the task of L'Espérance to preach in favour of the annexation 
of Savoy and the Rhineland in particular and of Louis Bonaparte's 
Messianic destiny to liberate the subject nationalities in general. It 
is common knowledge in Geneva that Vogt was an habitué of the 

=====第229页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 205 
editorial office of L'Espérance and one of its most active 
contributors. I myself have been informed of details which put this 
fact beyond all doubt. What Vogt hints at in his Studien, what he had 
his accomplice Karl Mayer, the garrulous Swabian, Rump par­
liamentarian and jeweller from Esslingen, proclaim so loudly at 
Neuchâtel, is developed further in L'Espérance. For example, it 
says in its issue of March 25, I860: 
"If war with France is the only hope of the German patriots, what reason can 
they have for wishing to weaken the government of that country and to prevent it 
from attaining its natural frontiers} Could it be that the German people is far from 
sharing this hatred of France? However that may be, there are some very sincere 
German patriots, in particular among the most progressive German democrats" 
(namely the Vogt of the Empire, the Ranickel, Karl Mayer from Esslingen and tutti 
quanti),  "who do not regard the loss of the left bank of the Rhine as a great misfortune, but 
who on the contrary are convinced that only after that loss political life will begin in 
Germany, a revived Germany founded on the alliance and merging with the 
civilisation of the European West." * 
Having been so precisely informed by Vogt of the views of the 
most progressive elements among the German democrats, L'Espér­
ance declared in a leading article on May 30 that 
"a plebiscite on the left bank of the Rhine would soon show that everyone there 
was in favour of the French ".c 
Der Postheiri, a humorous Swiss magazine, then overwhelmed 
L'Espérance with bad jokes, referring to it as the "miserable jade" 
which in addition to the light laurels of Bacchus Plon-Plon now had 
also to endure the "weighty paunch" of his Silenus on its back. 
The precision with which the Decembrist press manoeuvres 
were orchestrated can be seen in the following example. On May 
* "Si la seule espérance des patriotes allemands est fondée sur une guerre avec 
la France, quelle raison peuvent-ils avoir de chercher à affaiblir le gouvernement 
de ce pays et l'empêcher de former ses 3 frontières naturelles? Serait-il que le 
peuple en Allemagne est loin de partager cette haine de la France? Quoi qu'il en 
soit, il y a des patriotes allemands très sincères, et notamment parmi les démocrates 
les plus avancés, qui ne voient pas un grand malheur dans la perte de la rive 
gauche du Rhin, qui sont, au contraire, convaincus que c'est après cette perte 
seulement que commencera la vie politique d'une Allemagne régénérée, appuyée 
sur l'alliance et se confondant avec la civilisation de l'Occident européen" 
(L'Espérance, March 25, I860). 1' 
a In L'Espérance: "et l'empêcher de reclamer les" ("and to prevent it from 
claiming the").— Ed. 
h Marx quotes from the article "Allemagne. Correspondance particulière de 
l'Espérance". The italics and bold type are Marx's.— Ed. 
c "Le Rhin", L'Espérance, No. 149, May 30, I860.— Ed. 

=====第230页=====
206 Karl Marx 
30 L'Espérance in Geneva spoke of the cession of the left bank of 
the Rhine to the Decembrists by plebiscite; on May 31 Louis 
Jourdan in Le Siècle in Paris started to dig the trenches for the 
annexation of the Rhine, 3 and in the beginning of June Le 
Propagateur du Nord et du Pas-de-Calais opened up with crude 
artillery fire against Belgium. Shortly before the statements of the 
Genevan mouthpiece, Edmond About declared in L'Opinion 
nationale that Sardinia's aggrandizement had compelled the 
Emperor "de prendre la Savoie ... c.-à-d.  nous fermons notre porte", b 
and, he continued, if Germany's desire for unification led to a 
similar enlargement of Prussia, "alors nous aurions à veiller à 
notre sûreté, à prendre la rive gauche du Rhin,  c.-à-d.  nous fermerions 
notre porte". c This frivolous door-keeper was immediately followed 
by A. A., d that ponderous blockhead, the correspondent of 
L'Indépendance belge, a sort of Joseph Prudhomme and Sybil 
Extraordinary of the "providence" dwelling in the Tuileries. 6 
Meanwhile the enthusiasm for German unity peculiar to L'Espér­
ance and the same paper's indignant denunciation of German 
anti-Decembrists who had fallen into the clutches of Austria, had 
reached such giddy heights that James Fazy, who was forced to 
observe certain diplomatic proprieties and who was moreover on 
the point of converting his Revue de Genève into La Nation suisse, 
magnanimously condescended to declare in the Revue that it was 
possible to oppose Bonapartism without being an Austrian. 
Karl Vogt, German Dâ-Dâ, owner of a Decembrist recruitment 
office for the German press, Fazy's sub-agent, "agreeable 
companion" in the Palais Royal, Plon-Plon's  Falstaff,  Ranickel's 
"friend", prompter to the Biel Commis voyageur, contributor to 
L'Espérance, protégé of Edmond About, bard of the Lousiad—Karl 
Vogt had still to plumb the ultimate depths of depravity. In Paris he 
was to appear before the eyes of the world in the Revue contemporaine, 
arm in arm with Monsieur Edouard Simon. Let us consider 
for a moment what the Revue contemporaine is and who Monsieur 
Edouard Simon. 
The Revue contemporaine was originally the official Decembrist 
publication in sharp contrast to the Revue des deux Mondes, which 
a Louis Jourdan's article "Les frontières naturelles". — Ed. 
b "To take Savoy ... in other words, we are closing our door".— Ed. 
c "Then we should have to look to our security,  occupy  the left bank of  the Rhine, in 
other words, we should close our door".— Ed. 
d An allusion to the item "Autre correspondance. Paris, 27 avril" signed A. A., 
which appeared in L'Indépendance belge, No. 120, April 29, 1860.— Ed. 
e i.e. of Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第231页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 207 
received contributions from the elegant writers, the men of the 
Journal des Débats, Orleanists, Fusionists, and above all professors 
of the Collège de France and members of the Institut. 1^ Since the 
latter could not be directly assigned to the Revue contemporaine, the 
attempt was made to detach them from the Revue des deux Mondes 
and so indirectly to force them to join the Decembrist Revue. 
However, the coup did not have much success. The proprietors of 
the Revue contemporaine even found it inexpedient to do business 
with the editorial committee foisted onto them by M. La 
Guéronnière. But since the ventriloquist of the Tuileries stood in 
need of mouthpieces tuned in various keys, the Revue contem­
poraine was then transformed into a semi-official magazine while 
the Revue européenne with the editorial committee imposed by La 
Guéronnière was installed as official review. 
Now to Monsieur Edouard Simon, by nature a Rhine-
Prussian Jew called Eduard Simon, who however cuts the most 
comical capers to pass himself off as an authentic Frenchman, 
while his style constantly betrays the fact that he is a Rhine-
Prussian Jew translated into French. 
Shortly after the Schiller festivities (November 1859) in the 
home of a London acquaintance I met a highly respectable busi­
nessman who had lived many years in Paris. He gave me a de­
tailed account of the Parisian Schiller festivities, Schiller societies, 
etc. I interrupted him with a question about how German societies 
and meetings in Paris had managed to accommodate them­
selves to the Decembrist police. He replied with a humorous grin: 
"Naturally, there is no meeting without a mouchard, 3 nor any society without its 
mouchard. To avoid all complications we decided once and for all to adopt the 
simple tactic—probatum est h—of attracting a known spy and voting him on to the 
committee from the start. And we always have Edouard Simon at our dispo­
sal, a man who might have been made for the job. You are aware that La 
Guéronnière, who was formerly Lamartine's lackey and the manufacturer of long 
rigmaroles for Emile de Girardin, is now the Emperor's favourite, his privy stylist 
and at the same time the supreme censor of the French press. Well, Edouard Simon 
is La Guéronnièrés lap-dog, and," he added screwing up his nose, "he is a cur with 
a very unpleasant smell at that. Edouard Simon was unwilling to work pour le roi de 
Prusse, c as I am sure you will find understandable, but decided that he would 
perform an incalculable service for civilisation and himself if he were to make 
common cause with the Decembrist system. He is a fellow with a small mind and a 
nasty character, but in the sphere of petty intrigue he is not without a certain 
ability. La Guéronnière installed his Edouard Simon in La Patrie to write some of 
the leading articles. This well illustrated the tact of the privy stylist. For the 
a Spy.— Ed. 
b It has been shown to work.— Ed. 
c For the King of Prussia, i.e. for nothing.— Ed. 

=====第232页=====
208 Karl Marx 
proprietor of La Patrie, a banker called Delamarre, is an arrogant, headstrong, surly 
parvenu who cannot endure anyone around him who is not an utterly servile and 
pliable creature. So Edouard Simon was the right man for the position, since despite 
his poisonous malice, he can be as smooth as an angora cat. Under the republic La 
Patrie was, as you know, one of the most brazen mouthpieces of the rue de 
Poitiers. 1**- Since the December coup it has quarrelled with Le Pays and Le 
Constitutionnel for the honour of being recognised as the semi-official organ of the 
Tuileries and ever since the signal was given it has gone in for the annexation-fever in 
a big way. You know of those beggars who pretend to have epileptic attacks on the 
street so as to swindle passers-by of a few coppers. It was indeed an honour to La 
Patrie that it was allowed to be the first to announce the imminent annexation of Savoy 
and Nice. Scarcely had the annexation taken place when it enlarged its format, for, as 
M. Delamarre naively declared: 'La Savoie et le Comté de Nice ayant été annexés à la 
France, la conséquence naturelle est l'agrandissement de la Patrie.' a Who is not put in 
mind of the witticism of a Parisian cynic who when asked 'Qu'est-ce que la patrie?' 
replied 'Journal du soir'P If moreover the Rhine provinces were annexed, what an 
increase there would be then in La Patrie and its format and in the salaire of Edouard 
Simon  ! As far as economic policy is concerned La Patrie believes that the salvation of 
France is to be achieved by abolishing the tourniquet de la Bourse, c as a result of which 
business on the Exchange and hence throughout the land would again soar to the 
desired level. Edouard Simon is equally enthusiastic about the abolition of the tourniquet 
de la Bourse. However, our Edouard Simon is not only a writer of leading articles for La 
Patrie and La Guéronnière's lap-dog. He is the most sincere friend and informer of 
the new Jerusalem, alias the Prefecture of Police, and of M. Palestrina in particular. In 
short, gentlemen," the narrator concluded, "a committee with M. Edouard 
Simon in its bosom is by that very fact in the very best police odour." 
And Herr ... gave a curiously shrill laugh as if there were a 
further ineffably secret connection between Monsieur Edouard 
Simon and the odeur de mauvais lieu. d 
Mr. Kinglake has drawn the attention of the House of Commons 
to the pleasant confusion of foreign policy, the police and the 
press,  so characteristic of the Decembrist agents (session of the 
House of Commons, July 12, 1860). e Of course, Monsieur 
Edouard Simon—Vogt's infamous f Eduard is not to be confused 
with Vogt's gentle Kunigunde, alias Ludwig Simon of Trier*— 
Monsieur Edouard Simon, La Guéronnière's lap-dog, Delamarre's 
* Thanks to the intervention of the gentle Kunigunde some of Vogt's attacks 
against me were inserted in a local sheet in my home town of Trier. They included 
a "Savoy and the county of Nice having been annexed by France, the natural 
consequence is the enlargement of  the Patrie" (Patrie can mean both "motherland" and 
the title of the newspaper).— Ed. 
b "What is the motherland?" "An evening paper."—Ed. 
c Whirligig of the Stock Exchange.— Ed. 
d The smell of a place of ill-repute.— Ed. 
e Mr. Kinglake's speech was reported in The Times, No.  23671,  July 13, 1860.— Ed. 
f Marx puns on the word ruchbar (notorious, infamous) which in this context can 
also mean "ill-smelling".— Ed. 

=====第233页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 209 
poodle, Palestrina's spy3  and general dogsbody, clearly belongs if 
not to the cream at least to the Limburg cheese of the 10th 
December, to the Second Circle where 
"s'annida 
Ipocrisia, lusinghe, e chi affatura, 
Falsità, ladroneccio, e simonia, 
Ruffian, baratti, e simile lordura". b 
Many weeks before the publication of the "Magnum Opus" 
Karl Vogt had commissioned his Edouard Simon to review it in the 
French press. Edouard Simon opted for double emploi. First, he 
privately translated the "Magnum Opus" for M. La Guéronnière 
and in this connection his patron then assigned him to the Revue 
contemporaine. It was in vain that the editorial board of the Revue 
contemporaine humbly pleaded that if Edouard Simon were to 
appear in their columns it should at least be anonymously. La 
Guéronnière was inexorable. Edouard Simon made his debut in the 
Revue contemporaine of February 15, 1860 with an advertisement 
for his friend Vogt under the title: " Un tableau de mœurs politiques 
de l'Allemagne. Le procès de M. Vogt avec la Gazette d'Augsbourg" 
(Political Portrait of Germany. Herr Vogt's Action against the 
Augsburg Gazette), signed— Edouard Simon. 
The "Romanic" Edouard Simon does not believe that "he needs 
to hurl invective at the noble German race in order to prove 
himself a good Frenchman" (Revue contemporaine, loc. cit., p. 531), 
but as a "good Frenchman" and a "Romanic by birth" he must at 
least exhibit his innate ignorance of German affairs. Thus among 
other statements he asserts of his Karl Vogt: "He was one of the 
three Regents 0 of the short-lived Empire."* Monsieur Edouard Simon 
references to my "carnal miscegenation" with the Allgemeine. What an association of 
ideas for the chaste Kunigunde! Very shocking indeed! [Marx wrote the last sentence 
in English. The reference is to an item published in the Trier Volksblatt on November 
7, 1859. Marx mentions it also in a letter to Engels of November 19, 1859 (see present 
edition, Vol. 40).] 
* "Il fut un des trois régents de l'empire éphémère" (loc. cit., p. 518). 
a Marx uses the word Spitzel which means "spy" but in this context also suggests 
"spitz".— Ed. 
b "Hypocrites, flatterers, dealers in sorcery. 
Panders and cheats, and all such filthy  stuff, 
With theft, and simony and barratry 
All have their nest." 
(Dante, The Divine Comedy, Inferno, Canto XI, adapted.)—Ed. 
c Marx's italics.— Ed. 

=====第234页=====
210 Karl Marx 
does not know of course that the Empire in partibus* groaned under 
the rule of a pentarchy,h and "as a Frenchman" he imagines that if 
only for the sake of symmetry there were three parliamentary 
Regents of the Empire in Stuttgart corresponding to the three wise 
kings of Cologne.183  "Friend" Vogt's jokes in the "Magnum Opus" 
"frequently go beyond the limits of French taste".* Edouard the 
Frenchman will remedy this and will "strive to make a judicious 
selection".** "Friend" Vogt has a natural liking for "garish colours" 
and "is not exactly subtle in his use of language".*** Naturally! For 
"friend" Vogt is only a German who has been annexed, just as 
Dâ-Dâ is only an Arab who has been annexed, whereas Edouard 
Simon is a "good Frenchman" by birth and belongs to the 
"Romanic" race. Did Herr Orges and Herr Dietzel ever go so far in 
their slander of the "Romanic race"? 
Monsieur Edouard Simon amuses his superiors by exhibiting 
one of the "three" wise German Rump-Kings to the Paris public, 
with the agreement, moreover, and on the instructions of that 
Holy German Rump-King, and parading him as a voluntary 
prisoner in the wake of the triumphal carriage of the Imperial 
Quasimodo. It is obvious, says Edouard Simon, after quoting from 
Vogt's "Magnum Opus", 
"it is obvious that it did not matter to Herr Vogt from where help might come 
in favour of German unity, provided only that it did come; he even regarded the 
French Empire' as particularly well fitted to hasten the realisation of the solution he 
favoured. Perhaps Herr Vogt abandoned his old antecedents too cheaply (?!), and his 
former colleagues who had sat with him on the extreme Left of the Frankfurt 
Parliament must have been astonished to see this intransigent opponent of every 
unified power, this passionate zealot of anarchy, display such lively sympathies for 
the sovereign who has subdued anarchy in France".**** 
* "Il dépasserait le but au goût des Français" (loc. cit., p. 519). 
** "Nous nous efforcerons de choisir" (loc. cit.). 
*** "M. Vogt aime beaucoup les couleurs tranchantes, et il n'est pas précisément 
un gourmet en matière de langage" (loc. cit., p. 530). 
**** "On le voit, M. Vogt se souciait peu d'où vînt le secours en faveur de l'unité 
allemande, pourvu qu'il vînt; l'empire français lui semblait même singulièrement 
propre à hâter le dénouement qu'il désire. Peut-être en cela M. Vogt faisait-il bon 
marché de ses antécédents, et il dut paraître étrange, à ses anciens collègues qui 
siégeaient avec lui à l'extrême gauche dans le Parlement de Francfort, de voir ce 
fougueux antagoniste de tout pouvoir unique, ce fervent zélateur de l'anarchie 
manifester de si vives svmpathies envers le souverain qui l'a vaincue en France" (loc. 
cit., p. 518). 
a The words in partions infidelium (in lands inhabited by infidels) were added to 
the title of Catholic bishops appointed to purely nominal dioceses in non-Catholic 
countries. Here in partibus means non-existent.— Ed. 
b Marx means the five Imperial Regents (Franz Raveaux, Karl Vogt, Heinrich 
Simon, Friedrich Schüler and August Becher). — Ed. 

=====第235页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 211 
Edouard transfers the "fugitive Regent of the Empire" from the 
un-"committed" Left to the extreme Left of the Frankfurt 
Parliament. The man who voted in favour of "the hereditary 
German Emperor" 184 is transformed into an "intransigent oppo­
nent of every unified power", and the member of the Central 
March Association who preached "order" at any price to the 
motley parties inhabiting the taverns of Frankfurt becomes a 
"passionate zealot of anarchy". And all this to put the achievement 
of the 10th December in capturing the "fugitive Regent of the 
Empire" into its proper perspective. All the more precious are the 
"lively sympathies" which Herr Vogt "cherishes for the man who 
had subdued anarchy in France", all the more valuable his present 
recognition ' that the French Empire is particularly ivell fitted to bring 
about the unity of Germany", and all the more comprehensible is 
"friend" Simons broad hint that "friend" Vogt "perhaps aban­
doned his antecedents too cheaply (de bon marché)", i.e. the 
December man at any rate did not have to pay "too dearly". And 
in order to remove every doubt that might have remained in 
higher places that "friend" Vogt might not be as utterly reliable as 
"friend" Simon, Monsieur Edouard Simon explains with a grin 
and a wink, rubbing his hands the while, that Vogt in his passion 
for order, "if he has understood him rightly, has even notified the 
Genevan authorities of revolutionary intrigues"* that have come to his 
attention, just as Monsieur Edouard Simon "notified" Messrs. 
Palestrina and La Guéronnière. 
It is common knowledge that About and Jourdan and Granier 
de Cassagnac and Boniface and Dr. Hoffmann, that the monks of 
L'Espérance, the knights of Les Nationalités, the bellows of 
L'Opinion nationale, the penny-a-liners 3 of L'Indépendance, The 
Morning Chronicle, the Nouvelliste Vaudois, etc., that the La 
Guéronnières and the Simons, the stylists, civilisationists, Decem­
brists,  Plon-Plonists, Dentuists and dentists one and all take their 
inspiration from one and the same illustrious—money-box. So we 
see that Dâ-Dâ Vogt is no solitary partisan fighting a lonely battle, 
but is subsidised, indoctrinated, enlisted, enrolled along with the 
canaille, bound up with Edouard Simon, annexed by Plon-Plon, 
and sticking to them through thick and thin. The remaining 
question is whether Karl Vogt has been paid for his agency? 
* "Si nous l'avons bien compris, il a même appelé l'attention des autorités de 
Genève sur ces menées" (loc. cit., p. 529). 
a Marx uses the English expression. — Ed. 

=====第236页=====
212 Karl Marx 
"If I am not mistaken, to bribe means to offer someone money or other 
advantages to perform actions or make utterances contrary to his own convictions" 
("Magnum Opus", p. 217). 
And Plon-Plonism is the sum of Vogt's convictions. So that even 
if he was paid in cash, he was by no means  bribed.  But the modes 
of payment are at least as various as the different forms of 
coinage. 
Who knows whether Plon-Plon did not promise his Falstaff the 
post of governor of the Mouse Tower near the Binger Loch? 185 
Or nomination as corresponding member of the Institut, now that 
About in his La Prusse en 1860 has made French naturalists 
quarrel over the honour of corresponding simultaneously with the 
living Vogt and the dead Dieffenbach? Or perhaps he held out 
prospects of a restoration of his Regency of the Empire? 
I know of course that current reports provide a more prosaic 
explanation. Thus it is said that "with the change of circumstances 
since 1859" there has been a change in the circumstances of our 
"agreeable companion"3 (who had shortly before been one of the 
managers of a joint-stock company which had run aground and 
became the subject of a criminal investigation186 ). His anxious 
friends tried to explain away these developments by claiming that 
an Italian mining company had presented Vogt with a large 
number of shares in recognition of his contributions to "mineralo­
gy", a gift which he had turned into cash during his first stay in 
Paris.  People conversant with the situation but who do not know 
each other, have written to me almost simultaneously from 
Switzerland and France informing me that the "agreeable 
companion" had assumed the fairly profitable superintendence of 
an estate called "La Bergerie" near Nyon (in the Vaud). The 
estate is the widow's seat which Plon-Plon purchased for the 
Iphigenia of Turin. b I have even seen a letter written by a "New 
Swiss" who was still on terms of intimacy with Vogt long after "the 
change in circumstances of 1859" to a "Mr. P. B. B. of 78 
Fenchurch Street, London" early in 1860 in which he mentions 
a very considerable sum of money which his ex-friend had recei­
ved from the treasury in Paris, not as a bribe, but as payment in 
advance. 
Such items of news and worse have made their way to London, 
a Carl Vogt, "Zur Warnung", Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150 (special 
Supplement), June 2, 1859.— Ed. 
b Princess Clothilde of Savoy, daughter of the Sardinian King Victor 
Emmanuel.— Ed. 

=====第237页=====
Herr Vogt. — IX. Agency 213 
but for my part I would not give a brass farthing for them. I 
rather believe Vogt implicitly, when he says that 
"it is no one's business where I" (Vogt) "get my money from. I shall continue to 
try to obtain whatever  resources  are needed to achieve my political ends, and conscious that 
I am working for a good cause I shall continue to obtain them from wherever I can" 
("Magnum Opus", p. 226) — 
hence also from the Paris treasury. 
Political ends! 
"Nugaris, cum tibi, Calve, 
Pinguis aqualiculus propenso sesquipede extet." a 
Good cause! This is apparently the German idealistic expression 
for what the Englishman with his coarse materialism calls "the 
good things of this world".b 
Whatever Dr. Schaihle may think of it, why should we not 
believe Vogt implicitly, since in the same "Magnum Opus" he 
declares with equal seriousness at the end of his tall stories about 
the Brimstone Gang, etc.: 
"That concludes this phase of contemporary history. What I have  described  are no 
mere day-dreams; they are pure facts!" ("Magnum Opus", p. 182.) 
Whv shouldn't his agency be just as pure as the facts recounted 
in the "Magnum Opus"? 
For my part, I am firmly convinced that, in contrast to all the 
other writing, agitating, politicising, conspiring, propagandising, 
boasting, Plon-Plonising, plotting and self-compromising members 
of the  December  Gang, it is solely and exclusively the unique Vogt who 
regards his Emperor as "l'homme qu'on aime pour lui-même". c 
"Swerz niht geloubt, der sündet ,,, as Wolfram von Eschenbach 
says, d or "He errs who does not believe it", as a contemporary song 
savs. 
a "You're drivelling, Calvus, with your 
Fat little paunch protruding in front of you eighteen inches." 
(Persius, Satires, Book I, First Satire.) — Ed. 
b Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
c "A man whom one loves for his own  sake."—Ed. 
d "He sins who does not believe it" (Wolfram von Eschenbach, Parzival, IX. 
Buch).—  Ed. 

=====第238页=====
214 
X 
PATRONS AND ACCOMPLICES 
Principibus placuisse viris  non ultima laus est. 3 
As guarantors of his "good behaviour"b the ex-Vogt of the 
Empire proposes 
"Kossuth"  and "the two  other men—Fazy,  the  regenerator  of Geneva,  and 
Klapka,  the  defender  of  Komorn" —whom  he  "proudly calls  his  friends" 
("Magnum Opus",  p. 213). 
I call them his patrons. 
After the battle of Komorn (July 2, 1849) Görgey usurped the 
supreme command of the Hungarian army in defiance of the 
orders of the Hungarian Government, which had dismissed him. 
"If an energetic  man had  stood  at the  head  of the  government," writes Colonel 
Lapinski,  who was  still a supporter  of Kossuth when  he wrote  his  book,  "a stop 
could have been  put to all of  Görgey's intrigues even  at that time. Kossuth needed 
only to come into  the  camp  and say a few  words  to the  army  and all of  Görgey's 
popularity would  not  have saved  him  from defeat....  But  Kossuth  did not  come;  he 
was not  forceful enough  to oppose Görgey  in public  and so  while he intrigued against 
the general  in secret,  he attempted  to justify  the  latter's misdemeanours  in the  eyes of the 
world."  (Th.  Lapinski, Feldzug  der  Ungarischen Hauptarmee,  etc.. pp. 125, 126). 
On his own admission, Kossuth was officially informed of 
Görgey's intended betrayal some time later by General Guyon (see 
David Urquhart, Visit to the Hungarian Exiles at Kutayah c). 
"It is true that-Kossuth  did say in the  course  of a  fine speech  in Szeged that  if 
he knew that anyone  was a  traitor  he would murder  him  with  his own  hands.  He 
may have  had  Görgey  in mind  as he  spoke. However,  not  only  did he not  carry  out 
this somewhat theatrical threat,  he did not  even tell  all his  Ministers just whom  he 
a To  have pleased great  men is not the  greatest glory (Horace, Epistles,  I, 
17).—  Ed. 
b Marx uses  the  English phrase.— Ed. 
c Kiitahya.— Ed. 

=====第239页=====
Herr Vogt. — X. Patrons and Accomplices 215 
had under suspicion; while he was busy forging miserable plans against Görgey with 
some of them, [...] he always spoke of him with the greatest  respect  and even wrote letters to 
him couched in the most amicable terms. Others may understand him but I cannot 
understand how it was possible for him to realise that the salvation of the nation 
wholly depended on the fall of a dangerous man and yet to make no more than a 
tentative gesture to bring him down, while at the same time supporting him, 
winning new adherents and admirers to his cause by expressing his confidence in 
him, and thus placing all the power into his4iands. While Kossuth vacillated in this 
pusillanimous way, working now for Görgey and now against him ...  Görgey,  who was 
more consistent and resolute than Kossuth, put his evil plan into practice" (Th. 
Lapinski, loc. cit., pp. 163, 164). 
On August 11, 1849, on Görgey's orders, Kossuth issued a 
manifesto, ostensibly from the fortress of Arad, announcing his 
abdication and conferring on Görgey "supreme government 
authority in both military and civilian affairs". He went on to say: 
"After the unfortunate outcome of the battles which God has visited upon the 
nation in recent days, there is no longer any hope that we can continue our defensive 
struggle against the combined forces of the two great powers [...] with any prospect of 
success."  a 
Having thus stated at the beginning of the manifesto that 
Hungary's cause was irrevocably lost, and moreover as a result of 
Divine visitation, Kossuth goes on to make Görgey "responsible before 
God for deploying the power" placed by Kossuth at his disposal "for 
the salvation" of Hungary. He trusted Görgey enough to deliver 
Hungary up to him, but too little to deliver up his own person to him. 
His personal distrust of Görgey was so intense that he contrived it so 
that the arrival of his deed of abdication in Görgey's hands coincided 
with his own arrival on Turkish soil. This is why he concludes his 
manifesto with the words: 
"If my death can be of any use to my country, I shall sacrifice my own life with 
j(>y" 
What he had sacrificed on the altar of his country, handing it 
over te) Görgev, was the government, the title to which however he 
at once usurped again under Turkish protection. 
In Kütahya His Excellency, the Governor in partibus, received a 
copy of the first Blue Book on the Hungarian catastrophe laid 
before Parliament by Palmerston. b As he wrote to David Urquhart, 
the study of these diplomatic documents convinced him that 
"Russia had a spy, nay an agent even, in every Cabinet" and that in the 
:i Lajos Kossuth, "An die Nation! Festung Arad am 11. August 1849". Quoted 
in Theophil Lapinski's Feldzug der Ungarischen Hauptarmee..., Hamburg, 1850, 
S. Mb.—Ed. 
h Correspondence  relative to the Affairs of Hungary, 1847-1849.  Presented to both  Houses 
of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty. August 15, 1850, London.— Ed. 

=====第240页=====
216 Karl Marx 
Russian interest Palmerston had betrayed dear Hungary.a  * And the 
first words that fell from his lips when he stepped onto English 
soil in Southampton were: "Palmerston, the dear friend of my 
bosom!" b 
After he was freed from internment in Turkey Kossuth sailed to 
England. Off the coast of Marseilles, where he was forbidden to 
land, he issued a manifesto whose tenor and phraseology were 
those of French social democracy/ Having set foot on English soil 
he at once repudiated 
"that novel doctrine, social democracy, which rightly or wrongly is held to be 
incompatible with social order and the security of property. Hungary neither has 
nor wishes to have anything to do with these doctrines, if only for the extremely simple 
reason that in Hungary there is no opportunity nor even the slightest inducement for 
them to be introduced." d  (Cf. the letter from Marseilles.) 
During the first two weeks of his stay in England he changed his 
confession of faith as frequently as his audience—he was all things 
to all men. Count Kasimir Batthyâny gave this explanation of his 
public breach with Kossuth which took place at this time: 
"It is not just the bévues e that Kossuth has committed in the first two weeks since 
his release that have induced me to take this step, but all my experience of him, 
everything I have seen, suffered, allowed, endured, and, as you will recall, 
disguised and concealed, at first in Hungary and then in exile,— in short it is a 
matter of the opinion I have formed about the man.... Permit me to remark that 
whatever Mr. Kossuth has said or may say in Southampton, Wisbech or London, in 
England, in short, cannot undo what he said in Marseilles. In the land of the 
'young giant'" (America) "he will again sing a different tune, for just as he is 
unscrupulous f in other matters and bends like a reed beneath any gust of wind, so 
too does he gainsav his own words sans geneß and does not hesitate to hide behind 
* Kossuth did not understand then how Palmerston's feigned hostility to Russia 
"could" deceive anyone of ordinary intelligence. "How could a man of. any intellect 
for a single moment believe that the Minister who allowed Russia's intervention in 
Hungary, would give the word of attack against her?" (Letter dated Kutayah, 
December 17, 1850. Correspondence of Kossuth.) 
a Marx uses the English phrase "dear Hungary".— Ed. 
b Marx quotes this sentence in English and gives its German equivalent in 
brackets.— Ed. 
c Lajos Kossuth, "An die Marseiller Démocratie" [Bord des Mississippi, 29. 
September 1851], quoted in Gustav von Alvensleben's L. Kossuth nach der Capitulation 
von Vilagos, Weimar, 1852, S. 65-66.— Ed. 
d From Kossuth's speech at a workers' meeting at Copenhagen House. Quoted 
in Authentic Life of His Excellency Louis Kossuth..., London, 1851, p. 76.— Ed. 
e Blunders.— Ed 
f Marx gives the English words "unscrupulous" and, further on in the text, "a 
most undeserving heart" in brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed 
s Without the slightest embarrassment.— Ed. 

=====第241页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 217 
the great names of men now dead whom he has ruined, such as my poor cousin, 
Louis Batthyâny.... I do not hesitate to declare that before Kossuth leaves England 
you will have good reason to regret the honours you have squandered on a most 
undeserving heart" (Correspondence of Kossuth, letter of Count Batthyâny to Mr. 
Urquhart, Paris, October 29, 1851). 
Kossuth's performance in the United States, where he spoke 
against slavery in the North and for slavery in the South, left 
behind nothing but a great sense of disappointment and 300 dead 
speeches. Bringing the curtain down hastily on this peculiar 
episode, I would only remark that he strongly recommended the 
Germans in the United States, and in particular the German 
emigration, to conclude an alliance between Germany, Hungary 
and Italy, to the exclusion of France (and not just the coup d'état 
government, but France  itself,  and even the French emigration 
together with the parties in France represented by it). No sooner 
had he returned to London than he attempted to establish relations 
with Louis Bonaparte through the agency of Count Szirmay, a 
dubious character, and through Colonel Kiss in Paris (see my 
letter in the New-York Tribune of September 28, 1852 and my 
public declaration in the same paper on November 16, 1852 a). 
During the Mazzini rising in Milan in 1853 188 a proclamation 
appeared on the walls of the town addressed to the Hungarian 
troops stationed there and calling on them to join the Italian 
insurgents.11 It bore the signature: Louis Kossuth. Scarcely had the 
news of the defeat of the insurgents reached London when 
Kossuth hastened to publish a statement in The Times" and other 
English papers, declaring the proclamation to be a forgery and 
thereby publicly contradicting his friend Mazzini. The proclama­
tion was nevertheless authentic. Mazzini had obtained it from 
Kossuth, he owned the original manuscript in Kossuth's handwrit­
ing and he had acted in concert with Kossuth. Convinced that 
Austrian despotism in Italy could only be overthrown by the 
united action of Italy and Hungary, Mazzini then first tried to 
replace Kossuth with a more reliable Hungarian leader, but after 
this attempt had failed because of the divisions within the 
Hungarian emigration, he forgave his unreliable ally and mag-
a Karl Marx, "Movements of Mazzini and Kossuth.— League with Louis 
Napoleon.— Palmerston" and "Kossuth, Mazzini, and Louis Napoleon. To the 
Editor of The N. Y. Tribune, London, November 16, 1852" (see present edition, 
Vol. 11).—Ed. 
b L. Kossuth, "In the Name of the Hungarian Nation. To the Soldiers 
Quartered in Italy, February  1853",  The Times, No. 21348, February 10, 
1853.—  Ed. 
r "Italy. The 'Voce della Verita!'", The Times, No. 21366, March 3,  1853.—  Ed. 

=====第242页=====
218 Karl Marx 
nanimously abstained from an exposure which was bound to 
destroy Kossuth's reputation in England. 
The same year, 1853, it will be remembered, saw the beginning 
of the Russo-Turkish war. On December 17, 1850 Kossuth had 
written to David Urquhart from Kütahya: 
"Take away the Turkish supremacy from Turkey and it will cease to be. And 
after all, as matters stand, Turkey is indispensably necessary to the freedom of the 
world."  a 
His enthusiasm for the Turks was even greater in a letter he 
wrote to the Grand Vizier Reshid Pasha on February 15, 1851. In 
extravagant phrases he offered his services to the Turkish 
Government. On January 22, 1852, during his tour of the United 
States, he wrote to David Urquhart: 
"Would you feel inclined, knowing how much the interests of Hungary and 
Turkey were identical, to plead my cause at Constantinople? The Porte did not 
know who I am when I was there. My reception in England and America, and the 
position in which the chances of fortune, and I may say Providence, have placed 
me, could show the Porte that I am a true friend, and perhaps a not uninfluential 
one, of Turkey and her future." 
On November 5, 1853 he wrote to Mr. Crawshay (an Urquhar-
tist), offering to go to Constantinople as an ally of Turkey, but 
"not with empty hands",b and therefore asked Mr. Crawshay to 
raise funds 
"by private applications addressed confidentially to such liberal men as might 
well afford the assistance he required". 
In this letter he says: "I hate and despise the artifice of making 
revolutions." At the same time as he was penning letters to the 
Urquhartists that overflowed with hatred of revolutions and love 
for the Turks, he issued manifestos together with Mazzini which 
proclaimed the expulsion of the Turks from Europe and the 
transformation of Turkey into an "oriental Switzerland", and also 
signed the exhortations to revolution in general put out by the 
so-called Central Committee of European Democracy.189 
Since as early as the end of 1853 Kossuth had aimlessly 
squandered the money he had collected in America in 1852 by his 
speechifying in the name of Hungary, and since moreover his plea 
to Mr. Crawshay fell on deaf ears, the Governor abandoned his 
intended chivalrous journey to Constantinople, but instead he sent 
a Here and below Marx quotes from the article "Data by Which to Judge of 
Kossuth", The Free  Press,  No. 5, May 27, 1859. The italics are in the article.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the English words "not with empty hands" and, below, "I hate 
and despise the artifice of making revolutions" in brackets after their German 
equivalents.— Ed. 

=====第243页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 219 
his agent, Colonel Johann Bangya, supplying him with the best 
possible recommendations.* 
* I myself had made the acquaintance of Bangya in London in 1850, together 
with his friend at the time, the present General Tiirr. His underhand dealings with 
parties of every complexion, Orleanists, Bonapartists, etc., and his association with 
policemen of every "nationality" made me suspect him, but he dispelled my suspicions 
quite simply by showing me a document in Kossuth's own hand in which he (who had 
formerly been provisional chief commissioner of the police in Komorn3  under 
Klapka) was appointed chief commissioner of the police in partions. As a secret chief of 
police in the service of the revolution he naturally had to keep in "touch" with police 
in the service of the governments. In the course of the summer of 1852 I discovered 
that he had appropriated a manuscript b I had asked him to convey to a bookseller in 
Berlin and steered it into the hands of a German government. After I had written to a 
Hungarian in Paris0 describing this incident and a number of other striking 
peculiarities of the man's, and after the Bangya mystery had been completely cleared 
up thanks to the intervention of a third person well informed in the matter,d I sent an 
open denunciation, signed by  myself,  to the New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung early in 
1853. e In a letter, still in my possession, in which he attempted to justify his actions, 
Bangya emphasised that I had less reason than anyone to regard him as a spy, since he 
had always (and this was perfectly true) avoided discussing with me the affairs of my 
own party. Although Kossuth and his supporters did not drop Bangya at the time, my 
revelations in the Criminal-Zeitung made it nevertheless difficult for him to continue 
operating in London and so he was all the more ready to grasp the opportunity 
provided by the troubles in the Orient of employing his talents in another setting. 
Soon after the conclusion of the Peace of Paris in 1856 I saw from the English 
newspapers that a certain Mehemed Bey, a colonel in the Turkish service, formerly a 
Christian known under the name of Johann Bangya, had sailed from Constantinople 
to Circassia, in the company of some Polish refugees, and that once there he figured as 
Sepher Pasha's Chief of the General  Staff,  and as what might be termed the "Simon 
Bolivar" of the Circassians. In the columns of the London Free  Press,  of which many 
copies are sent to Constantinople, I drew attention to the liberator's past. f On January 
20, 1858 Bangya was, as is mentioned in the text, sentenced to death in Aderbi by a 
military tribunal of the Polish Legion under the command of Colonel Th. Lapinski 
for plotting treason against Circassia. As Bangya was a Turkish colonel, Sepher Pasha 
decided that execution of the sentence was incompatible with the respect due to the 
Sublime Porte and therefore shipped the condemned man to Trebizond from where 
he soon returned to Constantinople, a free man. In the meantime the Hungarian 
emigration in Constantinople had enthusiastically taken up his cause against the Poles. 
Shielded from the Divan (which, since he was a "colonel", had moreover to feed both 
him and his harem) by the protection of the Russian Embassy, and from the Poles by 
a Komârom. — Ed. 
b The pamphlet The Great Men of the Exile by Marx and Engels (see present 
edition, Vol. 11).— Ed. 
c Gustav Zerfy (see Marx's letter to him of December 28, 1852, present edition, 
Vol. 39).—  Ed. 
d Bartholomäus Szemere.— Ed. 
e See Karl Marx, "Hirsch's Confession" (present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed. 
f Karl Marx, "A Traitor in Circassia", The  Free  Press,  No. 34, April 1, 1857.— Ed. 

=====第244页=====
220 Karl Marx 
A military tribunal held in Aderbi in Circassia on January 20, 
1858 unanimously passed a sentence of death on " Mehemed Bey, 
formerly Johann Bangya d'lllosfalva, who on his own admission and 
on the evidence of witnesses had been found guilty of high 
treason and conducting a secret correspondence with the enemy" 
(the Russian general Philipson). d However, this did not prevent 
him from living peacefully in Constantinople to this very day. In a 
handwritten confession submitted to the tribunal, Bangya said inter 
alia. 
"My political action was entirely dictated by the chief of my country, Louis 
Kossuth.... Provided with letters of introduction from my political  chief,  I came to 
Constantinople on the 22nd December,  1853." e 
He goes on to describe how he became a Moslem and entered 
the Turkish service with the rank of colonel. 
"My instructions" (from Kossuth) "insisted that I should get attached in some 
way or other to troops which were to take part in operations on the Circassian 
coast." 
His task there was to prevent the Circassians from taking any 
part in the war against Russia. He carried out his mission 
successfully and towards the close of the war he sent "Kossuth a 
detailed account of the situation in Circassia" from Constan­
tinople. Before his second expedition to Circassia, which he 
undertook together with the Poles, he received an order from 
Kossuth to collaborate with certain Hungarians, among whom was 
General Stein (Ferhad Pasha). s 
the prejudices of his fellow-countrymen, Bangya coolly proceeded to publish a 
self-apologia in the Journal de Constantinople. However, a Circassian deputation arrived 
presently and this put an end to his games. The Hungarian emigration officially 
dropped their favourite, though de très mauvaise grâce. 3 All the papers relating to the 
military tribunal in Aderbi, including Bangya's own confession of guilt, and all the 
documents produced later in Constantinople were sent on to London by the Polish 
emigration, and once there they were published in extracts in The Free Press (May 
1858). b The documents were also published more extensively by me in the New-York 
[Daily] Tribune on June 16, 1858.c 
a With great reluctance.— Ed. 
b "Extract from the Minutes of the Council of War, held at Aderbi...", The Free 
Press, No. 16, May 12, 1858.— Ed. 
c See "A Curious Piece of History", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5352.— Ed. 
d "Sentence. January 20, 1858", The Free Press, No. 16, May 12, 1858.— Ed. 
e Here and below Marx quotes from "Confession of Bangya before the Council of 
War", ibid.— Ed. 

=====第245页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 221 
"Captain Franchini," he says, "military secretary to the Russian Ambassador* was 
present at several of our conferences. The object was to win over Circassia to 
Russian interests in a peaceable, slow, but sure manner. [...] Before the expedition set 
out from Constantinople" (mid-February 1857), "I received letters and instructions 
from Kossuth approving my plan of operations." 
Bangya's treachery came to light in Circassia when a letter to 
Philipson, the Russian general, was intercepted. 
"In conformity with my instructions," Bangya says, "I was to get in touch with the 
Russian general. For a long time I could not make up my mind to do this, but at 
last I received orders so precise that it was impossible for me to hesitate any longer." 
The proceedings of the military tribunal in Aderbi and 
especially Bangya's confession made a great sensation in Constan­
tinople, London and New York. Kossuth was repeatedly and 
urgently pressed, even from the Hungarian side, to make a public 
statement, but to no avail. To this day he has maintained timorous 
silence on Bangya's mission in Circassia. 
In the autumn of 1858 Kossuth was busy hawking around 
England and Scotland moderately priced lectures in which he 
denounced the Austrian concordat190 and Louis Bonaparte. The 
passionate fanaticism with which he warned the English to beware 
of the treacherous designs of Louis Bonaparte, whom he described 
as the secret ally of Russia, can be seen, e.g., from The Glasgow 
Sentinel of November 20, 1858.b  When Louis Bonaparte revealed 
his Italian plans early in 1859, Kossuth denounced him in 
Mazzinïs Pensiero ed Azione and warned "all true republicans", 
Italians, Hungarians and even Germans, to beware of allowing 
themselves to be used as a cat's-paw by the Imperial Quasimodo. 
In February 1859 Kossuth ascertained that Colonel Kiss, Count 
Teleki and General Klapka, all of whom had long since belonged 
to the red camarilla of the Palais Royal, were hatching a 
conspiracy with Plon-Plon to provoke an uprising in Hungary. 
Kossuth now threatened a public polemic in the English press 
unless he too were admitted to the "secret league". Plon-Plon was 
more than willing to open the doors of the conclave to him. 
Travelling under the name of Mr. Brown and furnished with an 
English passport, Kossuth went to Paris in the beginning of May. 
He hastened to the Palais Royal and expounded his plans for a 
Hungarian uprising to Plon-Plon at great length. 191 On the 
evening of May 3 the Prince Rouge accompanied the ex-
Governor to the Tuileries in his own carriage, to present him 
there to the saviour of society. Throughout the meeting with Louis 
a Apollinary Petrovich Butenev.— Ed. 
b This refers to the article "Louis Kossuth and Panslavism".— Ed. 

=====第246页=====
222 Karl Marx 
Bonaparte, words failed the normally so eloquent speaker, so that 
Plon-Plon had to act as spokesman and present Kossuth's 
programme to his cousin. Kossuth later praised the almost literal 
accuracy of Plon-Plon's rendering. Having listened attentively to 
his cousin's exposition, Louis Bonaparte declared that there was 
only one obstacle preventing him from adopting Kossuth's 
proposals, and this was Kossuth's republican convictions and 
republican connections. Thereupon the ex-Governor solemnly 
abjured his republican faith, protesting that he neither was a 
republican now, nor had he ever been one, but that political 
necessity alone and a strange concatenation of circumstances had 
forced him into an alliance with the republican party of the 
European emigration. As proof of his anti-republicanism he 
offered Plon-Plon the Hungarian crown in the name of his 
country. At that time, this crown had not yet been abolished. 
Moreover, Kossuth was not officially authorised to auction it, but 
everyone who has followed his appearances abroad with any 
attention will have observed that he had long been accustomed to 
speak of his "dear Hungary"3 much as a backwoods squire will 
speak of his estate.* 
I take his repudiation of republicanism to be sincere. A civil list 
of 300,000 florins, claimed in Pest to maintain the dignity of the 
executive; the transfer of the patronage of the hospitals from an 
Austrian Archduchessb to his sisterc; the attempt to christen a 
number of regiments with the name of Kossuth; his efforts to 
form a camarilla; the stubbornness with which he clung to the title 
of governor when abroad, a title which he had renounced in the 
moment of danger; his entire subsequent behaviour, much more 
that of a pretender than a refugee—all that points to tendencies 
alien to republicanism. 
After his formal cleaning of the suspicion of republicanism, an 
agreement was reached placing 3 million francs at Mr. Kossuth's 
disposal. There was nothing objectionable about this clause in 
itself since money was needed to finance the military organisation 
of the Hungarian refugees, and why should the Governor be 
denied the same right to receive subsidies from his new ally as had 
* That such matters come to light appears less strange if it is borne in mind 
that at least two loquacious parties were involved here. Incidentally, English papers 
reported these facts during Kossuth's stay in London (in the late summer of 1859). 
a Marx uses the English expression.— Ed. 
b Maria Theresa.— Ed. 
c Zsuzsânna Meszlenyi.— Ed. 

=====第247页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 223 
been enjoyed by all the despotic powers of Europe who had been 
subsidised by England throughout the anti-Jacobin war? Kossuth 
was given 50,000 francs3 on the spot as an advance on his personal 
expenses and he secured certain other pecuniary advantages, a 
sort of insurance premium, in the event of the premature end to 
the war. Financial flair and melodramatic emotions are by no 
means mutually exclusive. After all, as his ex-Finance Minister, 
Dusek, must be aware, even during the Hungarian revolution 
Kossuth had taken the precaution of receiving his salary not in 
Kossuth-notes but in silver or in Austrian banknotes. 
Before Kossuth left the Tuileries it was agreed that he should 
undertake to neutralise the alleged "Austrian tendencies" of the 
Derby Ministry by launching a neutrality campaign in England. It 
is known how the voluntary support of the Whigs and the 
Manchester School enabled him to carry out this initial part of the 
agreement with the greatest success. A lecturing tour from the 
Mansion House in London to the Free Trade Hall in Manchester 
formed an antithesis to the Anglo-Scottish tour of autumn 1858 
when he hawked his hatred of Bonaparte and Cherbourg, "the 
standing menace to England", 0 at a shilling per head. 
The larger part of the Hungarian emigration in Europe had 
withdrawn its support for Kossuth since the end of 1852. The 
prospect of an invasion of the Adriatic coast with French assistance 
brought the majority back to his flag. His negotiations with the 
military sector of his new-found supporters were not without a 
certain Decembrist flavour. In order to be in a position to assign a 
larger amount of French money to them he advanced them to 
higher military rank, lieutenants, for instance, were promoted to 
major. To begin with each man received travelling expenses to 
Turin, then a lavish sum for a uniform (the cost of a major's outfit 
amounted to £150), and finally six months' advance of salary with 
the promise of one year's retirement pay after the conclusion of 
peace. The salaries themselves were not unduly high: 10,000 
francs c for the supreme general (Klapka), 6,000 francs for the 
generals,  5,000  for the brigadiers, 4,000 for the lieutenant-
colonels, 3,000 for the majors, and so on. The Hungarian forces 
assembled in Turin consisted almost entirely of officers without 
a The Free  Press  of September 28, 1859 ("Particulars of Kossuth's Transaction with 
Louis Napoleon"), and the New-York Daily Tribune of September 24, 1859 ("Kossuth 
and Louis Napoleon") have: "75,000 francs".— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English phrases "lecturing tour" and "the standing menace to 
England".— Ed. 
c The Free Press of September 28, 1859 has: "12,000 francs".— Ed. 

=====第248页=====
224 Karl Marx 
the rank and file, and I have heard many bitter words about this 
from the "lesser" Hungarian emigration. 
General Moritz Perczel, as has already been mentioned, resigned 
publicly as soon as he had seen through the diplomatic game. 
Despite Louis Bonaparte's order to the contrary, Klapka insisted 
on a landing near Fiume, but Kossuth made sure that the 
Hungarian refugee corps stayed within the theatrical limits laid 
down by the director of the troupe. 
The rumours of the peace signed at Villafranca had hardly 
arrived in Turin when Kossuth, terrified of being handed over to 
the Austrians, took to his heels and escaped to Geneva, secretly, 
behind the back of the military forces at his disposal. At the time 
neither the name of Francis Joseph, nor that of Louis Bonaparte, 
stood in such bad odour in the Hungarian camp in Turin as that 
of Louis Kossuth, but for the fact that the comic side of his latest 
escapade somewhat overshadowed all criticism. On his return 
Kossuth published in London a letter to his tame elephant, a 
certain McAdam in Glasgow,3 declaring himself to be disillusioned, 
but not cheated and closing with the emotional statement that he 
had nowhere to lay his head and that therefore all letters for him 
should be sent to his friend F. Pulszky who had offered shelter to 
the refugee. The more than Anglo-Saxon gruffness with which the 
London press intimated to Kossuth that he should use the 
Bonapartist subsidies to rent himself a house in London convinced 
him that for the time being his role in London was at an end. 
Apart from his talent as an orator Kossuth also possesses the 
great gift of silence as soon as the audience shows definite signs of 
displeasure or he finds himself at a loss for words by which to 
justify  himself.  Like the sun he knows all about eclipses. That he 
was capable of consistency at least once in his life was demon­
strated by his recent letter to Garibaldi in which he warned him 
not to make an attack on Rome lest he offend the Emperor of the 
French, "the only support of the oppressed nationalities".b 
Just as, in the first half of the eighteenth century, Alberoni was 
known as the colossal cardinal, so we may think of Kossuth as a 
colossal Langenschwarz. He is essentially an improviser who is 
a Passages from the letter were quoted in a leading article in The Times, No. 
23428,  October 4, 1859. A statement by McAdam to the effect that Kossuth's letter 
was a private one was published in The Times, No.  23431,  October 7. Marx 
mentioned the fact in a letter to Bartholomäus Szemere on October 8 (see present 
edition, Vol. 40).— Ed. 
b Cf. Kossuth's letter to Garibaldi, Turin, September 14, in L. Kossuth, Meine 
Schriften aus der Emigration, Bd. III, S. 24.— Ed. 

=====第249页=====
Herr Vogt. — X. Patrons and Accomplices 225 
moulded by the impressions he receives from the audience facing 
him at a given moment, not an author who stamps his original 
ideas on the world. Like Blondin on his rope, Kossuth dances on 
his tongue. Cut off from the mood of his people he was bound to 
lapse into mere virtuosity and the vices of the virtuoso. The 
insubstantiality of thought characteristic of the improviser is 
inevitably reflected in the ambivalence of his actions. If Kossuth 
was once the Aeolian harp through which the hurricane of the 
people reverberated, he is now merely the Dionysian ear which 
echoes in a murmur the whisperings in the mysterious apartments 
of the Palais Royal and the Tuileries. 
It would be quite unjust to place General Klapka, Vogt's second 
patron, on the same level as Kossuth. Klapka was one of the best 
Hungarian revolutionary generals. Like the majority of officers 
who gathered in Turin in 1859 he regards Louis Bonaparte much 
as Franz Râkôczy regarded Louis XIV. In their eyes Louis 
Bonaparte represents France's military power, a power which 
might serve Hungary but which, if only on geographical grounds, 
could never endanger it.* But why does Vogt appeal to the 
authority of Klapka? Klapka has never made a secret of the fact 
that he belongs to Plon-Plon's red camarilla. So that "friend" 
Klapka can vouch for "friend" Vogt? Klapka has shown no great 
talent in the selection of his friends. One of his closest friends in 
Komorn was Colonel Assermann. Let us hear about this Colonel 
Assermann from Colonel Lapinski, who served under Klapka up 
to the surrender of Komorn and who subsequently distinguished 
himself in Circassia fighting against the Russians. 
* Although I can understand how Klapka can entertain such views, it is 
astonishing to find similar ones in the above-quoted work of Szemere'sa and I have 
frankly told him what I think of it in this respect.b I find it even harder to 
understand his latest statement about the Austrian concession.192 I am aware that 
Szemere does not allow private considerations to influence his decisions on public 
affairs and that he had very important reasons for declaring that with the 
concessions granted by Vienna, the Hungarians could take all they wanted in Pest; 
that any Hungarian insurrection from abroad, especially with the aid of the 
French, would necessarily provoke Russian intervention in Hungary, whether for 
or against Austria; and finally, that the autonomy granted to Transylvania, Slavonia 
and Croatia, as well as to the Voivodina, would at this particular moment ensure 
that the Vienna Cabinet had the loyalty of these "nationalities" against the Magyars 
just as it did in 1848-49. All that is true enough, but could have been said without 
appearing to recognise the Hungarian Constitution "in usum delphini " 193 in the 
mutilated Viennese edition. 
a This refers to Bartholomäus Szemere's pamphlet Hungary, from 1848 to 1860, 
London, I860.— Ed. 
b Marx to Szemere, June 2, 1860 (see present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed. 

=====第250页=====
226 Karl Marx 
"The betrayal at Vilâgos," 194 Lapinski says, "threw the numerous and idle staff 
officers in Komorn into a state of great terror.... The scented gentlemen with 
golden collars, many of whom were able neither to hold a rifle nor to command 
three men, were full of fear running about in confusion and devising plans to save 
their own skins at any price. These men, who had managed on one pretext or 
another to leave the main army and withdraw to the cosy safety of the impregnable 
fortress, without having to perform any labour over and above putting their 
signature to a receipt once a month acknowledging that their salaries were correct 
and in order, were terrified by the thought that they were now faced with a 
life-and-death struggle.... It was these wretches who conjured up dreadful visions 
of internal unrest, mutiny, etc., in order to make the general surrender the fortress 
as quickly as possible [...] if they could only save themselves and their property. 
The latter was of special concern to many of them, for all their endeavours 
throughout the revolution had been concentrated on enriching themselves, and a 
number had succeeded. Some individuals managed to enrich themselves quite 
easily for often half a year would pass before it was necessary to give an account of 
the funds they had received. Since this was a situation which favoured treachery 
and fraud many people may have dipped their hands more deeply into the 
cash-box than they could have justified.... The armistice had been concluded: how 
was it used? From the supplies in the fortress, which would have lasted a year, 
unnecessarily large rations were distributed among the villages, while no provisions 
were brought in from the surrounding area; even the hay and oats which the 
peasants in the nearby villages wanted to sell was left lying there so that a few 
weeks later the Cossacks' horses devoured the property of the peasants while we in 
the fortress complained about the lack of supplies. The cattle in the fortress were 
for the most part sold off outside the town on the pretext that there was a shortage 
of fodder. Colonel Assermann presumably did not know that meat can be pickled. A 
large part of the grain was also sold off on the grounds that it was going mouldy; 
this was done openly, and even more such things were done secretly. With such a 
man as Assermann at his side and with a number of similar individuals in his 
entourage Klapka had of course quickly to abandon every good idea that came into 
his head; those gentlemen took good care of that..." (Lapinski, loo cit., pp. 
202-06). 3 
The memoirs of both Görgey and Klapka b provide no less 
eloquent testimony to Klapka's lack of character and political 
understanding. All the errors he committed during the defence of 
Komorn stem from this defect. 
"If Klapka with his knowledge and patriotism a/50 had a firm will of his own, and 
if he had acted in accordance with opinions he had formed  himself,  rather than 
with those suggested to him by fools and cowards, the defence of Komorn would 
sparkle in the annals of history like a meteor" (loc. cit., p. 209). 
On August 3, Klapka had gained a brilliant victory over the 
besieging Austrian corps at Komorn, he had scattered it and put it 
out of action for some time. He followed this up by taking Raabc 
a Theophil Lapinski, Feldzug der Ungarischen Hauptarmee im Jahre 1849.— Ed. 
b Arthur Görgey's Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 
1849, Bd. 1-2, Leipzig, 1852, and Memoiren von Georg Klapka. April bis October 
1849, Leipzig, 1850.— Ed. 
c Now Györ. — Ed. 

=====第251页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 227 
and could easily take Vienna as well, but for eight days remained 
irresolute and inactive at Raab and then returned to Komorn 
where he was met by the news of Görgey's surrender and found a 
letter from the latter awaiting him. The enemy requested an 
armistice so that the scattered besieging corps of the Austrians and 
the Russians advancing from Rima Szombat 3 could be concen­
trated near Komorn and invest the fortress at their leisure. Instead 
of attacking and defeating the enemy formations piecemeal before 
they could join up, Klapka again vacillated irresolutely, but 
rejected the request of the Austrian and Russian spokesmen for an 
armistice. At that moment, says Lapinski, 
"an adjutant of the Emperor Nicholas arrived in Komorn on August  22....  But, 
said the Russian Mephisto in honeyed tones, surely you will grant us a two weeks' 
armistice, General. It is His Majesty, my gracious Emperor, who is asking you! This 
worked like a quick poison. Where the efforts of the Austrian spokesmen and the 
arguments of the Russian negotiators had failed, this cunning Russian emissary 
succeeded with a few brief words. Klapka could not resist the subtle compliment 
and signed an armistice for 14 days. The fall of Komorn dates from this act". b 
Klapka allowed the armistice to be used by Colonel Assermann, as 
we have already mentioned, to disperse in two weeks the provisions 
of the fortress, which would have lasted a whole year. At the end of 
the armistice Grabbe invested Komorn from the Vag, while the 
Austrians, whose forces had gradually grown to 40,000 men, 
camped on the right bank of the Danube. The inactive life behind 
the walls and fortifications demoralised the troops inside Komorn. 
Klapka did not launch a single attack on the Russian besieging 
corps,  which had seen no action yet and was only 19,000 strong. 
The enemy's preparations for the siege were not disturbed for an 
instant. In fact, from the moment he had signed the armistice, 
Klapka prepared everything not for defence but for capitulation. 
The only energy he showed was of an inquisitorial nature and was 
directed at the upright officers who were opposed to capitulation. 
"In the end," Lapinski says, "it became dangerous to say anything about the 
Austrians if one wished to avoid arrest." 
Finally, on September 27, the capitulation was signed. 
"In view of the power, of the desperate situation of the nation, which had put 
its last hopes in Komorn," Lapinski says, "in view of the situation in Europe and 
the impotence of Austria, which would have made the greatest sacrifices for the 
sake of Komorn, the surrender conditions were as wretched as could be imagined."0 
a Rimavska Sobota.— Ed. 
b Theophil Lapinski, op. cit., S. 201-02.— Ed. 
c Ibid., S. 230.— Ed. 

=====第252页=====
228 Karl Marx 
They "were just sufficient to enable us to escape quickly from 
Komorn over the frontier", but they did not contain the slightest 
guarantee either for Hungary or even for the revolutionary 
generals in the hands of the Austrians. Moreover, they were drawn 
up in great haste and were so imprecise and ambiguous that it was 
easy for Haynau to violate them later on. 
So much for Klapka. If Vogt is lacking in "character", Klapka is 
the last man to make good the deficiency. 
Vogt's third patron is "James Fazy, the regenerator of Geneva",3 
as he is described by Vogt, his court jester. The following letters, 
written by Johann Philipp Becker h to the addressee of his letter 
reproduced earlier, 0 contain a portrait of Fazy which is so apt that 
any additional comment will only spoil it. I would make only one 
preliminary remark. The most nauseating feature of Vogt's 
so-called Studien is the hypocritical show of Lutheran and even 
Calvinist horror of the "ultramontane party ". l95 Thus, for example, 
he confronts Germany with the absurd alternative of either giving 
Louis Bonaparte a free hand or submitting to the domination of 
the Austrian concordat, and "verily we should rather prefer to 
undergo a second period of national humiliation" (Studien, p. 52). 
In the nasal tones of the puritan he fumes about 
"the ultramontane party, the sworn enemy of humanity, this monster that is 
attacking its very core" (loc. cit., p. 120). d 
He has of course never heard of the fact which even Dupin Aîné 
revealed in the Decembrist Senate, that 
"under Louis Bonaparte's régime the congregations, associations and founda­
tions of all kinds directly subject to the Order of Jesuits have become more 
numerous than they were under the ancien régime, and that all the state regulations 
which restricted the ultramontane organs of propaganda even before 1789 have 
been systematically dismantled by Decembrist legislation and administration". 
But Vogt must at any rate know that the rule of his local 
Bonaparte, M. James Fazy, is based on a long-standing coalition 
between the so-called radical party and the ultramontane party. 
When the Vienna Congress incorporated Geneva, the traditional 
home of Calvinism, into the Swiss Confederation, it added to its 
a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 213.—  Ed. 
b Becker wrote them at Marx's request (see Marx's letter to him of April 9, 
1860,  present edition, Vol. 41). For tactical reasons Becker addressed them to Georg 
Friedrich Rheinländer. — Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 60-64.— Ed. 
d The words in quotation marks are Marx's summary of several passages from the 
Studien. —Ed. 

=====第253页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 229 
territory, along with certain Savoyard districts, a rural Catholic 
population and the crème of the ultramontane priesthood. It is the 
alliance with this "sworn enemy of humanity, this monster" which 
has made Fazy the dictator of Geneva and Vogt Fazy's member of the 
Council of States. So much by way of introduction. 
"Paris, July 2, 1860 
"Dear R..., 
"At long last I really must comply with your wish and give you my opinion of 
M. James Fazy.... 
"Just as the political sciences are of no avail unless one knows how to apply 
them in real life, so too statesmanship is sterile unless it is based on science and 
philosophical thought. A so-called statesman who has nothing but theory will not 
fool anyone and he will soon reveal his incapacity. On the other hand, a man who 
has a one-track talent for statesmanship can more easily conceal his lack of 
knowledge and intellectual prowess, he may pass for a practical statesman and gain 
the support of the great market of mediocrity. Whether or not the rule of such a 
man can advance the culture of a nation and can create conditions ensuring its 
undisturbed progress, lies beyond the powers of judgment of the blindly adulating 
crowd. If there is only the appearance that things are going well and are improving 
and if onlv everything is done in the name of freedom and civilisation! 
"M. James Fazy is an outstanding specimen of the breed of political virtuosos. 
This astute man is distinguished not only for his statecraft but largely for his 
political craftiness. He resorts to all sorts of artifices and produces tours de force as 
often as the 'public interest' requires it, but with his usual cunning avoids every 
salto mortale. Full of guile in his manipulation of roles behind the scenes, a skilful 
director and prompter, he is the ne plus ultra of a French actor. His 'strength of 
character', which recoils from nothing if only it will serve his purposes, would be 
much to be admired, were it not for the fact that it is so intimately bound up with 
the disreputable nature of those purposes. Once one is familiar with the man's lack 
of principles and moral character, one will be less inclined to admire his ingenuity 
in devising means and his adroitness in employing them. This political virtuoso 
contrives by a sleight of hand boldly to appropriate everything good that occurs in 
the life of the people he governs; he then presents it to the great mass of the 
people in his own name so that they believe and are prepared to swear that it has 
all been brought about by or through the agency of 'Papa Fazy'. With equal skill he 
manages to shrug off the responsibility for everything that is bad or unpopular and 
to blame it on others. In his government he will not endure any independent 
personality, his colleagues must submit to being arbitrarily repudiated or forced to 
act as godfather for his abortive undertakings. Submitting to his despotic brutality à 
discrétion, 3 they have always to be prepared to act as the scapegoats and 
whipping-boys for the sake of the people and the glory of their President. Just as a 
crowned monarch will always ask himself whether a political measure will damage 
his dynasty, however much it may be to the advantage of the people, before he 'is 
pleased' to approve it, so too Papa Fazy asks  himself,  whenever he plans to take 
action: 'Will it not topple my presidential chair?' Hence our hero always adapts his 
policies to circumstances and lives from hand to mouth: on one day he will act out 
an uproarious comedy in the government, the next dav he will perform a conjuring 
trick in the Grand Council and the day after that he will produce a sensational 
a Unconditionally.— Ed. 

=====第254页=====
230 Karl Marx 
coup at a popular assembly, and the great mass, skilfully cosseted by him, only too 
happy to believe in a visible and audible God whom it can worship and pray to, 
becomes credulous and believes in pennies from heaven when it is only a heavy 
shower beating down on the roofs. I do not wish to suggest that the people of 
Geneva are immature „and lacking in intelligence; on the contrary, I am convinced 
that hardly anywhere can one find a more active public life, a more vigorous and 
conscious endeavour to evolve a free civil society than here on the banks of the 
Lake of Geneva. I shall return later to the subject and attempt to explain why M. 
Fazy has nevertheless been able on so many occasions to secure a majority of votes. 
"All that has been achieved in Geneva in fifteen years by an energetic 
generation he has chalked up to the credit of his rule, or he has caused his lackeys 
and worshippers to do so. The demolition of the fortifications, the impressive 
extension and improvement of the capital of the Canton, for instance, pass for his 
achievement. But every administration, including that of M. Fazy, would have been 
ruthlessly pushed aside if it had attempted to resist the mighty pressure from the 
populace to tear down fortifications that had become useless and to expand a town 
in which health conditions were increasingly deteriorating because of the terrible 
overcrowding. This question thus also became a question of Fazy's own survival and 
he energetically took it in hand — honour to whom honour is due—and has helped 
to carry out many improvements to the general satisfaction of the public. But 
without arrogant insolence no individual can set himself up as the originator or 
creator of what has been achieved by the strenuous and joint efforts of a whole 
generation to satisfy a great need of the age. It is only society as a whole that 
creates, and then only in a relative sense, an integral whole, to which the members 
according to their strength and position contribute a larger or smaller share. Blind 
faith in the authorities is a superstition like any other and is detrimental to any 
healthy development. 
"I am well aware that our M. Fazy is like everyone else in that he only does 
those things which he cannot refrain from doing, and he only refrains from doing 
things that he cannot do, and that like every living being, in his desire to develop 
his own individuality completely, he pursues his own needs. It is just as impossible 
to expect him to act otherwise as to demand that a cat should go into the water of 
its own accord or a horse climb trees. If he acted differently he would not be James 
Fazy, and if he were not James Fazy he might perhaps be Louis Bonaparte or 
something of the sort. If greatness in a man who possesses power is to keep a 
people in leading-strings, to dazzle them with conjuring tricks, without impressing 
the stamp of intensive progress on their moral and intellectual culture, but instead 
branding society with the marks of corruption, then Fazy would surely be great and 
worthy of being envied by tyrants more powerful than he. 
"He is as capable as anyone of sustaining contradictory policies and from them 
he produces the magic formula with which, as with a compass, he steers his little 
ship of state. At one moment radicalism will supply the crew and ultramontanism 
the cargo, at another, it will be the other way about—just as it suits the book and 
the latest tactics of the helmsman. So the machine of state is constantly in motion, 
heaving from one side to the other, like the balance wheel of a watch. And with 
what a happy effect! The radicals swear that things are moving forwards, the 
ultramontanists are convinced that they are going backwards. Both views are 
correct; both sides are happy in their faith and the Lord God Fazy remains at the 
helm. 
"Now, my dear friend, let these lines be enough for the moment. 
"Warmest greetings from 
Your Joh. Philipp Becker" 

=====第255页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 231 
"Paris, July 20, 1860 
"Dear R..., 
"So you think that my portrait of Fazy is perhaps somewhat exaggerated. By no 
means, my dear friend! Moreover, one cannot just think and judge things and 
people according to one's whims, but only in accordance with the logic of one's 
understanding and inner experience. Anyone whose words differ from his thoughts 
in such matters, and whose acts differ from his words, is untrue to himself and a 
scoundrel. 
"Fazy, who received his earliest education in a Herrnhut school 196 in Neu­
wied and speaks good German, still gives the appearance, at the age of 65, of judg­
ing Germany and its people according to the impressions gained at that model ins­
titution. Nothing German, and even Swiss German, is to his taste, and only in rare 
cases does he make an exception of this. As a native of Geneva and as a man 
who has spent a long time in the United States of North America, he is intimately 
familiar with republican institutions, with the methods of agitation and, owing to 
his natural disposition, especially with the various stratagems of intrigue. He is 
more of a demagogue than a democrat and his chief political slogan, his badge: 
laissez aller et laissez faire, 1^ would not be so bad, if only he could refrain from 
having a finger in every pie in which people attempt to do something without the 
blessing of the state. His interventions are designed either to achieve something 
that adds to his own glory, or where this proves to be impossible, to frustrate the 
enterprise, as he did in the project of Herr Mayer and others to establish the 
Banque de Crédit et d'Échange and to set up a Chamber of Commerce. During 
the Genevan revolution of 1846 198 M. James acted in accordance with the precept: 
away from the danger zone makes for a long life, and he thought more of how to 
escape than of how to win. He was just on the point of leaving Geneva in secret 
when Albert Galeer, the heart and soul of the entire movement, made a last mighty 
effort to resolve the struggle which had long raged indecisively, and gained a total 
victory. Galeer, who was single-mindedly devoted to the cause and cared nothing 
lor fame, firmly believed, at least at that time, that Fazy was motivated by a sincere 
love of the people. He was not at all put out when that hero, who had been saved 
from a precipitate flight in the nick of time, posed as the conqueror at a popular 
assembly immediately after the victory. Galeer himself could not contemplate a 
government post for himself immediately after the revolution, especially as he was 
not a Genevan, but a citizen of the Canton of Berne and so could neither vote nor 
be elected according to the confederate laws in force at the time. It is true that 
citizenship was soon conferred on him and after that he was elected into the Grand 
Council and was also given a post as translator of state papers. As the focus of the 
most energetic among the young people of Geneva he became a firm pillar of 
radical rule. Thanks to him Fazy' s position as the hero of the great mass was 
strengthened still further. Using the phraseology of French radicalism which he 
had acquired when working on Le National in Paris in the day of Louis Philippe, 
James Fazy agitated in the press and on the podium, disguising his true thoughts 
and desires to his heart's content. Nevertheless, despite all his demagoguery a year 
had scarcely passed before he began to be seriously accused in various circles of 
entertaining secret relations with the leaders of the ultramontane party, and soon 
after of being a Francophile. In German Switzerland, where people look at these 
things mote coolly and their judgments are more detached, they seem to have seen 
through his game even earlier. Towards the end of 1847, immediately after the 
conclusion of the Sonderbund War, M. James Fazy went to the offices of the 
War Department to pay a call on General Ochsenbein; I was the only person there, 
as Ochsenbein was with the rest of the officers ^isiting the wounded in the 
9-1305 

=====第256页=====
232 Karl Marx 
hospitals. When Ochsenbein returned I told him that M. Fazy had called, to 
which he responded contemptuously: 'Oh, that perfidious hypocrite!' General 
Ochsenbein, the former President of the Swiss Confederation and head of the 
Berne Government, who for years has been living on an Imperial French pension 
in Switzerland, may now perhaps think more charitably of an old colleague who is 
certainly his equal. However, it is a noteworthy fact that M. Fazy was never elected 
into the Federal Council by the Swiss National Assembly, despite all the efforts of 
his friends and  himself,  and despite the tendency, so dominant in this Assembly as 
almost to have become an inflexible dogma, to ensure that the important cantons 
should be guaranteed a turn in the Central Government. He always was a 
recalcitrant in relation to, and when possible tried to put a spoke in the wheel of, 
the federal authority which provided him with no opportunity to exercise power, 
and instead limited the cantonal sovereignty so convenient for him. 
"When, early in 1849, the Federal police deemed it politically expedient to 
persecute me for organising a Sicilian legion, I went to Geneva where Fazy told 
me that I could organise to my heart's content and had no need to concern myself 
about the Federal Council. I am well aware that M. Fazy will instantly sacrifice 
anyone as soon as things take a bad turn for the person concerned, even if the law 
is on that person's side, and I have later experienced this myself in an incident 
which is too complicated to explain in a letter but to the facts of which the Federal 
Commissars Dr. Kern and Trog can testify. 
"As far as the refugees were concerned, he used the watchword of humanity to 
resist the measures of the Federal Council and with callous arbitrariness persecuted 
refugees who were in his bad books. Above all, outstanding people close to Galeer, 
in whom he suspected a future rival, were subjected to ruthless persecution. 
Mazzini had good cause to fear him more than the Federal police. The tall Heinzen 
was abhorrent to him and had to leave the Canton almost at once. 'He thumps 
around as if the ground belonged to him', was the only explanation Fazy naively 
offered. Struve was arrested while out walking with his wife, even though there 
had been no instructions from the Federal Council, and was pushed over the 
frontier to the Canton of Vaud on the grounds that he was a Russian spy. Galeer 
managed to get to Fazy in time and tried to rectify this error. The two became 
embroiled in loud discussions since Fazy believes he is more convincing the more 
he shouts and the more indignant he pretends to be. Struve had to remain a 
Russian spy. If I remember rightlv this scene took place in the Hôtel des Bergues 
in the presence of Mr. Herzen, the Russian refugee with whom the head of the 
Geneva Government liked to dine. However, this gentleman certainly had no part 
in the sordid accusations brought against Struve. Fazy is undoubtedly a greater 
Russophile than Struve, for I once heard him say in a speech at some celebration: 
'The works of Jean Jacques Rousseau are more read and better understood in 
Russia than in Germany.' It is true that his principal intention here was to snipe at 
Galeer's German friends and the Germans in general. 
"Galeer, who up till then had gone along with Fazy through thick and thin on 
political matters and whom I spoke to just after he had crossed swords with Fazy 
on Struve's account, told me sadly: 'I am through with Fazy now. As a matter of 
honour I can no longer associate with him. The man is a veritable monster 
politically, a mere animal in his desires. If I were to remain in league with him this 
would mean helping to destroy the cause of the people from within. Only if he is 
confronted by a truly liberal party, will he be compelled to uphold the banner of 
radicalism to save his position. As long as he is opposed only bv the old aristocracy 
things will only get worse, since he has long been flirting with the ultramontane 
party and can really do what he iikes. Moreover, he is no true Swiss in his attitudes 

=====第257页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 233 
and looks more to Paris than to Berne. I have for a long time now had reason 
enough to turn my back on him but I was prevented by the fact that I had been 
accustomed to look on him as a worthy man for so long. Only repeated internal 
struggles and the external clash today have finally prevailed on me to settle 
accounts with him.' 
"All the people with independent minds and especially the members of the 
young school of political economy gathered round Galeer, and the committed 
radical and socialist elements thus 'united' soon became known as the democratic 
party. Henceforth radicalism, with few exceptions, consisted solely in conscious or 
unconscious servility towards Fazy, who had now found, in the Catholic districts of 
Savoy united with Geneva after 1815, a lever by which to control the majority. The 
ultramontane priests, all-powerful in that region, now entered into an alliance with 
'radicalism', which was the upshot of Fazy's activity. Galeer was subjected to the 
basest sort of calumny, persecuted and was finally removed from his post. The 
young democratic party now found itself caught between the party of the 
aristocrats on the one hand and the party of the united old radicals and the 
ultramontanists on the other, and was as yet unable to put up its own independent 
list at the approaching elections. And although M. James Fazy refused to include 
the names of some of the democrats in his own list, Galeer and his friends, 
scorning the offers of the aristocratic party, resolved to give their votes this time to 
Fazy, looking for victory to the future. So if Fazy had been sincere in what he said 
about progress and a radically bourgeois development he would have had no need 
to attach himself to the filthy wing of the eternally backward-looking ultramontan­
ists. In order to prosecute the malicious attacks and accusations against Galeer with 
greater effect the satellites of His Excellency, the 'radical' President, founded a 
special abusive paper to relieve that astute lord and master of the necessity of 
befouling his own Moniteur, the Revue de Genève, with his invective, more and more 
of which now appeared in the paper of his whipping-boys, whom he could disown 
at will. Galeer, whose health was weak, succumbed to this dastardly campaign and 
died in the course of the same year (1851) when he was still no more than 
thirty-five years of age. How often did I not hear it said in Geneva: 'Our  good,  noble 
Galeer  -was  the victim of the inexorable revenge of our Jesuitical  tyrant.  ' In the following 
elections Galeer's friends entered into the alliance offered by the aristocratic party, 
and they did so all the more willingly since the latter declared themselves content 
with the fall of Fazy and with a very modest share in the government. Galeer, who 
always remained true to his principles, would probably have rejected this alliance 
even now, but, as the members of his party said, to what end has M. Fazy given us 
the fine example of his alliance with the ultramontane party, why should we be 
ashamed of joining up with the decent wing of the aristocratic party when Fazy 
does not blush to be associated with the indecent wing of the ultramontanists? Can 
we not progress at least as far with the cultured aristocracy as M. Fazy claims to 
with the ignorant ultramontanists? 
"When it came to the elections, then (I believe they took place in November 
1853) many radicals and even a number of Fazy's ministerial colleagues went over 
to the democrats, so that the hero of 1846 was unseated from his presidential chair 
by a great majority. The ex-President, who had run up lots of debts, now found 
himself in an extremely embarrassing situation. In this context I must digress to 
reveal a number of characteristic facts about his life. 
"Even before entering the government M. James Fazy had run through a 
substantial inheritance in fine style. Up to his ears in debts and mercilessly pursued 
by his creditors, he sought as soon as he had arrived at the presidential chair 
quickly to abolish the practice of arresting debtors. Of course, he was acting 'in the 
9* 

=====第258页=====
234 Karl Marx 
interests of personal liberty'. In 1856 I was told by a Genevan citizen plagued by 
debts:  'It is a good thing that we had a spendthrift as head of the government. 
Though he could not abolish debts, at least he abolished the debtors' prison.' 
"In the beginning of the fifties, however, M. Fazy found himself in sore 
straits materially, so that a 'grateful people' had to come to his rescue and make 
him a present of a large building site that had become available with the razing of 
the fortifications. And why not indeed? Since he had been instrumental in cleaning 
this area of the fortifications, why should he not 'annex' a portion of it, especially 
as greater potentates than he do not disdain to do things of that sort. M. Fazy 
was now able to sell many large building sites and build a big beautiful house for 
himself.  Unfortunately, he soon incurred new debts and could not pay the wages of 
his builders. Early in 1855 he was forced to endure being shouted at on the street 
by a master carpenter to whom he owed a few thousand francs: 'Pay me, you 
rogue, so that I can buy bread for my children.' It was in these circumstances that 
the hard-pressed man became an ex-President, and, to crown it all, he found 
himself in an even more painfully embarrassing situation. What happened was that 
the Caisse d'Escompte, a radical bank, was forced to suspend payments. Fazy's 
friends in the bank, themselves overburdened with debts, had advanced credit to 
him and to each other far beyond what was permitted in the statutes and was 
actually at the disposal of the bank. The director, who is in jail to this day, had 
been even less restrained—bad examples ruin good habits — in advancing credit 
to himself.  Thus the Caisse d'Escompte found itself on the brink of a grave 
emergency: bankruptcy. The savings of a hundred thrifty workers' families were in 
jeopardy. Good counsel and, even more urgently, action were needed, cost what it 
might, otherwise Fazism would have been swept away by the deficit like chaff in the 
wind. Naturally enough in the circumstances, there could be no question of raising 
money for the Caisse d'Escompte directly. However, at that time there was another 
bank in Geneva labouring to establish  itself,  the Banque Générale Suisse. A 
considerable amount of capital had to be procured for this bank so that in return it 
would rescue the Caisse d'Escompte from its financial ebb and M. Fazy from the 
flood of debts. Fazy had to act as rescuer in order to be rescued  himself.  In case of 
success he was guaranteed a substantial commission expressed in so and so many 
per cent and the Caisse d'Escompte the badly needed additional capital. So on 
behalf of the Banque Générale Suisse and also pro domo, a M. Fazy went to Paris 
where, after a sojourn lasting several weeks and, as rumour would have it, thanks to 
the gracious assistance of 'His Majesty'}* he succeeded in persuading the Crédit 
Mobilier to provide millions of francs towards the rescue operation. At around 
the same time (November 1855) the preparations for the new elections were being 
made and the sauveur c therefore sent letters home to Geneva in advance, 
announcing that he would presently arrive bearing in person his cargo of millions. 
This was a healing plaster for the stricken hearts of the shareholders of the Caisse 
d'Escompte, and a magic wand for the ultramontane-radical voters. At that time a 
good likeness of him appeared in a caricature showing him as a gigantic swan 
entering the harbour of Geneva weighed down with sacks of gold. A joker told me 
at the time that according to the story he had heard over a beer Fazy had brought 
back 50 million, over a glass of wine the sum rose to 100 million and when the 
absinthe was reached it had become 200 million. In the eyes of his children, the 
reputation of Papa Fazy's miraculous powers was fully restored. The democrats, 
a For his own benefit.— Ed. 
b Napoleon III.— Ed. 
c Saviour.— Ed. 

=====第259页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 235 
fondly imagining that their victory at the hustings was assured, did not exert 
themselves very much. A society of muscular young men that had been formed 
some time before— les fruitiers —now established themselves as Fazy's bodyguard. 
They terrorised the electorate in the most brutal manner possible and their idol 
ascended the presidential throne once more. 
"This time, however, it soon became perfectly clear that the ultramontane 
faction had not lent their massive support for nothing, but that they were 
determined to have their share of the rewards of victory. M. Marilley, the Bishop 
of Fribourg, an eternal agitator and trouble-maker who had been driven out of 
Switzerland as a result of the Sonderbund War, left France and reappeared in 
Geneva one fine day with the official permission of M. Fazy. Once in Geneva he 
began to celebrate 'Holy' Mass once again. The entire city reverberated with anger, 
and popular fury soon echoed throughout Switzerland. It was too much even for 
the blindest radicals, the most subservient fruitiers. A popular assembly was 
convened without delay and the head of the government was presented with a vote 
of no-confidence. His colleague, Councillor Tourte, although himself merely a 
disciple and pupil of Fazy, suddenly displayed a very dubious desire for 
independence and he thundered away at his lord and master without any scruples 
whatever. However, M. Fazy had taken good care to absent himself from the 
country before the arrival of the Lord Bishop, just as he always did leaving his 
colleagues to drink what he had brewed. M. de Marilley, of course, had to leave the 
city and the country without more ado. Papa Fazy however wrote from Berne 
giving his unruly children a dressing down and asserting that he had been the 
victim of a misunderstanding, the government had not handled the affair correctly, 
he had merely acted in the 'interest of freedom of religion' and had simply 
permitted the Bishop to make a visit. After the storm had abated a much wronged 
Papa Fazy returned to Geneva. It was now all the simpler to re-establish his injured 
authority and restore faith in his pure love of freedom and of his country, by the 
simple device of uttering a few oracular statements which ring very true and fit any 
situation, because his colleagues were decent enough to shoulder the main 
responsibility. But Fazy had thus achieved the satisfactory end of demonstrating to 
his friends of the ultramontane faction that he was always prepared to do for 
them—whatever lay in his power. For a number of years now M. James Fazy has 
been a very wealthy man. Not only is the Banque Générale Suisse said to have 
guaranteed him a certain percentage for the duration of his life, but he has also, as 
head of the government, revealed great understanding of his own interests in such 
matters as the development of railways in his own Canton, etc. In his large and 
beautiful mansion (the Hôtel Fazy on the Quai du Mont Blanc) the beau monde 
moves among the cercle des étrangers. 3 And ever since Piedmont found the 
'gambling dens' of the Savoy spas incompatible with its political morality, the 
compassionate President of the Republic of Geneva has touchingly offered such a 
den asylum in his roomy dwelling. Long live freedom! Laissez aller et laissez faire! 
Allez chez moi et faites votre jeu! b 
"Darling, what more can you desire?c 
Your Johann Philipp Becker" 
a Circle of foreigners.— Ed. 
b Let people do as they think best. Come to my place and make your 
stake.— Ed. 
c From Heinrich Heine's cycle of poems, "Die Heimkehr", No. 64, Buch der 
Lieder, Erster Teil. — Ed. 

=====第260页=====
236 Karl Marx 
Leaving Vogt's patrons, I descend now to his accomplices. 
Peace and goodwill to this fair meeting, 
I come not with hostility, but greeting.3 
At the head of the procession, from which I intend only to 
single out a few of the more striking figures, we encounter the 
Berlin National-Zeitung, under the command of Herr F. Zabel. A 
comparison between the review of the "Magnum Opus" which 
appeared at Vogt's prompting in the Revue contemporaine from the 
pen of M. Edouard Simon b and the corresponding articles in the 
National-Zeitung, Breslauer Zeitung, etc., almost leads one to the 
conclusion that the "well-rounded character" issued two pro­
grammes, one dealing with the Italian campaign, the other with the 
Augsburg campaign. What on earth could have induced Herr 
F. Zabel, that fat and tedious bore of the National-Zeitung, who is 
usually so cautious, to kick over the traces and translate Vogt's 
street-songs into leading articles? 
The first detailed reference to the National-Zeitung appeared in 
No. 205 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on January 26, 1849, in a 
leading article beginning with the words "Signpost to Schilda". 202 
However, the arms of this signpost are too long to reprint them 
here.  In a leading article of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 224 
of February 17, 1849, it is stated: 
"The Berlin National-Zeitung represents triviality portentously expressed. Some 
recent samples. They are taken from its discussion of the Prussian circular note.... 
Althoughs and buts! Can and may and seem! Consider and wish that the Prussian 
Government may wish! Like the inmate of a bagnio each phrase has a 
hundredweight tied 10 it, and is therefore weighty. Each 'if, each 'although', 
each 'but' is a real Dr. utriusque jurisS And if you take all that Christian-Germanic 
padding, all those cotton rags in which the National-Zeitung has solicitously 
enveloped its wisdom and unwrap them just as carefully, what remains? ... Political 
hot air, in black and white, Berlin leading articles en grande tenue d.... The 
National-Zeitung is obviously written for the thinking reader, just like Rotteck's 
Weltgeschichte- 0*.... The French have an apt formula for thought of this kind which 
is active purely at a linguistic level. 'Je n'aime pas les épinards et j'en suis bien aise; 
car si je les aimais, j'en mangerais beaucoup, et je ne peux pas les souffrir.' 'I do 
not like spinach and that is a good thing; for if I liked it I would not be able to eat 
enough of it and I can't stand it.' ... The National-Zeitung has Prussia's happiness 
at heart and so it wants—another Ministry. What it wants in any case is—a 
Ministry. And this is the only thing which the patrons of the National-Zeitung are 
definite and self-confident about." 
a Marx quotes the verses in English and gives the German translation in a 
footnote.— Ed. 
h Edouard Simon, "Un tableau de moeurs politiques en Allemagne...", Revue 
contemporaine, t. 13, Paris, 1860.— Ed. 
c Doctor of both laws (civil and canon).— Ed. 
d In full dress.— Ed. 

=====第261页=====
Herr Vogt. — X. Patrons and Accomplices 237 
In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 296, a the following can be 
found: 
"Berlin, May 9, 1849.... It is interesting to observe the attitude of the Berlin 
press towards the Saxon revolution. The 'National-Zeitung' knows only one emotion: the 
fear of being  banned" 
But fear is an elixir of life, as the National-Zeitung has 
demonstrated throughout the decade of Manteuffel's rule. 
The National-Zeitung has proved the truth of Pope's dictum: 
Still her old empire to restore she tries, 
For, born a goddess, Dullness never dies.*204 
The only thing that distinguishes Pope's realm of Dullness from 
that of the National-Zeitung is that in the former "nowb Dunce the 
second reigns like Dunce the first", whereas in the latter, the old 
dunce, Dunce the first,c still holds sway. 
The Breslauer Zeitung, which follows hard on the heels of the 
National-Zeitung, is now in raptures about the Hohenzollern 
Ministry as it had been about the Manteuffel Ministry before it. 
Early in 1860 I received the following letter d: 
"Breslau, February 27, 1860 
"Dear Marx, 
"I saw in the Volks-Zeitung your address and your declaration against the 
National-Zeitung. e An article similar to that in the National-Zeitung appeared also in 
the Breslauer Zeitung from the pen of its daily contributor, Dr. Stein. This is the 
same Dr. Stein who used to sit with D'Ester on the extreme left of the Berlin 
National Assembly and who proposed the famous motion against the officers of the 
Prussian army. This great Stein with the diminutive body was suspended from his 
post as teacher. When the new Ministry was installed he set himself the task of 
agitating on its  behalf,  not just in the past year, in preparation for the elections, 
but even now, to bring about a merger of the Silesian democrats and the 
constitutionalists. Despite this his application to the present Ministry for permission 
to give private lessons has been refused, not just once but over and over again. The 
previous Ministry had tacitly allowed him to teach, while the present one prohibits 
him from doing so on the grounds that it is unlawful. He has now gone to Berlin 
to obtain permission there but without success, as you can see elsewhere in the 
* It is impossible to find a German equivalent for Dullness. It is more than 
boredom, it is ennui elevated into a principle, soporific lifelessness, blunted stupor. 
As a quality of style Dullness is what the Neue Rheinische Zeitung called "triviality 
portentously expressed". [Marx quotes the two lines from Alexander Pope in 
English and gives the German translation at the beginning of this footnote.] 
a Of May 12, 1849.— Ed. 
b Pope has "still".— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase "Dunce the first".— Ed. 
d An entry in Marx's notebook says the letter was written by Peter 
Nothjung.— Ed. 
e See this volume, pp.  12-13.—  Ed. 

=====第262页=====
238 Karl Marrç 
same issue of the Volks-Zeitung which printed your declaration. Dr. Stein has now 
made the Brimstone Gang play their part in the procession of fools in the Breslauer 
Ressourcen-Gesellschaft. Nevertheless, Dr. Stein, Schlehan, Semrau and their cronies 
have to put up with one humiliation after the other at the hands of the 
constitutionalists; but men of their stamp will not let themselves be deflected from 
their patriotic purposes. What do you say to this fine company?" 
What should I say about my colleague Stein, for in fact, Stein 
was my colleague, since I was for a full six months, in 1855, a 
correspondent of the Neue Oder-Zeitung 205 and this was the only 
German paper for which I wrote while I was abroad. Clearly, Stein 
is a man with a stony [steinern] heart and even the refusal to allow 
him to give private lessons could not soften him. The Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung hammered away at Stein a great deal in order 
to knock him into shape. Thus in No. 225, for example: 
"Cologne, February 16, 1849.... As for Herr Stein  himself,  we 
recall the time when he attacked the republicans on fanatically 
constitutional grounds, when in the Schlesische Zeitung he roundly 
denounced the representatives of the working class and had them 
denounced by a schoolteacher whose ideas were akin to his own and 
who is now a member of the 'Association for Law and Order'. Just 
as pitiful as the Agreers Assembly itself was the so-called 
democratic group of this Assembly. It could be foreseen that these 
gentlemen, in order to be re-elected, would now recognise the 
imposed Constitution. It is even more characteristic of the standpoint 
of these gentlemen that after the elections they are disavowing in 
the democratic clubs what before the elections they assented to at 
meetings of the electors. This petty, crafty liberal slyness was never 
the diplomacy of revolutionaries." 206 
The [Neue] Rheinische Zeitung had not sculptured this stone 
[Stein] in vain, as he demonstrated as soon as Manteuffel had 
dictated the dictated Chamber out of existence once again, for Dr. 
Julius Stein then proclaimed in the "chief democratic club in 
Breslau": 
"We"  (the extreme Berlin Left) "have regarded the German question as a lost 
cause from the outset.... People must now realise that no united Germany is  possible  as 
there are still German Princes" (Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 290). 
It is indeed a heart-rending sight, it is enough to melt a stone, 
to see how Schwerin time and time again rejects this same Stein, 
even though he is no longer a stumbling-block [Stein des Anstosses], 
and refuses to use him—as a building stone [Baustein]. 3 
I do not know if my readers have ever themselves seen a copy 
a Cf. Psalms 118:22, Matthew 21:42 and Luke 20:17.— Ed. 

=====第263页=====
Herr Vogt. — X. Patrons and Accomplices 239 
of Punch, the London equivalent of the Kladderadatsch. The 
title-page shows a picture of Punch sitting down and behind him 
stands his dog Toby with a grumpy expression on his face and a 
pen behind his ear, both of which point to his being a born 
penny-a-liner. 3 If it is fair to compare small things with large b  then 
one could perhaps compare Vogt with Punch, especially since the 
latter has lost his wit, a misfortune that struck him in 1846 with 
the abolition of the Corn Laws. 207 His companion, however, Toby 
the dog, can only be compared to himself or to— Eduard Meyen. 
And in fact if Eduard Meyen were ever really to die he would not 
stand in need of any Pythagorean migration of the soul. Toby has 
already taken care of that during his lifetime. I would not go as 
far as to claim that Eduard Meyen sat for the artist who designed 
the title vignette, but in any case I have never in my life seen a 
greater similarity between a man and a dog. But there is nothing 
surprising about this, since Eduard Meyen is a penny-a-liner by 
nature, and the penny-a-liner is by nature—Toby. E. Meyen has 
always inclined to devote his obtrusively versatile pen to ready-
made party-organisation-literary-enterprise institutions. An 
imposed programme saves one the trouble of thinking for  oneself, 
the feeling of togetherness with a more or less organised mass of 
people stifles the sense of one's own inadequacy, and the 
realisation that a war-chest is available can overcome, momentarily 
at least, even Toby's professional peevishness. Thus we find 
Eduard Meyen attached to the unfortunate Central Democratic 
Committee, that empty nut which grew out of the German 
Democratic Assembly in Frankfurt am Main in 1848. 208 As an exile 
in London he was engaged as the most indefatigable producer of 
the lithographed flysheets on which a portion of the money Kinkel 
had raised by loan to manufacture a revolution was frittered away, 
a circumstance which did not of course prevent the selfsame 
Eduard Meyen from rushing with bag and baggage into the camp 
of the Prince Regent 0 to beg for an amnesty and in fact to obtain 
permission to go to Wandsbek and pester the Hamburg Freischütz 
with articles on foreign policy. Vogt, who was busy enlisting the 
services of "people who" would "follow his Programme" and were 
prepared to bring him articles, and who was dangling the 
tempting sight of a well-filled war-chest before their eyes, came as 
a godsend to Eduard Meyen, who was running around without a 
a Here and below Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
b Cf. Virgil, Georgies, Book IV, 176.— Ed. 
c William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 

=====第264页=====
240 Karl Marx 
master just then, for no one was willing to pay the dog tax during 
those hard times. And you can just imagine the howls of rage 
when Toby heard a rumour that I was about to cheat Vogt's party 
literary-enterprise institution of its credit and its pen-pushing pugs 
of their fees! Quelle horreur! Vogt's instructions to his Eduard 
Meyen about the obligatory treatment of the "Magnum Opus" 
were just as detailed as those given to Edouard Simon, and in fact 
Eduard Meyen did adorn 5 numbers of Der Freischütz (Nos.  17-21, 
1860) with pieces from the "Magnum Opus". a But what a 
difference! Whereas Edouard Simon corrected the original, 
Eduard Meyen bowdlerised it. The simplest evidence of the 
objective understanding of a given topic is surely the ability to copy 
printed matter, but our Eduard Meyen is utterly incapable of 
copying even a single line correctly. Toby's mind lacks even the 
strength requisite for correct copying. Just listen: 
Der Freischütz, No. 17: 
"The paper" (Allgemeine Zeitung) "... has now been found guilty ... also ... of 
having made use of the assistance of a revolutionary party which Vogt has 
stigmatised as the Brimstone Gang of the German republicans." 
When and where has Vogt prated about the Brimstone Gang of 
the German republicans? 
Der Freischütz, No. 18: 
"It is Liebknecht who has launched an attack on Vogt in the Allgemeine Zeitung}* 
by repeating there the accusations made by Biscamp in the London Volk. However, 
the accusations did not develop their full force until Marx sent to the offices of the 
Allgemeine Zeitung a pamphlet that had appeared in London and which he 
attributed to Blind." 
Vogt was able to tell many lies but even his lawyer, Hermann, 
forbade him the lie that the article by Biscamp, which had not 
been reprinted in the Allgemeine Zeitung, was "repeated" there by 
Liebknecht. Nor has Vogt ever thought of maintaining that it was 
I who sent the pamphlet Zur Warnung to the Allgemeine Zeitung. 
On the contrary, he says quite explicitly: "It was Herr Liebknecht 
... who sent the libellous pamphlet to the Allgemeine Zeitung" 
("Magnum Opus" p. 167). 
Der Freischütz, No. 19: 
"Blind positively denied that he was the pamphlet's author, and the printer 
certified that it was not given to him to print by Blind. What is however certain is that 
a This refers to Eduard Meyen's article "Carl Vogts Kampf gegen die 
Augsburger Allgem. Zeitung und die Marxianer" published in Der Freischütz in 
February 1860.— Ed. 
b Wilhelm Liebknecht [An die Redaction der Allgemeinen Zeitung, Augsburg], 
Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300, October 27, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第265页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 241 
the lampoon was immediately taken over in the same type-setting in Das Volk, and 
that Marx caused it to be published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, etc." 
In his "Magnum Opus" Vogt on the one hand prints Fidelio 
Hollinger's declaration asserting that the pamphlet had not been set 
in his print-shop, a and, on the other, my counter-declaration that 
the original type of the lampoon was still standing at Hollinger's 
when it was reprinted in Das Volkh What chaos did our 
unfortunate Toby make out of this! 
Der Freischütz, No. 19: 
"As far as the people themselves are concerned" (Engels and I are supposed to 
say in Techow's letter) "they are pure rationalists who have no patience with 
nationality." 
No sentimentality, my dear Toby; no sentimentality, writes 
Techow, according to Vogt. 
Der Freischütz, No. 20: 
"Marx ... did not prevent the duellists from going to Ostend to fight a pistol duel. 
Techow acted as Willich's second, etc. After this incident [...] Techow broke off 
relations with Marx and his League." 
Eduard Meyen is not content to substitute Ostend for Antwerp. 
He had probably heard about the Frenchman in the West End of 
London complaining that the English write "London" and 
pronounce it "Constantinople". Techow, who had only met me 
once in his life at the time of his correspondence and who 
moreover writes explicitly that he had at first intended to join me 
and my League, is made by Eduard Meyen to break off relations 
with me and my League, of which he was never a member. 
Der Freischütz, No. 21  : 
"This incident" (the Joint Workers' Festival in Lausanne) "explains the violent • 
attack on Vogt which was made in Das Volk in London." 
In the "Magnum Opus" Vogt himself gives the date of the 
"violent attack" on him in Das Volk— May 14, 1859. c (The 
pamphlet appeared in Das Volk on June 18, 1859.) However, the 
Lausanne Joint Festival took place on June 26 and 27, 1859, i.e. 
long after the "violent attack" which according to Meyen it 
provoked. 
But we have quoted enough of Toby's reading. It is not 
surprising that Toby having managed to read all sorts of things in 
a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., Dokumente, S. 38.—  Ed. 
b ibid., S. 39-40. See also this volume, pp. 8-9.— Ed. 
c ibid., S. \7.— Ed. 

=====第266页=====
242 Karl Marx 
Vogt that were not there should also have made this discovery: 
"Vogt's book will take its rightful place among the boldest, wittiest and most 
useful polemics in our literature" (Der Freischütz, No. 17). 
Just think of this wretched Toby, incapable as he is of even 
copying out two lines of a printed book correctly, just think of him 
condemned to sit in Wandsbek, having to decipher the book of 
world history209 every day, straining to read a record of events 
barely hinted at in the obscurest of scripts, copying away by the 
hour and having to produce life-size photographs of the dissolving 
views3  of the present in the columns of Der Freischütz] Unhappy 
Wandsbek Messenger! b Happy Hamburg reader of Der Freischütz] 
A few days ago the London Times published a strange news 
item which went through the entire English press and bore the 
title:  "A Man Shot by a Dog." It seems therefore that Toby knows 
how to use a gun and thus it is not surprising to find Eduard 
Meyen sing in Der Freischütz: "A marksman am I in the pay of the 
Regent." 0 
The Kölnische Zeitung confined itself to a few malicious little 
paragraphs and insinuations in favour of Vogt. A week after the 
"Magnum Opus" had appeared it spread the fairy-tale in its 
columns that it was already out-of-print, probably so as not to have to 
lay violent hands upon it. But what an irony of history! 
If only I had been able to foresee in 1848-49, at the time of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, when we had daily to cross swords with 
our Cologne neighbour for the Poles, Hungarians and 
Italians, that this very same Kölnische Zeitung would in 1859 
become the chivalrous protagonist of the principle of nationality, 
and that the simple Herr Jusepp Dumont would emerge from his 
chrysalis as Signor Giuseppe Del Monte! But of course at that time 
no Louis Bonaparte had as yet given the nationalities the superior 
blessing of morality and liberalism, and the Kölnische Zeitung will 
always remember that Louis Bonaparte has saved society. The red 
fury with which it attacked Austria at the time can be seen from the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 144 d: 
"Cologne, November 15 (1848). At a moment when the whole of Germany cries 
out in indignation because the blood-stained minion of the Austrian bandit, 
because a Windischgrätz could dare to have the deputy Robert Blum shot down 
a Marx uses the English phrase "dissolving views".— Ed. 
b Marx here puns on Wandsbeker Bote—Wandsbek Messenger, a celebrated 
paper published by the poet Matthias Claudius from 1770 to 1775.— Ed. 
c See B. von Braunthal, Das Nachtlager in Granada.—Ed. 
d This refers to the item "Köln, 15. November" in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of 
November 16, 1848. Marx quotes from his notebook.— Ed. 

=====第267页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 243 
like a dog—at such a moment it is fitting to take note of two German papers of 
which one has attempted with almost unheard-of perfidy to vilify the last few days 
of the dead man's life, while the other pursues him to the grave with its insipid 
cretinism. We are referring to the Kölnische Zeitung and the Rheinische Volks-Halle 
(vulgo Narrhalla 3).... In No. 292 the Kölnische Zeitung reported: 'On the 22nd of 
this month' (October) 'the enthusiastic leaders of the democratic party ... left Vienna; 
so did ... Robert Blum. The Kölnische Zeitung made this statement without any 
qualification, but set its denunciation of Blum in Garamond type to print it more 
firmly on the reader's memory. The Kölnische Zeitung reached the heights of 
perfection in its subsequent issues. It was not ashamed to find space in its columns 
even for the articles of the most black and yellow paper of the camarilla, news 
items from the journal of the Archduchess Sophie [...], the most infamous of all 
Austrian papers [...] " (there then follows a quotation including this passage): 
"'Robert Blum earned no laurels in Vienna.... For he spoke in the great hall of the 
internal enemies—timorousness, lack of courage and of stamina; but if there were 
to arise other enemies in addition to these internal ones—he hoped this would not 
be the case—but if there were still people in the city who preferred the victory of 
the military to the victory of freedom, then the life-and-death battle waged before 
the walls of the city must be just as ruthlessly waged against them too.... In Herr 
Blum's speech there lay the madness of a Septembrist .... If Herr Blum really 
spoke those words then we must say quite frankly that he has dishonoured 
himself.' So much for the Kölnische Zeitung." 
By means of an ingenious system of concealed plumbing, all the 
lavatories of London empty their physical refuse into the Thames. 
In the same way every day the capital of the world spews out all its 
social refuse through a system of goose quills, and it pours out 
into a great central paper cloaca—the Daily Telegraph. Liebig 
rightly criticises the senseless wastefulness which robs the Thames 
of its purity and the English soil of its manure.b Levy, however, 
the proprietor of this central paper cloaca, is an expert not only in 
chemistry, but even in alchemy. Having transformed the social 
refuse of London into newspaper articles, he transforms the 
newspaper articles into copper, and finally the copper into gold. 
At the entrance which leads to the central paper cloaca, the 
following words are written di colore oscuro: "hie ... quisquam faxit 
oletumV c or as Byron translated it so poetically "Wanderer, stop 
and—piss!"d 
Levy, like Habakkuk, est capable de tout. e He is capable of printing 
a leading article three columns long on a single case of rape. 
Earlier this year he treated his numerous public of gourmets to an 
a Roughly = fool's paradise, a pun on Valhalla.— Ed. 
b Justus von Liebig, Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und 
Physiologie, Braunschweig, 1840, S. 216.— Ed. 
c In sombre colours: "Here ... it is permitted to make bad odours!" The Latin 
words are a paraphrased line from Persius, Satires, Book I, First Satire.— Ed. 
d Byron, "Epitaph".— Ed. 
e Is capable of everything.— Ed. 

=====第268页=====
244 Karl Marx 
asafoetida stew that had been ingeniously brewed from ingredients 
of a certain court case that were so nauseating that the judge 
ordered the court to be cleared of women and children. 
Unfortunately Levy had spiced the stew with the name of an 
innocent person. The resulting libel action brought against Levy 
ended with his conviction and the public condemnation of his 
newspaper by the English judiciary. As everyone knows, libel 
actions, like all other actions, are shamelessly expensive in 
England; they are in a sense the privilege of the coffre fort? 
However, a number of unemployed lawyers in the City now 
discovered that Levy was fair game; they joined forces and offered 
their services gratis as a speculation to anyone who wished to take 
action against Levy for libel. Levy himself thereupon complained 
loudly in his paper that a new kind of blackmail had become 
fashionable: libel actions against Levy. Since then it has become 
precarious to sue Levy. One lays oneself open to ambiguous talk, 
for just as you can read on walls in London the notice: Commit no 
Nuisance, so too you can find written on the entrances to the 
English courts: Commit Levy}* 
Politicians refer to the Daily Telegraph as "Palmerston's 
mobpaper", but Levy's refuse barge only carries politics as ballast. 
The Saturday Review aptly described his penny-rag as "cheap and 
nasty". 
"It is a fatal symptom," it says inter alia, "that it should have given such a 
definite preference for dirt to cleanliness. In every case it will exclude the most 
important report in order to leave space for a disreputable article." 
Nevertheless, Levy also has a prudery of his own. He criticises 
immorality in the theatre, for instance, and like a second Cato the 
Censor, he pursues the dress of the ballet dancers, which 
according to him starts too late and ends too soon. Such fits of 
virtue only take Levy out of the frying-pan into the fire. O Logic! 
a London theatrical journal, The Players, exclaims, O Logic! where 
is thy blush? How the roguec must have laughed in his sleeve!... 
The Telegraph as guardian of the decency of female costume on 
the stage! Holy Jupiter, what will happen next? Earthquakes and 
fiery comets are the least that can be expected now. Decency! "I 
thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word."d And as Hamlet 
a Of the strong-box, i.e. of the rich.— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx uses English: "Commit no Nuisance", "Commit Levy", 
"mobpaper", "cheap and nasty".— Ed. 
c Marx gives the English word in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. 
d Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, Act IV, Scene 1. In Marx's original the 
English sentence is followed by its German equivalent in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第269页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 245 
advises Ophelia, the "Player" advises Levy to clear off to a 
nunnery: "Get thee to a nunnery, 3 Levy!" Levy in a nunnery! And 
perhaps "nunnery" is just a printing error for a nonariab so that we 
should really read it "Get thee to a nonaria, Levy!" and in that 
case,  everyone will be 
"multum gaudere paratus, 
Si Cynico" (the cynic Levy) "barbam petulans nonaria vellat".c 
The Weekly Mail maintains that although Levy really fools no 
one,d  he has changed "i" into "y", and it is true that among the 
22,000 Lévites 211 whom Moses counted in the journey through the 
wilderness, there was not a single Levi who spelled his name with«a 
"y". Just as Edouard Simon spares no effort to be regarded as 
belonging to the Romance people, so Levy is determined to be an 
Anglo-Saxon. Therefore, at least once a month he attacks the 
un-English policies of Mr. Disraeli, for Disraeli, "the Asiatic 
mystery", 6 is, unlike the Telegraph, not an Anglo-Saxon by 
descent. But what does it profit Levy to attack Mr. D'Israeli and to 
change "i" into "y", when Mother Nature has inscribed his origins 
in the clearest possible way right in the middle of his face. The 
nose of the mysterious stranger of Slawkenbergius (see Tristram 
Shandy) who had got the finest nose from the promontory of 
noses f was just a nine days' wonder in Strasbourg^ whereas Levy's 
nose provides conversation throughout the year in the City of 
London. A Greek epigrammatist describes the nose of a certain 
Castor which could be used for all sorts of things: as a shovel, a 
trumpet, a sickle, an anchor, etc. He concludes his description with 
the words: 
"OUTWS  ei&x?'inCTTOV  crxevovc Kcxcrrcop TerùxT|xe, 
'Pîva cpépwv nàcnrçç äp(XEPOV èp-yacria«;" * 
* Thus was Castor equipped with a tool that was truly amazing, 
Owning a nose that served almost every conceivable purpose." 
[Anonymous epigram from Anthologia Graeca, XI, 203, Verses 7 and 8.] 
a Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act III, Scene 1.— Ed. 
b Harlot.— Ed. 
c "...always ready to be delighted, 
Should the harlot playfully tug at the beard of the Cynic" (Persius, Satires, 
Book I, First Satire).— Ed. 
d Marx puns on the idiom "ein X für ein U vormachen" (to put an X in place of a 
U) which means to try to fool someone.— Ed. 
e Marx gives the English phrase in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. 
f Marx uses English: "finest nose" and "promontory of noses".— Ed. 
g Cf. Laurence Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, 
Vol. IV, Slawkenbergius.— Ed. 

=====第270页=====
246 Karl Marx 
But even Castor could not have guessed the purpose to which 
Levy puts his nose. The English poet comes nearer to it in the 
lines: 
"And 'tis a miracle we may suppose, 
No nastiness offends his skilful nose."a 
Indeed the great skill of Levy's nose consists in its ability to 
titillate with a rotten smell, to sniff it out a hundred miles away 
and to attract it. Thus Levy's nose serves the Daily Telegraph as 
elephant's trunk, antenna, lighthouse and telegraph. It is therefore 
no exaggeration to say that Levy writes his paper with his nose. 
The clean-minded Daily Telegraph was of course the only 
English paper in which Vogt's Lousiad, not only could, but had to 
be printed. In Levy's organ an article two-and-a-half columns long 
appeared on February 6, 1860, with the title: "The Journalistic 
Auxiliaries of Austria",b which was in fact a mere translation into 
malodorous English of the two leading articles from the Berlin 
National-Zeitung. To lead the reader astray, the article bore the 
superscription: "From an occasional correspondent, Frankfort on 
the Main, February 2."c I knew of course that the only 
correspondent of the Telegraph was based in Berlin where Levy's 
nose had sniffed him out with its customary virtuosity. I therefore 
wrote at once to a friend in Berlin asking him to see if he could 
discover the name of Levy's correspondent.212  My friend, a man 
whose learning has been acknowledged even by Alexander von 
Humboldt, was obdurate enough to insist that there was no Daily 
Telegraph in London and consequently no correspondent belong­
ing to it in Berlin. I therefore turned to another acquaintance in 
the City on the Spree. Reply: the Berlin correspondent of the 
Daily Telegraph exists and is called—Abel. I thought this might 
well conceal a gross mystification. Abel was obviously just an 
abbreviation of Zabel. Nor was I led astray by the fact that Zabel 
cannot write English. If Abel can edit the National-Zeitung as Zabel 
without knowing any German, why should not Zabel be able to 
contribute to the Telegraph as Abel without knowing any English. 
So Zabel, Abel, Abel, Zabel? Hov/ to find a way out of this Babel? 
I examined the Berlin organ of wisdom once again, comparing it 
with Levy's, and this time I discovered the following passage in 
No. 41 of the National-Zeitung: 
a Marx quotes in English and gives the German translation in a footnote.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the title in English and supplies the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
c Marx gives the words of the superscription in English and supplies the 
German translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第271页=====
Herr Vogt. — X. Patrons and Accomplices 247 
"Liebknecht strangely enough adds: 'We asked the magistrate (?) to authenticate 
our signatures."' 
This passage about the magistrate and Zabel's astonished 
question mark after the word "magistrate" puts one in mind of 
the Swabian who "as soon as he got off the ship in Asia asked: 
'Isn't there some good fellow from Bebbingen here?'" Levy's 
paper omits not only the entire passage, but even the question 
mark, which proves conclusively that Levy's correspondent does 
not share F. Zabel's belief that London police-court judges or 
magistrates3  are the same thing as the Berlin Magistrat 2™ Hence 
Zabel was not Abel and Abel was not Zabel. In the meantime, 
however, other acquaintances in Berlin had heard of my 
difficulties. One of them wrote: "Among the 22,000 Lévites in 
Numbers there is an Abel, but it is spelt Abigail." Another wrote: 
"On this occasion it is Abel who killed Cain, not Cain who killed 
Abel." In this way I went deeper and deeper into the maze until, 
finally, the editor of a London newspaper assured me with the dry 
earnestness of the English that Abel was not a joke, but a Jewish-
born man of letters in Berlin whose full name was Dr. Karl Abel. 
This noble youth had served for a considerable time under Stahl 
and Gerlach as a zealous drudge for the Kreuz-Zeitung, but with 
the change of Ministry he had changed, if not his skin, at least 
his colours. The over-eager zeal of the renegade would indeed 
explain why Levy's Berlin correspondent imagines that the 
freedom of the press in England has been specially designed to 
allow him to peddle his compulsive admiration of the Hohenzol-
lern Ministry. Hypothetically, then, we may assume that there is an 
Abel in Berlin as well as a Levy in London — par nobile fratrum. b 
Abel supplies his Levy simultaneously from everywhere under 
the sun: from Berlin, Vienna, Frankfurt am Main, Stockholm, 
Petersburg, Hong Kong, etc.,— a much greater achievement than 
De Maistre's Voyage autour de ma chambre. But whatever address 
Abel chooses when he writes to his Levy, his dominant sign of the 
Zodiac remains constant: Cancer. In contrast to the procession in 
Echternach where those taking part move two steps forward 
and one step back, 214 Abel's articles take one step forward and two 
steps back. 
"No crab more active in the dirty dance, 
Downward to climb, and backward to advance." (Pope)' 
a Marx gives the English term in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. 
h A noble pair of brothers (Horace, Satires, Book II, Satire 3).— Ed. 
c Alexander Pope, The Dunnad, Book II. Marx quotes in English and gives the 
German translation in a footnote.— Ed. 

=====第272页=====
248 Karl Marx 
Abel has an undeniable talent for providing his Levy with the 
state secrets of the Continent. For example, if the Kölnische 
Zeitung publishes a leading article it has borrowed from the 
Baltische Monatsschrift on the state of the Russian finances, Abel 
will let a month go by and will suddenly send the Kölnische 
Zeitung's article to London from Petersburg, not omitting to hint 
of course that he acquired the statistical secrets entre deux cigares, 
not indeed from the Tsar  himself,  or even from the Russian 
Minister of Finance, but assuredly from one of the directors of the 
State Bank. And he will declare triumphantly: "I am in a position 
to state, etc." 3 Or the official Preussische Zeitung puts out a 
ministerial feeler, for instance indicating Herr von Schleinitz's 
unauthoritative ideas about the problem of the Electorate of 
Hesse. This time Abel wastes no time. The very same day he 
writes to his Levy openly from Berlin about the problem of the 
Electorate of Hesse. A week later he reports: The Preussische 
Zeitung, the organ of the Ministry, has printed the following article 
on the problem of the Electorate of Hesse and "I owe it to 
myself"  to point out that a week ago I  myself,  etc. Or he translates 
an article from the Allgemeine Zeitung, and gives it a date-line 
perhaps from Stockholm. This is inevitably followed by the phrase, 
"I must warn vour readers" to beware—not of the article he has 
copied, but of some other article in the Allgemeine Zeitung that he 
has not copied. Yet, whenever he happens to mention the 
Kreuz-Zeitung he makes the sign of the cross so as to disguise his 
true identity. 
As to Abel's style, we can give the reader an idea of what it is 
like by saying that it is a poor imitation of the styles of Stern 
Gescheidt, Isidor Berlinerblau and Jacob Wiesenriesler. 
With Abel's permission we shall make a digression at this point. 
The original Stern Gescheidt is another accomplice of Vogt. He is 
a certain L. Bamberger who in 1848 was the editor of a provincial 
rag in Mainz b and is at present a loup-garouc  married "on full 
pay" in Paris and a Decembrist democrat "in the simplest meaning of 
the word". To grasp the significance of this "simple" meaning, it 
is necessary to be acquainted with the jargon of the Paris Stock 
Exchange synagogue. Stern Gescheidt's "simple" democracy is 
identical with what Isaac Péreire calls "la démocratisation du crédit", 
1 This phrase and, below, the expressions "I owe it to  myself"  and "I must warn 
your readers" are in English in the original. The German equivalents are given in 
brackets.— Ed. 
b The Mainzer Zeitung. —Ed. 
c Werewolf.—  Ed. 

=====第273页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 249 
the démocratisation of credit. This consists in transforming the 
entire nation, and not just certain strata in it, into a gambling den 
so that the people can be swindled en  massed 5 Under Louis 
Philippe the oligarchic Stock Exchange wolf had been so 
strait-laced that he confined his depredations to the national 
wealth accumulated by the upper bourgeoisie; under the aegis of 
Louis Bonaparte, however, all is fair game3  for the democratic 
Stock Exchange  wolf,  who like the Roman Emperor exclaims: non 
olet* adding with Stern Gescheidt Bamberger: "It's the quantity that 
does it." This is Stern Gescheidt's democracy in its extreme 
"simplicity". More recently, Stern Gescheidt Bamberger has come 
to be known under the name of "Hurrah, on to Italy!" c In contrast 
to that, during the campaign for the Imperial Constitution he 
answered to the name of "Ouch, away from Kirchheimboland!" I 
have in my possession a priceless manuscript describing the heroic 
deeds of Stern Gescheidt Bamberger, who absconded from 
Kirchheimboland and led the volunteer corps of the Rhine-
Palatinate by the nose. He was much too smartd  not to have sensed 
that the bloated, blood-streaked soil of December was gold-bearing 
for smart treasure-seekers. So he went to Paris where, as his friend 
Isidor Berlinerblau alias H. B. Oppenheim puts it so aptly, "one 
feels freer than one knows". Stern Gescheidt, whose "circulation 
was coming to a standstill" in 1858 (see the declaration of the 
Banque de France on circulation in 1858-59 e), was overjoyed 
when he suddenly saw the dirty soil of December glistening with 
the bright colours of high-faluting ideas. Stern Gescheidt, as smart 
as he is brightly democratic, realised that if Paris had a flood 
which were to wash over the soil of December, it would sweep 
away the Credit in his ledger, while leaving the Debit behind. It is 
common knowledge that Stern Gescheidt Bamberger has added a 
tenth, Hebrew, muse to the nine Greek ones: it is "the muse of 
time",  as he calls the Stock Exchange list. 
But to return to Abel. Abel's style is saturated with the odor 
specificus inseparable from the Daily Telegraph, the paper cloaca of 
a Marx writes "fish" in the original.— Ed. 
b It doesn't smell (these words are usually attributed to Emperor Vespasian who 
introduced a tax on public lavatories).— Ed. 
c An allusion to Ludwig Bamberger's book Juchhe nach Italia! published 
anonymously in Berne and Geneva in 1859.— Ed. 
d Marx uses the word gescheit, punning on the name Gescheidt. On 
Bamberger's part in the events of 1849 see Engels' The Campaign for the German 
Imperial Constitution (present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 196 and 224).— Ed. 
<• "The Bank of France", The Times, No. 23203, January 14, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第274页=====
250 Karl Marx 
the capital of the world. When Levy finds himself genuinely 
moved by the scent of Abel's news reports, Abel's learning and the 
energy and zeal with which Abel writes from 20 different latitudes 
at the same time—at such moments of the greatest exaltation Levy 
has a very special term of endearment for Abel: he calls him his 
"industrious bug".3 
Poetic justice demands that at the end of the comedy the 
"well-rounded character" should not get stuck together with Abel 
in the London muck, but who is to pull him out of it? Who is to 
be his saviour? A mudlark is to be his saviour, namely Baron von 
Vincke,b a squire of the red earth,c  a knight of the joyful 
countenance, chevalier sans peur et sans reproche. 216 
As already mentioned, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung as early as 
1848 revealed the identity of the opposites Vogt and Vincke, d and 
Vogt himself had a presentiment of this identity as early as 1859 
when he wrote in his Studien: 
"Herr von Vincke as the apostle of a new political freedom ... really verges on 
the realm of the ridiculous" (loc. cit., p. 21), 
i.e. Vogt's own realm. However, on March 1, 1860 Vincke publicly 
extended the hand of friendship in a speech in which, as Johann 
Philipp Becker expressed it, he "used the Brimstone Gang as an 
illustration of the modest Prussian Chamber". Hardly a year had 
passed since he had recommended to that same house the 
pamphlet Po and Rhine e whose sulphurous origins he had of 
course been unable to detect, since he lacked Levy's nose. When 
moreover Vincke began to play the Italian just like Vogt, when 
Vincke, like Vogt, insulted the Poles and when Vincke, like Vogt, 
proclaimed the partition of Germany, the feuding brothers fell 
into each other's arms for ever. 
It is well known that like poles are bound to repel each other. 
So for a long time Vogt and Vincke repelled each other. Both 
men drivel too much so that each imagined that the other wished 
to prevent him from speaking. 
Vogt is a great zoologist, as Ranickel testifies, and so is Vincke, 
as is demonstrated by his pig-farm at Ickern. 
a Alexander Pope, The Dunciad, Book I. Marx uses the English phrase and 
gives the German translation and the author's name in a footnote.— Ed. 
b Marx puns on the name Vincke and the word Mistfinke (mudlark, filthy 
fellow).— Ed. 
c Westphalia.— Ed. 
d This refers to an item in the column "Deutschland" in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, No. 181, December 29, 1848.— Ed. 
e See present edition, Vol. 16.— Ed. 

=====第275页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 251 
In Spanish drama there are always two clowns per hero. 
Calderon equips even St. Cyprian, the Spanish Faust, with a 
Moscon and a Clarin. 3 In the same way, in the Frankfurt 
Parliament, the reactionary General von Radowitz had two comic 
adjutants, his harlequin Lichnowski and his clown Vincke. Vogt, 
however, the liberal counter-clown, had to do everything on his 
own, for Jacobus Venedey only knew how to act the sentimental 
role of Pantalone, and so inevitably, he came to resent Vincke. 
Vincke liked occasionally to take off the fool's cap and bells. On 
June 21, 1848, for example, he declared in Parliament: 
"He sometimes imagined that he was in a theatre rather than in such an 
assembly." b 
And at a party of the Tories of the Frankfurt Parliament he 
made an appearance as the Prince of Fools, sat on a barrel and 
217 
sang : 
"The Prince of Fools am I, 
I'll booze until I die." 
This too offended his counterpart. Furthermore, Vogt and 
Vincke could not intimidate each other so they both imagined that 
their best course was for each to set upon the other. Falstaff Vogt 
knew what to think of the knight without fear or reproach, and 
vice versa. The Westphalian Bayard had in his time studied law at 
German universities, not so much the Roman  corpus  juris 218 for, as 
he said, his ancestors of the red earth had not defeated Varus for 
nothing. To make up for it he threw himself on Teutonic law, i.e. 
the students' code of behaviour, whose basis he thoroughly explored 
in every direction and subsequently made notorious as the legal 
basis.c As a result of this profound and casuistical research into the 
students' code of behaviour he later on, whenever faced with a 
duel, always found some Duns-Scotian hair which at the decisive 
moment interposed itself as hair-splittingly sharply between our 
knight and the shedding of blood as the naked sword in the bridal 
bed which separated the princess from the locum tenens.d From the 
adventure with the Supreme Court advocate Benda at the time of the 
United Diet of 1847219 to the no less notorious adventure with the 
a Calderon, El Mdgico prodigioso.—Ed. 
b The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 25, June 25, 1848.— Ed. 
c A reference to Georg Vincke's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on 
June 21, 1848, in which he said "my standpoint is that of the undermined legal 
basis"  (ibid.). — Ed. 
d Substitute.— Ed. 

=====第276页=====
252 Karl Marx 
Prussian Minister of War a in the Chamber of Deputies in 1860, this 
hair-splitting always intervened with the regularity of a recurrent 
fever. We can see how unfair was the reproach, recently levelled at 
the squire, that he had lost his legal basis. It is not his fault if his 
legal basis consists entirely of trapdoors. Moreover, since the 
students' code of behaviour is really only applicable in the higher 
reaches of legal debate, the ingenious squire replaces it at the 
ordinary parliamentary level by the code of the cudgels. 
In the frog-pond of Frankfurt Vincke once bitterly referred to 
his counterpart Vogt as the "Minister of the Future"? But it really 
struck home when he heard in Ickern that Vogt, mindful of the 
maxim 
"Once a position of power you've found, 
Ycu're lord and master the whole year round",c 
had not only become Imperial Regent, but even Minister of 
Foreign Affairs in partibus, and he grumbled irritably that the 
rights of seniority had been ignored. For as early as the United 
Diet of 1847 Vincke as a frondeur had been against the Ministry 
and as a representative of the nobility against the bourgeois 
opposition. Hence on the outbreak of the March revolution he 
thought that he above all others was predestined to save the 
crown. But his rivals became Ministers of the Present, whereas he 
was appointed "Minister of the Future", a post that he has filled 
with unbroken success to this day. 
In revenge he shook the dust of Berlin from his feet and went 
to St. Paul's Church in Frankfurt, where he joined the extreme 
Right wing, acting as a clown, claqueur and bully for General 
Radowitz. 
Our finchd was a fanatical and zealous Austrian as long as this 
had the approval of the authorities. He thundered frantically 
against the nationalities. 
"On the left they are infatuated with every conceivable nationality in 
turn — Italians, Poles, and now even Magyars" (session of October 23, 1848).220 
The three knights Vincke, Lichnowski and Arnim played a 
musical trio: 
a Albrecht Roon.— Ed. 
b Report on the session of the Frankfurt National Assembly of September 16, 
1848 in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 106, September 19, 1848 in the column 
"Deutschland ".— Ed. 
c Johann Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung..., S. 
76.—  Ed. 
d Marx puns on Fink (finch) and Vincke.— Ed. 

=====第277页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 253 
"To ox's bellow and cow's fart 
The ass provides the underpart." 
They performed this with such virtuosity in opposition to those 
who spoke in support of Poland (session of June 5, 1848)a that 
even the President's bell ran out of breath, and when Radowitz 
went so far as to put forward military and "natural" arguments in 
favour of incorporating the Mincio into the German Empire 
(session of August 12, 1848),b  Vincke stood on his head and 
signalled his applause with his legs, to the delight of the whole 
gallery and the secret admiration of Vogt. As the chief claqueur 
for the resolutions by means of which the Frankfurt frog-pond 
stamped the dynastic subjugation of Poland, Hungary and Italy 
with the approval of the German people, the squire of the red 
earth shouted even more excitedly when the claims of the German 
nation had to be sacrificed because of the humiliating armistice of 
Malmö. To secure a majority for the ratification of the cease-fire, 
diplomatic and other observers sneaked down from the gallery 
and joined the Right-wing benches. The fraud was discovered and 
Raveaux pressed for a new vote. The finch protested that it was 
not a matter of who voted but of what was voted for (session of 
September 16, 1848).° During the September rising in Frankfurt 
that had been provoked by the resolution approving the Malmö 
armistice the Westphalian Bayard vanished without a trace, but 
reappeared after the state of siege had been proclaimed and 
avenged himself in a series of reactionary somersaults for the 
fright which no one could ever make up to him. 
Not content with his verbal fulminations against Poles, Italians 
and Hungarians, he proposed that the Archduke John of Austria 
should be made president of the provisional central authority 
(session of June 21, 1848),d  but he obsequiously added the rider 
that the Habsburg executive of the German Parliament should 
neither implement nor proclaim, nor in any way concern itself 
with the Parliament's plebeian resolutions. He even fell into a rage 
when, just to make a change, his colleagues in the majority voted 
that the Imperial Administrator should at least graciously deign to 
secure the previous agreement of the Parliament on matters of 
war and peace or the conclusion of treaties with foreign powers 
(session of June 27, 1848). And the extreme heat which the finch 
a The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 10, June 10, 1848.— Ed. 
h ibid., No. 76, August 15, 1848.— Ed. 
c ibid., No. 106, September 19, 1848.— Ed. 
d ibid.. No. 25, June 25, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第278页=====
254 Karl Marx 
generated in his noisy efforts to extort from the German 
Parliament a vote of confidence for the Imperial Minister 
Schmerling and his associates by way of reward for their and the 
Imperial Administrator's complicity in the bloody and infamous 
betrayal of Vienna 221 (session of October 23, 1848), triumphantly 
refuted Fischart's slanderous words: 
"Oh, what cold mouths 
Are Westphalian mouths!"3 
Thus Vincke was amiably pro-Habsburg until the Fata Morgana 
of Little Germany222 suddenly came into view, looming above the 
parliamentary Sahara, and the squire perceived a life-size minister­
ial portfolio with a finch under its arm. Since the walls of St. Paul's 
Church had unusually long ears, he might well flatter himself that 
the noise he had made in Frankfurt with his outbursts about 
loyalty to the Hohenzollern dynasty had produced an agreeable 
effect in Berlin. Had he not declared before a crowded St. Paul's 
Church on June 21, 1848: 
"I have been sent here by the electorate to defend the rights not only of the 
people, but also of the princes. I always comfort myself with the saying of the 
Great Electorb who once described the inhabitants of the Markc as his most loyal 
and obedient subjects. And we in the Mark are proud of it."d 
And our Bayard from the Mark proceeded from phrases to 
fisticuffs in the celebrated parliamentary battle in which he won 
his spurs (sessions of August 7 and 8, 1848). What happened was 
that when Brentano, in the course of the debate on the proposed 
amnesty for Friedrich Hecker, let fall an ambiguous reference to 
one of the Hohenzollern princes from the rostrum, the finch had 
a veritable attack of loyalty rabies and rushing from his seat he 
hurled himself upon Herr Brentano and tried to drag him from 
the rostrum, shouting "Come down, you dirty dog!" Brentano was 
not to be dislodged. Later on the squire assaulted him a second 
time and threw down the gauntlet of knighthood, though 
naturally he reserved the right to later and more mature 
reflections on scruples arising from the legal basis. Brentano 
accepted his challenge with the words: 
"Outside the church you may say whatever you wish to me; but if you do not let 
go of me here I shall hit you in the face." 
a Johann Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung..., S. 
68.—  Ed. 
b Frederick William.— Ed. 
c A county in Westphalia.— Ed. 
d In this passage Marx summarises Vincke's speech, which was reported in the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 25, June 25, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第279页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 255 
The squire then reached into his quiver of invective and 
showered the Left with a series of dirty dogs until Reichardt 
shouted at him: "Von Vincke, you are a skunk" (session of August 
7, 1848).a The finch tried to cut short the debate on the 
disagreement between the Brandenburg Ministry and the Berlin 
Agreers Assembly by simply proposing that the Assembly should 
proceed to the next item on the agenda. 
"Ever since Wrangel's triumphant entry into Berlin," he said, "order had 
reigned, stocks have risen on the Exchange.... The Berlin Assembly has no right to 
issue proclamations to the people, etc."b 
The members of the Agreers Assembly had hardly been dispersed 
before our knight without fear or reproach fell upon them with even 
greater fury. 
"We lack the political experience," he lamented in the session of December 12, 
1848,  "needed for a republic. This has been proved to us by the members of the 
former Berlin Assembly who approved resolutions dictated by base personal 
ambitions." c 
He sought to appease the storm this provoked by declaring that 
"he was ready to defend his words against anyone, in a chivalrous manner  ", but, 
the cautious knight added, "he was not referring to any member of this Assembly, 
only the members of the dispersed Berlin Assembly".223 
This was the defiant challenge that our Bayard of the Mark 
hurled at the entire army of dispersed Agreers. One of them 
heard his call, pulled himself together and succeeded in bringing 
about an unheard-of event: he managed to induce our squire of 
the red earth to venture bodily onto the battlefield at Eisenach. 
Bloodshed seemed inevitable when, at the decisive moment, our 
Bayard smelled a Duns-Scotian rat. His opponent bore the name 
of Georg Jung and while the laws of honour enjoined the knight 
without fear or reproach to do battle with dragons, they would not 
allow him under any circumstances to take up the cudgels with a 
namesake of the dragon killer. d The finch simply could not be 
made to give up this idée fixe. He swore by all that is holy that he 
would rather slit his stomach like a Japanese daimio 224 than touch 
a Joseph Reichardt made this remark on August 8. It was included in the 
report on the session published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 72, August 11, 
1848.—  Ed. 
b Georg Vincke's speech of November 14, 1848, ibid., No. 145, November 17, 
1848.—  Ed. 
c Georg Vincke's speech of December 12, 1848, ibid., No. 169, December 15, 
1848.—  Ed. 
d St. George.— Ed. 

=====第280页=====
256 Karl Marx 
a hair of the head belonging to a man with the name of Georg, 
especially if he was below duelling age. a The knight invulnerable 
to duels showed all the less restraint in his onslaughts in St. Paul's 
Church against Temme and other persons unpalatable to the 
government who were safely under lock and key in the gaol at 
Münster (session of January 9, 1849). b While he scorned no detail 
that might ingratiate him in high places his zeal to prove his 
loyalty surpassed itself in his titanic efforts to bring about the 
creation of a lesser Germany and a greater crown for Prussia. 
Warwick the King-Maker was a child compared to Vincke the 
Emperor-Maker. 
Our Bayard from the Mark now imagined that he had heaped 
enough burning coals on the heads of the ingrates of March 1848. 
When the Ministry of Action 225 fell, Vincke vanished for a time 
from St. Paul's Church and held himself in readiness. He did 
likewise on the fall of the von Pfuel Ministry. But as the mountain 
still failed to come to Mahomet, Mahomet resolved to go to the 
mountain. Having been elected in the first available rotten 
borough,c the knight of the red earth suddenly reappeared in 
Berlin as a deputy in the imposed Chamber,*1 fully expectant that 
the reward for his deeds in Frankfurt would now be forthcoming. 
Moreover, the knight felt entirely at home in the state of siege 
which would not deny him any unparliamentary freedom. He 
lapped up the hisses and jeers with which the people of Berlin 
greeted him as he stood with the other "imposed" deputies in 
front of the palace, waiting to be admitted to the White Hall, all 
the more eagerly as Manteuffel had dropped a delicate hint to the 
effect that they were inclined in the very highest places to accept 
the gift of the lesser German crown from the hands of the 
Emperor-Makers of Frankfurt if only to find a vacant ministerial 
portfolio in payment for a certain service. Full of such sweet 
dreams the finch sought to make himself useful for the time being 
by acting as the dirty boy of the Cabinet. He drew up a draft 
address to the Crown on lines laid down by the Kreuz-Zeitung,e 
a Marx puns on the name Jung and the adjective jung (young).— Ed. 
b The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 196, January 16, 1849.— Ed. 
c Marx uses English: "rotten borough" and, below, "dirty boy".— Ed. 
d i.e. the Chamber set up under the Constitution imposed by Frederick William IV 
in December 1848. It was dissolved in February 1849.— Ed. 
e This refers to a motion Georg Vincke tabled in the Second Chamber of the 
Prussian National Assembly on March 31, 1849 (see the N»ue Rheinische Zeitung, 
No. 262, April 3, 1849).— Ed. 

=====第281页=====
Herr Vogt. —X. Patrons and Accomplices 257 
inveighed against amnesty,3 and was only willing to accept the 
imposed Constitution on the express condition that it would be 
revised and revoked0 by a "strong state power". He insulted the 
Left-wing deputies suffering from the rigours of the state of siege, 
etc., and patiently awaited the hour of his triumph. 
The catastrophe drew nearer, the Frankfurt deputation bringing 
the offer of the Imperial Crown had arrived in Berlin and on 
April 2 (1849) Vincke put forward the most loyal amendment 
to the proposals about the Emperor,c an amendment for which 
Manteuffel voted in all innocence. As soon as the session was 
over Vincke rushed into a neighbouring second-hand shop where 
he personally purchased a portfolio, a portfolio of black card­
board, with a red velvet cover edged in gold. The following day 
our knight of the joyous countenance sat contentedly in his seat in 
the middle of the Chamber, grinning like a triumphant faun—but 
the words he heard from Manteuffel's mocking lips were "never, 
never, never" 226 ; and the fearless squire, the colour drained from 
his cheeks, and quivering like an electric eel with emotion, gasped 
to his friends: "Hold me back, or I shall do something terrible." 
The Kreuz-Zeitung, whose prescriptions Vincke had been anxiously 
following for months and to whose proposed address of the 
Chamber he had stood godfather, the Kreuz-Zeitung, to hold him 
back, published an article on the following day with the headline 
"The Nation in Danger" in which it declared inter alia: 
"The Ministry remains and the King'sd  answer to Herr von Vincke and his 
associates is that they should not involve themselves in matters which do not 
concern them." e 
Finding himself cheated our knight sans peur et sans reproche left 
Berlin for Ickern with a nose longer than Levy had ever had, a 
nose,  moreover, which simply could not have been fobbed off onto 
anyone except a—Minister of the Future] 
Having spent many a long anxious year vegetating in the 
pursuit of practical zoology in Ickern, our Cincinnatus of the red 
earth awoke one fine day in Berlin to find himself the official 
a Georg Vincke's speech of March 22, 1849, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 255, 
March 22, 1849.— Ed. 
b A pun in the original: ausgemerzt (eradicated) puts the reader in mind of 
März (March) and the March revolution in Germany.— Ed. 
c See the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 263, April 4, 1849.— Ed. 
d Frederick William IV— Ed. 
e "Das Vaterland ist in Gefahr!", Neue Preussische Zeitung, April 3, 1849. The 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung commented on this article in its issue No. 260, April 7, 
1849.—  Ed. 

=====第282页=====
258 Karl Marx 
leader of the opposition in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies. 
Having had such ill luck with his rightist speeches in Frankfurt he 
now embarked on left-handed speeches in Berlin. It was not 
possible to discover whether he represented the opposition of 
confidence or the confidence of the opposition. But however that 
may be, he once again overplayed his hand. He soon became so 
indispensable to the Cabinet on the opposition benches that he was 
forbidden ever to take his leave of them. The squire of the red 
earth thus remained—a Minister of the Future. 
In the circumstances the finch became tired of the whole 
business and so he concluded his famous Treaty of Ickern. Vogt 
gave it him in black and white: as soon as Plon-Plon had 
conquered the first parliamentarian island of Barataria 3 on the 
German continent, and as soon as he had peopled it with 
Sch-Oppenheimersb  and had installed his Falstaff as its Regent, 
Vogt would appoint the Westphalian Bayard to be his Prime 
Minister and confer on him the right to adjudicate in all matters 
concerning duelling. Furthermore, he would make him Real and 
Privy General Masterbuilder in charge of all the roads,* and 
would moreover raise him to a princely rank giving him the title 
of a Prince of Fools. Lastly, he would have a coin struck in the 
metal c that passes for money in the insular realm of Vogt and this 
coin would have engraved on it a pair of Siamese twins, with Vogt 
on the right as Plon-Plon's Regent, Vincke on the left as Vogt's 
Minister, and a vine-adorned inscription wound round the 
voluminous double-figure, stating 
"Cheek by jowl with you 
I throw down this challenge to the age."'1 
* See the pamphlet Auch eine Charakteristik des liberalen Abgeordneten von Vincke 
und erbauliche Geschichte des Sprochhövel-Elberfelder Wegbaues, Hagen, 1849. 
a The island of which Sancho Panza became Governor in Don Quixote, Book II, 
Chap.  44.— Ed. 
b A pun on the name Oppenheim and Schoppen (pint pot). Sch-Oppenheimers 
suggests "boozers".— Ed. 
c A pun on Blech, which means both "sheet metal" and, in a figurative sense, 
"nonsense".— Ed. 
d Adaptation of the lines: "Arm in arm with you I throw down this challenge to 
the age." From Schiller's Don Carlos, Act I, Scene 9.— Ed. 

=====第283页=====
259 
XI 
A LAWSUIT 
At the end of January 1860 two numbers of the Berlin 
National-Zeitung arrived in London containing two leading articles, 
the first bearing the title "Karl Vogt und die 'Allgemeine Zeitung"' 
(National-Zeitung, No. 37), and the second, "Wie man radikale 
Flugblätter macht" (National-Zeitung, No. 41). Under these headings 
F. Zabel presented a version of Vogt's "Magnum Opus" 3 
prepared in usum delphiniP7  The "Magnum Opus" itself did not 
reach London until much later. I decided at once to start 
proceedings for libel against this F. Zabel in Berlin. 
In the previous ten years a vast number of vilifications of myself 
had appeared in the German and German-American press, but 
they only rarely drew any literary response from me, and then 
only if a real party interest seemed to be at stake, as with the 
Cologne communist trial. In my view the press has the right to 
insult writers, politicians, actors and other public figures. If I 
regarded an attack to be worth answering my motto in such cases 
was: à corsaire, corsaire et demi. h 
Here the position was different. Zabel accused me of a series of 
criminal and infamous actions and he did so for the benefit of a 
public whose political prejudices inclined it to credit the greatest 
atrocities and who, moreover, in view of my eleven-year absence 
from Germany, had nothing to enable it to form a judgment of 
me. Quite apart from any political considerations, I therefore 
owed it to my family, my wife and children, to have Zabel's 
defamatory accusations tested in a court of law. 
a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung. —Ed. 
b Pay rogues in their own coin.— Ed. 

=====第284页=====
260 Karl Marx 
The method of procedure I selected excluded from the outset 
any legal comedy of errors along the lines of Vogt's action against 
the Allgemeine Zeitung. Even if I had indulged in the fantastic idea 
of appealing against Vogt before the same Fazyesque court which 
had already quashed one criminal action in Vogt's interests, 3 there 
were a number of important and even decisive points that could 
only be settled in Prussia and not in Geneva. Conversely, the only 
one of Zabel's statements for which he might have sought proof 
from Vogt was based on alleged documents which Zabel could 
produce just as easily in Berlin as his friend Vogt in Geneva. My 
"complaint" against Zabel contained the following points: 
1. In No. 37 of the National-Zeitung dated January 22, 1860, in 
an article entitled "Karl Vogt und die 'Allgemeine Zeitung'" Zabel 
writes: 
"Vogt reports on p. 136 et seq.: Among the refugees of 1849 the term Brimstone 
Gang, or the name of the Bristlers, referred to a number of people who, originally 
scattered throughout Switzerland, France and England, gradually congregated in 
London, where they revered Herr Marx as their visible leader. The political principle of 
these  fellows was the 'dictatorship of the proletariat' and with the aid of this illusion 
they succeeded in deceiving for a while not only some of the best among the 
refugees but also the workers from Willich's volunteer corps. They continued the work 
of the 'Rheinische Zeitung' h among the refugees. In 1849 this paper had counselled 
against any participation in the movement and had also constantly attacked all the 
members of Parliament because the Imperial Constitution was the only aim of the 
movement. The Brimstone Gang maintained a frightfully strict discipline among its 
supporters. Any of them who sought in any way to make a decent living in the 
bourgeois world was branded a traitor to the revolution merely for attempting to 
become independent. It was expected that the revolution would break out again at 
any moment and it was vital to keep its soldiers mobile and ready to be sent into 
battle. With the aid of rumours, letters, etc., dissension, brawling and duels were 
artificially fomented in this carefully nurtured class of loafers. Each one suspected 
the other of being a spy and a reactionary; distrust was universal. One of the chief 
occupations of the Brimstone Gang was to compromise  people  at home in Germany in such a 
way that they were forced to pay money so that the gang should preserve their  secret  without 
compromising them. Not just one, but hundreds of  letters  were written to  people  in Germany, 
threatening to denounce  them  for complicity in this or that act of revolution  unless  a certain sum 
of money  had been received  at a specified  address by  a given  date.  Following the principle that 
'whoever is not unconditionally for us, is against us', the reputation of anyone who 
opposed these intrigues was 'ruined', not just among the refugees, but also by means 
of the press. The 'proletarians' filled the columns of the reactionary  press  in Germany with 
their denunciations of  those  democrats who did not subscribe to their views; they became the 
confederates of the secret police in France and Germany. To fill in the picture Vogt 
publishes among other documents a long letter by Techow, a former lieutenant, dated 
a The action against the joint-stock company La Cimentaire. See Appendix 16 
and also Marx's letter to Engels of November 16, 1860 (present edition, Vol. 
4\).—  Ed. 
b The Neue Rheinische  Zeitung. —- Ed. 

=====第285页=====
Herr Vogt. — XI. A. Lawsuit 261 
August 26, 1850, in which the principles, the intrigues, the feuds and the various 
hostile secret unions of the 'proletarians' are described, and in which we see how 
Marx, puffed up with Napoleonic pride in his intellectual superiority, rules the  members 
of the Brimstone Gang with a rod of iron. " 
We should note at once, so as better to understand what 
follows, that Zabel, who was ostensibly allowing Vogt to "speak for 
himself"  in the passage quoted above, now goes on in his own 
name to throw further light on the Brimstone Gang, by 
mentioning qne after the other the Cherval trial in Paris, the 
communist trial in Cologne, the pamphlet I wrote about the last, 3 
Liebknecht's revolutionary congress in Murten and his relations 
with the Allgemeine Zeitung in which I acted as mediator, Ohiv, 
who is "likewise a channel of the Brimstone Gang", and lastly, 
Biscamp's letter of October 20, 1859 to the Allgemeine Zeitung!" He-
concludes with the statement: 
"A week after Biscamp Marx, too, wrote to the Allgemeine Zeitung, offering it 
a 'legal document' as evidence against Vogt about which we shall perhaps speak at a 
later date. These then are the correspondents of the 'Allgemeine Zeitung'/' 
Of the whole of this leading article No. 1, 1 made use only of 
the section printed under 1. in my submission, and in that passage 
I was concerned only with the following sentences: 
"One of the chief occupations of the Brimstone Gang" (commanded by Marx) 
"was to compromise people at home in Germany in such a way that they were forced 
to pay money so that the gang should preserve their secret without compromising 
them. Not just one, but hundreds of letters were written to people in Gernianv, 
threatening to denounce them for complicity in this or that act of revolution uniess 
a certain sum of money had been received at a specified address by a given date." 
Here, of course, what I required from Zabel was proof that his 
claims were true. In my first advice to my lawyer. Legal Counsellor 
Weber in Berlin, I wrote that I did not require Zabel to produce 
"hundreds of threatening letters", 0 or even one, but just a single 
line showing that any one of my notorious party associates had 
been guilty of the infamous deeds imputed to them. Zabel, after 
all, only needed to turn to Vogt, who could have sent him dozens 
of "threatening letters" by return. And if by any chance Vogt 
were unable to produce even a single line from the hundreds of 
threatening letters, he would in any case still be able to give the 
names of the several hundred "people in Germany" who had been 
a Karl Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial m Cologne (present 
edition, Vol. 11).— Ed. 
'•• See this volume, p. 127.— Ed. 
c See Marx's letter to Weber of February 13, 1860 (present edition. Vol. 
41).—  Ed. 

=====第286页=====
262 Karl Marx 
plundered in the manner described. Since these people are to be 
found in "Germany" they would undoubtedly be more accessible 
to a court in Berlin than to one in Geneva. 
Thus my ground of complaint against Zabel's leading article 
No. 1 confined itself to a single point: political compromising of  people 
in Germany for the purpose of extorting money from them. In order at 
the same time to refute the other statements made in his leading 
article No. 1, I produced a series of facts. Here I did not require 
Zabel to prove that his claims were true, I showed that they  were  false. 
As to the Brimstone Gang or Bristiers, Johann Philipp Becker's 
letter 3 has thrown sufficient light on them. As far as the character 
of the Communist League was concerned, and my involvement with 
it, H. Bürgers of Cologne, one of the condemned in the Cologne 
communist trial, belonged to those people who could have been 
subpoenaed as witnesses to Berlin and made to testify under oath 
during the proceedings. Furthermore, Frederick Engels had dis­
covered amongst his papers a. letter dated November 1852 b and 
authenticated by its postmarks in London and Manchester, in which 
I informed him of the dissolution of the League at my suggestion 
together with the reasons for that dissolution as they were set 
forth in the resolution: viz. that since the arrest of the accused in 
Cologne all contacts with the Continent had been broken off and 
that a propaganda societv of this kind was no longer opportune. 
As for Zabel's shameless allegations about my contacts 'with the 
secret police in Germany and France'5, these were supposed to 
have been verified partly bv the Cologne communist trial and 
partly by the Cherval trial in Paris. I shall have more to say about 
the latter in due course. With reference to the former I sent mv 
defence counsel a copy of my Revelations Concerning the Communist 
Trial in Cologne, which had appeared in 1853, and pointed out 
that the lawver Schneider II could be subpoenaed from Cologne 
to Berlin where he could testify under oath to my part in 
uncovering the nefarious activities of the police.1  Zabels claim that 
my party associates and myself had "filled the columns of the 
reactionary press in Germany with denunciations of those demo­
crats who did not subscribe to our views"—this claim was to be 
confronted with the fact that I never either directly or indirectly 
wrote for German newspapers from abroad, with the single 
a See this volume, pp. 60-64.— Ed. 
h Marx to Engels, November 19, 1852 (see present edition, Vol. 39). An extract 
from this letter is contained in Marx's notebook.— Ed. 
' See Marx's letters to Weber of February 24 and March 3, 1860 (present 
edition, Vol 41),— Ed. 

=====第287页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 263 
exception of the Neue Oder-Zeitung. My printed contributions to 
that paper and, if need be, the testimony of one of its editors, Dr. 
Eisner, would prove that I never thought it worth the trouble to 
mention even one "democrat" by name. As for Liebknecht's reports 
to the Allgemeine Zeitung, they began in the spring of 1855, three 
years after the "League" was dissolved, and moreover they appea­
red without my knowledge, and as a scrutiny of the back numbers 
will reveal they contain accounts of English politics written from 
his political standpoint, but not a word about "democrats". When, 
during my absence from London, Liebknecht sent a pamphlet 
printed in London and attacking the "democrat" Vogt a to the 
Allgemeine Zeitung, he was perfectly entitled to do so for he knew 
that the pamphlet had been published by a "democrat" whom the 
"democrat" Vogt had himself invited to collaborate on his 
"democratic" propaganda, i.e. whom Vogt had recognised as a 
"democrat" of equal standing with  himself.  Zabel's comic tale 
making me a "correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung" was 
utterly refuted by a letter written to me by Herr Orges a few days 
before the opening of the Augsburg trial (see Appendix 10), in 
which he, inter alia, sought to correct my presumed "liberal" 
prejudices against the Allgemeine Zeitung. Lastly, Zabel's lie that "a 
week after Biscamp Marx, too, wrote to the Allgemeine Zeitung" 
collapsed of its own accord since Biscamp's letter was dated 
October 20, 1859 and the brief note I sent to Herr Orges along 
with the "document" he had asked for, was already in the hands 
of the Augsburg Court on October 24, 1859 and so could not 
possibly have been written in London on October 29, 1859. 
For the benefit of the court it seemed appropriate to supple­
ment the evidence already mentioned with a few documents which 
would serve to reflect back on "democrat" Zabel the grotesquely 
defaming light in which he had sought to place my situation 
within the emigration and my "intrigues" abroad. 
I first lived in Paris from the end of 1843 until early in 1845, 
when I was expelled by Guizot. To indicate my position within the 
French revolutionary party during my stay in Paris I sent my 
counsel a letter from Flocon which in the name of the Provisional 
Government of 1848 revoked Guizot's decree of expulsion and 
invited me to return to France from Belgium (Appendix 14). I 
lived in Brussels from the beginning of 1845 until the end of 
February 1848, when Rogier had me expelled from Belgium. 
Subsequently the Brussels Municipal Council dismissed the police 
a Zur Warnung by Karl Blind.— Ed. 
10-1305 

=====第288页=====
264 Karl Marx 
commissar who had arrested my wife and myself on the occasion 
of my expulsion. In Brussels there was an international democratic 
association228  in which the aged General Mellinet who had saved 
Antwerp from the Dutch held the office of Honorary President. 
The lawyer Jottrand, a former member of the Belgian Provisional 
Government, was President; the Vice-President for the Poles was 
Lelewel, a former member of the Polish Provisional Government; 
the Vice-President for the French was Imbert, who had been 
Governor of the Tuileries after the February revolution of 1848, 
and I held the post of Vice-President for the Germans, having 
been elected at a public meeting consisting of the members of the 
German Workers' Association and the entire German emigration 
in Brussels. A letter from Jottrand to me at the time of the 
establishment of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (Jottrand belongs to 
what is known as the American school of republicanism, i.e. a 
trend alien to me), and a few otherwise insignificant lines from my 
friend Lelewel provide a sufficient indication of my position in the 
democratic party in Brussels. I added them therefore to the material 
in my defence (Appendix 14). 
After I had been driven out of Prussia in the spring of 1849 
and out of France in the late summer of the same year, I went to 
London, where following the dissolution of the League (1852) and 
the departure of most of my friends from London, I have been 
living without joining any associations whether public or secret, 
and indeed without society of any sort. I do, however, from time 
to time, with the permission of "democrat" Zabel, give free 
lectures on political economy to a select group of workers. The 
German Workers' Educational Society in London, from which I 
resigned on September 15, 1850, celebrated its twentieth anniver­
sary on February 6, 1860. It invited me to attend the celebrations, 
at which it passed a unanimous resolution "to brand as slander" 
Vogt's allegation that I had "exploited" the German workers in 
general and the London workers in particular. Herr Müller, who 
was at that time the President of the Workers' Society, had this 
resolution authenticated on March 1, 1860 at the Police Court in 
Bow Street. Together with this document I sent my lawyer a letter 
from the English lawyer and leader of the Chartist Party, Ernest 
Jones (Appendix 14), in which he expresses his indignation about 
the "infamous articles" a of the National-Zeitung and draws 
a Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 

=====第289页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 265 
attention inter alia to my unpaid collaboration over a period of 
years on the London organs of the Chartist Party. (It should be 
noted, incidentally, that Ernest Jones, who was born and brought 
up in Berlin, knows more German than Zabel.) I may also mention 
here that when the English Labour Parliament assembled in 
Manchester at the end of  1853, 229 Louis Blanc and I were the only 
members of the London emigration to be invited to attend as 
honorary members. 
Finally, since our honorary Vogt has represented me as "living 
from the sweat of the workers", from whom I have never either 
asked or received a penny, and since "democrat" Zabel has 
suggested that I have "compromised people in Germany" 
politically "in such a way that they were forced to pay money so 
that the gang should preserve their secret without compromising 
them", I requested Mr. Charles A. Dana, the managing editor 3 of 
the New-York Tribune, the first Anglo-American paper which has 
200,000 subscribers and is thus almost as widely known as the Biel 
Commis voyageur and Zabel's "organ of democracy", b to give me a 
statement in writing about my ten-year-long paid collaboration on 
the Tribune, the Cyclopaedia Americana, etc. His letter, extremely 
flattering for me (see Appendix 14), was the last document I 
thought it necessary to forward to my lawyer to defend myself 
against the stink-ball No. 1 of Vogt and Zabel. 
2. In Zabel's leading article No. 2, "Wie man radikale 
Flugblätter macht" (National-Zeitung, No. 41, January 25, 1860), it 
is stated: 
"Where the money for this generously distributed paper" (i.e. Das Volk) "came 
from,  is known to the gods; men, however, are well aware that Marx and Biscamp 
have no money to spare." 
Looked at in isolation this passage might appear to be no more 
than a frank expression of astonishment, as if I were to say: "How 
a certain stout party whom I knew in my student days in Berlin as 
a dunce bereft of all intellectual and material charms—he was the 
owner of a day nursery and his literary accomplishments prior to 
the revolution of 1848 were confined to a few furtive contribu­
tions to a literary local rag—how the above-mentioned stout dunce 
managed to become editor-in-chief of the National-Zeitung, a 
shareholder in it and 'a democrat in possession of spare 
money'—that is known to the gods. Men, however, who have read 
a Marx uses English: "managing editor".— Ed. 
b The Schweizer Handels-Courier and the National-Zeitung.—Ed. 
10* 

=====第290页=====
266 Karl Marx 
a certain novel by Balzac3 and who have made a study of the 
Manteuffel era, may be able to hazard a guess." 
Zabel's remark acquires quite a different, and far more 
malicious inflection from the circumstance that it follows his 
allegations about my connections with the secret police of France 
and Germany and my conspiratorial and police efforts to extort 
money with the aid of threatening letters, and leads on directly to 
the "manufacture of counterfeit paper money on a massive scale" 
to be treated under 3. Obviously he intends to imply that I 
obtained financial contributions for Das Volk in a disreputable 
manner. 
In order to refute Zabel in court I obtained an affidavit from 
Manchester dated March 3, 1860 according to which all the money 
I gave to Das Volk (with the exception of a specified amount out 
of my own pocket) came, not, as Vogt opined, from "the other 
side of the Channel", but from the pockets of my friends in 
Manchester (see "The Augsburg Campaign"). b 
3. "To throw light on" the "tactics" of the "'proletarian' party 
under Marx", F. Zabel narrates the following story (leading article 
No. 2 inter  alia): 
"In this way a conspiracy of the most infamous sort was devised in 1852, which 
aimed at damaging the Swiss workers' associations by manufacturing counterfeit 
paper money on a massive scale. See Vogt for further details, etc." 
This is how Zabel interprets Vogt's assertions about the Cherval 
affair and makes me the moral source and criminal accomplice in 
the "manufacture of counterfeit paper money on a massive scale". 
The evidence I assembled in refutation of these allegations by 
"democrat" Zabel extended over the whole period from Cherval's 
admission to the "Communist League" to his flight from Geneva 
in 1854. An affidavit taken out by Karl Schapper at the Police 
Court at Bow Street on March 1, 1860 c proved that Cherval had 
been admitted to the League in London before I myself joined it. 
It showed further that when he was in Paris, where he lived from 
the summer of 1850 until the spring of 1852, he entered into 
relations not with  myself,  but with the rival League of Willich and 
Schapper which was hostile to me. Finally, it proved that after his 
feigned escape from the prison of St. Pélagie and his return to 
a Presumably Illusions perdues. —Ed. 
h See this volume, pp. 118, 119.— Ed. 
c On this see Marx's letter to Karl Schapper of February 27, 1860 (present 
edition, Vol. 41). Extracts from the letter and from the affidavit are contained in 
Marx's notebook.— Ed. 

=====第291页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 267 
London (spring 1852), he joined the public German Workers' 
Educational Society there to which I had ceased to belong in 
September 1850. Here he was finally exposed, condemned and 
expelled. Moreover, the lawyer Schneider II in Cologne could be 
made to testify under oath that the revelations about Cherval 
made while the Cologne communist trial was in progress, the 
account of his relations with the Prussian police in London, etc., 
all came from me. My Revelations, which were published in 1853, 
proved that I had publicly denounced him after the conclusion of 
the trial. Finally, Johann Philipp Becker's letter 3 provided 
information about Cherval's Geneva period. 
4. Having with genuinely dunce-like logic babbled about the 
pamphlet Zur Warnung, which had been aimed at Vogt, and 
having done his best to discredit Vögele's testimony 1* about the 
origins of the pamphlet, which testimony I had forwarded to the 
Allgemeine Zeitung, "democrat" F. Zabel concludes his peroration in 
leading article No. 2 as follows: 
"He"  (Blind) "is obviously not a member of the Marx party in the narrower sense. 
It appears to us that the latter did not find it too difficult to turn him into a 
scapegoat, and if the charges levelled at Vogt were to carry any weight, they had to 
be attributed to a definite person who would have to be responsible for them. The 
Marx party could very easily saddle Blind with the authorship of the pamphlet 
because and after he had expressed similar views to those contained in it in 
conversation with Marx and in an article in The Free Press. By making use of Blind's 
assertions and turns of phrase the pamphlet could be fabricated and made to look as if he 
had concocted  it.... Anybody is at liberty to regard either Marx or Blind as its 
author", etc. 
Zabel here accuses me of having fabricated a document, viz. the 
pamphlet Zur Warnung, in Blind's name and of having subse­
quently, in a false testimony sent by me to the Allgemeine Zeitung, 
represented Blind as the author of the pamphlet fabricated by 
myself.  The legal refutation of "democrat" Zabel's allegations was 
as decisive as it was simple. It consisted of Blind's letter to 
Liebknecht, cited earlier on, of Blind's article in The Free  Press, c the 
two affidavits of Wiehe and Vögele (Appendices 12 and 13) and 
the printed declaration of M. D. Schaible. d 
Vogt, who is known to have jeered at the Bavarian Government 
in his Studien^ launched an action against the Allgemeine Zeitung at 
a See this volume, pp. 60-64.— Ed. 
b ibid., Appendix 12.— Ed. 
c ibid., pp. 122,  122-23.—  Ed. 
d ibid., pp. 130-31.—  Ed. 
e Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, S.  91.—  Ed. 

=====第292页=====
268 Karl Marx 
the end of August 1859. As early as September the Allgemeine 
Zeitung had to request a postponement of the hearing and 
although the postponement had been granted the trial actually 
took place on October 24, 1859. If this was possible in the 
obscurantist state of Bavaria, what might not be expected from the 
enlightened state of Prussia, quite apart from the proverbial truth 
that "in Berlin there are judges". 
My lawyer, Counsellor Weber, formulated my case thus: 
"The editor of the National-Zeitung, Dr. Zabel, has repeatedly and publicly 
libelled me in leading articles in Nos. 37 and 41 of that paper of this year. In 
particular he has accused me (1) of acquiring and having acquired money in a 
dishonourable and criminal manner; (2) of having fabricated the anonymous 
pamphlet Zur Warnung and of having not only represented a certain Blind as its 
author to the Allgemeine Zeitung against my better knowledge, but also of having 
sought to prove this assertion with the aid of a document of whose inaccurate 
contents I must have been convinced." 
Counsellor Weber elected to proceed first by means of an official 
investigation, i.e. he denounced Zabel's libels to the Public 
Prosecutor with the idea that proceedings against Zabel" should 
then be initiated by the Public Prosecutor's Office. This resulted in 
the following "ruling" which was handed down on April 18, I860: 
"The original documents are returned to Dr. Karl Marx c/o Counsellor Weber, 
together with the notification that no issue of public importance is raised by this 
matter which could make it desirable for me to take any action (Article XVI of the 
Prolegomena to the Penal Code of April 14, 1851).a Berlin, April 18. 
"Public Prosecutor at the Royal Municipal Court, 
(signed) Lippe" 
My counsel appealed to the Chief Public Prosecutor and on April 
26, 1860 he received a second "ruling" worded thus: 
"To the Royal Counsellor Weber, acting on behalf of Dr. Karl Marx of London. 
I hereby return to you the documents accompanying the complaint of April 20 of 
this year concerning the denunciation against Dr. Zabel. The only criterion by 
which the Public Prosecutor may act in considering what discretion he is allowed by 
Article XVI of the Prolegomena to the Penal Code is, of course, the question 
whether prosecution is required by any discernible public interest. Concurring with 
the judgment of the Royal Public Prosecutor I must answer this question negatively 
in the present instance, and I accordingly reject your complaint. Berlin, April 26, 
1860. 
"Chief Public Prosecutor at the Royal High Court, 
(signed) Schwarck" 
a "Gesetz über die Einführung des Strafgesetzbuchs für die Preussischen 
Staaten. Vom 14. April  1851",  Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen 
Staaten 1851.— Ed. 

=====第293页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 269 
I found these two refusals on the part of Public Prosecutor 
Lippe and Chief Public Prosecutor Schwank entirely justified. In 
every state throughout the world, and hence presumably in the 
state of Prussia also, the public interest is interpreted as the interest 
of the government. As far as the Prussian Government was 
concerned there neither was nor could there be "any discernible 
public interest'' in the prosecution of "democrat" Zabel for libels 
against my person. If anything, the interest lay in the opposite 
direction. Moreover, the Public Prosecutor does not have the 
judicial authority to pass judgment; he has to follow blindly the 
regulations laid down by his superior, the Minister of Justice in the 
final instance, and he must do this regardless of his own views or 
convictions. 
In actual fact, then, I am quite in agreement with the decisions 
of Messrs. Lippe and Schwarck, although I have legal reser­
vations about Lippe's reference to Article XVI of the Pro­
legomena to the Penal Code of April 14, 1851. There is no 
paragraph in the Prussian Code which obliges the Public 
Prosecutor's Office to give a reason for its refusal to intervene. 
Nor is there any single syllable about this in the Article XVI 
referred to by Lippe. So why quote it? 
My lawyer now proceeded to launch a civil action, and I 
breathed a sigh of  relief.  Though the Prussian Government had 
no public interest in prosecuting F. Zabel, I had the strongest 
private interest to defend  myself.  And I could now act in my own 
name. The verdict was a matter of indifference to me, if only I 
could compel F. Zabel to appear at the bar of a public court. But 
just imagine my astonishment! I was told that it was not yet a 
matter of instituting legal proceedings, but of a court hearing to 
settle the question whether I had a right to bring an action against 
F. Zabel. 
I was disconcerted to discover that, according to the Prussian 
judicial regulations, before the judge can hear the action and 
proceed to judgment, every plaintiff must plead his case to the 
same judge to enable the latter to see whether the plaintiff has the 
right to sue. In the course of this preliminary investigation the 
judge may call for additional evidence, or he may suppress part of 
the old evidence, or he may find that the plaintiff has no right to 
sue. If he sees fit to allow the right to sue, the judge arranges the 
hearing, the case is heard and is settled by a verdict. If the judge 
refuses the right to sue, he simply stops the action by a decree, by 
a ruling. This procedure applies not only to actions for libel, but to 
all civil cases. Thus an action for libel, like any other civil action, 

=====第294页=====
270 Karl Marx 
can be dismissed in all instances by such an official ruling and 
therefore will never be settled. 
It will be granted that a code of law which does not recognise 
the right of the private individual to sue in his own private 
interests, ignores the simplest and most basic laws of civil society. 
The right to sue, a self-evident right of the independent private 
individual, is turned into a privilege granted by the state through 
the agency of its judiciary. In every legal conflict the state 
intervenes placing itself between the private individual and the 
gateway to the court, which is its private property and which it 
opens or closes as it thinks fit. First the judge gives a ruling in his 
capacity as an official; later on he gives his verdict, in his capacity as 
a judge. The same judge who, without hearing the accused, 
without hearing the pros and cons of the case, prejudges the issue 
of whether there are grounds for an action, and who, let us say, 
places himself on the side of the  plaintiff,  who thus decides to a 
certain degree in favour of the legitimacy of the complaint, who 
decides therefore to a certain degree against the defendant, this 
very same judge is supposed subsequently, in the actual trial, to 
decide impartially between the plaintiff and defendant, i.e. to pass a 
verdict on his own prejudgment. B. boxes A.'s ears. A. cannot sue 
the attacker until he has civilly acquired a licence to do so from 
the court official. A. withholds from B. a piece of land that 
belongs to him. B. requires a preliminary licence enabling him to 
assert his property rights before the court. He may receive it or he 
may not. B. libels A. publicly in the press, and an official of the 
judiciary, sitting in camera, may "rule" that A. may not sue B. It 
is easy to see what monstrous injustices may be perpetrated 
because of this procedure even in civil cases in the strict sense of 
the word. Still more so in case of libels made in the press against 
political parties. In all countries, and even in Prussia, judges are 
known to be human beings like everyone else. Even one of the 
Vice-Presidents of the Royal Prussian Supreme Tribunal, Dr. Götze, 
has declared in the Prussian Upper House that Prussian law was 
embarrassed by the disturbances of the years 1848, 1849 and 
1850,  and needed some time to orientate  itself.  Who can 
guarantee that Dr. Götze has not miscalculated the time required 
for orientation? The fact that in Prussia the right to take action 
against a slanderer, for example, depends on the interim 
"ruling" of an official whom the government, moreover, may 
punish for so-called "derelictions of duty while in office", with 
censure, fines, forced transfer and even dishonourable dismissal 
from the judiciary (see the interim ordinance of July 10, 1849 

=====第295页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 271 
and the Law concerning discipline of May 7, 1851a)—how shall I 
even begin to make this credible, if not clear, to English readers? 
For it is my intention to publish an English pamphlet about my 
case against F. Zabel. 230 And when Edmond About wrote his La 
Prusse en 1860 what would he not have given for the information 
that in the entire realm of the Prussian monarchy the right to sue 
does not exist anywhere but in the Rhine Province, which has been 
"blessed" with the possession of the Code Napoléon™ '! Men must 
suffer everywhere under the courts, but only in a very few 
countries are they forbidden to sue. 
In the circumstances it is understandable that my action against 
Zabel in the Prussian courts had to change into my dispute with the 
Prussian courts about Zabel. Leaving the theoretical beauties of the 
law to one side, let us now cast a glance at the charms of applying 
it in practice. 
On June 8, 1860 the Royal Municipal Court in Berlin issued the 
following "ruling": 
"Ruling regarding the suit for libel brought on June 5, 1860 
"Marx contra Zabel. M. 38 de 1860 
"1. The suit is dismissed for lack of an indictable offence, because the two 
incriminating leading articles of the local 'National-Zeitung' merely make the political 
views of the Augsburg 'Allgemeine Zeitung' and the history of the anonymous pamphlet 
'Zur Warnung' the object of discussion. The statements and assertions contained therein, 
insofar as they are those of the author himself and are not merely quotations from other 
persons, do not exceed the bounds of legitimate criticism. In accordance with § 154 of 
the Penal Code, therefore, since the intention to insult is evident neither from the 
form of these utterances, nor from the circumstances in which they were made, they 
cannot be held to be punishable. 
Berlin, June 8, 1860 
"Royal Municipal Court, Criminal Division 
"Commission I for Libel Cases (L.S.b)" 
Thus the Municipal Court forbids me to sue F. Zabel and 
absolves Zabel of the irksome necessity of having to answer for his 
public libels! And why? "For lack of an indictable  offence.  " The 
Public Prosecutor's Office refused to take action against Zabel on 
my behalf because no discernible public interest was involved. The 
Municipal Court forbids me to proceed against Zabel on my own 
behalf because there is no indictable offence. And why is there no 
indictable offence? 
a "Verordnung, betreffend die Dienstvergehen der Richter ... vom 10. Juli 
1849"  and "Gesetz, betreffend die Dienstvergehen der Richter ... vom 7. Mai 
1851".—  Ed. 
b Locus sigilli: the place of the seal.— Ed. 

=====第296页=====
272 Karl Marx 
First: "Because the two leading articles of the 'National-Zeitung' 
merely relate to the political views of the 'Allgemeine Zeitung'." 
Because Zabel has for the time being deceitfully transformed me 
into a "correspondent of the 'Allgemeine Zeitung"' he has the right to 
make me the whipping-boy in his feud with that paper, and I do 
not even have the right to complain about this "ruling" of the 
mighty Zabel! Brimstone Gang, Bristlers, complot franco-
allemand, revolutionary congress in Murten, Cologne communist 
trial, fabrication of counterfeit paper money in Geneva, "work of 
the 'Rheinische Zeitung'", etc., etc.—  all this "merely relates to the 
political views of the 'Allgemeine Zeitung' ". 
Second: F. Zabel had "no intention to insult". Of course not! The 
good fellow only had the intention of killing me off politically and 
morally with his lies. 
When "democrat" F. Zabel asserts in the National-Zeitung that 
I have counterfeited money on a massive scale, fabricated docu­
ments in the name of third persons, politically compromised 
people in Germany so as to extort money from them by 
threatening to denounce them, etc., it is evident that according to 
legal terminology he can have had only one of two things in mind: 
either to libel me or to denounce me. If the first, then he is legally 
punishable; if the second, then he must prove the truth of his 
assertions in a court of law. What do I care for any other private 
intentions of "democrat" F. Zabel? 
Zabel libels me, but without "the intention to insult". He injures 
my reputation like the Turk who cut off the head of a Greek, but 
without intending to injure him. 
If one speaks of "insulting" and "the intention to insult", if 
one speaks of the kind of infamous actions which "democrat" 
F. Zabel imputes to me, then the specific "intention" to "insult", 
the utterly malicious intention of the good Zabel —why it breathes 
from every pore of his leading articles Nos. 1 and 2. 
Vogt's "Magnum Opus", appendices included, has no fewer 
than 278 pages. And F. Zabel, who is accustomed "to draw out the 
thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his argument", 3 our 
conceited F. Zabel, Dunce Zabel has succeeded in compressing 
these 278 pages into approximately five small newspaper columns 
without forgoing a single one of Vogt's libels against me and my 
party. F. Zabel provides an anthology of the most scurrilous parts 
and a table of contents for the less drastic portions. F. Zabel, 
accustomed to expanding two molecules of ideas into 278 pages, 
a Shakespeare, Love's Labour's Lost, Act V, Scene 1.— Ed. 

=====第297页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 273 
now condenses 278 pages into two leading articles without losing a 
single atom of dirt in the process. Ira facit poetam? How potent a 
malice it must have been to transform the hydrocephalic Zabel 
into a hydraulic press of such force! 
On the other hand, his malice blinds him to such an extent that 
he ascribes miraculous powers to me, actual miraculous powers, 
only to enable him to make one more slanderous insinuation at my 
expense. 
Having begun in the first leading article with a description of 
the Brimstone Gang under my command, and having happily 
turned me and my associates into the "confederates of the  secret  police 
in France and Germany", having recounted, inter alia, that "these 
people" hated Vogt because he was continuously rescuing 
Switzerland from their clutches, he goes on: 
"Now when last year Vogt had brought an action against the Allgemeine Zeitung, 
the latter received a communication from another London accomplice, Biscamp.... In 
the most shameless manner the writer offered ... his services as a second 
correspondent along with Herr Liebknecht. [...] A  week  after Biscamp Marx, too,  wrote  to 
the 'Allgemeine Zeitung', offering it a 'legal document' as evidence against Vogt about 
which"  b (the document, the evidence or Vogt?) "we shall  perhaps speak  at a later  date.  " 
Zabel gave this promise on January 22 and carried it out as 
early as January 25 in the National-Zeitung, No. 41, where we can 
read: 
"So Blind denies being the author of the pamphlet; he is ... referred to as such 
for the first time in Biscamp's letter to the 'Allgemeine Zeitung' of October 20.... To 
strengthen the case for Blind's authorship Marx wrote to the 'Allgemeine Zeitung' on 
October 29." 
So F. Zabel credits me, not once, but twice, first on January 22 
and then again on January 25, having had three days to think it 
over, with the magic power of writing a letter in London on 
October 29, 1859 which had been in the possession of the 
Augsburg District Court on October 24, 1859. And both times he 
credits me with this magic power in order to establish a link 
between the "document" I forwarded to the Allgemeine Zeitung, 
and the objectionable letter sent to it by Biscamp, 0 i.e. to make my 
letter look like the pedisequusd  to Biscamp's. So was it not malice, 
pigheaded malice which made F. Zabel stupid to the point of 
a Anger makes the poet (Virgil, The  Aeneid,  Book VII, 507, paraphrased).— Ed. 
b In German: von dem, but dem can refer either to the document, the evidence or 
Vogt.— Ed. 
c See this volume, p. 127.— Ed. 
d Sequel.— Ed. 

=====第298页=====
274 Karl Marx 
beginning to believe in magic, far beyond the average degree of 
duncedom? 
But, the Municipal Court "argues further", Zabel's leading 
article No. 2 "merely makes the history of the anonymous pamphlet 
Zur Warnung" the "object of discussion". The object} Read 
pretext. 
Eisele-Beisele, concealed this time under the name of "German 
Patriots", had, it appears, sent an "open letter" in November 
1859 to the "National Association" which was printed in the 
reactionary Neue Hannoversche Zeitung. 232 This "open letter" of­
fended against the "democracy" of Zabel, a democracy in which 
the heroic courage to attack the Habsburg dynasty was neatly 
balanced by the servility shown to the Hohenzollern dynasty. The 
Neue Preussische Zeitung took the opportunity provided by the 
"open letter" to make the not very original discovery that once 
democracy has got under way it need not necessarily end up 
in— F. Zabel and his "organ of democracy". Zabel flew into a rage 
and wrote leading article No. 2, "Wie man radikale Flugblätter 
macht" ["How Radical Pamphlets Are Made"]. 
"By inviting the Kreuz-Zeitung," Zabel begins portentously, "to go through the 
history of the pamphlet (Zur Warnung) with the help of the documents and 
explanations provided by Vogt, we express the hope that it will finally admit that we 
were in the right when we said two months ago that the open letter to the National 
Association was something for it, not for us, that it had been designed for its 
columns, not for ours." 
So "democrat" Zabel, who has been so radically initiated by 
Vogt into the mysteries of radicalism, wishes for his part to read 
the Kreuz-Zeitung a lecture on the mystery of "how radical 
pamphlets are made", or as the Municipal Court expresses it: "he 
merely wishes to make the history of the pamphlet 'Zur Warnung' 
the object of discussion". And how does F. Zabel set about his 
task? 
He starts with the "tactics" of the "'proletarian' party under 
Marx". First, he recounts how, in the name of a Workers' 
Association but behind its back, the "proletarians under Marx" 
send letters from London for foreign workers' associations "which 
are to be compromised", hatch "intrigues", set up a secret league, 
etc.; and how they, finally, compose "documents" which "inevitably 
attract the protests of the police" to those associations "which are 
to be compromised". Thus in order to teach the Kreuz-Zeitung 
"how radical pamphlets are made", Zabel begins by explaining 
that "the 'proletarian' party under Marx" manufactures police 
"reports" and "documents", which are not "pamphlets" at all. In 

=====第299页=====
Herr Vogt. — XI. A Lawsuit 275 
order to explain "how radical pamphlets are made" he goes on to 
recount that the "proletarians under Marx" manufactured "counter­
feit paper money on a massive scale" in Geneva in 1852, which are 
likewise not "radical pamphlets". In order to demonstrate "how 
radical pamphlets are made", he reports that the "proletarians 
under Marx" carried out "manoeuvres" hostile to the Swiss and 
compromising for the associations during the Lausanne Joint 
Festival in 1859—and these too are not "radical pamphlets". He 
explains that "Biscamp and Marx" with the aid of funds whose 
source was known only "to the gods" produced Das Volk, which 
was not a "radical pamphlet" either but a weekly journal. And 
after all this he puts in a good word for the immaculate purity of 
Vogt's recruiting agency, which once again was no "radical 
pamphlet". In this way he fills 2 of the 3 l/4 columns of the article 
entitled "How Radical Pamphlets Are Made". Thus for these 2/3  of 
the article the history of the anonymous pamphlet serves merely as 
a pretext for reproducing those of Vogt's slanders which F. Zabel, 
his "friend" and accomplice, has not dealt with under the heading 
"Political Views of the 'Allgemeine Zeitung'". Lastly at the very end 
Dunce I comes to the art of "making radical pamphlets", namely 
to "the history" of the pamphlet Zur Warnung. 
"Blind denies being the author of the pamphlet; he is impudently referred to as 
such for the first time in Biscamp's letter to the Allgemeine Zeitung of October  20.... 
To strengthen the case for Blind's authorship Marx wrote to the Allgemeine Zeitung on 
October 29: 'I have obtained the accompanying document because Blind refused to 
stand by statements which he made to me and to other persons.'" 
Now Zabel suspects this document in particular because 
Liebknecht ... "strangely enough" adds: "We requested the 
magistrate (?)" (this question mark stands in Zabel's text) "to 
authenticate our signatures" and Zabel has resolved once and for 
all not to recognise any magistrate but the Berlin magistrate. Zabel 
goes on to report the contents of Vögele's declaration which had 
caused Blind to send the statements of Hollinger and Wiehe to the 
Allgemeine Zeitung to prove that the pamphlet had not been printed on 
Hollinger's press and was therefore not composed by Blind. He 
continues: 
"Marx, always ready with an answer, replied in the Allgemeine Zeitung on Novem­
ber 15." 
Zabel lists the various points in my reply. Marx says this ... 
Marx says that..., "in addition, Marx refers". So since I do not say 
anything "in addition", surely Zabel has informed his readers of 
all the points I make in my reply? But we know our Zabel! He 

=====第300页=====
276 Karl Marx 
conceals, leaves out, suppresses the decisive point of my reply.3 In 
my declaration of November 15b  I make a number of points, all of 
which are numbered. Thus "1. ... 2. ... and finally, 3. ...": "It so 
happened that the reprint" (of the pamphlet) "in Das Volk was 
made from the type still standing in Hollinger's print-shop. Thus 
without the need to call witnesses, a simple comparison of the 
pamphlet and the reprint of it in Das Volk would be sufficient to 
prove to a court that the former came from F. Hollinger's print-shop." 
That's the conclusive piece of evidence, Zabel said to  himself.  My 
readers must not hear of this. So he spirits away the strongest 
point of my reply and instead burdens my conscience with a 
suspect gift of repartee. 0 Thus Zabel's account of "the history of 
the pamphlet" contains two intentional falsehoods. He falsifies 
first the chronology and then the contents of my declaration of 
November 15. His twofold falsification prepares the way for his 
conclusion that I "fabricated" the pamphlet, and that I did so in such 
a way that it "looked like Blind's fabrication" and hence that in 
sending Vögele's testimony to the Allgemeine Zeitung I likewise 
sent a false testimony, and did so knowingly. The accusation of 
fabricating documents with the intention of saddling a third 
person with responsibility for them does not, in the view of the 
Berlin Municipal Court, "exceed the bounds of legitimate criticism" 
and even less does it imply "an intention to insult". 
At the end of his recipe describing "how radical pamphlets are 
made" it suddenly occurs to Zabel that there is one shameless 
invention of Vogt's that he has omitted to make use of, and so 
right at the end of his leading article No. 2 he hastily adds the 
following note: 
"In 1850 another circular" (as Vogt recollects) "written by Parliamentary  Wolf, 
alias Casemate  Wolf,  was sent to the 'proletarians' in Germany, and simultaneously 
allowed to fall into the hands of the Hanover police." d 
With this pretty police anecdote about one of the former editors 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, our stout party, democrat Zabel, 
grins and takes his leave of his readers. The words "alias 
3 Marx puns on the words unterschlagen (suppress) and schlagend (decisive).— 
Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 8-9. The italics were introduced by Marx in Herr 
Vogt.—Ed. 
c Marx puns on the words Schlagkraft (forcefulness, striking power, here— 
strongest point) and Schlagfertigkeit (gift of repartee).— Ed. 
d From the article "Wie man radikale Flugblätter macht", National-Zeitung, 
No. 41, January 25, I860.— Ed. 

=====第301页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 277 
Casemate  Wolf"  belong not to Vogt but to F. Zabel. His Silesian 
readers were to be clearly informed that he is talking about their 
countryman W. Wolff the former co-editor of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. How assiduously our good Zabel toils to ensure that the 
connection between the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and the police in 
France and Germany is established down to the last detail! His 
Silesians might imagine otherwise that it was Zabel's own B. Wolff 
that was under discussion, Zabel's natural superior 3 who, as is well 
known, rearranges world history with the aid of telegrams and in 
"secret league" with such well-known manufacturers of false 
reports as Reuter in London and Havas in Paris. Sigmund 
Engländer, the notorious secret police agent, is the heart and soul 
of the Reuter bureau and hence the presiding genius of the trinity 
B. Wolff-Reuter-Havas. 
Despite all this and despite democrat Zabel's intention not to 
insult, the Berlin Municipal Court declares that Zabel's two leading 
articles do indeed "contain statements and assertions" which 
"exceed the bounds of legitimate criticism" and are therefore 
"punishable", or at least actionable. So produce this Zabel! Hand 
him over and let him wriggle in court! Not so fast! the Municipal 
Court exclaims. The "statements and assertions" contained in the 
two leading articles, the Municipal Court says, do not, "insofar as 
they are those of the author" (Zabel) "himself and are not merely 
quotations from other persons", exceed "the bounds of legitimate 
criticism" and are not "punishable". Hence Zabel is not only not 
punishable, he is not even actionable and "the costs are therefore 
to be borne by the  plaintiff".  So the libellous part of Zabel's 
"statements and assertions" is "mere quotation". Voyons! 
It will be remembered from the opening part of this chapter 
that my action for libel was based on four passages in Zabel's two 
leading articles. In the passage dealing with Das Volk's financial 
resources (sub 2 of the points listed above), Zabel himself does not 
claim to quote nor does he quote in fact, for: 
Zabel (National-Zeitung, No. 41) Vogt ("Magnum Opus", p. 212) 
"Where the money for this generous- "The regular correspondent of the 
ly distributed paper" (Das Volk) Allgemeine Zeitung is a collaborator on 
"came from, is known to the gods; this paper" (Das Volk) "which was 
men, however, are well aware that established with the aid of unknown 
Marx and Biscamp have no money to funds, for neither Biscamp nor Marx 
spare." have the requisite means for it" (i.e. 
to establish a paper on the basis of 
unknown funds?). 
a Marx gives the English phrase in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第302页=====
278 Karl Marx 
In the second incriminating passage (see above sub 4), in which 
I am accused of fabricating a document in Blind's name, Zabel 
even states explicitly that he is speaking in his own name, as Zabel, 
and not in Vogt's. 
"It appears to us", as monarch in the Kingdom of Dullness3  Zabel naturally 
makes use of the pluralis majestatis, h "it appears to us that the latter" (the Marx 
party) "did not find it too difficult to turn him" (Blind) "into a scapegoat.... By 
making use of Blind's assertions and turns of phrase the pamphlet could be 
fabricated and made to look as if he" (Blind) "had concocted it" (National-Zeitung, 
No. 41). 
The third of the incriminating passages (see above sub 3) must 
be "quoted" again in full: 
"In this way a conspiracy of the most infamous sort was devised in 1852, which 
aimed at damaging the Swiss workers' associations by manufacturing counterfeit 
paper money on a massive scale. (See Vogt for further details.) This conspiracy would 
have caused the greatest difficulties for the Swiss authorities if it had not been 
uncovered in time." 
Is this "merely a quotation", as the Municipal Court 
maintains, is it in fact a quotation of any kind? It is indeed partly 
plagiarised from Vogt, but it is not a quotation in any sense of the 
word. 
In the first place Zabel himself does not claim that he is quoting, 
but implies that he is speaking in his own right when he remarks 
in a parenthesis: "See Vogt for further details." And now look at 
the passage  itself!  In Geneva it was known that Cherval did not 
arrive in Geneva before spring 1853 and that his "conspiracy" and 
flight took place in spring 1854. So Vogt, writing in Geneva, does 
not venture to ?ssert that the "conspiracy ... was devised in 1852". 
This lie he leaves to our good Zabel in Berlin. Furthermore, Vogt 
says: 
"Various stone and copper plates had already been engraved for this purpose" 
(the manufacture of counterfeit banknotes, etc.) "by Nugent" (Cherval)  "himself" 
("Magnum Opus", p. 175). 
Hence various stone and copper plates had. already been 
engraved for the forgery, but the banknotes and treasury bills had 
not yet been manufactured. According to Zabel, however, "the 
manufacture of counterfeit paper money" had already taken 
place, and "on a massive scale", moreover. Vogt states that the 
statutory "purpose" of Cherval's conspiracy was 
"to attack despotism with its own weapons, by manufacturing counterfeit 
banknotes and treasury bills on a massive scale" (loc. cit.). 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b The royal plural.— Ed. 

=====第303页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 279 
Zabel deletes the attack on despotism and holds fast to the 
"manufacture of counterfeit paper money on a massive scale". In 
Zabel, then, what we have is an ordinary criminal act which is not 
even palliated for the benefit of the members of the "secret 
league" by the pretence of a political purpose. And this is how 
Zabel "quotes" from the "Magnum Opus" throughout. Vogt felt it 
necessary to turn his tall stories into a "book". So he fills it with 
details, spins it out, scrawls, splutters, colours, daubs, arranges, 
develops, complicates, explains, fantasises, fa del cul  trombetta*  with 
the result that at every point his Falstaffian soul shines through 
the purported facts, which are once more dissolved by his own 
narrative, though he is not aware of this, into the void from which 
they had emerged. Zabel, by contrast, who had to compress the 
book into two leading articles and did not wish to omit a single 
slander, suppresses everything but the caput mortuum h of every 
purported "fact", he strings the dry bones of these slanders 
together and then counts his rosary with the zeal of a Pharisee. 
Take the following case. Starting with the fact revealed first by 
myself,  that Cherval was a secret police agent and agent provocateur 
in the pay of various embassies, Vogt's imagination takes wing. He 
says inter alia: 
"Various stone and copper plates had already been engraved for this purpose" 
(forgery) "by Nugent" (Cherval)  "himself;  the gullible members of the secret 
league had already been selected to go to France, Switzerland and Germany with 
packets of these" (as yet unmanufactured) "counterfeit banknotes. But denuncia­
tions had already been made to the police and scandalously enough these also 
incriminated the workers' associations, etc." ("Magnum Opus", p. 175.) 
Vogt thus makes Cherval denounce his own operations to the 
police even though he has done no more than engrave the stone 
and copper plates for the intended forgery, even before the 
purpose of his conspiracy has been achieved, before a corpus delicti 
has appeared and anyone apart from himself has been compro­
mised. But the Vogtian Cherval is eager to "scandalously" incrimi­
nate "the workers' associations" in his "conspiracy". The foreign 
embassies that make use of Cherval are as stupid as he is and are 
equally precipitate 
"in indicating to the Swiss police in confidence that political intrigues were 
being devised in the workers' associations, etc."c 
a Makes a bugle of his rear (Dante, The Divine Comedy, Inferno, Canto 
XXI).—Ed 
b Literally: dead head; a term used in chemistry for the residuum left after 
distillation; here: remainder, residue.— Ed. 
c op. cit., S.  176.—  Ed. 

=====第304页=====
280 Karl Marx 
Simultaneously, these ambassadorial numskulls, who are too 
impatient to allow the conspiracy hatched by Cherval on their 
orders to come to fruition and who, in their childish impatience, 
reveal the identity of their own agent to no purpose, have police 
lying in wait at "the frontiers" to receive Cherval's emissaries, "if 
matters had developed to such a pitch" as they had prevented 
them from developing, "to receive them with counterfeit bank­
notes"  whose manufacture they had thwarted, 
"and turn the whole affair into an occasion for a general witch-hunt in which 
masses of innocent people would have had to pay for the misdeeds of a few wicked 
men". a 
When Vogt goes on to say that "the plan of the whole conspiracy 
had been monstrously conceived", everyone will agree that its 
conception was monstrously  stupid,  and when he concludes with the 
boast 
"I cannot deny that I contributed a substantial part in frustrating these devilish 
plans",b 
everyone will get the point and collapse with laughter at the 
whimsical devil. But compare this with the ascetic account given in 
Zabel's annals! 
"In this way a conspiracy of the most infamous sort was devised in 1852, which 
aimed at damaging the Swiss associations by manufacturing counterfeit paper 
money on a massive scale. (See Vogt for further details.) This conspiracy would 
have caused the greatest difficulties for the Swiss authorities if it had not been 
uncovered in time." 
Here, condensed into a single brief sentence, we find a whole 
bundle of facts, as dry as they are scandalous. "A conspiracy of 
the most infamous sort" dated 1852. "Manufacture of counterfeit 
paper money on a massive scale", i.e. an ordinary criminal act. 
The intentional compromising of the "Swiss workers' associations", 
i.e. betrayal of one's own party. The "greatest difficulties" which 
might have arisen for the "Swiss authorities", i.e. agent provocateur 
against the Swiss Republic in the interests of Continental despots. 
Lastly, "timely discovery of the conspiracy". Here criticism is 
deprived of all the vital clues provided by Vogt's account, they 
have been simply conjured away. One has to believe or disbelieve. 
And this is how Zabel treats the entire "Magnum Opus" insofar as 
it deals with my party associates and  myself.  As Heine so rightly 
says,  no human being is as dangerous as an addle-brained ass. 
a ibid., S. 177.— Ed. 
b ibid.— Ed. 

=====第305页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 281 
Lastly, the fourth incriminating passage (see above sub 1) with 
which leading article No. 1 opens its revelations about the 
"Brimstone Gang". It is true that Zabel begins with the words: 
"Vogt reports on p. 136 et seq." But Zabel does not make it clear 
whether he is summarising or quoting. He takes care not to use 
quotation marks. In fact, he does not quote. There could be no 
doubt about it from the outset since he condenses pp. 136, 137, 
138, 139, 140 and 141 of the "Magnum Opus" into 51 lines of 
about 48 letters each, does not indicate omissions, but packs the 
sentences as tightly as Dutch herrings, and lastly even has space in 
these 51 lines for reflections of his own. Wherever he comes upon 
a particularly vile sentence, he incorporates it more or less as it 
stands. For the rest, he mixes up his excerpts so that they do not 
follow the pagination of the "Magnum Opus" but are brought in 
as and when they suit his purpose. He equips the head of one 
Vogtian sentence with the tail of another Vogtian sentence. Or 
again, he composes a single sentence from the keywords of a 
dozen of Vogt's sentences. Should it occur that in Vogt's original 
the stylistic rubble prevents the light from falling right on the 
slander, Zabel clears away the rubble. For example, Vogt talks of 
"compromising people at home in Germany in such a way that  they  could no longer 
resist the attempts to blackmail them and were forced to pay money". 
According to Zabel, however, this reads: 
"compromising people in such a way that they were forced to pay money". 
Elsewhere Zabel alters anything that appears to him to be 
ambiguous in Vogt's unstylish mess. Thus Vogt: 
"they were forced to pay money so that the gang should preserve the 
secret of their having been compromised". 
Whereas in Zabel: 
"so that the gang should preserve their secret without compromising [them]". 
Finally, Zabel interpolates entire sentences of his own invention, 
such as: 
"The Brimstone Gang maintained a frightfully strict discipline among its 
supporters" and "they"—namely "the fellows who continued the work of the 'Rheinische 
Zeitung' among the refugees"—"they became the confederates of the secret police in 
France and Germany." 
Thus of the four passages regarded by me as libellous three 
stem from Zabel on Zabel's own admission, while the fourth alleged 
"quotation", although containing quotations, is not a quotation, and 
even less is it "merely a quotation", as the Municipal Court 

=====第306页=====
282 Karl Marx 
maintains, and least of all is it a quotation "from other persons" in 
the plural, as the same Municipal Court contends. Conversely, 
among all Zabel's "statements and assertions" about me there is not a 
single line of "criticism and appraisal" ("legitimate" or "illegiti­
mate"). 
But even supposing that the actual assumption of the Municipal 
Court is as true as it is false; even supposing that ZabeVs libellous 
statements about me were merely quotations, would the Municipal 
Court because of this circumstance be  legally  justified in forbidding 
me to bring an action against F. Zabel? On the contrary, in a 
"ruling" handed down by the Royal Prussian High Court which 
we shall give in extenso, we find that 
"It would not affect the situation as laid down in §156 of the Penal Code if the 
facts set out in the aforementioned articles turned out to be the author's own 
assertions or quotations from the assertions of third persons." 
So whether he quotes or not, "democrat" Zabel remains 
responsible for his "assertions". The Municipal Court has already 
declared that Zabel published assertions about me which are in 
themselves "punishable"; but these assertions are quotations 
and hence unassailable. Away with this pretext, which is legally 
untenable, cries the High Court. So finally I shall be able to lay 
hands on Zabel; the doors of the law will open, Italiam, Italiaml 3 
My lawyer appealed from the Municipal Court to the High Court 
and on July 11, I860 he received the following "ruling": 
"In the leading articles published in Nos. 37 and 41 of the National-Zeitung on 
January 22 and 25 of this year under the titles 'Karl Vogt and the Allgemeine 
Zeitung' and 'How Radical Pamphlets Are Made', a libel on the plaintiff Dr. Karl 
Marx of London cannot be found. Even though it would not affect the situation as 
laid down in §156 of the Penal Code if the facts set out in the aforementioned 
articles turned out to be the author's own assertions or the assertions of third 
persons, it would be wrong to restrict the right of the press to subject the activities 
of the parties and the published expression of their disagreements to analysis and 
criticism, insofar as the form of the polemic does not indicate an intention to insult. 
In the present case this intention cannot be presumed to exist. 
"In the aforementioned articles light is thrown above all on the conflict that 
prevailed between the views of Dr. Karl Vogt, on the one hand, and the Augsburg 
Allgemeine Zeitung, on the other, concerning the support expressed for the interests 
of the Italians and for the interests of Austria on the occasion of the recent war; in 
this context the intervention of the so-called German emigration in London on the 
side of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung and against Vogt, as well as some of the 
factional quarrels and the machinations of these refugees among themselves, are also 
discussed! 
a Virgil, The  Aeneid,  Book III.— Ed. 

=====第307页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI A Lawsuit 283 
"If in the course of these discussions the relations of the plaintiff to these parties 
and his partial involvement in their aspirations and in particular his efforts to assist 
the Augsburg 'Allgemeine Zeitung' in its polemic against Vogt by supplying it with 
evidence are drawn into the debate, the relevant allegations concerning this 
involvement which are contained in the two articles are not so much refuted as the 
plaintiff intended, but rather confirmed by the facts which he himself includes in his 
complaint If on the other hand he goes on to assert that he is identified, in a 
defamatory manner, with those political activities, on which the articles in question 
admittedly pass severe strictures, referring to them as eccentric, and even 
unprincipled and  dishonourable,  this assertion cannot be regarded as substantiated. For 
when the first article quotes from Vogt's account: 'that the refugees of 1849 gradually 
congregated in London, where they revered the above mentioned Marx as their visible 
leader'; and refers to a letter by Techow: 'in which we see how Marx, puffed up with 
Napoleonic pride in his intellectual superiority, rules the members of the Brimstone 
Gang with a rod of iron'—what we have here is in essence only a description of what 
Vogt calls the 'Brimstone Gang', and not an invective against Marx, who is portrayed 
rather as a restraining influence and intellectually superior. Least of all is his person 
associated with those people who are accused of blackmail and denunciation. Likewise, 
in the second article, it is nowhere stated that the plaintiff ascribed the authorship of 
the pamphlet Zur Warnung to the abovementioned Blind against his better knowledge, 
and that he knowingly sent false testimonies of third persons to that effect to the 
Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung. However, the fact that the testimony of the compositor 
Vögele was disputed is conceded by the plaintiff himself in his complaint when he cites 
the conflicting statements by Hollinger, the printer, and Wiehe, the compositor. 
Furthermore, on his own admission a certain Schaible later disclosed that he was the 
author of the pamphlet, and he did this moreover only after the two articles in the 
National-Zeitung had appeared. 
"The appeal of the 21st of last month against the negative ruling of the Royal 
Municipal Court of the 8th of the same month is adjudged to be without foundation 
and is therefore dismissed. Twenty-five silver groschen in costs for assessing the 
unfounded appeal are to be paid to the Treasury of the local Municipal Court without 
delay on pain of distraint. 
"Berlin, July 11, 1860 
Criminal Senate of the Royal High Court 
Second Division 
Guthschmidt Schultze 
"To D. Phil. Karl Marx c/o Legal 
Counsellor Weber" 
When I first received this "ruling" from my lawyer, I did not 
notice the address and conclusion on the first reading and, 
unfamiliar as I am with Prussian law, I imagined that I had been 
sent a copy of the defence handed in to the High Court by 
"democrat" F. Zabel. I said to myself that what Zabel had to say 
about "the views" (see Appendix 15) "of Dr. Karl Vogt and the 
Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung", and about "the interests of the 
Italians and the interests of the Austrians", all this must have 
accidentally strayed into his petition from a leading article 
intended for the National-Zeitung. 

=====第308页=====
284 Karl Marx 
In any event, "democrat" F. Zabel does not mention in so much 
as a single syllable either these views or those interests in the four 
columns that concern me in his two leading articles (which 
themselves amount to hardly six columns). In his petition Zabel 
says that I 
"assisted the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung in its polemic against Vogt by 
supplying it with evidence". 
He refers to Vogt's legal action against the "Allgemeine Zeitung" 
as the polemic of the "Allgemeine Zeitung" against Vogt. If legal ac­
tion and polemic were identical things why should I require the 
permission of the Public Prosecutor, the Municipal Court, the 
High Court, etc., for my "polemic" against Zabel? And Zabel even 
asserts that the "relevant allegations" in his two leading articles 
concerning my relations with the Allgemeine Zeitung were "not so 
much refuted as I had intended, but rather confirmed by the facts I 
had myself included". Not so much—but rather! In jus* it must be 
either-or. And what "relevant allegations" were made by Zabel? 
The "relevant allegations" in Zabel's leading article No. 1 
concerning my relations with the Allgemeine Zeitung were as 
follows: 
1. Liebknecht became correspondent for the Allgemeine Zeitung 
on the strength of a reference which I had given him officially. I 
declared, in my complaint, that Zabel was lying, but thought it 
unnecessary to advance any further "facts" on such an absurdity. 
2. According to Zabel I sent a "legal document" to the Allgemeine 
Zeitung from London on October 29, which in fact had been in 
the possession of the Augsburg District Court on October 24, and 
he found this "allegation" confirmed by the "facts" produced by 
me! From the facts I had advanced in my complaint, Zabel could 
indeed see that, quite apart from any political motives, it had 
become necessary for me to send in a document relating to the 
origins of the pamphlet Zur Warnung, because Vogt had publicly 
attempted to saddle me with the authorship of it even before the 
institution of legal proceedings. 3. Zabel's "allegation" that I was 
one of the correspondents of the Allgemeine Zeitung was refuted 
by me with the aid of authentic documents. Zabel's leading article 
No. 2, "How Radical Pamphlets Are Made", contained, as shown 
earlier on, no "allegations" concerning my relations with the 
Allgemeine Zeitung, other than the "allegation" that I myself had 
fabricated the pamphlet, that I had then laid it at Blind's door and 
a Law.— Ed. 

=====第309页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 285 
tried to prove that it was his work by means of Vögele's false 
testimony. Were all these "relevant allegations not so much 
refuted as I had intended, but rather confirmed by the facts 
included 'in my complaint'"? Zabel himself admits the opposite. 
Could Zabel have known that Schaible had written the pamphlet 
Zur Warnung} Did Zabel have to believe that compositor Vögele's 
testimony, which on my own admission was "disputed", was in fact 
correct? But where in the world have I laid down that Zabel must 
have this knowledge or that belief? My complaint refers "rather" to 
Zabel's "relevant allegation" that I "fabricated the pamphlet and 
made it look as if he" (Blind) "had concocted it" and that I later 
used Vögele's testimony to try and prove that it was Blind's work. 
Finally, I came across an argument in Zabel's defence which at 
least looked interesting. 
"If on the other hand he" (the plaintiff Marx) "goes on to assert that he is 
identified, in a defamatory manner, with those political activities" (of the Brimstone 
Gang),  "on which the articles in question" (Zabel's leading articles) "admittedly pass 
severe strictures, referring to them as eccentric, and even unprincipled and 
dishonourable, this assertion cannot be regarded as substantiated... Least of all is his 
person associated with those people who are accused of blackmail and denunciation." a 
Zabel is manifestly not one of those Romans of whom it is said: 
"memoriam quoque cum voce perdidissimus." h He has lost his 
memory, but not his tongue. He transforms not just brimstone but 
the Brimstone Gang from its crystalline state into a liquid and 
from a liquid into a gas, and he uses the red gas to throw dust in 
my eyes.0 The Brimstone Gang, he claims, is a "party" with whose 
"activities" he has never "identified" me, and with whose 
"blackmail and denunciations" he never even associated people 
"associated" with me. It is essential to convert this sulphurous gas 
back into the original flowers of sulphur. 
In leading article No. 1 (National-Zeitung, No. 37, 1860) Zabel 
opens his "relevant allegations" about the Brimstone Gang by 
describing "Marx" as its "visible leader". The second member of 
the Brimstone Gang whom he alludes to "to fill in the picture", 
but does not name, is Frederick Engels. He refers in particular to 
the letter in which Techow reports on his meeting with Fr. Engels, 
K. Schramm and  myself.  Zabel draws attention to the two last as 
illustrations of the "Brimstone Gang". Immediately after he men­
tions Cherval as a London emissary. Then it is Liebknecht's turn. 
a See this volume, p.  283.—  Ed. 
b "We lost our memories along with our vices" (Tacitus, Vitajulii Agricolae).— Ed. 
c Marx puns on roter Dampf (red gas) and blauen Dunst vormachen (literally: to 
produce blue smoke; figuratively: to throw dust in someone's eyes).— Ed. 

=====第310页=====
286 Karl Marx 
"This Liebknecht, in nomine  omen, & one of the most servile supporters of Marx.... 
Immediately after his arrival Liebknecht took up service with Marx, and his labours 
were to the complete satisfaction of his master." 
"Ohly", who marches directly behind Liebknecht, is "likewise a 
channel of the Brimstone Gang". Finally, "another London 
accomplice, Biscamp". All these details follow in quick succession in 
leading article No. 1, but at the end of leading article No. 2 yet 
another member of the Brimstone Gang is named, W.  Wolff— 
"Parliamentary  Wolf,  alias Casemate Wolf"—who had been 
entrusted with the vital mission of "sending out circulars". 
According to Zabel's "relevant allegations", then, the Brimstone 
Gang consists of: Marx, leader of the Brimstone Gang; F. Engels, 
illustration of the Brimstone Gang; Cherval, London emissary of 
the Brimstone gang; Liebknecht, "one of the most servile 
supporters of Marx"; Ohly, "likewise a channel of the Brimstone 
Gang"; Biscamp, "another'" London "accomplice"; lastly,  Wolff, 
the Brimstone Gang's writer of circulars. 
In his first 51 lines Zabel makes this miscellaneously constituted 
Brimstone Gang figure variously under the names: "Brimstone 
Gang or Bristlers", "fellows who continued the work of the 
Rheinische Zeitung among the refugees", the "proletarians" or, as 
we find in leading article No. 2, "the 'proletarian' party under 
Marx". 
So much for the personnel and the names of the Brimstone 
Gang. In his "relevant allegations" Zabel gives a brief and 
impressive account of its organisation. "Marx" is the "leader". The 
"Brimstone Gang" itself comprises the circle of his "close" 
supporters or, as Zabel says in his second leading article, "the Marx 
party in the narrower sense". Zabel even provides a touchstone for 
defining "the Marx party in the narrower sense". A member of the 
Marx party in the narrower sense must have seen Biscamp at least 
once in his life. 
"He"  (Blind), Zabel writes in leading article No. 2, "he declares that he has 
never seen Biscamp in the whole of his life. He is obviously not a member of the 
Marx party in the narrower sense." 
The "Marx party in the narrower sense", or the Brimstone 
Gang proper, is therefore the aristocracy of the gang, not to be 
confused with the third category, the mass of "supporters" or "this 
carefully nurtured class of loafers". So first comes leader Marx, 
then the "Brimstone Gang" proper, or "the Marx party in the 
a The name says everything. Lieb-knecht—dear servant.— Ed. 

=====第311页=====
Herr Vogt.— XI. A Lawsuit 287 
narrower sense", and lastly, the mass of "supporters" or the "class 
of loafers". The Brimstone Gang, subdivided into these three 
categories, enjoys a truly Spartan discipline. "The Brimstone 
Gang," says Zabel, "maintained a frightfully strict discipline among 
its supporters." While at the same time "Marx ... rules the members 
of the Brimstone Gang with a rod of iron". It is obvious that in 
such a well-organised "gang" as this, its characteristic "activities", 
its "chief occupations", the deeds the gang carries out qua gang, 
all take place on the orders of its leader and they are explicidy 
presented by Zabel as the actions of this leader with his rod of 
iron. And what was, if we may use the term, the official 
occupation of the gang? 
"One of the chief occupations of the Brimstone Gang was to compromise 
people at home in Germany in such a way that they were forced to pay money so 
that the gang should preserve their secret without compromising them. Not just 
one, but hundreds of letters were written to people in Germany, threatening to 
denounce them for complicity in this or that act of revolution unless a certain sum 
of money had been received at a specified address by a given date.... The 
reputation of anyone who opposed these intrigues was ruined, not just among the 
refugees, but also by means of the press. The 'proletarians' filled the columns of 
the reactionary press in Germany with their denunciations of those democrats who 
did not subscribe to their views; they became the confederates of the secret police in 
France and Germany, etc." (National-Zeitung, No. 37.)a 
After beginning the "relevant allegations" about the Brimstone 
Gang with the observation that I was its "visible leader", and after 
listing its "chief occupations", namely blackmail, denunciation, 
etc., Zabel concludes his general description of the Brimstone 
Gang with the words: 
"...They became the confederates of the secret police in France and Germany. To fill in 
the picture Vogt publishes a letter by Techow, a former lieutenant, dated August 
26, 1850 ... in which we see how Marx, puffed up with Napoleonic pride in his 
intellectual superiority, rules the members of the Brimstone Gang with a rod of iron." 
Having caused me to be "revered" as the "visible leader" of the 
Brimstone Gang in his introductory remarks, Zabel fears that the 
reader might imagine that behind the visible leader there was an 
invisible one, or that, like the Dalai Lama, I was content to be 
"revered". So at the end of his description he transforms me (in 
his words, not Vogt's) from the merely "visible" leader into the 
leader who wields a rod of iron, from the Dalai Lama into the 
Napoleon of the "Brimstone Gang". And it is precisely this 
remark that he cites in his petition as proof that he does not 
"identify" me with the "political activities" of the Brimstone Gang, 
a Here and below cf. this volume, pp.  260-61.—  Ed. 

=====第312页=====
288 Karl Marx 
on which "severe strictures are passed" and which are "referred 
to as eccentric, and even unprincipled and dishonourable". Of course 
he doesn't! Or not entirely! He does "identify" me with them, but 
not "in a defamatory manner". "Rather" he has done me the honour 
of appointing me the Napoleon of blackmailers, threatening-letter 
writers, mouchards, agents provocateurs, forgers, etc. Zabel clearly 
takes his conception of honour from the vocabulary of the 
December Gang. Hence the epithet "Napoleonic". But I am taking 
him to court because of this very honour he has shown me! With 
the "facts" adduced in my complaint I have proved, and 
proved so decisively that Zabel absolutely refuses to follow me to any 
public court, proved that all his "relevant allegations" about the 
Brimstone Gang are Vogtian inventions and lies, and that Zabel only 
"quotes" them in order to be able to "honour" me as the Napoleon 
of this Brimstone Gang. But am I not depicted by him as "a 
restraining influence and intellectually superior"? Does he not 
describe me as maintaining discipline in the gang? He himself 
explains what this restraint, this superiority and this discipline 
consisted in. 
"The Brimstone Gang maintained a frightfully strict discipline among its 
supporters. Anyone who sought in any way to secure a decent living in the 
bourgeois world was branded a traitor to the revolution merely for attempting to 
become independent.... With the aid of rumours, letters, etc., dissension, brawling 
and duels were fomented in this carefully nurtured class of loafers, etc." 
But Zabel is not content with this general description of the 
"political activities" of the Brimstone Gang with which he has 
honourably "identified" me. 
Liebknecht, a "notorious member of the Marx party", "one of 
the most servile supporters of Marx, whose labours were to the 
complete satisfaction of his master", intentionally compromises the 
workers in Switzerland with the "revolutionary congress in 
Murten" and joyfully "leads" them "into the arms" of the waiting 
"gendarmes". "In the Cologne trial the authorship of the forged 
minute-book was attributed to this Liebknecht." (Zabel omits to 
add, of course, that this lie of Stieber's was publicly shown to be a 
lie of Stieber's during the actual proceedings.)  Wolff,  the former 
co-editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, is accused of sending "a 
circular to the proletarians" from London and at the same time 
"allowing it to fall into the hands of the Hanover police". 
While Zabel thus presents people who are "notoriously" 
connected with me as agents of the secret police, on the one hand, 
he also connects me with a "notorious" secret police agent, agent 
provocateur and forger, namely Cherval, on the other. Immediately 

=====第313页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 289 
following his general description of the Brimstone Gang he makes 
"a number of people" including Cherval travel from London to 
Paris "in the double role of revolutionary seducers of workers and 
confederates of the secret police" and bring about the "so-called 
communist trial", etc. In leading article No. 2 he takes up the 
story: 
"In this way a conspiracy of the most infamous sort was devised in 1852 which 
involved the manufacture of counterfeit paper money on a massive scale (see Vogt 
for further details), etc." 
Now if the reader of the National-Zeitung carries out Zabel's 
peremptory instructions and sees for further details in Vogt, what 
does he find? He finds that Cherval was sent by me to Geneva 
where under my direct orders he set in motion "the most 
infamous conspiracy involving counterfeit paper money", etc. The 
reader, referred by Zabel to Vogt, will further find this: 
"However, the personal involvement of Marx is quite irrelevant in this context, 
for, as we have already remarked, it is a matter of  complete  indifference whether Marx 
does something himself or has it done by a member of his gang; his control over his people is 
absolute." 
But Zabel could not rest content even with this. At the end of 
his two leading articles he felt impelled to whisper a final word 
into the ear of his readers. He says: 
"He"  (Blind) "declares at the same time that he has never seen Biscamp in the 
whole of his life. He is obviously not a member of the Marx party in the narrower 
sense. It appears to us that the latter" (i.e. the Marx party in the narrower sense) 
"did not find it too difficult to turn him" (Blind) "into a scapegoat.... The Marx 
party could very easily saddle Blind with the authorship of the pamphlet because ... 
he had expressed similar views to those contained in it in conversation with Marx 
and in an article in The Free  Press.  By making use of Blind's assertions and turns of 
phrase the pamphlet could be fabricated and made to look as if he" (Blind) "had 
concocted it." 
Hence "the Marx party" or "the Marx party in the narrower sense" 
alias the Brimstone Gang "fabricated" the pamphlet so that it 
looked as if Blind had concocted it? Having unfolded this 
hypothesis Zabel summarised its implications in the following 
laconic words: "Anybody is now at liberty to regard either Marx or 
Blind as its author." 
Thus it is not the Marx party or Blind, and not even Blind or 
the Marx party in the narrower sense, vulgo Brimstone Gang, but 
Blind or Marx, Marx sans phrase. Hence the Marx party, the Marx 
party in the narrower sense, the Brimstone Gang, etc., were 
merely pantheistic names for Marx, the person Marx. Zabel not 
only "identifies" Marx with the "party" of the Brimstone Gang, he 

=====第314页=====
290 Karl Marx 
personifies the Brimstone Gang in Marx. And the selfsame Zabel 
has the effrontery to assert before a court that, in his leading 
articles, he did not "identify the  plaintiff"  Marx with the 
"activities" of the Brimstone Gang in a "defamatory manner". 
With his hand on his heart he swears that "least of all" has he 
"associated" my "person with those people" whom he "accuses of 
blackmail and denunciation"! What a figure Zabel will cut in the 
public session of the court, I thought to  myself.  What a figure 
indeed! With this consoling exclamation, I turned once more to 
the document I had received from my lawyer and read it through 
again, vaguely noticing that it was signed by some such names as 
Müller and Schultze. 3 But I soon discovered my error. What I had 
in my hands was not Zabel's proposed petition, but—a "ruling" 
handed down by the High Court over the signatures of Guthschmidt 
and Schultze, a ruling that refused me the right to proceed with my 
action against Zabel, and, to cap it all, by way of punishing me for 
my "complaint" it ordered me to pay 25 silver groschen to the 
Treasury of the Berlin Municipal Court without delay, on pain of 
distraint. I was indeed attonitus^ However, on carefully reading the 
"ruling" once more my astonishment faded away. 
Example 1 
Zabel prints in the leading article of the 
"National-Zeitung", No. 37, 1860: 
"Vogt reports on p. 136 et seq.: 
Among the refugees of 1849 the term 
Brimstone Gang, or the name Bristlers, 
referred to a number of people who, 
originally scattered throughout Swit­
zerland, France and England, gradual­
ly congregated in London, where they 
revered Herr Marx as their visible 
leader." Messrs. Guthschmidt and Schultze read in 
the leading article of the "National-
Zeitung", No. 37, 1860: 
"For when the first article quotes 
from Vogt's account: 'that the refugees 
of 1849 gradually congregated in 
London, where they revered the above 
mentioned Marx as their visible 
leader'". 
Zabel says: Among the refugees of 1849 the term Brimstone Gang, 
or the name Bristlers, referred to a number of people, etc., who 
gradually congregated in London, where they revered myself as 
their visible leader. Messrs. Guthschmidt and Schultze, however, 
make Zabel say: The refugees of 1849 gradually congregated in 
London (which is not even true since a large proportion of the 
refugees congregated in Paris, New York, Jersey, etc.) where they 
revered me as their visible leader, an honour which I have not 
a The names of two philistines, the characters of many skits and jokes in the 
satirical journal Kladderadatsch. —Ed. 
b Thunderstruck.— Ed. 

=====第315页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 291 
received, nor is it imputed to me by either Zabel or Vogt. Now 
Messrs. Guthschmidt and Schultze are by no means giving a 
summary, they quote in inverted commas a sentence nowhere printed 
by Zabel as if it were quoted by Zabel in his first article "from 
Vogt's account". Messrs. Guthschmidt and Schultze evidently had 
before them a secret edition of No. 37 of the National-Zeitung, 
known neither to me nor the public. This must be the explanation 
of all these misunderstandings. 
This secret edition of No. 37 of the National-Zeitung differs from 
the vulgar edition of the same issue not just by a different 
formulation of particular sentences. The entire context of the first 
leading article in the vulgar edition has nothing but a few words in 
common with its context in the secret edition. 
Example II 
After Zabel has appointed me the 
leader of the refugees of 1849, Messrs. 
Guthschmidt and Schultze read in No. 37 
of the "National-Zeitung": 
"and when it" (the first article in 
the National-Zeitung) "goes on to refer 
to a letter by Techow, 'in which we see 
how Marx, puffed up with Napoleonic 
pride in his intellectual superiority, 
rules the members of the Brimstone 
Gang with a rod of iron'". Having appointed me the leader of the 
Brimstone Gang, Zabel goes on to say in 
No. 37 of the "National-Zeitung": 
"These fellows" (the Brimstone 
Gang) "...continued the work of the 
Rheinische Zeitung among the re­
fugees.... One of the chief occupations 
of the Brimstone Gang was to com­
promise people at home in Germany in 
such a way that they were forced to pay 
money.... The 'proletarians' filled the 
columns of the reactionary press in 
Germany with their denunciations ... 
they became the confederates of the 
secret police in France and Germany. 
To fill in the picture" (of the "Brim­
stone Gang" or "proletarians") "Vogt 
publishes a letter by Techow ... in 
which the principles, the activities, etc., 
of the 'proletarians' are described, and 
in which we see how Marx, puffed up 
with Napoleonic pride in his intellectu­
al superiority, rules the members of the 
Brimstone Gang with a rod of iron." 
Given that judges have the legal authority to grant or refuse 
private individuals the right to bring an action, it is clear that 
Messrs. Guthschmidt and Schultze were not only justified in refusing 
me the right to sue Zabel, they were obliged to do so. For the 
context of the leading article in No. 37 of the secret edition of the 
National-Zeitung, which they reproduce in nuce, a flatly precludes 
a In brief.—  Ed. 

=====第316页=====
292 Karl Marx 
any corpus delicti. For what in fact does Zabel say in this secret 
edition? In the first place he confers on me the undeserved 
honour of causing me to be "revered" as the "visible leader" by 
the entire community of refugees living in London in 1849. And 
why should I wish to "bring an action" against him for that? And 
secondly, he does me the no less undeserved honour of making 
me "rule with a rod of iron" over a Brimstone Gang without 
connecting me with that gang in any other way whatever, more or 
less as I had ruled over Zabel and his companions in 1848-49. And 
what is there in that to make me "bring an action" against Zabel? 
It is obvious what confusions can arise when the law permits 
officials of the judiciary to "give a ruling" and "rule" in secret on 
the question of whether or not someone has the right to bring an 
action against another person, e.g. for libel in the National-Zeitung. 
The plaintiff sues on the basis of a vulgar edition of No. 37 of 
the National-Zeitung of which perhaps 10,000 copies are available 
to the public, and the judge bases his ruling on a secret edition of 
the same issue produced for him alone. So little care is taken in this 
procedure to preserve the identity even of the corpus delicti. 
By making the right of private individuals to bring an action 
dependent on a judicial permit in each particular case, Prussian 
law proceeds from the assumption that the state is a paternal 
authority which must regulate and act as guardian over the civil 
existence of its children. But even from the standpoint of Prussian 
law the "ruling" of the High Court seems strange. The intention 
of Prussian law is evidently to prevent the bringing of frivolous 
actions and therefore, if I understand its spirit correctly, and if I 
am right in assuming that its aim is not the systematic refusal of 
justice, it gives the judge the right to refuse permission for a case 
to proceed, but only if the complaint is prima facie3  unfounded, if 
the suit appears frivolous on the face of it. Is that the case in the 
present instance? The Municipal Court concedes that Zabel's 
leading articles in fact contain "defamatory" and hence "punisha­
ble" statements about me. It only places F. Zabel beyond the reach 
of my legal vengeance because F. Zabel has "merely  quoted'  his 
libels.  The High Court declares: defamatory statements are equally 
punishable by law whether they are quoted or not quoted, but it 
goes on to deny for its part that Zabel's leading articles contain any 
defamatory statements about myself whether quoted or unquoted. 
Thus the Municipal Court and the High Court have not merely 
divergent, but directly conflicting views of the facts of the  case.  The 
a At first view.— Ed. 

=====第317页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 293 
one finds defamatory statements about me where the other fails to 
do so. The contradictory judicial findings about the facts of the case 
demonstrate clearly that prima facie there are grounds for 
complaint. If Papinian and Ulpian say: This printed statement is 
defamatory; and if Mucius Scaevola and Manilius Brutus assert the 
opposite: This printed statement is not defamatory, what will the 
nation of quirites233  think? Why should the people not believe with 
Ulpian and Papinian that Zabel had in fact published defamatory 
statements about me in Nos. 37 and 41 of the National-Zeitung? And 
if I assure the nation of the quirites that Mucius Scaevola and 
Manilius Brutus have given me a secret certificate stating that Zabel's 
"defamatory" statements and assertions in no way referred to my 
person, the nation of the quirites will undoubtedly shrug their 
shoulders and say: à d'autres. 3 
Since the High Court is the final court of appeal as far as the 
facts of a case are concerned, in this case therefore it was the court 
of last instance that had to decide whether Zabel's two leading 
articles in fact contained defamatory statements about me and 
whether the intention to insult was present; and since the 
High Court denies that the facts of the case provided sufficient 
grounds for action, a further appeal to the Supreme Tribunal 
could only relate to the question whether the substantive findings of 
the High Court were not based on an error in law. In its "ruling" 
the High Court had established that Zabel had accused the 
Brimstone Gang of "unprincipled and dishonourable activities", 
"denunciations and blackmail", the same Brimstone Gang that in the 
same leading article the same Zabel had expressly described as "the 
Marx party", or "the Marx party in the narrower  sense",  with "Marx" as 
its visible "leader", ruling it with a rod of iron. Was the High Court 
within its legal rights in not regarding this as an insult to me? My 
lawyer, Counsellor  Weber,  comments on the question as follows in his 
submission to the Supreme Tribunal: 
"It is true that it is nowhere stated in so many words" (by Zabel) "that Marx 
had extorted or forged money, or denounced anybody. But is anything more 
explicit required than the statement: Marx was the leader of a party which was 
engaged in the above-mentioned criminal and immoral activities? No sensible and 
unprejudiced person can deny that the leader of an association whose purpose and 
chief activities consist in the execution of crimes, not only condones these activities, 
but initiates and organises them and enjoys their fruits. And this leader is, 
unquestionably, doubly responsible, both as participant and as the intellectual 
inspiration, even if it cannot be proved in any particular instance that he was 
actually implicated in a specific act of crime. The view expressed in the disputed 
ruling" (of the High Court) "would imply that a man's good name was utterly at the 
a Tell us another one.— Ed. 

=====第318页=====
294 Karl Marx 
mercy of anyone who wished to discredit him. Instead of fraudulently asserting that A. had 
committed murder, a would-be slanderer would need only to say that somewhere or other a 
gang was engaged in committing murder and that A. was the leader of the gang. The view 
expressed by the High Court grants this slanderer complete impunity. According to the 
correct view, however, the same punishment for slander should be imposed on the 
slanderer irrespective of whether he falsely accuses a man of being a robber or a 
robber-chief." 
From the standpoint of ordinary common sense a libel has 
undoubtedly been committed. Does it also exist in the view of 
Prussian law? The High Court says no, my lawyer says yes. If the 
High Court has ruled, contrary to the Municipal Court, that the 
form of a quotation should not grant immunity to a libeller, why 
should not the Supreme Tribunal rule, contrary to the High 
Court, that the libeller is not protected by the "tapeworm" form? My 
lawyer appealed to the Supreme Tribunal, hence so to speak to 
the Areopagus  itself,  on this legal point, on the argument that there 
had been an error in law on the part of the High Court in its 
appraisal of the facts of the case. The Supreme Tribunal  "ruled": 
"I. Your appeal of August 23 of this year against the ruling on July 11 of this 
year of the Criminal Senate of the Royal High Court in the action for libel brought 
by Dr. K. Marx against Dr. Zabel, editor of the National-Zeitung, is hereby 
dismissed as without foundation after consideration of the relevant documents. 
II. For the Royal High Court did not find an objective defamation of the plaintiff 
in the two leading articles of the National-Zeitung in question, nor did it find that 
there was an intention to insult the  plaintiff.  It was right, therefore, to refuse 
permission to proceed with the proposed action for libel. The question whether 
there is an objective act of defamation, or an intention to insult, essentially pertains 
to matters of fact and the conclusions regarding them can only be disputed by 
appeal to the Royal Supreme Tribunal if the decision of the Appeal judge is based 
on an error in law. III. However, such an error is not evident in the present 
instance. IV. The costs of this ruling are to be borne by you and for this purpose 
25 silver groschen should be deposited with the Treasury of the local Royal 
Municipal Court within a week. 
"Berlin, October 5, 1860 
Royal Supreme Tribunal, von Schlickmann 
"To Legal Counsellor Weber in Berlin" 
For the sake of clarity I have numbered the various sections of 
the "ruling" of the Supreme Tribunal. 
Sub I. Herr von Schlickmann states that the appeal against the 
High Court has been "dismissed". Sub II. Herr von Schlickmann 
informs us of the respective spheres of competence of the High 
Court and the Supreme Tribunal—evidently a didactic digression 
irrelevant to the matter in hand. Sub IV. Herr Weber is ordered to 
pay the sum of 25 silver groschen into the Treasury of the Berlin 

=====第319页=====
Herr Vogt. —XI. A Lawsuit 295 
Municipal Court within a week. This is a  consequence  of the "ruling", 
but certainly not its reason. 
Where then is the "dismissal" of the appeal substantiated? Where 
is the answer to the very detailed case set out by my lawyer? It is: 
Sub III. "However, such an error is not evident in the present 
instance." 
If we strike out the little word not from this sentence sub III, 
the explanation reads: "However, such an error is evident in the 
present instance." And this of course would overturn the ruling of 
the High Court. Thus this ruling is sustained only by the word 
"not" with which Herr von Schlickmann "dismisses" in the name of 
the Supreme Tribunal the appeal put forward by Counsellor 
Weber. 
AvTOTcn-oç  é<pT). a Not! Herr von Schlickmann does not refute the 
legal objections raised by my lawyer; he does not discuss them; he 
does not even mention them. Of course, Herr von Schlickmann had 
reasons enough for his "ruling", but he fails to state them. Not! 
The demonstrative force of this little word lies entirely in the 
authority of the man who utters it, in the position he holds in the 
hierarchy. In itself "not" proves nothing. Not! AVTOTCITO«;  &q>r\. 
Thus the Supreme Tribunal too forbade me to bring an 
action against "democrat" F. Zabel. 
Thus ended my lawsuit with the Prussian courts. 
a He himself hath spoken (the words are attributed to the disciples of 
Pythagoras).— Ed. 

=====第320页=====
296 
XII 
APPENDICES 
1. SCHILY'S EXPULSION FROM SWITZERLAND 
A letter from Schily about his expulsion from Switzerland which 
exemplifies the treatment meted out to non-pariiamentary  ref­
ugees 234 can unfortunately only be printed in extract, owing to 
lack of space. The letter begins by recounting how two German 
refugees, B. and I.,a  both friends of Schily, left Geneva, were 
arrested during their journey through Switzerland and, having 
been liberated by Druey, returned again to Geneva. 
"At their request," Schily continues, "I went to Fazy to find out whether anyone 
was looking for them and he reassured me by saying that there was no reason at 
Cantonal level to disturb their incognito and that no inquiries about them had 
reached him at Federal level either. I would do well, however, to have an interview 
with the chef du département de justice et de police, M. Girard, mentioning his name 
and what he had told me. This Î did with more or iess the same success and 
leaving my address behind in case there were any Federal inquiries. A few weeks 
later I was visited by a police officer who requested me to give him the address of 
B. and I. I refused, hurried around to the aforementioned Girard and upon being 
threatened by him with expulsion unless I gave him the address, I explained to 
him that according to our previous agreement 1 couid be appealed to as an 
intermédiaire, but not as a dénonciateur. To which he replied: 'Vous avez i'air de 
vouloir vous interposer comme ambassadeur entre moi et ces réfugiés, pour traiter 
de puissance à puissance.' b I replied: 'Je n'ai pas ('ambition d'être accrédité 
ambassadeur près de vous.' 0 And in fact I was then dismissed without any of the 
ceremony to which ambassadors are entitled. On my way home ' learnt that B. and 
I. had just been discovered, and that they had been arrested and led off so that Ï 
could regard Girard's threat as superseded by events. But I had reckoned without 
April 1, for on this ominous day in 1852 1 was requested bv a police officer, ::i rhe 
middle of the street, to accompany him to the Hôtel de Ville, where some uuestions 
a Elard Biscamp and Peter ïmandt. — Ed. 
b "It looks as if you would like to act the ambassador between me and these 
refugees, to mediate as between equal powers.''—Ed. 
c "I have no ambition to become an ambassador accredited to  you."—Ed. 

=====第321页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 297 
were to be put to me. Once arrived there it was explained to me by State 
Councillor Tourte, the Genevan Commissar for the expulsion of refugees and ad 
latus* to Trog, his counterpart at Federal level, who happened to be in Geneva at 
the time, that I was expelled and that he must send me to Berne without delay; all 
of this to his greatest regret, since there was no complaint against me at Cantonal 
level, but the Federal Commissar insisted on my expulsion. To my request to be 
allowed to see the latter he replied: 'Non, nous ne voulons pas que le commissaire 
fédéral fasse la police ici.' b This statement, of course, contradicted his earlier one 
and in general he now abandoned his role of Genevan State Councillor, which 
consisted in resisting Federal demands for expulsion with liberal prudery, in 
yielding only to force, sometimes also yielding, with pleasure or resignation, to the 
application of gentle pressure. 0 Another feature of this role was to noise it abroad 
that the person expelled was a spy and that it had been necessary to remove him in 
the interests of the 'good cause'.... Thus Tourte told the refugees afterwards that 
he had had to get rid of me because I was in league with the Federal Commissar, 
together with whom I had sought to frustrate his (Tourte's) measures to protect 
the refugees, i.e. that I was in league with the same Commissar who, much to his 
regret, had given orders to expel me. Quelles tartines! à What lies and contradictions! 
And all for a little aura popularise Of course, wind is what that gentleman uses to 
keep his balloon airborne. Grand Councillor and State Councillor of Geneva, 
member of the Swiss Council of States or National Council, a born Counsellor of 
Confusion, he needs only to become a member of the Federal Council to ensure 
that Switzerland will enjoy peaceful days in accordance with the saying: Providentia 
Dei et confusione hominum Helvetia salva fuit." f 
On arriving in London Schily sent a letter of protest about 
Tourte's slander to the Genevan Indépendant, which was under the 
influence of Raisin, whom we shall mention later, and which had 
shortly before printed a scathing attack on the assinine slanderous 
fabrications with which "the liberal faiseurs* were driving the 
refugees out of Switzerland". His letter was not published. 
"From the Hôtel de Ville in Geneva," Schily continues, "I was transferred to 
gaol, and on the following day I was sent by mail coach to Berne with a police 
guard. There M. Druey held me in close confinement for two weeks in the 
so-called Old Tower...." 
In his correspondence with the imprisoned Schily, which we 
shall refer to in due course, Druey placed all the guilt on the 
Canton of Geneva, while for his part Tourte had asserted that the 
entire responsibility lay with the Federal authorities, since there was 
a Assistant.— Ed. 
b "No, we don't want the Federal Commissar playing the policeman  here."—Ed. 
c Marx uses English: "gentle pressure".— Ed, 
d What follies!— Ed. 
e Whiff of popularity (a phrase from Cicero's De haruspicum  responso,  20, 43).— Ed. 
{ The providence of God and the confusion of man have been the salvation of 
Switzerland.— Ed. 
g Busybodies.— Ed. 
11* 

=====第322页=====
298 .Karl Marx 
no complaint against him on the part of the Canton of Geneva. He had 
received a similar assurance shortly before from Raisin, the 
Genevan examining magistrate. Schily has this to say, among other 
things, about the latter gentleman: 
"On the occasion of the Federal Shooting Competition which was held in 
Geneva in the summer of 1851, Raisin had taken over the editorship of the Journal 
du tir federal, which appeared in French and German. He engaged me to work on 
the paper, promising me a fee of 300 francs in exchange for which I was supposed 
inter alia to record flagrante delicto 3 the opening and closing speeches in German of 
the President of the Committee Tourte. I owe a debt of gratitude to Tourte for 
having made my task much easier by his habit of addressing more or less the same 
enthusiastic words to the various deputations of marksmen, varying his phrases 
slightly according to whether he was eulogising the Bear of Berne, the Bull of Uri, b 
or other members of the Confederation. In particular, when he would come to the 
refrain 'But if the moment of danger ever arrives, then we shall, etc.', I would 
calmly lay down my pen and when Raisin asked why, I could answer: c'est le refrain 
du danger, je le sais par coeur. c Instead of my hard-earned fee of 300 francs, I 
managed only to extract 100 from Raisin, and only with the greatest difficulty 
although he did open up the prospect of collaborating on a political review he 
intended to establish in Geneva in order to be independent of all the existing 
parties and be able to oppose any side and especially the then 'liberal' government 
of Fazy and Tourte, even though he belonged to it  himself.  He was the very man 
for such an enterprise —  able,  as he used to boast, 'd'arracher la peau à qui que ce 
soit'.... d .Accordingly, he commissioned me to establish contacts for this journal in 
the course of a journey through Switzerland which I undertook after my Federal 
Shooting labours. I did so and on my return I drew up a written report on the 
results achieved. In the meantime, however, the wind had begun to blow from 
another direction and he found himself returning full sail from his expedition of 
piracy into the peaceful harbour of the existing government. J'en étais donc pour mes 
frais et honoraires, e for which I vainly pestered him and continue to do so to this 
day, and have still received nothing even though he is now a wealthy man.... 
Shortly before my arrest he asserted categorically that there was no question of my 
being expelled, his friend Tourte had himself assured him that it was not necessary 
for me to take any preventive measures with regard to Girard's threats, etc. ... In 
reply to a letter which I sent him de profundis, { from my old prison tower, asking 
him for a small instalment of the money he owed me and for an explanation of the 
incident (my arrest, etc.), he preserved a stubborn silence, even though he assured 
the person who brought him the message that he would comply with all my 
requests.... 
"A few months later I received a letter from K.,§ a reliable, unprejudiced man, 
informing me that my expulsion had been the work of the refugee parliament 
a In the very act of committing an offence.— Ed. 
h An allusion to the arms of the Cantons of Berne and Uri.— Ed. 
c "It is the refrain about danger, I know it by heart." — Ed. 
^ "To skin a man  alive."  — Ed. 
e That was the last I heard of my expenses and fees.— Ed. 
f Literally: out of the depths. Figuratively: from a state of extreme suffering 
(Psalms 130T).— Ed. 
s Presumably a letter from Friedrich Kamm written in 1852.— Ed. 

=====第323页=====
Herr Vogt.—XII. Appendices 299 
tarians, and this was confirmed mordicus 3 by a few lines written by Ranickel, which 
he enclosed. This view was also confirmed by many experienced observers with 
whom I later had an opportunity to discuss the matter.... Yet I did not hate the 
parliamentarians like that hyena Reinach, who used to drag the late-lamented 
Imperial Regent Vogt, day after day, from the Imperial tomb to the dinner table in 
Berne where Vogt sat like the reincarnation of the 'chained Prometheus', and then, 
entre poire et fromage} 3 would savagely devour both his mummy and the reincarnated 
form to the horror of those present. It is true that I was no admirer of the 
parliamentarians' deeds, quite the reverse! But is it likely that these gentlemen 
intended to punish me for this by an Imperial ban—regarding Switzerland as part 
of the Empire because both the Imperial Constitution and the most recent 
resolution of the Imperial Diet lie buried there? I think it more likely that the 
presumption of their persecution of myself is connected with the parliamentary 
rebellion mentioned in my previous letter c against the Geneva Refugee Committee 
formed by  myself,  Becker and a number of Genevan citizens.... Why these 
gentlemen wished to usurp the right to distribute the refugee funds was a matter 
about which even they differed among themselves. Some of them, among them 
Dentzel from the little Chamber of Baden, preferred, contrary to our practice of 
giving aid above all to penniless workers, to wipe away the tears of professional 
sufferers, heroes of the revolution, patriotic sons of the nation, who had seen 
better days.... Is fecit cui prodest,d as the saying goes in the trade, and since my 
activities were, it is true, inconvenient to these gentlemen, the suspicion arose that 
they had made use of their influence in important places to bring about my 
removal. It was known that they had the aurem principise  or, at any rate, they were 
close enough to it to whisper something or other about my restiveness, and that 
princeps Tourte especially had frequently gathered them around  himself...." 
Having described how he was moved from the Old Tower in 
Berne to Basle and then over the French frontier, Schily 
continues: 
"As far as the expense entailed in expelling refugees is concerned, I cherish the 
hope that the costs were defrayed not by the Federal Treasury, but by that of the 
Holy Alliance. For one day a considerable time after our entry into Switzerland, 
Princess Olga was sitting at luncheon in a Berne restaurant with the Russian chargé 
d'affaires there. f Entre poire et fromage {sans comparaison to the terrible Reinach) Her 
Highness remarked to her table companion: 'Eh bien, Monsieur le baron, avez-vous 
encore beaucoup de réfugiés ici?' 'Pas mal, Princesse,' he replied, 'bien que nous en 
ayons déjà beaucoup renvoyé. M. Druey fait de son mieux à cet égard, et si de 
nouveaux fonds nous arrivent, nous en renverrons bien encore.'s This was overheard 
and passed on to me by the waiter on duty, a quondam volunteer in the Imperial 
campaign where he served under my august command." 
a Convincingly.— Ed. 
b Over the dessert.— Ed. 
c Schily's letter of February 8, I860 (see this volume, pp. 43-46).— Ed. 
d He did it who benefits by it (Seneca, Medea, III, 500-01).— Ed. 
e Ear of the authorities.— Ed. 
f Pavel Alexeyevich Krüdener. — Ed. 
s "Well, Baron, are there still many refugees here?" "Quite a few, Your Highness, 
although we have already sent many of them back. M. Druey does his best in this 
respect, and if  we receive new funds we shall be able to send back even more."—Ed. 

=====第324页=====
300 Karl Marx 
During Schily's removal his travel-effects vanished mysteriously 
and irretrievably. 
"It has remained a mystery to this very day how my effects could have vanished 
in Le Havre from the chaos of bundles accompanying a German émigré train (into 
which we had been incorporated in Basle by Klenk, the emigration agent, whom 
the Federal authorities had hired to transport us to Le Havre, with the result that 
all the luggage belonging to the refugees and emigrants had become hopelessly 
confused), unless it had been achieved with the aid of a list of the refugees and their 
baggage. Perhaps the Swiss Consul in Le Havre, the merchant Wanner, to whom we 
were sent for further transportation, knows more about it. He promised that we 
would be fully compensated. Druey later confirmed this promise in a letter which I 
sent to Advocate Vogt in Berne to enable him to pursue the matter in the Federal 
Council. However, I have not been able to get it back from him up to now, nor have 
I ever received a reply to any of the letters I wrote to him. On the other hand, in the 
summer of 1856 my complaint was rejected by the Federal Council and I was 
warned to keep the peace, without being given any reasons for this decision.... 
"All this and all the expulsions involving so many gendarmes, handcuffs, etc., 
are mere trivia, however, compared to the peculiarly cosy good-neighbourly 
arrangement of sending home the so-called less serious offenders of the Baden 
campaign, providing them with special travel passes and directing them to report 
on their arrival to the local authorities where, instead of being allowed to resume 
their occupations, as they had been led to expect, they were subjected to all sorts of 
unexpected penances. The silent sufferings of all those extradited in this way (for 
extradition is the correct word) are still waiting for their chronicler and avenger. 
"The Swiss Tacitus speaking of Switzerland says that it does a man credit 'if his 
faults may be mentioned without detracting from his greatness'. There is no lack of 
materials for praise of this kind; to praise Switzerland in this manner does not spoil 
its figure ... qui aime bien châtie bien? And in fact I for my part have an 
irrepressible love for Switzerland by and large. I like both the country and the 
people. Keeping a gun as part of his household equipment, always ready and 
skilful in using it to protect historical traditions of good repute and modern 
achievements of good quality, the Swiss in my eyes definitely deserves respect. He 
is entitled to the sympathies of others because he himself feels sympathy for others 
who struggle to improve their situation. 'I would rather that God had lost his best 
pair of angels,' a Swiss farmer said in his annoyance at the failure of the South 
German uprising. He might not have been prepared to risk a team of his horses 
for it, but he would have been more likely to risk his skin and his gun. In his heart 
of hearts the Swiss is not neutral, even if he practises neutrality because of, and in 
order to preserve, his inherited possessions. Incidentally the old crust of neutrality 
which cloaks his better nature will probably soon burst asunder with all these 
foreign feet trampling on it—for that is after all the essence of neutrality—and 
there will be a big bang and that will clear the air." 
Thus far Schily's letter. In the Prison Tower in Berne he was 
not able to arrange a personal meeting with Druey, but he did 
manage to exchange letters with that gentleman. In reply to a 
letter from Schily inquiring into the reasons for his arrest and 
asking permission to consult his lawyer, Herr Wyss in Berne, 
Druey wrote on April 9, 1852: 
a He who loves well chastises well.— Ed. 

=====第325页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 301 
"... L'autorité genevoise a ordonné votre renvoi du Canton, vous a fait arrêter 
et conduire à Berne à la disposition 3 de mon département, parce que vous vous 
êtes montré un des réfugiés les plus remuants et que vous avez cherché à cacher I. 
et B., que vous vous étiez engagé à représenter à l'autorité. Pour ce motif et parce 
que votre séjour ultérieur en Suisse nuirait aux relations internationales de la 
Confédération, le Conseil fédéral a ordonné votre renvoi du territoire suisse, etc. ... 
Comme votre arrestation n'a pas pour but un procès criminel ou correctionnel, 
mais une mesure de haute  politique**  ... il n'est pas nécessaire que vous consultiez 
l'avocat. D'ailleurs, avant de ... autoriser l'entrevue que vous me demandez avec M. l'avocat 
Wyss, je désire savoir le but de cette entrevue." c 
The letters which Schily was permitted, after numerous com­
plaints, to write to his friends in Geneva had all to be submitted 
beforehand to M. Druey to inspect. In one of these letters Schily 
used the expression "Vae victis"P 7 Druey wrote to him about it in 
a letter dated April 19, 1852: 
"Dans le billet que vous avez adressé à M. J., d se trouvent les mots: vae victis... 
Cela veut-il dire que les autorités fédérales vous traitent en vaincu? S'il en était 
ainsi, ce serait une accusation mensongère, contre laquelle je devrais protester."e 
Schily replied to the mighty Druey in a letter dated April 21, 
1852: 
"Je ne pense pas, M. le conseiller fédéral, que cette manière de caractériser les 
mesures prises à mon égard puisse me valoir le reproche d'une accusation 
mensongère; du moins un pareil reproche ne serait pas de nature à me faire revenir 
de l'idée que je suis traité avec dureté; au contraire, adressé à un prisonnier, par 
celui qui le tient en prison, une telle réponse me paraîtrait une dureté de plus."f 
3 Marx has: "déposition". — Ed. 
b Marx has: "police". — Ed. 
c "...The Genevan authorities have ordered your expulsion from the Canton; they 
have had you arrested and conducted to Berne and put at the disposition of my 
department, because you have shown yourself to be one of the most restive of the 
refugees and have tried to conceal the whereabouts of I. and B., of which you were 
obliged to inform the authorities. For this reason and because your further residence 
in Switzerland would have harmed the international relations of the Confederation, the 
Federal Council has resolved on expelling you from Swiss territory, etc. ... Since the 
purpose of your arrest was not the institution of any criminal or civil action against 
you, but is a measure necessitated by considerations of high politics ... there is no need for 
you to consult a lawyer. In any event before ... authorising the interview you request with 
M. Wyss,  your  lawyer,  I should have  to know for what  purpose  you want  to consult him. "—Ed. 
d Abraham Jacoby.— Ed. 
e "The note you have written to M. J. contains the words: vae victis.... Is that 
supposed to mean that the Federal authorities treat you as one treats a defeated 
opponent? If this is the implication, it is a lying accusation against which I should feel 
bound to protest." — Ed. 
f "I do not believe, Federal Councillor, that the way in which I have described the 
measures taken in my regard can be thought to merit the reproach of making lying 
accusations; at the very least such a reproach is hardly likely to persuade me that I am 
not being treated harshly; on the contrary, for me as a prisoner to receive an answer like 
this from the person who keeps me in prison seems to be another harsh act." — Ed. 

=====第326页=====
302 Karl Marx 
Towards the close of March 1852, shortly before Schily 's arrest 
and the deportation of other unparliamentary refugees, the 
reactionary Journal de Genève published all sorts of wild gossip 
about communist plots among the German refugees in Geneva: 
Herr Trog was said to be busy cleaning out a nest of German 
communists with a brood of 84 communist dragons inside it, etc. 
Alongside this reactionary Genevan paper a scribbler in Berne 
who belonged to the parliamentary gang—it must be assumed that 
it was Karl Vogt since he repeatedly claims in the "Magnum 
Opus"  that it was he who had rescued Switzerland from the 
clutches of the communist refugees—was busy spreading similar 
news in the Frankfurter Journal over the initials "ss". For example, 
he wrote that the Genevan Committee to aid German refugees, a 
committee consisting of communists, had been overthrown because 
of its inequitable distribution of the available funds, and that it 
had been replaced by upright men (namely parliamentarians) who 
would soon put an end to these evil practices. He wrote further 
that the dictator of Geneva seemed at last to be prepared to 
comply with the ordinances of the Federal Commissars, since two 
German refugees belonging to the communist faction had shortly 
before been put under arrest and brought from Geneva to Berne, 
etc. 238 The Schweizerische National-Zeitung, which appears in 
Basle, published an answer from Geneva in its issue No. 72, of 
March 25, 1852, in which it said inter alia: 
"Every unbiassed person knows that just as Switzerland is concerned only with 
the consolidation and constitutional development of its political achievements, so 
too the feeble remnants of the German emigration in this country are occupied 
entirely with earning their daily bread and other perfectly harmless pursuits, and 
that the fairy-tales about communism are the product of hallucinations on the part 
of philistines or else are concocted by politically or personally interested informers." 
After the Berne parliamentary correspondent of the Frankfurter 
Journal had been described as one of these informers—the article 
concludes: 
"The refugees here are of the opinion that in their ranks there are a number of 
so-called 'decent men' on the pattern of the former 'Biedermen and Bassermen of 
the Empire'3 who, driven by nostalgia for the flesh-pots of home, seek to pave 
the way for their own pardon at the hands of their native rulers by reactionary 
expectorations of this kind. We should like to send them our best wishes for a 
a A pun on the names of Friedrich Karl Biedermann and Friedrich Daniel 
Bassermann, Biedermann means "honest man" and, in an ironical sense, "philistine". 
Bassermansch means "homeless tramp" or "beggar".— Ed. 

=====第327页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 303 
speedy departure as they will then cease to compromise the refugees and the 
government that gives them asylum." 
Schily was known to the refugee parliamentarians as the author 
of this article. It appeared in the Basle National-Zeitung on 
March 25, and on April 1 Schily's wholly unmotivated arrest took 
place. "Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?" a 
2. THE REVOLUTIONARY CONGRESS IN MURTEN 
After the Murten scandalb the German refugees in Geneva, with 
the exception of the refugee parliamentarians, issued a protest 
addressed "To the Supreme Department of Justice and the Police 
of the Confederation", from which I print the following pas-
240 
sage : 
"... The monarchs did not rest content with their previous diplomatic gains. 
They rattled their sabres all around Switzerland and threatened military occupation 
so as to make a clean sweep of the refugees. The Federal Council at any rate has 
expressed its concern about this danger in an official document. And lo and 
behold! There were further deportations, justified this time by the notorious 
assembly in Murten and the claim that traces of political and propagandistic 
activities had been uncovered by the investigation following it. As far as the facts 
are concerned this claim must be categorically rejected.... From the legal point of 
view, however, it is important to bear in mind that wherever the rule of law 
obtains, actions proscribed by the law can only be punished by penalties laid down by the 
law, and this holds good for deportation too, if it is not to appear as the arbitrary 
action of the police. Or was perhaps here too the intention to play off diplomacy 
against us and to say: we have been forced to act thus out of consideration for foreign 
powers, in the interests of international relations? Very well, then, if this is the 
position, the cross of the Confederation0 should hide its head in shame before the 
Turkish crescent, which, when the myrmidons searching for refugees knock on the 
Porte,d shows its horns and does not eat humble pie.e If this is the position, then 
give us our passports so that we can go to Turkey and when the door has closed 
behind us, hand over the keys to the Swiss bastion of liberty to the Holy Alliance as 
a feudurn oblatum,{  and hold them in future as the insignia of chamberlains of the 
Holy Alliance, with the motto: Finis Helvetiae!" s 
a "Can heavenly spirits cherish resentment so dire?" Virgil,  Aeneid,  I, 11.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 50-55.— Ed. 
c Switzerland's national flag.— Ed. 
d A pun in the original: an der Pforte klopft (literally, "knocks on the door". Pforte 
in German means both "door" and "the Porte", i.e. the Turkish Government).— Ed. 
e In the original: nicht zu Kreuze kriecht —"does not crawl to the cross".— Ed. 
f Feudal  fief.—  Ed. 
s End to Switzerland! (by analogy with Finis Poloniae!—End to Poland! See p. 148 
of this volume).— Ed. 

=====第328页=====
304 Karl Marx 
3. CHERVAL 
I realised from Joh. Ph. Becker's letter3  that the "associate of 
Marx" or the "associates" of Cherval mentioned by the Vogt of 
the Empire b could only be Herr Stecher, now resident in London. 
Up to that time I had not had the honour of making his personal 
acquaintance, although I had heard many complimentary descrip­
tions of his great and many-sided artistic talents. In consequence 
of Becker's letter we met for the first time. The following is a 
letter from my "associate" to me. c 
"17 Sussex St., London W. C. 
October 14, 1860 
"Dear Herr Marx, 
"I am glad to be able to give you some information about Nugent 
(Cherval-Crämer) who was mentioned in Vogt's pamphlet of which you were kind 
enough to send me an extract. In March 1853 I came to Geneva after a trip to 
Italy. Nugent arrived in Geneva at around the same time and I made his 
acquaintance in a lithography workshop. I had myself just taken up lithography 
and since Nugent had a thorough knowledge of it, and since he was extremely 
agreeable, energetic and industrious by nature, I accepted his proposal to share an 
atelier with him. What Vogt says about Nugent's activities in Geneva is roughly the 
same as what I heard for myself at the time, if you discount the usual 
exaggerations to be expected from journalists or pamphleteers. There was very 
little success. I knew only one of the group, a good-natured and hard-working, but 
otherwise imprudent and light-minded young man. And since he was one of the 
leaders it must be presumed that N. was everything in the group and the others 
nothing but curious listeners. I am convinced that neither stone nor copper plates 
were ever engraved, although I heard N. talk of such matters. My own 
acquaintances were mainly Genevans and Italians. I was aware that later on I was 
thought to be a spy by Vogt and other German refugees, whom I did not know. 
But I took no notice of it—the truth will always out. I was not even offended; it 
was so easy to arouse suspicion as there were spies aplenty and to discover who 
they were was not always a simple matter. I am almost certain that Nugent did not 
correspond with anyone in Geneva after he had been expelled from there. I later 
received two letters from him inviting me to join him in Paris to help him with a 
project on medieval architecture, which I did. In Paris I found Nugent to be 
utterly remote from politics and correspondence. AH this of course suggests that I 
myself could be 'the associates of Marx! since I neither saw nor heard of anyone else 
whom Nugent had induced to come to Paris. Of course Herr Vogt could not know that 
I had never had any contact with you, either direct or indirect, and that I probably 
never would have had, if I had not moved to London where by chance I have had 
the pleasure of meeting you and your esteemed family. 
"With best wishes to you and your ladies, 
H. Cal. Stecher" 
a See this volume, pp. 60-64.— Ed. 
b See Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess..., S. 175.—  Ed. 
c This letter has not been found.— Ed. 

=====第329页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 305 
4. THE COMMUNIST TRIAL IN COLOGNE 
In this section I wish to make public information concerning the 
Prussian Embassy in London and its correspondence with Prussian 
authorities on the Continent during the Cologne trial. This 
information is based on the confessions of Hirsch which were 
published by A. Willich in April 1853 in the New-Yorker Criminal-
Zeitung under the title "Die Opfer der Moucharderie, Rechtfer­
tigungsschrift von Wilhelm Hirsch". 3 Hirsch, who is at present in a 
Hamburg gaol, was the principal tool of Police Lieutenant Greif 
and his agent Fleury. It was on instructions from them and under 
their direction that he forged the false Minute-Book submitted as 
evidence by Stieber in the course of the communist trial. I give 
here a number of excerpts from Hirsch's memoirs. 
(During the Great Exhibition) "the German associations were kept under 
surveillance by a police triumvirate: Police Superintendent Stieber for Prussia, a 
Herr Kubesch for Austria and Police Commissioner Huntel of Bremen". 
Having volunteered to act as an informer, Hirsch had an 
interview in London with Alberts who was Secretary at the 
Prussian Embassy. He gives this account of their first meeting: 
"The meetings of the Prussian Embassy in London with its secret agents take 
place at a public house well fitted for the purpose. The Cock, in Fleet St., Temple 
Bar, is so unobtrusive that but for a golden cock pointing to the entrance the casual 
passer-by would hardly notice it. I went through a narrow passage leading to the 
interior of this old English tavern and asked for Mr. Charles, whereupon a 
corpulent personage introduced himself to me with such an amiable smile that 
anyone seeing us would have taken us to be old friends. The Embassy agent (for 
this is what he was) seemed to be in very high spirits and his mood was still further 
improved by brandy and water. He enjoyed it so much that for a long time he 
seemed to have completely forgotten the purpose of our meeting. Mr. Charles at 
once revealed that his true name was Alberts and that he was the Embassy Secretary. 
To begin with, he informed me that in fact he had nothing to do with the police 
but that he would act as an intermediary in this case... A second meeting took place 
at his home in 39 Brewer St., Golden Square, and it was here that I made the 
acquaintance of Police Lieutenant  Greif.  Greif looked the true policeman: medium 
height, dark hair and a beard of the same colour cut in the regulation style, with 
the moustache meeting the side-whiskers and the chin left shaven. His eyes looked 
anything but intelligent and they protruded fiercely in a permanent glare, 
apparently the result of frequent association with thieves and rogues.... Like Herr 
Alberts, Herr Greif introduced himself to me by the pseudonym of Mr. Charles. 
The latest Mr. Charles was at least in a more serious mood and he even felt it was 
necessary to test me.... Our first meeting ended with his instructing me to give him 
an accurate report on all the activities of the revolutionary émigrés.... On the next 
a This article was published in instalments in the Belletristisches Journal und 
New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung on April 1, 8, 15 and 22, 1853. Excerpts from it are 
contained in Marx's notebook. For his assessment of it see his article "Hirsch's 
Confessions" (present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed. 

=====第330页=====
306 Karl Marx 
occasion Herr Greif introduced me to what he called 'his right hand', namely 'one 
of his agents', he added. This turned out to be a tall elegantly dressed young man 
who also gave his name as Mr. Charles. The whole political police seems to have 
adopted this pseudonym and I now had three Charleses to deal with. The latest 
specimen seemed to be the most remarkable. He said that 'he too had been a 
revolutionary but that all things were possible and I had only to go along with 
him'." 
Greif left London for some time and parted from Hirsch 
"expressly commending me to the latest Mr. Charles who, he said, acted always 
on his instructions. I should not hesitate to confide in him. Moreover, even if 
certain things should appear strange to me I should not be surprised. To make this 
clearer he added: 'The Ministry sometimes requires various things, chiefly 
documents; if these are unobtainable we should find some way out!"' 
Hirsch states further that the latest Charles was Fleury. 
"He had earlier been employed in the office of the Dresdner Zeitung, which was 
edited by L. Wittig. When he was in Baden, he was, as a result of recommendations 
he had brought from Saxony, sent by the provisional government to the Palatinate 
to take in hand the organisation of the Landsturm, etc. When the Prussians 
occupied Karlsruhe he was taken prisoner, etc. He suddenly reappeared in London 
towards the end of 1850 or early in 1851; from the outset he went here by the 
name of de Fleury and was known by this name in refugee circles. He was hard 
up, at least he seemed to be, stayed in the refugee barracks set up by the Refugee 
Committee and drew subsidies. Early in the summer of 1851 his position suddenly 
improved; he moved into a respectable apartment and at the end of the year he 
married the daughter of an English engineer. He turned up later in Paris as a 
police agent.... His real name is Krause and he is the son of Krause the cobbler who 
was executed some 15 or 18 years ago in Dresden together with Backhof and 
Beseler for the murder of Countess Schönberg and her maid.... Fleury-Krause told 
me many times that he had been working for different governments since he was 
14." 
It is this same Fleury-Krause whom Stieber admitted in open 
court in Cologne to be a secret Prussian police agent working 
directly under  Greif.  In my Revelations Concerning the Communist 
Trial in Cologne I wrote of Fleury: 
"Fleury is not indeed the Fleur de Marie of the police 
prostitutes, but he is a flower 3 and he will bear blossom, albeit only 
fleurs-de-lys." * 
This prophecy has in a sense been fulfilled; some months after 
the communist trial Fleury was sentenced in England to several 
years in the hulksb for forgery. 
* Fleurs-de-lys [lilies] is the French colloquial name of the letters T. F. (travaux 
forcés,  forced labour), the brand-mark of criminals. [Note by Engels to the 1885 edition 
of the Revelations. See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 442.] 
a A pun: Fleur de Marie—the heroine in Eugène Sue's novel Les mystères  de Paris, 
fleur —a flower.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第331页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 307 
"As the right-hand man of Police Lieutenant  Greif,"  Hirsch writes, "Fleury 
dealt directly with the Prussian Embassy during Greifs absence." 
Fleury was in contact with Max Reuter who stole the letters 
from Oswald Dietz, at that time archivist of the Schapper-Willich 
League. 241 
"Stieber," says Hirsch, "had learned from the agent of the Prussian 
Ambassador in Paris Hatzfeldt, the notorious Cherval, of the letters written by the 
latter to London. Stieber got Reuter to find out where they were, whereupon Fleury 
stole them on Stieber's orders and with Reuter's aid. These are the stolen letters 
which Herr Stieber was not ashamed to exhibit 'as such' to the jury in Cologne.... In 
autumn 1851 Fleury had been in Paris with Greif and Stieber after the latter 
had, through the mediation of Count Hatzfeldt, made contact with Cherval, or more 
correctly, Joseph Cramer with whose assistance he hoped to engineer a plot. With 
this end in view consultations were held in Paris between Messrs. Stieber,  Greif, 
Fleury, two other police agents, Beckmann* and Sommer, and the famous French 
spy Lucien de la Hodde (who went by the name of Duprez) and they gave Cherval 
directions according to which he was to tailor his correspondence. Fleury often 
laughed in my presence over the scuffle he had provoked between Stieber and 
Cherval. And the man called Schmidt who in the guise of secretary of a 
revolutionary league in Strasbourg and Cologne had gained admission to the 
society founded at the behest of the police by Cherval, was none other than M. de 
Fleury.... Fleury was undoubtedly the sole agent of the Prussian secret police in 
London and all proposals and offers that the Embassy received went through his 
hands....  Messrs. Greif and Stieber were accustomed to relying on his judgment." 
Fleury informed Hirsch: 
"Herr Greif has told you what has to be done.... At Police Headquarters in 
Frankfurt they are themselves of the opinion that our primary aim must be to 
make the position of the political police secure, the means we use to achieve this are 
immaterial; the September plot in Paris is already one step in this direction." 3 
Greif returned to London and expressed satisfaction with 
Hirsch's work but demanded more. In particular he wanted 
reports on "the secret meetings of the Marx party". 
"At all costs," the Police Lieutenant concluded, "we must draw up reports on 
the League meetings. Do it any way you wish as long as you don't overstep the 
limits of credibility. I am too occupied to attend to it  myself.  M. de Fleury will work 
with you as my representative." 
Greifs occupation at that time consisted, as Hirsch states, in a 
correspondence via de la Hodde-Duprez with Maupas concerning 
* The same manb  who figures in the Arnim Trial. [Note by Marx in the 1875 
edition of the Revelations, to which Appendix 4 to Herr Vogt was supplemented.] He 
was already then Paris correspondent for the Kölnische Zeitung and was to 
remain so for many years, [Engels' addition to Marx's note in the 1885 edition 
of the Revelations.] 
1 Reckmann. — Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 55-56.—  F.d. 

=====第332页=====
308 Karl Marx 
the arrangements for the mock escape of Cherval and Gipperich 
from the St. Pélagie gaol. On being assured by Hirsch that 
"Marx had not founded any new central organisation of the League in 
London ... Greif agreed with Fleury that in the circumstances we should for the 
time being prepare reports on meetings of the League ourselves. He,  Greif,  would 
vouch for their authenticity, and in any case his submissions would be accepted". 
So Hirsch and Fleury set to work."The content" of their reports 
on the secret meetings of the League I held 
"was provided", Hirsch states, "by reports of discussions that took place from 
time to time; the admission of new members, the founding of new sections in 
obscure corners of Germany, or a new organisation; speculation to the effect that 
in Cologne Marx's imprisoned friends did or did not have any prospects of being 
released; letters that had come from this person or that, and so on. On this last 
point Fleury usually took care to mention people in Germany who had become 
suspect as a result of political investigations or who had been involved in some 
political activity or other. Very often, however, we had to have recourse to our 
imagination and then we would report on the activities of a non-existent member 
of the League. But Herr Greif said that the reports were excellent and that anyway 
we had to have them at all costs. Some of the writing was done by Fleury alone but 
mostly I had to help him as he was unable to describe the smallest detail without 
errors of style. In this way the reports came into being and without a moment's 
hesitation Herr Greif declared his willingness to vouch for their authenticity". 
Hirsch then describes how Fleury and he visited Arnold Ruge in 
Brighton, and Eduard Meyen (of Tobian memory 3) and stole 
letters and lithographed material from them. Not content with this, 
Greif-Fleury rented a lithographic press from Stanbury Press, 
Fetter Lane, and together with Hirsch began to produce "radical 
pamphlets". That "democrat", F. Zabel, could learn a lesson or 
two here. Let him take note of this: 
"The first pamphlet I" (Hirsch) "wrote was entitled An das Landproletariat at 
Fleury's suggestion; and we managed to make a few good copies of it. Herr Greif 
sent these copies as documents emanating from the Marx party. To make it seem 
more plausible we included in the reports of the so-called League meetings, which 
came into being in the manner described above, a few words about the dispatch of 
such a pamphlet. One other product of this kind was fabricated; its title was An die 
Kinder des Volkes and I do not know under whose auspices Herr Greif sent this 
one in. We later abandoned this trick chiefly because it was so costly." 
At this point Cherval arrived in London after his mock escape 
from Paris and was attached to Greif at a weekly salary of £1 10s., 
"in return for which he was required to make reports on the contacts between 
the German and French émigrés". 
Publicly exposed and expelled from the Workers' Society as a 
a See this volume, p. 239.— Ed. 

=====第333页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 309 
"Cherval very understandably described the German émigrés and their organs 
as being as insignificant as could be—since he found it quite impossible to get hold 
of any information on the subject which he could pass on. By way of compensation 
he compiled a report for Greif on the non-German revolutionary party which put 
Munchausen's tall stories in the shade". 
Hirsch now returns to the Cologne trial. 
"Herr Greif had already been questioned a number of times about the contents 
of the League reports prepared at his instance by Fleury in so far as they had any 
bearing on the Cologne trial.... There were also particular commissions in 
connection with the trial. On one occasion Marx was alleged to be corresponding 
with Lassalle via an 'ale-house' and the Public Prosecutor required further 
information.... Rather more naïve was the Public Prosecutor's request asking for 
precise information about the financial assistance that Lassalle in Düsseldorf was 
allegedly sending to the defendant Röser in Cologne ... it was believed that the true 
source of the money was in London." 
I have already recounted in Section III, 4 how Fleury, acting on 
instructions from Hinckeldey, was to find someone in London who 
would be willing to appear before the jury in Cologne in the guise 
of H.,a  the witness who had disappeared, etc. After a detailed 
account of this incident Hirsch goes on: 
"Herr Stieber had meanwhile urgently requested Greif to supply him, if at all 
possible, with the original minutes of the League meetings that he had been 
reporting on. Fleury was of the opinion that he could produce an original 
minute-book if only the requisite people were available. Above all, however, he 
would need specimens of the handwriting of some of Marx's friends. I made use of this 
last remark in order to extricate myself from the whole undertaking; Fleury 
alluded to the topic only once again and after that he said nothing more. Around 
this time Stieber suddenly appeared in Cologne with a Minute-Book of the 
League's central organisation in London.... I was even more astonished when I 
found that the minutes as reported in extract in the papers were absolutely 
identical with the reports concocted by Fleury at Greifs behest. It was evident that 
Herr Greif or Herr Stieber himself had had a copy made somehow or other, for the 
minutes in this allegedly original document bore signatures while those submitted by Fleury 
had none. From Fleury himself I learned about this miracle only that 'Stieber can 
contrive anything, it will be a sensation!'" 
As soon as Fleury heard that "Marx" had had the handwriting 
of the ostensible signatories of the minutes (Liebknecht, Rings, 
Ulmer, etc.) witnessed in a London Police Court b he wrote the 
following letter: 
" To the Royal Police Presidium in Berlin; dated from London. 
"It is the intention of Marx and his friends here to discredit the signatures on 
the League Minutes by having handwriting specimens legally authenticated. These 
specimens are to be produced in the Court of Assizes as the really authentic ones. 
Everyone familiar with the English laws knows that on this point they can be 
a Haupt (see this volume, p. 67).— Ed. 
b Marx uses English: Police Court.— Ed. 

=====第334页=====
310 Karl Marx 
manipulated and that a person who vouches for the authenticity of a thing does 
not actually give any true guarantee. The person who gives you this information 
does not recoil from giving you his name in a matter like this where the truth is at 
stake. Becker, 4, Litchfield St." "Fleury knew the address of Becker, a German 
refugee living in the same house as Willich. It might very easily happen later on 
that the suspicion of authorship would fall on the latter who was an opponent of 
Marx.... Fleury looked forward eagerly to the scandal that would result. The letter 
would be read out in court, but of course too late, he thought, for any doubts 
about its authenticity to arise before the trial was over.... The letter, signed by 
Becker, was addressed to the Police Presidium in Berlin, however it went not to 
Berlin but to 'Police Officer Goldheim, Frankfurter Hof in Cologne', and an 
envelope for this letter arrived at the Police Presidium in Berlin with a note stating 
that 'Herr Stieber in Cologne would give a complete explanation as to its use....' Stieber 
made no use of this letter; he was unable to do so because he was forced to drop 
the whole Minute-Book." 
With regard to the Minute-Book Hirsch says that 
"Herr Stieber declared" (in court) "that he had had the Minute-Book in his 
hands for two weeks but had scrupled to produce it; he declared further that it 
had come to him by a courier called  Greif....  Hence Greif had personally delivered 
his own work. How can this be reconciled with a letter of Herr Goldheim's in which he 
informed the Embassy that 'the Minute-Book was produced so late only in order to 
avoid scrutiny as to its authenticity....'" 
On Friday, October 29, Herr Goldheim arrived in London. 
"As Herr Stieber had to face the fact that it was not possible to uphold the 
authenticity of the Minute-Book he sent a deputy to negotiate with Fleury about it 
on the spot. At issue was the question whether a proof could not be obtained after 
all. His discussions were fruitless and he returned without any decision having been 
reached. Fleury was left in a state of despair for Stieber was now resolved to expose 
him rather than compromise the police chiefs. But I did not realise that this was 
the cause of Fleury's disquiet until Herr Stieber made his declaration soon 
afterwards. In panic, M. Fleury now resorted to his last expedient. He brought 
me a specimen of handwriting for me to use to copy out a declaration, sign it 
'Liebknecht' and take an oath before the Lord Mayor of London that I was 
Liebknecht.... Fleury told me that the handwriting was that of the person who had 
written the Minute-Book and that Herr Goldheim had brought it with him" (from 
Cologne).  "But if Herr Stieber had received the Minute-Book per  Greif,  the courier 
from London, how was it possible for Herr Goldheim to bring a specimen of the 
handwriting of the alleged Minute-Book writer from Cologne at the very moment 
when Greif had just arrived back in London?.... What Fleury gave me consisted 
of a few phrases and a signature...." Hirsch 'copied the handwriting as 
closely as he could and wrote that the undersigned, i.e. Liebknecht, declared that 
the signature of Liebknecht legally witnessed by Maix and Co. was false and that 
this, his signature was the only genuine one. When I had finished and had the 
handwriting in my hands" (i.e. the specimen given him by Fleury to copy), "which 
fortunately I still possess, I told Fleury, who was not a little taken aback, that I had 
had second thoughts and would not go through with it. Inconsolable at first, he 
then announced that he would swear to it himself....For safety's sake he would have 
the writing countersigned by the Prussian Consul; and he went to the Consulate at 
once.  I waited for him in a tavern; when he got back he had the countersignature 

=====第335页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 311 
and he next went to the Lord Mayor to swear the oath. But the plan fell through 
as the Lord Mayor wanted further guarantees and Fleury could not give them—so 
the oath remained unsworn.... Late in the evening I saw M. de Fleury again, and 
for the last time. That very day he had been unpleasantly surprised to read Herr 
Stieber's declaration concerning him in the Kölnische Zeitung. 'But I know that 
Stieber could not have acted differently, otherwise he would have had to 
compromise  himself,'  M. de Fleury said very truly by way of consoling  himself.... 
' There will  be a great explosion in Berlin if  the Cologne prisoners  are convicted,'  M. de Fleury 
said to me at one of our last meetings". 
Fleury's last meetings with Hirsch took place at the end of  October 
1852.  Hirsch's confessions are dated the end of November 1852; 
and at the end of March 1853 came the "explosion in Berlin" (the 
Ladendorf conspiracy).* 24S 
* The reader will be interested to see the testimonials that Stieber himself gave his 
two accomplices Fleury-Krause and Hirsch. He writes of the first in the Black Book' 244 
II, p. 69: 
"No.  345. Krause, Carl Friedrich August, from Dresden. He is the son of Friedrich 
August Krause, a farmer executed for his part in the murder of Countess Schönberg 
in Dresden in 1834, and afterwards" (after his execution?) "a corn-dealer, and of his 
widow Johanna Rosine née Göllnitz, who is still living. Carl Friedrich was born on 
January 9, 1824, in the vineyard houses at Coswig near Dresden. From October 1, 
1832,  he went to the charity school in Dresden; in 1836 he was admitted to the 
orphanage in Antonstadt, Dresden, and in 1840 he was confirmed. He was then 
apprenticed to Herr Gruhle, a Dresden merchant, but in the following year he was 
arrested and detained by the Dresden Municipal Court for  repeated  theft.  However, the 
period of detention was counted towards his sentence and he was released. After this 
he lived with his mother without taking a job, but in March 1842 he was arrested again 
for breaking and entering and this time he was sentenced to four  years'  imprisonment. On 
October 23, 1846, he came out of gaol and returned to Dresden and began to  associate 
with the most notorious thieves. Then, the Rehabilitation Society took him up and found 
him a job in a cigar factory and he remained in this job without interruption or any 
further misdemeanour until March 1848. But after that date he gave in to his idleness 
again and began to frequent political societies" (as a government spy; see above his 
admission to Hirsch in London). "Early in 1849 he became a salesman of the Dresdner 
Zeitung edited by the republican literateur E. L. Wittig who is now in America but 
who at that time was in Dresden. In May 1849 he took part in the Dresden uprising 
and became commandant of the barricade in the Sophienstrasse. He fled to Baden 
after the uprising was quelled and there he was empowered by the provisional 
government of Baden (the decrees of June 10 and 23, 1849) to raise a Landsturm and 
requisition supplies for the insurgents. He was taken prisoner by Prussian soldiers but 
on October 8, 1849, he escaped from Rastatt." (Just as, later on, Cherval "escaped" 
from Paris. But now comes the part of the bouquet which has the authentic police-
aroma—it should be borne in mind that this was primed two vears alter the Cologne 
Trial.) "According to a report in the Berlin Publizist, No. 39 of May 15, 1853, taken 
from a book printed in New York with the tttie Die Opfer der Spionage* by Wilhelm 
Hirsch, a Hamburg shop-assistant" (() Stieber, you foreboding angel! ,J;. "Krause 
a Die Opfer der Moucharderie, Rechtfertigungsschrift von Wilhelm Hirsch. —Ed. 
'' See this volume, p.  71.—  Ed. 

=====第336页=====
312 Karl Marx 
5. SLANDERS 
When the communist trial in Cologne was over, Vogt-like 
calumnies about my "exploitation" of the workers were busily 
disseminated, especially in the German-American press. Some of 
my friends living in America—Messrs. J. Weydemeyer, Dr. 
A. jacoby (a practising doctor in New York and one of the 
defendants in the Cologne communist trial) and A. Cluss (an 
official in the U.S. Navy Yard in Washington) — published a 
detailed refutation of these absurdities dated New York, 
November 7,  Î853.  Their article contained the comment that I was 
in the right to preserve silence about my private affairs insofar as 
it was a matter of gaining the approval of the philistines. "But 
when faced by the hostility of the mob, the philistines and the 
turned up in London late in 1850 or early in 1851 as a political émigré bearing the name 
of Charles de Fleury.  At first he lived in somewhat straitened circumstances but later, in 
1851,  his position improved. For after he was admitted to the Communist League" 
(another Stieber lie), "he worked as an agent for a number of governments in the 
course of which, however, he became involved in a number of swindles." 
So much for Stieber's gratitude to his friend Fleury who, moreover (as we noted 
above),  was sentenced to several vears' imprisonment in London for forgery just a few 
months after the Cologne trial. 
Concerning the worthy Hirsch we can read (op. cit., p. 58): 
"No.  265. Hirsch, Wilhelm, shop-assistant from Hamburg. Tt appears that he 
went to London not as a refugee but of his own accord." (Why this wholly superfluous 
lie? After all, Goldheim tried to arrest him in Hamburg!) "But once there he 
associated with refugees and especially with the communist party. He played a double 
game. On the one hand, he was active on behalf of the revolutionary party, while, on 
the other, he offered to spy on political criminals and forgers for a number of 
continental governments. But he himself became implicated in the  worst possible  frauds 
t-nd swindles. In particular, he was guilty of forgery, so that everyone should be on 
their guard against  him,.  Together with various other individuals he even manufactured 
false paper money merely in order to extract high rewards from the police for 
uncovering forgeries. He was eventually unmasked by both sides" (namely, both by 
police forgers and non-police ones?) "and he has now returned from London to 
Hamburg where he lives in poor circumstances." 
Thus far Stieber on his London accomplices to whose "truthfulness and reliability" 
he is never tired of testifying. It is interesting to see how utterly impossible it is for this 
model Prussian to speak the simple truth. He cannot even restrain himself from 
smuggling* quite purposeless lies into the—true and false—facts taken from the 
documents. On the testimony of such professional liars — and they are more 
numerous now than ever—hundreds of people are sent to prison and in this lies what 
is nowadays called salvation of the state. [This note to Appendix 4 was added by 
Engels in the 3rd (1885) edition of the Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in 
Cologne.] 
a A pun on the name Stieber and the verb hineinstiebern (to smuggle in, 
insert).—  Ed. 

=====第337页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 313 
degenerate idlers, it does harm to the cause in our view and so we 
break that silence."3 
6. THE WAR BETWEEN FROGS AND MICEb 
In my pamphlet The Knight,  etc.,  from which I quoted above, I 
wrote on p. 5: 
"...On July 20, 1851 the 'Agitation Union' was founded, and on 
July 27, 1851 the German 'Émigré Club'. From that day ... dates 
the struggle on both sides of the ocean between the 'Émigrés' and 
the 'Agitators', the great war between frogs and mice. 
Now who will give me words and who the tongue, 
To sing of such brave deeds in sonorous sounds! 
For ne'er was strife upon this earth begun 
More proudly fought on bloodier battle grounds; 
Compared to this all other wars are roses. 
To tell of it my lyric art confounds 
For on this earth there ne'er was seen such glory 
Or noble valour bright as in this story. 
(After Boiardo, Orlando innamorato, 
Canto 27.)"c 
Now it is by no means my intention to go into the details of "the 
story" of this strife or into the agreement entitled, verbotenus,d 
"The Preliminary Agreement about the Treaty on the Alliance" 
(under which name it was publicised throughout the entire 
German-American press), which was reached between Gottfried 
Kinkel in the name of the Émigré Club, and A. Goegg on behalf 
of the "Revolutionary League of the Two Worlds", on August 13, 
1852.  I would only remark that with a few exceptions the entire 
parliamentary emigration joined in the farce on one side or the 
other. (Of course, names like K. Vogt were at that time avoided by 
every party if only for propriety's sake.) 
At the end of his revolutionary pleasure and fund-raising tour 
of the United States, Gottfried Kinkel, the passion flower of 
German philistinism, wrote a "Denkschrift über das deutsche 
Nationalanlehn zur Förderung der Revolution", dated Elmira,N. Y., 
February 22, 1852, in which he gave vent to views which at least 
a J. Weydemeyer, A. Cluss, A. Jacoby, "An die Redaktion der New-Yorker 
Criminal-Zeitung, November 7,  1853",  New-Yorker Criminal Zeitung, No. 37, 
November 25,  1853.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, p. 87.— Ed. 
c See present edition, Vol. 12, p.  488.—  Ed. 
d Literally.— Ed. 

=====第338页=====
314 Karl Marx 
possess the merit of great simplicity. Gottfried believes that 
engineering a revolution is much like making a railway. Once the 
money is there, the railway, or the revolution will follow in due 
course. Whereas the nation should cherish a longing for revolution 
in its heart, the makers of revolution should have cash in their 
pockets, and everything therefore depends on "a small well-
equipped band of men with a plentiful supply of money". It is 
remarkable into what bizarre byways of thought even melodramatic 
minds are driven by England's commercial wind. Since everything 
here,  even public opinion,3 is organised with the aid of shares, why 
not float a joint-stock company "for the promotion of the 
revolution"? 
In a public meeting with Kossuth, who was also engaged at that 
time on a revolutionary fund-raising campaign in the United 
States, Gottfried expressed himself in highly aesthetic terms: 
"Even from your clean hands, Governor, the gift of freedom would be a bitter 
pill, and I would moisten it with the tears of my shame."b 
Hence Gottfried, having looked the gift-horse so sharply in the 
mouth, assured the governor that if the latter should present to 
him "the revolution in the east" with his right hand, he, Gottfried, 
would present to him "the revolution in the west" in return. Seven 
years later, in the Hermann, a paper he had founded  himself,  the 
very same Gottfried assured his readers that he was a man of rare 
consistency,c and that having proclaimed the Prince Regentd  as 
Emperor of Germany before the military court in Rastatt, 245 he had 
always kept this as his motto. 
Count Oskar Reichenbach, one of the three original regents and 
the Treasurer of the Revolutionary Loan, published the accounts 
in London on October 8, 1852, together with a statement in which 
he dissociated himself from the enterprise. At the same time he 
declared that "in any event I neither can nor will hand the money 
over to citizens Kinkel, etc." Instead he invited the shareholders to 
hand in their provisional loan certificates in exchange for the 
money in his hands. His own resignation as treasurer, etc., he said, 
"was motivated by political and legal considerations.... The assumptions on 
which the idea of the loan was based have not been realised. The sum of 20,000 
a Marx uses the English phrase: "public opinion".— Ed. 
b G. Kinkel, "Denkschrift über das deutsche Nationalanlehn zur Förderung der 
Revolution", New-Yorker Staats-Zeitung, March 2, 1852.— Ed. 
c G. Kinkel, "Brief des Herausgebers an einen Freund in Amerika", Hermann, 
March 26, 1859.— Ed. 
d William.— Ed. 

=====第339页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 315 
dollars which had to be raised before the loan could be proceeded with, has 
therefore not been acquired.... The proposal to found a periodical and to promote 
agitation found no echo. Only political charlatans or revolutionary monomaniacs 
could deem the loan to be practicable at present and imagine that an equitable, and 
hence impersonal, actively revolutionary use of the money by all party groups is 
possible at this moment." 
But Gottfried's faith in revolution could not be shaken so easily 
and so he procured a "resolution" that allowed him to carry on the 
business under another name. 
Reichenbach's statement of the accounts contains some interest­
ing data. 
"The Trustees," he says, "cannot be held responsible for contributions which 
may have been made later by the committees to persons other than  myself,  and I 
would ask the committees to take note of this when calling in the certificates and 
settling accounts." 
According to his computations £1,587 6s. 4d. was received, of 
which London had contributed £2 5s., and "Germany" £9. The 
expenditure amounted to £584 18s. 5d. and was broken down as 
follows: Kinkeïs and Hillgärtner's, travel expenses: £220; other travel 
expenses: £54; lithographic press: £11; cost of provisional certifi­
cates:  £14; lithographed  correspondence,  stamps, etc.: £106 Is. 6d. On 
Kinkel's instructions, etc.: £100. 
The Revolutionary Loan ended up with £1,000, which Gottfried 
Kinkel keeps in the Westminster Bank as earnest money for the 
first German provisional government. And despite all this, there is 
still no provisional government. Perhaps Germany believes that 36 
actual governments are quite sufficient. 
Certain American loan funds which were not incorporated into 
the central London Treasury were at least employed here and 
there for patriotic purposes. Such was the case with the £100 
which Gottfried Kinkel gave to Karl Blind early in 1858 to 
transform into "radical pamphlets", etc. 
7. PALMERSTON-POLEMIC 
"Council Hall, Sheffield, May 6th, 1856 
"Doctor, 
"The Sheffield Foreign Affairs Committee instruct me to convey to you an 
expression of their warm thanks for the great public service you have rendered by 
your admirable exposé of the Kars-Papers a published in the People's Paper. 
"I have the honour, &c. 
"Dr. Karl Marx"b Wm. Cyples, Secretary 
a Marx's series of articles "The Fall of Kars" (see present edition, Vol. 14).— Ed. 
b Marx quotes the letter in English.— Ed. 

=====第340页=====
316 Karl Marx 
8. STATEMENT BY HERR A. SCHERZER 
Herr A. Scherzer, a man who has played a praiseworthy role in 
the workers' movement since the 1830s, wrote to me from London 
on April 22, 1860: 
"Dear Citizen, 
"I cannot let the occasion pass without protesting about a passage in the 
monstrous tissue of lies and the infamous calumnies of Vogt's pamphlet which 
concerns me personally. I am referring to the statement in Document No. 7, 
printed in the supplement to the Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150, of June 2, 
where it says: 'We know that at this very time fresh efforts are being made from 
London. Letters signed by A. Sch... are being sent from there to both associations 
and individuals, etc' These 'letters' appear to be the reason why Herr K. Vogt 
wrote elsewhere in his book: 'At the beginning of this year (1859) a new arena for 
political agitation seemed to be opening up. The opportunity was seized in a 
moment so as to regain some influence if possible. The tactics have not altered in 
this respect for years. A committee about which "no-one knows nothing", as it says 
in the old song, circulates letters through an equally unknown president or 
secretary, etc., etc. Having reconnoitred the terrain in this manner, a number of 
"travelling brethren" turn up in the country and at once start to organise a secret 
league. The association which is to be compromised learns nothing of these 
goings-on which remain the work of a number of sectarian individuals. For the 
most part even the correspondence conducted in the name of the association 
remains quite unknown to it, but the letters refer always to "our association", etc., 
and the inquiries of the police, which follow inexorably, and are based on 
documents that have fallen into their hands, always affect the association as a 
whole, etc' 
"Why did Herr K. Vogt not print the whole letter which he alludes to in 
Document No. 7? Why not 'reconnoitre' the source he has relied on for his 
information? It would have been easy for him to discover that the public Workers' 
Educational Society in London chose its correspondence committee, to which I had 
the honour to be elected, in open session. When Herr Vogt speaks of unknown 
secretaries and the like, I am very pleased to be unknown to him, but am happy to 
be able to say that I am known to thousands of German workers, who have all 
derived benefit from the erudition of the men whom he vilifies now. Times have 
changed. The period of secret societies is past. It is ridiculous to talk of secret 
leagues or sects, when problems are dealt with openly in a workers' society, where 
strangers attend as visitors at every meeting. The letters signed by me were so 
formulated that it was impossible for anyone to come to harm in consequence. We 
German workers in London had only one interest at heart and that was to learn 
about the mood of the workers' associations on the Continent, and to found a 
newspaper which would represent the interests of the working class and which 
would do battle with writers in the pay of the enemy. It naturally did not occur to a 
single German worker to act in the interests of a Bonaparte, a thing of which only 
a Vogt or people of his kind are capable. We undoubtedly hate the despotism of 
Austria with a far deeper loathing than Herr Vogt, but we do not seek its defeat in 
the victory of another despot. Every people must liberate  itself.  Is it not striking 
that Herr Vogt arrogates for himself the very means which he accuses us of having 
used against his own activities? Herr Vogt asserts that he is not in the pay of 
Bonaparte, and that he only received money to set up a newspaper from 
democratic sources. In saying this he hopes to exonerate  himself,  but how can he 

=====第341页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 317 
be so obtuse, with all his learning, to cast suspicion on workers, and hurl 
accusations at them for concerning themselves with the well-being of their country 
and for making propaganda about the need to establish a newspaper? 
"With my most sincere respects, 
A. Scherzer" 
9. BLIND'S ARTICLE IN THE FREE PRESS 
OF MAY 27, 1859a 
"The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary 
"A Correspondent, who encloses his card, writes as follows: — 
"Sir,—Having been present at the last meeting in the Music Hall, I heard the 
statement made concerning the Grand Duke Constantine. I am able to give you 
another fact: — 
"So far back as last summer, Prince Jérôme-Napoléon detailed to some of his 
confidants at Geneva a plan of attack against Austria, and prospective rearrange­
ment of the map of Europe. I know the name of a Swiss senator to whom he 
broached the subject. Prince Jérôme, at that time, declared that, according to the 
plan made, Grand Duke Constantine was to become King of Hungary. 
"I know further of attempts made, in the beginning of the present year, to win 
over to the Russo-Napoleonic scheme some of the exiled German Democrats, as 
well as some influential Liberals in Germany. Large pecuniary advantages were 
held out to them as a bribe. I am glad to say that these offers were rejected with 
indignation." b 
10. HERR ORGES' LETTERS 
"Dear Sir, 
"I heard today from Herr Liebknecht that you would be kind enough to 
put a legal document at our disposal, relating to the origins of the pamphlet 
against Vogt. c May I ask you urgently to send it to us as quickly as possible, so that 
we can produce it in court. Please, send the document against a receipt and charge 
us for any expenses you may have incurred. Incidentally, my dear Sir, the liberal 
party sometimes misjudges the Allgemeine Zeitung. We (the editors) have gone 
through fire and water and have passed all the tests of political commitment. If you 
do not consider the separate piece of work, the individual article, but our whole 
activity you will probably come to realise that no German newspaper strives as we 
do, without haste, but without rest, for unity and freedom, power and culture, for 
spiritual and material progress, for greater patriotic awareness and higher moral 
standards of the German nation, and that no paper achieves more than ours. You 
should judge our deeds by their effects. Asking you once more most urgendy to 
grant my request, and assuring you of my greatest respect, 
"Yours sincerely, 
Hermann Orges 
"Augsburg, 16/10" 
a See this volume, pp. 122-24.— Ed. 
b Marx quotes this report in English.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 119-24.— Ed. 

=====第342页=====
318 Karl Marx 
The second letter, dated the same day, was only an extract of the 
first, and was posted, as Herr Orges states, "only for safety's 
sake".  In it he likewise requests "the most urgent dispatch of the 
document about the origins of the well-known pamphlet against 
Vogt, a document which, as Herr Liebknecht writes, you have 
been so kind as to put at our disposal". 
11. CIRCULAR AGAINST K. BLIND 
I include here only the concluding section of my circular against 
Blind of February 4, 1860, which was written in English3: 
"Now, before taking any further step, I want to show up the 
fellows who evidently have played into the hands of Vogt. I, 
therefore, publicly declare that the statement of Blind, Wiehe and 
Hollinger, according to which the anonymous pamphlet was not 
printed in Hollinger's office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, is a deliberate 
lie. First, Mr. Vögele, one of the compositors, formerly employed by 
Hollinger, will declare upon oath that the said pamphlet was printed 
in Hollinger's office, was written in the hand-writing of Mr.  Blind, 
and partly composed by Hollinger  himself.  Secondly, it can be 
judicially proved that the pamphlet and the article in Das Volk have 
been taken off the same types. Thirdly, it will be shown that Wiehe 
was not employed by Hollinger for eleven consecutive months, and, 
especially, was not employed by him at the time of the pamphlet's 
publication. Lastly, witnesses may be summoned in whose presence 
Wiehe himself confessed having been persuaded by Hollinger to sign 
the wilfully false declaration in the Augsburg Gazette. h Consequently, I 
again declare the above said Charles Blind to be a deliberate liar. 
Karl Marx" 
From the London "Times", February 3rd. 
"Vienna, January 30th.— The Swiss Professor Vogt pretends to know that 
France will procure for Switzerland Faucigny, Chablais, and the Genevese,«-' the 
neutral provinces of Savoy, if the Grand Council of the Republic will let her have 
the free use of the Simplon." d 
a Marx quotes this excerpt from the circular in English (see this volume, 
pp. 10-11).— Ed. 
b The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung. — Ed. 
c Genevois. — Ed. 
d Marx quotes this report in English (see also this volume, p. 195).— Ed. 

=====第343页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 319 
12. VÖGELE'S AFFIDAVIT 
"I declare herewith: 
that the German flysheet Zur Warnung (A Warning) which was afterwards 
reprinted in No. 7 (d.d. 18th June 1859) of Das Volk (a German paper which was 
then published in London) and which was again reprinted in the Allgemeine Zeitung 
of Augsburg (the Augsburg Gazette)—that this flysheet was composed partly by 
Mr. Fidelio Hollinger of 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, London, partly by  myself,  who 
was then employed by Mr. Fidelio Hollinger, and that the flysheet was published in 
Mr. F. Hollinger's Printing office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, London; that the 
manuscript of the said flysheet was in the handwriting of Mr. Charles Blind; that I 
saw Mr. F. Hollinger give to Mr. William Liebknecht of 14, Church Street, Soho, 
London, the proof sheet of the flysheet Zur Warnung; that Mr. F. Hollinger 
hesitated at first giving the proofsheet to Mr. W. Liebknecht, and, that, when 
Mr. W. Liebknecht had withdrawn, he, Mr. F. Hollinger, expressed to me, and to 
my fellow workman J. F. Wiehe, his regret for having given the proofsheet out of 
his hands. 
"Declared at the Police Court, Bow Street, in the County of Middlesex, the 
eleventh day of February 1860, before me, Th. Henry, one of the Police Magistrates 
of the Metropolis. 
"L.S.  A. Vögele"  * 
13. WIEHE'S AFFIDAVIT 
"One of the first days of November last—I do not recollect the exact date—in 
the evening between nine and ten o'clock I was taken out of bed by 
Mr. F. Hollinger, in whose house I then lived, and by whom I was employed as 
compositor. He presented to me a paper to the effect, that, during the preceding 
eleven months I had been continuously employed by him, and that during all that 
time a certain German flysheet Zur Warnung (A Warning) had not been composed 
and printed in Mr. Hollinger's Office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho. In my perplexed 
state,  and not aware of the importance of the transaction, I complied with his wish, 
and copied, and signed the document. Mr. Hollinger promised me money, but I 
never received anything. During that transaction Mr. Charles Blind, as my wife 
informed me at the time, was waiting in Mr. Hollinger's room. A few days later, 
Mrs.  Hollinger called me down from dinner and led me into her husband's room, 
where I found Mr. Charles Blind alone. He presented me the same paper which 
Mr. Hollinger had presented me before, and entreated me to write, and sign a 
second copy, as he wanted two, the one for  himself,  and the other for publication 
in the Press. He added that he would show himself grateful to me. I copied and 
signed again the paper. 
"I herewith declare the truth of the above statement* and that: 
"1) During the 11 months mentioned in the document I was for six weeks not 
employed by Mr. Hollinger, but by a Mr. Ermani. 2) I did not work in 
Mr. Hollinger's Office just at that time when the flysheet Zur Warnung (A 
Warning) was published. 3) I heard at the time from Mr. Vögele, who then worked 
for Mr. Hollinger, that he, Vögele, had, together with Mr. Hollinger  himself, 
composed the flysheet in question, and that the manuscript was in Mr. Blind's 
handwriting. 4) The types of the pamphlet were still standing when I returned to 
Mr. Hollinger's service. I myself broke them into columns for the reprint of the 
a Marx gives this document in English (see also this volume, p. 128).— Ed. 

=====第344页=====
320 Karl Marx 
flysheet (or pamphlet) Zur Warnung (A Warning) in the German paper Das Volk 
published at London, by Mr. Fidelio Hollinger, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho. The 
flysheet appeared in No. 7, d. d. 18th June 1859, of Das Volk (The People). 5) I 
saw Mr. Hollinger give to Mr. William Liebknecht of 14, Church Street, Soho, 
London, the proofsheet of the pamphlet Zur Warnung, on which proof sheet 
Mr. Charles Blind with his own hand had corrected four or five mistakes. 
Mr. Hollinger hesitated at first giving the proofsheet to Mr. Liebknecht, and when 
Mr. Liebknecht had withdrawn, he, F. Hollinger, expressed to me and my fellow 
workman Vögele his regret for having given the proofsheet out of his hands. 
"Declared and signed by the said Johann Friedrich Wiehe at the Police Court, 
Bow Street, this 8th day of February, 1860, before me Th. Henry, Magistrate of the 
said court. 
"L.S.  Johann Friedrich Wiehe"* 
14. FROM THE TRIAL PAPERS 
" Gouvernement Provisoire 
République Française. Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité. 
Au nom du Peuple Français 
"Paris,  1 Mars 1848 
"Brave et loyal Marx, 
"Le sol de la république française est un champ d'asile pour tous les amis de la 
liberté. La tyrannie vous a banni, la France libre vous rouvre ses portes, à vous et à 
tous ceux qui combattent pour la cause sainte, la cause fraternelle de tous les 
peuples. Tout agent du gouvernement français doit interpréter sa mission dans ce 
sens.  Salut et fraternité. 
Ferdinand Flocon, Membre du gouvernement provisoire"b 
"Bruxelles, le 19 Mai 1848 
"Mon cher Monsieur Marx, 
"J'entends avec un grand plaisir par notre ami Weerth que vous allez faire 
paraître à Cologne une Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane dont il m'a remis le prospectus. Il 
a Marx gives this document in English (see also this volume, pp. 129-30).— Ed. 
b "Provisional Government 
French Republic. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. 
In the name of the French People 
"Paris,  March 1, 1848 
"Honest, worthy Marx, 
"The soil of the French Republic is a place of asylum for all the friends of 
freedom. Tyranny has expelled you, a free France opens its doors to you once 
more, to you and to all those who fight for the sacred cause, the fraternal cause of 
all the peoples. Every official of the French Government should interpret his task in 
this sense. With fraternal greetings. 
Ferdinand Flocon, Member of the Provisional Government."—Ed. 

=====第345页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 321 
est bien nécessaire que cette feuille nous tienne au courant en Belgique des affaires 
de la démocratie allemande, car il est impossible d'en rien savoir de certain ici par 
la Gazette de Cologne, la Gazette Universelle d'Augsbourg et les autres gazettes 
aristocratiques de l'Allemagne que nous recevons à Bruxelles, non plus que par 
notre Indépendance Belge dont toutes les correspondances particulières sont conçues 
au point de vue des intérêts de notre aristocratie bourgeoise. M. Weerth me dit 
qu'il va vous joindre à Cologne pour contribuer à l'entreprise de la Nouvelle Gazette 
Rhénane: et il me promet en votre nom l'envoi de cette feuille en échange du Dé­
bat social que je vous enverrai de mon côté. Je ne demande pas mieux aussi 
que d'entretenir avec vous une correspondance sur les affaires communes à nos 
deux pays. Il est indispensable que les Belges et les Allemands ne restent pas 
trop étrangers les uns aux autres, dans l'intérêt commun des deux pays: car il 
se prépare en France des événements qui ne tarderont pas à mettre en jeu des 
questions qui toucheront les deux pays ensemble. Je reviens de Paris où j'ai passé 
une dizaine de jours que j'ai employés de mon mieux à me rendre compte de la 
situation de cette grande capitale. Je me suis trouvé, à la fin de mon séjour, juste 
au milieu des affaires du 15 mai. 246 J'assistais même à la séance où  s'est  passé le fait 
de l'irruption du peuple dans l'assemblée nationale.... Tout ce que j'ai compris, à 
voir l'attitude du peuple parisien et à entendre parler les principaux personnages 
qui sont en ce moment dans les affaires de la république française, c'est qu'on 
s'attend à une forte réaction de l'esprit bourgeois contre les événements de février 
dernier; les affaires du 15 mai précipiteront sans doute cette réaction. Or, celle-ci 
amènera indubitablement dans peu de temps un nouveau soulèvement du peuple... 
La France devra bientôt recourir à la guerre. C'est pour ce cas-là que nous aurons 
à aviser, ici et chez vous, sur ce que nous aurons à faire ensemble. Si la guerre se 
porte d'abord vers l'Italie nous aurons du répit... Mais si elle se porte sur-le-champ 
vers ce pays-ci je ne sais pas trop encore ce que nous aurons à faire, et alors nous 
aurons besoin du conseil des Allemands... En attendant j'annoncerai dans le Débat 
social de dimanche la publication prochaine de votre nouvelle feuille... Je compte aller 
à Londres vers la fin du mois de juin prochain. Si vous avez occasion d'écrire à 
Londres à quelques amis, veuillez les prier de m'y faire accueil. Tout à vous 
cordialement, 
L. Jottrand, Avt." a 
a "My dear Mr. Marx, I hear with great pleasure from our friend Weerth that 
you intend to publish a Neue Rheinische Zeitung in Cologne of which he has 
sent me the prospectus. It is extremely necessary for this paper to keep 
us in Belgium informed about the affairs of German democracy, since it 
is not possible to learn anything definite about this from the Kölnische 
Zeitung, the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung and the other aristocratic German 
papers which we receive here in Brussels, any more than from our Indépendance 
Belge, all of whose special reports are written from the standpoint of the 
interests of our bourgeois aristocracy. Herr Weerth has told me that he is 
going to join you in Cologne to collaborate on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
and he has promised me in your name to send me copies of it in exchange for 
the Débat social which I shall forward to you. I can ask nothing better than to 
correspond with you about the affairs common to our two nations. It is in the 
interest of both our countries that Belgians and Germans should become better 
acquainted with each other, for in France events are about to take place which in a 
short time will pose problems affecting both our countries. I have just come back 

=====第346页=====
322 Karl Marx 
"Bruxelles, 10 Février, 1860 
"Mon cher Marx, 
"N'ayant pas de vos nouvelles, depuis très longtemps, j'ai reçu votre dernière3 
avec la plus vive satisfaction. Vous vous plaignez du retard des choses, et du 
peu d'empressement de ma part de vous répondre à la question que vous m'aviez 
faite.  Que faire: l'âge ralentit la plume; j'espère cependant que vous trouverez 
mes avis et mon sentiment toujours les mêmes. Je vois que votre ..dernière est 
tracée à la dictée par la main de votre secrétaire intime, de votre adorable moitié: 
or Madame Marx ne cesse de se rappeler du vieux hermite de Bruxelles. Qu'elle 
daigne recevoir avec bonté mes salutations respectueuses. 
"Conservez-moi, cher confrère, dans vos amitiés. Salut et fraternité. 
Lelewel" b 
from Paris after spending ten days there during which time I did my best to gain 
an understanding of what is happening in this great metropolis. At the end of my 
stay I found myself in the midst of the events of May 15. I was even present at the 
session of the National Assembly during which the people rushed into the 
Chamber.... As far as I have understood both from seeing the attitude of the 
people of Paris and from listening to the speeches of the leading statesmen in the 
French Republic at the present time, a powerful reaction is expected against the 
events of February last on the part of the bourgeoisie; the events of May 15 will 
doubtless hasten this reaction. And this will undoubtedly lead in a short time to a 
new uprising by the people.... France will soon have to have recourse to war. It is 
for this reason that we ought to consider here and in your country what common 
action we should take in that event. If to start with the war is directed against Italy 
we shall have a breathing space; ... but if it is directed against this country from the 
very beginning I do not yet know what we should do, and we should then be in 
need of the advice of the Germans.... In the meantime I shall announce the 
approaching publication of your new paper in the Sunday edition of the Débat 
social.... I plan to go to London towards the end of June. Should you have 
occasion to write to any of your friends in London, I would be grateful if you 
could ask them to receive me kindly. 
"With cordial greetings, 
L. Jottrand, Lawyer" 
See also this volume, pp. 263-66.— Ed. 
a This refers to Marx's letter to Lelewel of February 3, 1860 (present edition, 
Vol. 41).—  Ed. 
b "My dear Marx, not having heard any news from you for a long time, I was 
very glad to receive your last communication. You complain about the delay and the 
lack of urgency on my part in answering the question you put to me. But what 
can one do: age slows down the pen. Nevertheless, I hope that you will find my 
opinions and my feelings the same as ever. I see that your last letter was written 
at your dictation by the hand of your private secretary, your charming wife. So 
Madame Marx still remembers the old hermit in Brussels. Please, convey to her 
my respectful greetings. 
"Continue to include me, dear colleague, among your friends. With fraternal 
greetings. 
Lelewel".—-Ed. 

=====第347页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 323 
"5, Cambridge Place, 
Kensington, London, 
February 11th, 1860 
"My dear Marx, 
"I have read a series of infamous articles against you in the National-Zeitung and 
am utterly astonished at the falsehood and malignity of the writer. I really feel it a 
duty that every one who is acquainted with you, should, however unnecessary such 
a testimony must be, pay a tribute to the worth, honour and disinterestedness of 
your character. It becomes doubly incumbent in me to do so, when I recollect how 
many articles you contributed to my little magazine, the Notes to the People, and 
subsequently to the People's Paper, for a series of years, utterly gratuitously; articles 
which were of such high value to the people's cause, and of such great benefit to 
the paper. Permit me to hope that you will severely punish your dastardly and 
unmanly libeller. 
"Believe me, my dear Marx, most sincerely, yours, 
Ernest Jones 
"Dr. Karl Marx" 3 
"Tribune Office, 
New York, 
March 8th, 1860 
"My dear Sir, 
"In reply to your request I am very happy to state the facts of your connection 
with various publications in the United States concerning which I have had a 
personal knowledge. Nearly nine years ago I engaged you to write for the New 
York Tribune, and the engagement has been continued ever since. You have written 
for us constantly, without a single week's interruption, that I can remember; and 
you are not only one of the most highly valued, but one of the best paid 
contributors attached to the journal. The only fault I have had to find with you has 
been that you have occasionally exhibited too German a tone of feeling for an 
American newspaper. This has been the case with reference both to Russia and 
France. In questions relating to both, Czarism and Bonapartism, I have sometimes 
thought that you manifested too much interest and too great anxiety for the unity 
and independence of Germany. This was more striking perhaps in connection with 
the late Italian war than on any other occasion. In that I agreed perfectly with you: 
sympathy with the Italian people. I had as little confidence as you in the sincerity of 
the French Emperor, and believed as little as you that Italian liberty was to be 
expected from him; but I did not think that Germany had any such ground for 
alarm as you, in common with other patriotic Germans, thought she had. 
"I must add that in all your writings which have passed through my hands, you 
have always manifested the most cordial interest in the welfare and progress of the 
labouring classes; and that you have written much with direct reference to that 
end. 
"I have also at various times within the past five or six years been the medium 
through which contributions of yours have been furnished to Putnam's Monthly,247 a 
literary magazine of high character; and also to the New American Cyclopaedia, of 
which I am also an editor, and for which you have furnished some very important 
articles. 
a Marx gives the letter in English.— Ed. 

=====第348页=====
324 Karl Marx 
"If any other explanations are needed I shall be happy to furnish them. 
Meanwhile I remain, yours very faithfully, 
Charles A. Dana, Managing Editor of the N. Y. Tribune 
"Dr. Charles Marx" 3 
15. DENTU PAMPHLETS 
I have shown that the Dentu pamphlets are the source from 
which the German Dâ-Dâ derives his wisdom about world history 
in general and "Napoleon's salutary policy" in particular. The 
"salutary policy of Napoleon" is a phrase from a recent leading 
article by "democrat" F. Zabel. What the French themselves think 
and know about these pamphlets can be seen from the following 
extract from the Paris weekly, the Courrier du Dimanche, No. 42, of 
October 14, 1860. 
"Pour ce qui regarde le moment actuel, prenez dix brochures au hasard, et vous 
reconnaîtrez que neuf au moins ont été pensées, élaborées, écrites ... par qui? par 
des romanciers de profession, par des chansonniers, par des vaudevillistes, par des 
sacristains! 
"Parle-t-on dans les gazettes de mystérieuses entrevues entre les puissances du 
Nord, de la Sainte-Alliance qui ressuscite? Vite voilà un faiseur agréable de 
couplets assez littéraires, et même (jadis) passablement libéraux, qui court chez 
l'inévitable M. Dentu et lui apporte sous ce titre ronflant: La coalition, une longue et 
fade paraphrase des articles de M. Grandguillot. L'alliance anglaise semble déplaire 
parfois à M. Limayrac? Vite, un M. Châtelet, chevalier de l'ordre de Grégoire le 
Grand,248  et qui doit être sacristain quelque part, si j'en crois son style, publie ou 
republie un long et ridicule factum: Crimes et délits de l'Angleterre contre la France. 
Déjà l'auteur du Compère Guillery (Edmond About) avait jugé à propos de nous 
édifier sur les arcanes politiques de la monarchie prussienne, et avait donné du 
haut de ses chutes théâtrales, des conseils de prudence aux chambres de Berlin. On 
annonce que M. Clairville va prochainement élucider la question de l'isthme de 
Panama, si fort embrouillée par M. Belly; et sans doute quelques jours après la 
conférence royale du 21 Octobre, 249 on verra paraître à toutes les vitrines de nos 
libraires une splendide brochure rose qui portera ce titre: Mémoire sur l'entrevue de 
Varsovie par le corps de ballet de l'Opéra. 
"Cette invasion, en apparence inexplicable, des questions politiques par les dii 
minores de la littérature, se rattache à bien des causes. Nous en citerons ici une 
seule, mais qui est la plus immédiate et la plus incontestable. 
"Dans le marasme presque universel d'esprit et de coeur, ces messieurs, qui 
font le triste métier d'amuseurs publics, ne savent plus par quel moyen secouer et 
réveiller leurs lecteurs. Les vieilles gaîtés de leurs refrains et de leurs anecdotes leur 
reviennent sans cesse. Eux-mêmes se sentent aussi mornes, aussi tristes, aussi 
ennuyés que ceux qu'ils entreprennent de dérider. Voilà pourquoi à bout de 
ressources, ils se sont mis, en désespoir de cause, à écrire les uns des mémoires de 
courtisanes, les autres des brochures diplomatiques. 
"Puis,  un beau matin, un aventurier de la plume, qui n'a jamais fait à la 
politique le sacrifice d'une heure sérieuse d'étude, qui n'a pas même au coeur le 
a Marx gives the letter in English.— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 325 
semblant d'une conviction, quelle qu'elle soit, se lève et se dit: 'J'ai besoin de 
frapper un grand coup! Vovons! que ferai-je pour attirer sur moi l'attention 
générale qui me fuit d'instinct? Ecrirai-je un opuscule sur la question Léotard ou 
sur la question d'Orient? Révélerai-je au monde surpris le secret de boudoirs où je 
n'entrai jamais, ou celui de la politique russe qui m'est plus étrange encore? Dois-je 
m'attendrir en prose voitairienne sur  les femmes  éclaboussées  ou en prose évangélique 
sur les malheureuses populations maronites250  traquées, dépouillées, massacrées 
par le fanatisme mahométan? Lancerai-je une apoiogie de mademoiselle Rigol-
boche ou un plaidoyer en faveur du pouvoir temporel? Décidément, j opte pour la 
politique. J'amuserai encore mieux mon public avec ;es rois et ies empereurs, 
qu'avec les lorettes.' Cela dit, notre surnuméraire ae la littérature bohème compulse 
le Moniteur, hante quelques >ours les colonnades de la Bourse, rend visite à 
quelques fonctionnaires et sait enfin de cuel côté souffle ie vent de la curiosité à la 
ville,  ou celui de la faveur à la cour: il choisit alors un titre que ce vent puisse 
enfler d'une façon suffisante et se reoose content sur ses lauriers. Aussi bien son 
oeuvre est faite désormais; car aujourd'hui, en matière de brochure, il n'y a que 
deux choses qui comptent, le titre et les relations que l'on suppose entre l'écrivain 
et 'de hauts personnages'. 
"Est-il nécessaire de dire, après cela, ce que valent les brochures qui nous 
inondent? Ramassez un jour tout ce que vous avez de courage, tâchez de les lire 
jusqu'au bout et vous serez effrayés de l'ignorance inouïe, de la légèreté intolérable, 
voire même de l'amoindrissement de •.ens moral qu'elles décèlent dans leurs 
auteurs. Et je ne parle pas ici des plus mauvaises... Et chaque année nous courbe 
plus bas, chaque année voit apparaître un nouveau signe de décadence 
intellectuelle, chaque année ajoute une honte littéraire nouvelle à celles dont il 
nous faut déjà rougir. De telle sorte que les plus optimistes se prennent quelquefois 
à douter de demain, et se demandent avec angoisse: Sortirons-nous de là?" a 
1 "As to the present state of affairs, pick any ten pamphlets at random and you 
will find that at least nine of them have been devised worked out and written ... by 
whom? By professional novelists, song-writers, vauceville-vvriters or sextons. 
"If the newspapers mention mysterious meetings between the northern powers 
or a project to resurrect the Hoiv Alliance, Immediately some amiable person 
manufacturing fairly literary songs, and even (formerly) passably liberal songs, will 
run off to the inevitable M. Dentu and supply him, under the resounding title: "La 
Coalition', with a lengthy and insipid paraphrase of the articles of M. Grandguil-
!ot. If the alliance with England seems sometimes to disolease M. Limayrac, a 
M. Châtelet, knight of the Order of Gregory the Great, and a man who must be a 
sexton somewhere or other, to judge him by his stvle, quickly publishes or 
republishes a long, ridiculous account: Crimes et délits de l'Angleterre contre la France. 
The author of Compère Guillery (Edmona About) has already deemed it expedient 
to edifv us with stories about the political secrets of the Prussian monarchv and 
"«m i,ie heights ot his theatrical fiascos he has nonoured the Chambers of Berlin 
i; is ->ru(.< nt ..u\ice. Tt has been announced that M. Clairviile will soon 
. r1 in o iioHeni  •>{  the Isthmus of Panama which has been so thoroughly 
•' .  <  !!' and no doubt a :ew days after the royai conference oi' 
-\* (' " i .ail see in the windows oi ail our bookshops a spienaid pink 
• armg the title: Mémoire sur l'entrevue de Varsovie par ie corps de ballet de 
r ' it.iL^ inexplicable invasion of the political arena by the  lesser  gods of 
• 01 dime ' «»•> aianv causes. We shall only mention one here, but that one is the 
most palpable and the most indisputable of all. 

=====第350页=====
326 Karl Marx 
The phrase "  the salutary  policy  of Napoleon" quoted above was taken 
from the National-Zeitung. Strangely enough the Paris correspon­
dent of the Manchester Guardian which is regarded throughout 
England as a paper publishing mostly reliable news—has reported 
the following curiosity: 
"Paris,  November 8.... Louis-Napoleon spends his gold in vain in supporting 
such newspapers as the National-Zeitung." (Manchester Guardian of November 12, 
I860.)3 
"Amidst the almost universal decline of intellect and heart, the gentlemen who 
have the dreary task of amusing the public are at a loss for the means to astonish 
and rouse their readers. They continually reproduce the old jokes of their refrains 
and their anecdotes. They are themselves as depressed, as melancholy and as bored 
as those whom they undertake to cheer up. This is why out of sheer despair, when 
they have come to their wits' end, some of them begin to write the memoirs of 
courtesans, and others diplomatic pamphlets. 
"Then, one fine morning, an adventurer of the pen who has never sacrificed a 
single hour of serious study to politics, who does not even have the ghost of a 
genuine conviction of any sort in his heart, gets out of bed and says to  himself: 
'1 must strike a great blow! Let's see. what shall I do to attract the notice of the 
general public which instinctively ignores me? Shall I write an article on the 
Leotard affair or on the Eastern Question? Shall I reveal to an astonished world 
the secrets of boudoirs which I have never entered, or the mysteries of Russian 
politics of which I know even less? Shall I melt with emotion in the Voltairean 
manner about the faie of fallen women, or bewail in Biblical prose the wretched 
Maronite population persecuted, plundered and slaughtered by Moslem fanaticism? 
Shall I sing the praises of Mademoiselle Rigolboche or pen an apologia of temporal 
power? I have it: I shall settle for politics. I shall entertain my public better with 
kings and emperors than with loose women.' Having said which, our supernumer­
ary of the literary Bohème wades through the Moniteur, hangs around the 
colonnades of the Stock Exchange for several days, visits a few officials and in the 
end he knows which way the wind of the town's curiosity is blowing, or the 
direction of the favour of the Court. He then selects a title capable of capturing a 
sufficient portion of this wind, whereupon he rests on his laurels. He has now done 
everything necessary: for these days only two things are needed to make a 
pamphlet: the title and the relations thai may be supposed to exist between the 
author and people in high places'. 
"Is it stili necessarv. after all this, to speak of the value of the pamphlets which 
are flooding the market? If one day you pluck up all your courage and try to read 
them right through to the end you will be appalled by the extraordinary ignorance. 
the unbearable frivoiousness and especially the utter debasement of moral 
principles tiiai thev reveal in their authors. And I am not speaking of the worst of 
them.... And even year sees the standard sink still lower, every year brings new 
evidence oi intellectual decadence, every year brings a new literary dishonour to 
add to those which already make us blush. Things have come to such a pass tha 
even the greates. optimists sometimes wonder what the morrow will bring and 
anxiously ask themselves: Shall we ever be able to escape from all  this?"—Ed. 
a Marx quotes the passage from The Manchester Guardian in English and gives the 
German translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第351页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 327 
However, I think that the normally so well-informed correspond­
ent of the Manchester Guardian is mistaken this time. For F. Zabel 
is said to have gone over to the Bonapartist camp to prove that he is 
not in the pay of Austria. At any rate, this information reached me 
from Berlin and it fits well into the—Dunciad. 
16. POSTSCRIPT 
a) K. VOGT AND LA CIMENTAIRE 
While the last of these pages were being printed, I accidentally 
came across the October issue (1860) of the Stimmen der Zeit. 
A. Kolatschek, the former publisher of the Deutsche Monatsschrift, 
the organ of the refugee parliamentarians, and hence, in a 
manner of speaking, the literary superior of the "fugitive Regent 
of the Empire", tells the following story about his friend Karl Vogt 
on p. 37: 
"The Geneva joint-stock company, La Cimentaire, which numbered none other 
than Herr Karl Vogt himself among its directors, was founded in 1857. By 1858 the 
shareholders were down to their last farthing and the public prosecutor 
immediately put one of the directors in gaol on charges of fraud. At the time of 
the arrest Herr Vogt happened to be away in Berne; he returned in haste, the man 
who had been arrested was set at liberty, the charges were suppressed 'for fear of 
causing a scandal', but the shareholders lost everything. But after such an example 
as this it cannot really be maintained that property is very well protected in Geneva 
and the error of Herr Karl Vogt in this respect is all the stranger since he was, as 
we have mentioned, one of the directors of the company concerned. And even in France 
in similar cases it is customary to search for the culprits among the directors, to put 
them into gaol and to use their property to satisfy the civil claims of the 
shareholders." 
This should be compared with the account given by Joh. Ph. 
Becker in his letter (in Chapter X) about the bank incident which 
drove M. James Fazy into the arms of the Decembrists.3  Such details 
as this are a great help in solving the riddle of how "Napoleon  le Petit" 
became the greatest man of his age. As is well known "Napoléon le 
Petit" himself had to choose between a coup d'état and—Clichy. 251 
b) KOSSUTH 
The following excerpt from a memorandum of a conversation 
with Kossuth proves incontrovertibly that Kossuth knows perfectly 
well that it is Russia that constitutes the greatest threat to 
a See this volume, pp. 230-35.— Ed. 
12-1305 

=====第352页=====
328 Karl Marx 
Hungary. The memorandum252 comes from one of the most 
celebrated radical members3 of the present House of Commons.b 
"Memorandum of a conversation with M. Kossuth on the evening of May 30th, 1854, 
at.... 
"... A return to strict legality in Hungary (said he, viz. Kossuth) might renew the 
union of Hungary and Austria, and would prevent Russia from finding any partisan in 
Hungary. He (Kossuth) would not offer any opposition to a return to legality. He 
would advise his countrymen to accept with good faith such a restoration, if it 
could be obtained, and would pledge himself not in any way to be an obstacle to 
such an arrangement. He would not himself return to Hungary. He would not him­
self put forward such a course for Austria as he had no belief in Austria's return to 
legality, except under pressure of dire necessity. He gave me authority to say, such 
were his sentiments, and if appealed to, he would avow them, though he could not 
commit himself to any proposal, as he could not expect Austria to abandon her 
traditional scheme of centralisation till forced to do  so....  He would have consented 
in 1848 to Hungarian troops being sent to resist attacks of the Piedmontese" 
(M. Kossuth went much further in 1848 since he ensured that Hungarian troops 
would be sent against the Italian "rebels" by delivering a violent speech in the 
Imperial Diet in Pest), "but would not employ them to coerce Austrian Italy, as he 
would not consent to foreign troops in Hungary."253 
The mythopoeic power of popular fantasy has always shown 
itself in the creation of "great men". Simon Bolivar is undeniably 
the most convincing illustration of this. As for Kossuth, he is, for 
example, celebrated as the man who abolished feudalism in 
Hungary. Nevertheless he is in no way connected with the three 
great measures: universal taxation, the abolition of the feudal 
burden of the peasantry and the abolition without compensation of 
the tithes paid to the Church. The motion for universal taxation (the 
nobility having previously been exempt) was put by Szemere; the 
motion to do away with corvée, etc., by Bonis, the deputy for 
Szabolcz, and the clergy  itself,  acting through Jekelfalussy, a deputy 
and a canon, voluntarily relinquished its rights to raise tithes. 254 
c) EDMOND ABOUT'S LA PRUSSE EN 1860 
At the end of Chapter VIII I expressed the opinion that 
E. About1 ?, pamphlet La Prusse en 1860, or as it was originally 
called, Napoléon III et la Prusse, was a retranslation into French of 
an excerpt of Dâ-Dâ Vogt's German compilation of the Dentu 
pamphlets. 0 The only objection to this view was the total ignorance 
a William Sandford.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English term and gives the text of the memorandum, which 
follows, in English too.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 182-83.— Ed 

=====第353页=====
Herr Vogt. —XII. Appendices 329 
of the German language on the part of that unsuccessful comedy 
writer, E. About. But was it out of the question for the compère 
Guillery to have discovered a commère allemande 3 somewhere or 
other in Paris? Who this commère was remained a matter of 
conjecture. La Prusse en 1860 was known to have been published 
as a vademecum for Louis Bonaparte's trip to Baden-Baden 255; it 
was designed to foreshadow his request to the Prince Regent and 
to make it clear to Prussia that in the December 2 Empire Prussia 
possessed, in the concluding words of the pamphlet, an "allié très 
utile qui est peut-être appelé à lui" (Prussia) "rendre de grands 
services, pourvu qu'elle s'y prête un  peu"}*  E. About had already 
revealed in French (see Chapter IX, "Agency" 0) in L'Opinion 
Nationale as early as the spring of 1860 that "pourvu qu'elle s'y prête 
un peu" translated into German means: "on the condition that 
Prussia sells the Rhine Province to France". In view of these 
aggravating circumstances I could not name anyone as the 
German prompter of E. About, the unsuccessful comedy writer 
and Dentu pamphletist, simply on the basis of a conjecture. But I 
am now justified in declaring that the German commère of the 
compère Guillery is none other than Vogt's gentle Kunigunde— Herr 
Ludwig Simon of Trier. This was hardly suspected by the German 
refugee in London d who penned the well-known answer to About's 
pamphlet/ 
a Compère —godfather, commère allemande —German godmother.— Ed. 
h "A very useful ally, who is still ready to render her" (Prussia) "great service, 
provided that she will help herself."—Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 211-12.— Ed. 
d S. L. Borkheim.— Ed. 
e Napoleon III und Preussen. Antwort eines deutschen Flüchtlings auf die Broschüre 
"Preussen in 1860" von Edmond About, London, 1860.— Ed. 
12* 

=====第354页=====
V»"~ XIX N°- 5,882. NEW-YORK, TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1880. PRICE TWO CENTS. 
Karl Marx 
AFFAIRS IN FRANCE 
Paris,  Jan. 17, 1860 
Louis Napoleon has been converted to Free-trade, and is about 
to inaugurate a new era of peace. He can hardly fail to be enrolled 
as a member of the Society of Friends,257  and the year 1860 will, in 
the annals of Europe, be recorded as the year 1 of the 
Millennium. This extraordinary news going the round of the 
London Press dates its origin from a letter of Louis Bonaparte 
published in the Moniteur, dated Jan. 15, 1860, and addressed to 
Mr. Fould, Minister of State. 3 The first effect of the letter was to 
send the Funds down at Paris and to send them up at London. 
Now, before all things, it seems necessary to scrutinize somewhat 
closely the corpus delicti—that is, the Imperial letter—upon which 
the whole superstructure of the new era is about to be reared. 
Louis Bonaparte informs Mr. Fould that 
"the moment has arrived for applying ourselves to the means of giving a 
greater development to the different branches of national wealth." 
The almost identical announcementb  appeared in the Moniteur 
of January, 1852, when the Coup d'état inaugurated the era of the 
Crédit Mobilier, the Crédit Fonder, and other Crédits ambulants. 258 
And this is not all. Since that eventful epoch, every yearly financial 
bulletin issued under the auspices of the French autocrat has laid 
all its stress upon and proved by an awful array of official figures 
the circumstance that the Empire had been as good as its word, 
a Here and below see Le Moniteur universel, No. 15, January 15, 1860. Further 
on Marx calls this letter a "manifesto".— Ed. 
b "Au nom du peuple français", Le Moniteur universel, No. 15, January 15, 
1852.—  Ed. 

=====第355页=====
Affairs in France 331 
and that, under its fostering sway, all the branches of national 
industry had taken an immense development. 
Thus one finds himself in a fix. Either the proclamations of the 
Coup d'état were untimely, and the financial bulletins issued after 
the Coup d'état were spurious, or the present proclamation is a 
mere hoax. 
At all events, this much appears incontrovertible, on the own 
showing of the new Imperial manifesto, that the economical 
benefits which French society was to derive from the resurrection 
of Bonapartism belong not to the past, but to the future tense. Let 
us, then, see by what new contrivance the happy economical 
change is to be brought about. 
In the first instance, Louis Bonaparte tells Mr. Fould, who must 
have been somewhat startled at the profound discovery of his 
master, that "our foreign commerce must be developed by the 
exchange of products," a stupendous truism, indeed. Foreign 
commerce consisting in the exchange of national products for 
foreign products, it cannot be denied that, to develop French 
foreign commerce, the exchange of French products must be 
developed. The principal result which Louis Bonaparte expects 
from the new development of French foreign commerce he is 
about to start, is "to spread prosperity among the working 
classes," the which, as implicitly confessed by the man of the 
Coup d'État, and as shown by recent French writers (see, for 
instance, the works of the late Mr. Colins 3), have visibly decayed 
within the last ten years. Unhappily, one great fact strikes the most 
superficial observer. French foreign commerce has made immense 
strides from 1848 to 1860. Amounting in 1848 to about 875 
millions francs, it has risen to more than double that sum in 1859. 
An increase of commerce by more than 100 per cent in the short 
space of ten years, is a thing almost unprecedented. The causes 
that have brought about that increase are to be found in 
California, Australia, the United States, and so forth, but certainly 
not in the archives of the Tuileries. 259 It appears, then, that 
despite the immense increase of French foreign commerce within 
the last ten years—an increase to be traced to revolutions in the 
markets of the world quite beyond the petty control of the French 
police—the situation of the mass of the French nation has not 
improved. Consequently, there must have been at work some 
a Marx refers to Jean Guillaume Colins' works L'économie politique. Sources des 
révolutions et des utopies prétendues  socialistes,  Vols. I-III, Paris, 1856-1857, and Science 
sociale, Paris, 1857.— Ed. 

=====第356页=====
332 Karl Marx 
agency powerful enough to frustrate the natural results of 
commercial progress. If the development of French foreign 
commerce accounts for the apparent ease with which the second 
Empire has been allowed to indulge its expensive vagaries, the 
prostration of the nation, despite its doubled exports, betrays the 
cost at which that Imperial ease is purchased. If the Empire could 
not have subsisted without that development of French foreign 
commerce, that commercial progress has failed with the Empire 
to bear its legitimate fruits. 
The Austrian Emperor, having banished the deficit from his 
States by dint of a ukase, why should Louis Bonaparte, by dint of 
another ukase, not command the increase of French foreign 
commerce? Still he apprehends some hitch in his way. 
"We must first," he says, "improve our agriculture, and free our industry from 
all interior impediments which place it in a position of inferiority." 
That French agriculture is badly in want of improvement, is the 
standing topic of French economists; but how is Louis Bonaparte 
to do the thing? In the first place, he will grant loans to 
agriculture at a moderate "interest." French agriculture is 
notoriously the concern of more than two-thirds of the French 
nation. Will Louis Bonaparte impose taxes upon the remaining 
third, in order to grant loans "at a moderate rate" to the majority 
of the nation? The idea is in fact too preposterous to be insisted 
upon. On the other hand, it was the confessed aim of his Crédits 
Fonciers to direct loanable capital to the land. The only thing they 
have proved efficient in is not in ameliorating agriculture, but in 
ruining small freeholds and accelerating the concentration of 
landed estates. After all, we have here again the old worn-out 
panacea—institutions of credit. Nobody will deny that the second 
Empire marks an epoch in the development of French credit, but 
that it has overshot the mark, and that, with its own credit, its 
credit-fostering influence has gone to the wall. The only novelty 
seems to be that the semi-official credit machinery having been 
stretched and worked to its utmost, Louis Bonaparte now dreams 
of converting the Government itself into a direct loan-shop. While 
any such attempt must be fraught with immense dangers, it would 
as necessarily collapse as did his grain granaries, intended to screw 
up the prices of corn. 260 Draining, irrigating, and cleaning the 
ground, are all very good things in their different lines, but their 
only possible effect is to multiply agricultural products. They 
cannot raise, and they are not intended to raise, the prices of 
those products. Now then, even if Louis Bonaparte should find by 

=====第357页=====
Affairs in France 333 
some miraculous methods the ways and means required for those 
ameliorations on a national scale, how are they to mend the 
depreciation of agricultural produce which the French peasant has 
labored under for these five years? But then, Louis Napoleon will 
set about a consecutive amelioration of the means of communica­
tion. The coolness with which this proposition is made, beats even 
Bonapartist impudence. Look only to the development of French 
railways since 1850. The annual expense for these "means of 
communication" amounted, from 1845 to '47, to about 
175,000,000 of francs; from 1848 to '51, to about 125,000,000; 
from 1852 to '54, to nearly 250,000,000 (double the expenditure 
of 1848-'51); from 1854a to '56, to nearly 550,000,000; from 1857 
to '59, to about 500,000,000. In 1857, when the general crisis 
broke in upon the commercial world, the French Government 
stood aghast at the immense sums still required for the railways in 
progress or already conceded. It prohibited the railway companies 
from raising, by means of securities, debentures, &c, more than 
212,500,000 francs annually, interdicted the getting up of new 
companies, and circumscribed within fixed limits the work to be 
annually undertaken. And, after all this, Louis Bonaparte speaks 
as if railways, canals, and so forth, were now first to be invented! 
A forcible reduction of the canal dues, which he hints at, is, of 
course, an operation involving the breach of public contracts, 
frightening the capital embarked in those enterprises, and 
certainly not calculated to allure new capital into the same 
channels. Lastly, to find a market for agricultural products, 
manufacturing industry is to be stimulated. Yet, as we have 
already stated, manufacturing industry has made immense strides 
during the second Empire, but with all that, with the unprec­
edented increase of exports, with the immense development of 
railways and other means of communication, with the exaggera­
tion of a credit system formerly unknown in France, French 
agriculture languishes, and the French peasantry decays. How 
shall we account for the strange phenomenon? The fact that 
255,000,000 of francs are added yearly to the funded debt, not to 
speak of the impost of blood for the army and the navy, offers a 
sufficient answer. The Empire itself is the great incubus whose 
burden grows in a greater ratio than the productive powers of the 
French nation. 
Louis Bonaparte's prescriptions for French industry, if we 
deduct all that is mere phraseology, or is still looming in the 
a Thus in the original.— Ed. 

=====第358页=====
334 Karl Marx 
future, are simply these: Suppression of the duties on wool and 
cotton, and successive reductions on sugar and coffee. Now, this is 
all very well, but all the gullibility of English free-traders is 
required to call such measures free trade. Whoever is acquainted 
with political economy, knows full well that the abolition of duties 
on agricultural raw material forms a main item in the doctrine of 
the mercantile school of the eighteenth century. These "interior 
impediments" which weigh upon French production, are as 
nothing if compared with the octrois,261  dividing France into as 
many independent countries as there are towns, paralyzing the 
internal exchange, and barring the creation of wealth by crippling 
its consumption. Those octrois, however, have increased under the 
Imperial régime, and will continue to increase. The diminution of 
duties on wool and cotton is to be made up by suppressing the 
sinking fund, so that the last restraint upon the growth of the 
public debts, although merely nominal, will be done away with. 
On the other hand, the woods are to be cleared, the hills to be 
leveled, and the moors to be drained, by applying to those 
purposes the 160,000,000 of francs said to form the remnant 
disposable from the last war loans, in three yearly installments, 
which will make less than 54,000,000 of francs on an annual 
average. Why, the embankment of the Loire alone, so pompously 
announced by the Imperial Cagliostro some five years ago, and 
then no longer thought of, would absorb the whole sum in less 
than three months. What then remains of the manifesto! "The 
inauguration of an era of peace," as if that era had not long 
since been proclaimed at Bordeaux. "L'Empire c'est la paix."* 
Written on January 17, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5862, February 7, 1860 
a The words quoted are taken from Napoleon Ill's speech in Bordeaux on 
October 9, 1852, shortly before the plebiscite and the proclamation of the second 
Empire. They were a demagogic attempt to win the sympathy of the people.— Ed. 

=====第359页=====
335 
Karl Marx 
ENGLISH POLITICS 
London, Jan. 27, 1860 
The most interesting topics touched upon in the parliamentary 
address3 debates were the third Chinese war, the commercial 
treaty with France, and the Italian complication.262 The Chinese 
question, it ought to be understood, involves not only an 
international question, but also a constitutional question of vital 
import. The second Chinese war,263 undertaken on the arbitrary 
behest of Lord Palmerston, having led first to a vote of censure 
against his Cabinet, and then to a forcible dissolution of the House 
of Commons—the new House, although elected under his own 
auspices, was never called upon to cashier the sentence passed by 
its predecessor. To this very moment Lord Palmerston's second 
Chinese war stands condemned by a parliamentary verdict. But 
this is not all. 
On the 16th of September, 1859, the account of the repulse on 
the Peiho was received in England. Instead of summoning 
Parliament, Lord Palmerston addressed himself to Louis 
Bonaparte, and conversed with the autocrat on a new Anglo-
French expedition against China. 
"During three months," as Lord Grey says, "the British ports and arsenals 
resounded with the din of preparation, and measures were taken for dispatching 
artillery, stores, and gun-boats to China, and for sending land forces of not less 
than 10,000 men, in addition to the naval forces."b 
a Victoria, "The Queen's Speech. The Address, January 24, 1860," The Times, 
No. 23525, January 25, I860.—Ed. 
b Here and below Marx quotes Lord Grey's speech in the House of Lords on 
January 24, 1860 during the parliamentary address debates. See The Times, 
No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed. 

=====第360页=====
336 Karl Marx 
The country having thus been fairly embarked in a new war, on 
the one hand by a treaty with France, on the other by a vast 
expenditure incurred without any previous communication to 
Parliament, the latter, on its meeting, is coolly asked "to thank her 
Majesty for having informed them of what had occurred, and the 
preparations that were making for the expedition to China." In 
what different style could Louis Napoleon himself have addressed 
his own corps  législatif,  or the Emperor Alexander his senate? 
In the debate on the address in the House of Commons in 1857, 
Mr. Gladstone, the present Chancellor of the Exchequer, with 
reference to the Persian war,264 had indignantly exclaimed: 
"I will say, without fear of contradiction, that the practice of commencing wars, 
without first referring to Parliament, is utterly at variance with the established 
practice of the country, dangerous to the Constitution, and absolutely requiring the 
intervention of this House, in order to render the repetition of so dangerous a 
proceeding utterly impossible."3 
Lord Palmerston has not only repeated the proceeding, "so 
dangerous to the Constitution"; he has not only repeated it this 
time with the concurrence of the sanctimonious Mr. Gladstone, 
but as if to try the strength of ministerial irresponsibility, wielding 
the rights of Parliament against the Crown, the prerogatives of the 
Crown against Parliament and the privileges of both against the 
people—he had the boldness to repeat the dangerous proceeding 
within the same sphere of action. His one Chinese war being 
censured by the Parliament, he undertakes another Chinese war in 
spite of Parliament. Still, in both Houses, only one man mustered 
courage enough to make a stand against this ministerial usurpa­
tion; and, curiously to say, that one man belonging not to the 
popular, but to the aristocratic branch of the Legislature. The man 
is Lord Grey. He proposed an amendment to the address in 
answer to the Queen's speech to the purport that the expedition 
ought not to have been entered upon before the sense of both 
Houses of Parliament was taken. 
The manner in which Lord Grey's amendment was met, both by 
the spokesman of the ministerial party and the leader of her 
Majesty's opposition, is highly characteristic of the political crisis 
which the representative institutions of England are rapidly 
approaching. Lord Grey conceded that, in a formal sense, the 
Crown enjoyed the prerogative of entering upon wars, but since 
Ministers were interdicted from spending one single farthing on 
a Marx quotes Gladstone from Lord Grey's speech.— Ed. 

=====第361页=====
English Politics 337 
any enterprise without the previous sanction of Parliament, it was 
the constitutional law and practice that the responsible representa­
tives of the Crown should never enter upon warlike expeditions 
before notice having been given to Parliament, and the latter been 
called upon to make provision for defraying the expenditure 
which might be thus incurred. Thus, if the council of the nation 
thought fit, it might check, in the beginning, any unjust or 
impolitic war contemplated by ministers. His Lordship quoted 
then some examples in order to show how strictly these rules were 
formerly adhered to. In 1790, when some British vessels were 
seized by the Spaniards on the north-west coast of America, Pitt 
brought down to both Houses a message from the Crowna  calling 
for a vote of credit to meet the probable expenses. Again in 
December 1826, when the daughter of Dom Pedro b applied to 
England for assistance against Ferdinand VII of Spain, who 
intended an invasion of Portugal to the benefit of Dom Miguel, 
Canning brought down a similar message 0 notifying to Parliament 
the nature of the case and the amount of expenditure likely to be 
incurred. In conclusion Lord Grey broadly intimated that the 
ministry had dared to raise taxes upon the country without the 
concurrence of Parliament, since the large expenditure already 
incurred must have been defrayed one way or other; and could 
not have been defrayed without encroaching upon money-grants 
provided for entirely different demands. 
Now which sort of reply did Lord Grey elicit on the part of the 
Cabinet? The Duke of Newcastle, who had been foremost in 
protesting against the lawfulness of Palmerston's second Chinese 
war, answered in the first instance that "the very wholesome 
practice had arisen of late years of never moving an amendment 
to the address, unless some great party object was to be attained."0 
Consequently, Lord Grey being not prompted by factious motives, 
and pretending not to aspire to put Ministers out in order to put 
himself in, what, for the life of the Duke of Newcastle, could he 
mean by infringing upon that "very wholesome practice of late 
years"? Was he crotchety enough to fancy that they were to break 
a George III, "Message respecting Vessels captured by Spain at Nootka Sound. 
1790,  5 May", The Parliamentary History of England from the Earliest Period to the Year 
1803,  London, 1816, Vol. 28, pp. 764-66.— Ed. 
b Maria II da Gloria.— Ed. 
c George IV [Message respecting Portugal, December 11, 1826], Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, London, 1826, Vol. 16, pp. 334-36.— Ed. 
d Here and below Marx quotes the Duke of Newcastle's speech in the House of 
Lords on January 24, 1860. See The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed. 

=====第362页=====
338 Karl Marx 
lances except for great party objects? In the second instance, was it 
not notorious that the constitutional practice, so anxiously adhered 
to by Pitt and Canning, had been over and over again departed 
from by Lord Palmerston? Had that noble Viscount not carried on 
a war of his own in Portugal in 1831, in Greece in 1850, and, as 
the Duke of Newcastle might have added, in Persia, in Afghanis­
tan265 and in many other countries? Why, if Parliament had 
allowed Lord Palmerston to usurp to himself the right of war and 
peace and taxation during the course of thirty years, why, then, 
should they all at once try to break from their long servile 
tradition? Constitutional law might be on the side of Lord Grey, 
but prescription was undoubtedly on the side of Lord Palmerston. 
Why call the noble Viscount to account at this time of the day, 
since never before had he been punished for similar "wholesome" 
innovations? In fact, the Duke of Newcastle seemed rather 
indulgent in not accusing Lord Grey of rebellion for his attempt at 
breaking through Lord Palmerston's prescriptive privilege of 
doing with his own—the forces and the money of England—as he 
liked. 
Equally original was the manner in which the Duke of Newcastle 
endeavored to prove the legality of the Peiho expedition. There 
exists an Anglo-Chinese treaty of 1843, by dint of which England 
enjoys all the rights conceded by the Celestials to the most favored 
nations.266 Now Russia, in her recent treaty with China, has 
stipulated for the right of sailing up the Peiho.267 Consequently, 
under the treaty of 1843, the English had a right to such passage. 
This,  the Duke of Newcastle said, he might insist upon "without 
any great special pleading." Might he, indeed! On the one side 
there is the ugly circumstance that the Russian treaty was only 
ratified, and, consequently, dates its actual existence only from an 
epoch posterior to the Peiho catastrophe. This, of course, is but a 
slight husteron proteron.3 On the other hand, it is generally known 
that a state of war suspends all existing treaties. If the English 
were at war with the Chinese at the time of the Peiho expedition, 
they, of course, could appeal neither to the treaty of 1843, nor to 
any other treaty whatever. If they were not at war, Palmerston's 
Cabinet has taken upon itself to commence a new war without the 
sanction of Parliament? To escape the latter part of the 
dilemma, poor Newcastle asserts that since the Canton bombard­
ment,268 for the last two years, "England had never been at peace 
a The latter (put as) the former—a figure of speech in which what should come 
last is put first; inversion of the natural order.— Ed. 

=====第363页=====
English Politics 339 
with China." Consequently the Ministry had pushed on hostilities, 
not recommenced them, and consequently he might, without 
special pleading, appeal to the treaties effective only during a time 
of peace. And to highten the beauty of this queer sort of dialectics, 
Lord Palmerston, the chief of the Cabinet, asserts at the same 
time,  in the House of Commons, that England all this time over, 
"had never been at war with China."3 They were not so now. There 
were, of course, Canton bombardments, Peiho catastrophes, and 
Anglo-French expeditions, but there was no war, since war had 
never been declared, and since, to this moment, the Emperor of 
Chinab had allowed transactions at Shanghai to proceed in their 
usual course. The very fact of his having broken, in regard to the 
Chinese, through all the legitimate international forms of war, 
Palmerston pleads as a reason for dispensing also with the 
constitutional forms in regard to the British Parliament, while his 
spokesman in the House of Lords, Earl Granville, "with regard to 
China," disdainfully declares "the consultation of Parliament by 
Government" to be "a purely technical point."c  The consultation of 
Parliament by Government a purely technical point! What 
difference, then, does still remain between a British Parliament 
and a French Corps Législatif? In France, it is, at least, the 
presumed heir of a national hero d who dares to place himself in 
the place of the nation, and who at the same time openly 
confronts all the dangers of such usurpation. But, in England, it is 
some subaltern spokesman, some worn-out place-hunter, some 
anonymous nonentity of a so-called Cabinet, that, relying on the 
donkey power of the parliamentary mind and the bewildering 
evaporations of an anonymous press, without making any noise, 
without incurring any danger, quietly creep their way to irrespon­
sible power. Take on the one hand the commotions raised by a 
Sulla269; take on the other the fraudulent businesslike maneuvers 
of the manager of a joint stock bank, the secretary of a benevolent 
society, or the clerk of a vestry, and you will understand the 
difference between imperialist usurpation in France and ministeri­
al usurpation in England! Lord Derby, fully aware of the equal 
interest both factions have in securing ministerial impotence and 
irresponsibility, could, of course, "not concur with the noble Earl 
a Lord Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on January 25, 1860, 
The Times, No. 23526, January 26, I860.— Ed. 
b Hsien Fêng. — Ed. 
c The Earl of Granville's speech in the House of Lords on January 24, 1860, 
The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed. 
d The reference is to Napoleon III and Napoleon I.— Ed. 

=====第364页=====
340 Karl Marx 
[Grey] in the strong views which he takes of the laches of 
Government."3 He could not quite concur in Lord Grey's 
complaint that "the Government ought to have called Parliament 
together, to have consulted them on the Chinese question," but he 
"certainly would not support him by his vote, should he press the 
amendment to a division." 
Consequently, the amendment was not pressed to a division, and 
the whole debate, in both Houses, on the Chinese war, evaporated 
in grotesque compliments showered by both factions on the head 
of Admiral Hope for having so gloriously buried the English 
forces in the mud. 
Written on January 27, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5868, February 14, 1860 
a Lord Derby's speech in the House of Lords on January 24, 1860, The Times, 
No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed. 

=====第365页=====
341 
Karl Marx 
THE NEW TREATY BETWEEN FRANCE 
AND ENGLAND 
London, Jan. 28, 1860 
The commercial treaty with France 270 will not be communicated 
to the House of Commons before the 6th of February. Still, with 
what was broached during the address debates—with what is 
insinuated by the French papers, and with what is gossiped at 
London and Paris, one may, Mr. Gladstone's solemn warnings3 
notwithstanding, already venture upon some general appreciation 
of this "sweet changeling."271  It was on Monday, the 23d of 
January, that the treaty was duly signed at Paris, Rouher, Minister 
of Commerce, and Baroche, ad interim Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, acting as its French godfathers, while, on the part of 
England, the same function was performed by Lord Cowley and 
Mr. Cobden. That Mr. Michel Chevalier—the ex-St. Simonian— 
had his hand in the pie, and that general regret is felt throughout 
the whole realm of France that Louis Napoleon had not the tact of 
allowing this distinguished personage (viz.: Mr. Chevalier) to 
inscribe his name to the treaty by the side of his "English 
confrère," h is a piece of news which that "distinguished personage" 
himself was so condescending as to send over to London and have 
inserted in the various free-trade organs. But, what is not known 
by the journals, is that Père Enfantin, the ex-high-priest of St. 
Simonism, was the principal actor on the French side. Is it not 
truly wonderful how those St. Simonians, from Père Enfantin down 
to Isaac Péreire and Michel Chevalier, have been turned into the 
main economical pillars of the second Empire. But to return to 
a Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on January 25, 1860, The Times, 
No. 23526, January 26, I860.— Ed. 
b Colleague.— Ed. 

=====第366页=====
342 Karl Marx 
Mr. Chevalier's "English confrere," the Lancashire ex-manufac­
turer, who, of course, felt not a little elated at the honor of put­
ting his own sign-manual to an international treaty. If one should 
consider the circumstance that reciprocity treaties, and com­
mercial treaties generally, save the treaties with barbarians, have 
always been loudly denounced by the English free-traders, led 
by Mr. Cobden, as the worst and most perfidious form of pro­
tectionism; if it be further considered that the present treaty, 
even judged from the reciprocity stand-point, seems a rather 
ludicrous arrangement; and, lastly, if the political aims and 
purposes the treaty is destined to screen be duly weighed, people 
might feel inclined to pity Mr. Richard Cobden as the innocent 
victim of a Palmerstonian machination. Yet there is another side to 
the medal. Mr. Cobden, as is generally known, did once receive, in 
exchange for his Anti-Corn law 272 success, some £60,000 sterling 
on the part of the grateful manufacturing interest. Mr. Cobden 
invested the principal in American shares, and, consequent upon 
the crisis of 1857, lost almost everything. The hopes he still 
cherished when setting out on his voyage to the United States, 
proved delusory. Mr. Cobden returned to England a ruined man. 
To appeal to a national subscription some national pretext was 
wanted, some transaction that might be puffed, and again exhibit 
Mr. Cobden in the light of the guardian angel of the United 
Kingdom, "securing plenty and comfort to millions of lowly 
households." Well, the Anglo-French treaty did the thing, and, as 
you will see, from the provincial papers, a new subscription to the 
amount of £40,000, intended to compensate the great free-trade 
apostle for his American losses, already goes the round very 
"feelingly." There is no doubt that if Disraeli, for instance, had 
introduced to the Commons such a treaty, Mr. Cobden at the head 
of the free-traders would have risen to move for a vote of 
non-confidence in a Cabinet attempting to carry the legislation 
back to the darkest fallacies of the unenlightened past. 
From the following tables3 the number of protective duties 
levied during the year 1858 by England on French articles may be 
inferred: 
Articles. Duty. 
Baskets £2,061 
Butter 7,159 
China and Porcelain Ware 1,671 
Clocks 3,928 
a "Commercial Treaties and Free Trade", The Economist, No. 857, January 
28, 1860, p.  85.—  Ed. 

=====第367页=====
The New Treaty between France and England 343 
Coffee 4,311 
Eggs 19,934 
Embroidery  5,572 
Flowers, artificial 20,412 
Fruit 7,347 
Lace 1,858 
Boots, Shoes, and other Leather Manufactures  8,883 
Gloves 48,839 
Musical Instruments 4,695 
Oil, chemical 2,369 
Paper-Hangings 6,713 
Plaiting of Straw, for hats, &c 11,622 
Silks..."  215,455 
Brandy and other Spirits 824,960 
Sugar 275,702 
Tea 14,358 
Tobacco 52,696 
Watches 14,940 
Wine 164,855 
Most of the duties thus levied were protective duties, as those on 
baskets, clocks, lace, boots, gloves, silks, etc. Others, like the duties 
on brandy, etc., were higher than the English excise duty on 
British spirits, and so far protective. Even mere duties for 
revenue, such as the duty on wine, might be considered by a 
consequent free-trader as protective duties, because it is almost 
impossible to levy taxes on a foreign article without protecting 
some similar, if not identical, article in the home market. For 
instance, a revenue duty on foreign wine may be considered a 
protective duty for native beer, etc. By dint of the treaty just 
concluded all British duties on French manufactures will be 
abolished at once, while the duties on brandy, wine, and other 
articles, will be assimilated to English excise duties, or to the 
Custom-House duty now raised on similar products (wine for 
instance) if introduced from British colonies. On the other hand, 
the French changes of tariff will not be completely carried out 
before October, 1861, as will be seen from the following 
statement, borrowed from a French Government paper3: 
July 1, 1860 — Suppression of the import duties on cotton and wool. 
July 1, 1860 — Belgian tariff applied to English coal and coke. 
October 1, 1860 — Duty of 7 francs the 100 kilogs. substituted for 
the present duties on iron. 
December 31, 1860 — Diminution of the duties on the importation 
of machinery. 
a "Foreign correspondence. Paris, Thursday", The Economist, No. 857, January 
28, I860.—Ed. 

=====第368页=====
344 Karl Marx 
June 1, 1861—Removal of the prohibition on hemp threads and 
fabrics, and the adoption of duties not exceeding 30 per cent. 
October 1, 1861—Removal of all other prohibitions, to be replaced 
by protective duties ad valorem for five years, and not exceeding 25 per 
cent afterward. 
Save the reduction of the duty on English coal to the same rate 
now paid by Belgian coal, all the concessions apparently made by 
France appear of a very equivocal character. The price of a tun of 
pig iron No. 1 (Wales) amounts, for instance, at present, to £3 10/, 
but the French duty on iron will amount to nearly another £3. 
That the 30 per cent ad valorem duty on prohibited articles will be 
virtually protective is conceded by the London Economist. So far as 
the reductions, real or apparent, on English articles are put off to 
future periods, the English Government acts, in fact, the part of 
an insurance office for Louis Napoleon's tenure of power for the 
terms specified. The true secret, however, of the commercial 
treaty, viz.: that "it is no commercial treaty at all," but a simple hoax, 
intended to puzzle John Bull's commercial mind, and to cloak a 
deep-laid political scheme, has been masterly exposed by Mr. 
Disraeli during the address debates.3 The substance of his 
revelation was this: 
"Some years ago, the Emperor of the French made a communication similar 
to the letter lately addressed by him to the Minister of the Interior,0 in which 
communication he proposed the entire extinction of the prohibitive system, and the 
adoption of measures similar to those contained in his late manifesto.0  In 1856, a 
bill in this sense was introduced into the Corps Législatif [...], but, before being 
passed, was laid before the 86 Provincial Councils of France, d which, with the 
exception of 6, all adopted the proposal with an understanding that a certain 
period of time should elapse before the new system should be brought into play. 
Consequently, the Emperor agreeing with this proposition, some public document 
expressed his resolution to carry this system into effect, and appointed July, 1861, 
as the period with which it should commence." All, therefore, that France engages 
by the treaty to do in July, 1861, "was already provided by the course of law in 
France." 
Written on January 28, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5868, February 14, 1860 
a Benjamin Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on January 24, 1860, 
The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed. 
b The Times has "the Minister of State".— Ed. 
c See this volume, p. 330.— Ed. 
d The Times has "86 Councils General, the departmental Parliaments of 
France".— Ed. 

=====第369页=====
345 
Frederick Engels 
MILITARY REFORM IN GERMANY 
The Italian war of 1859, even more than the Crimean war,274 
established the fact that the French military organization was the 
best in Europe. Of all European armies, excepting the French, the 
Austrian army certainly ranked highest; and yet, in the short 
campaign of 1859, though its soldiers covered themselves with 
glory, the army, as a whole, could not win a single battle. With all 
due allowance for bad generalship, want of unity of command, 
and for the incompetent meddling of the Emperor, still the 
unanimous impression of the Austrian regimental officers and of 
the men was, that part of their want of success was due to an 
organization less adapted for real war than that of their 
opponents. And if the Austrian army—thoroughly reorganized as 
it had been only a few years before—was found to be deficient, 
what was to be expected from other armies whose organization 
was of even a more ancient date? 
That the French were superior in this particular, was a fact not 
to be wondered at. No nation with any military aptitude can carry 
on petty warfare for twenty-five years on so colossal a scale as that 
of Algeria,275 without thereby developing to a high pitch the 
capabilities of its troops. While England and Russia had waged 
their wars in India and the Caucasus principally with troops set 
apart for this service, the greater part of the French army had 
passed through the Algerine school. France really had made the 
most of this school, which had been expensive in men and money, 
but very effective and fruitful in valuable military experience. 
After this, the Crimean war, another school on a larger scale, 
served to enhance the confidence of the soldier by showing him 
that what he had learned in his campaigns against nomadic tribes 

=====第370页=====
346 Frederick Engels 
and irregulars, was quite as useful and applicable in a contest with 
regular troops. 
That with such opportunities, a nation endowed with peculiar 
genius for the military profession, should have brought its warlike 
organization to a perfection exceeding anything attained by its 
neighbors—a fact proved beyond dispute at Magenta and 
Solferino276—nevertheless excited wonder, especially in Germany. 
The military pedants of that country had been so secure in their 
presumed superiority over the volatile, unsteady, undisciplined, 
immoral French, that the blow stunned them. On the other hand, 
the younger and more intelligent portions of the Austrian and 
other German armies, always opposed to martinetism, now at once 
began to speak out. The Austrian officers, fresh from Magenta, 
were the first to say, what is perfectly true, that the French carry 
no knapsacks in battle; that they have no stocks, no stiff collars, no 
tight coats or trousers; they are dressed in loose trousers, and a 
loose great coat with collar turned down, and neck and chest quite 
free;  their head covered with a light cap, and they carry their 
cartridges in their trousers pockets. Where the men of the 
Austrians arrive fatigued, and out of breath, the French come up 
fresh and singing, and ready for any physical effort. Thus 
reported the letters of the Austrian officers fresh from the 
battle-field, and Prussian, Bavarian, and other officers soon 
chimed in. The awful fact was there. Soldiers had actually dared 
to face the enemy without all the cumbersome paraphernalia 
which compose almost all the glorious pomp and circumstance of 
war, and which taken together are equivalent to a strait-jacket; 
and in spite of the absence of this strait-jacket they had been 
victorious on every field. This fact was so very serious that even 
the German Governments could not close their eyes to it. 
Thus military reform became the watchword of the day in 
Germany, to the great dismay of old fogies in general. The most 
revolutionary theories in matters military were not only pro­
pounded with impunity, but even taken into consideration by 
governments. The first point was of course that of the equipment 
of the soldier, which had formed the most conspicuous difference 
between the two armies on the battle-field, and the discussion of 
this project was as interminable as the varieties of taste. An 
immense deal of ingenuity was expended on military tailoring. 
Caps,  helmets, shakos, hats, coats, blouses, capotes, collars, cuffs, 
trousers, gaiters, and boots were discussed with vivacity and 
loquacity as if on such things alone had depended the fate of the 
day at Solferino. The Austrians were the most extravagant in their 

=====第371页=====
Military Reform in Germany 347 
military fashions. From an almost exact copy of the French model 
(barring the color) they passed through all the intermediate stages, 
up to the blouse and slouched, wide-awake hat. Imagine the  stiff, 
conservative, staid, Imperial Royal Austrian soldier in the coquet­
tish dress of the French chasseur, or, still worse, in the blouse and 
felt hat of the revolutionary German free corps of 1848. A greater 
satire could not be passed on the Austrian military system than 
that either of these extremes should have been taken seriously into 
consideration. As usual, the debate has been exhausted rather 
than settled; military old fogyism has recovered part of the lost 
ground, and in Austria, at least, the alterations in the uniform will, 
upon the whole, be trifling; while in the other German armies 
scarcely any change appears probable, except that the Prussian 
helmet, that pet invention of the romantic Frederick William IV, 
seems doomed to descend to the grave even before its inventor. 
Next came the great knapsack question. That the French went 
into battle without their knapsacks was a piece of imprudence 
which could be justified by nothing but their good luck, and the 
warmth of the season. But should it become a habitual thing with 
them, the first reverse in cold or rainy weather would punish them 
severely for it. In fact, the general adoption of this usage would 
imply nothing less than that in every batde the beaten army 
should lose not only its artillery, colors, and stores, but the whole 
of the individual baggage of its infantry also. In consequence, a 
few rainy bivouacs would completely break up the infantry, 
reduced as it would be to such clothing as every man might 
happen to be dressed in. The real question, however, would seem 
to be, how the individual baggage of the soldier can be reduced to 
a minimum, and this is a point of importance which might easily 
be settled in a satisfactory way, if the items composing it were 
considered merely as to their real utility in a campaign; but the 
discussion in Germany has not settled it. 
Beside the clothes question and the knapsack question, the 
organization of the various subdivisions of the army is also a 
matter much disputed. How many men should make a company, 
how many companies a battalion, how many battalions a regiment, 
how many regiments a brigade, how many brigades a division, and 
so forth. This is another point upon which a great deal of bosh 
may be uttered with the most serious and important face in the 
world. In every army the system of elementary tactics confines to 
certain limits the strength and number of companies and 
battalions; the strength of brigades and divisions find their 
minimum and maximum by the strength adopted in neighboring 

=====第372页=====
348 Frederick Engels 
armies, so that in case of a conflict the disproportion between the 
larger tactical units may not be too great. To try to solve such 
questions not by the actual conditions as given by the facts of the 
case,  but by an attempted recourse to first principles, is mere 
fudge, worthy perhaps of German philosophers but not suited to 
practical men. The increase in the number of the Austrian 
regiments of infantry of the line from 63 to 80, with a reduced 
number of battalions, will no more insure them "better luck next 
time"  than the widening of their trousers and the turning down 
of their collars. 
But while man-millinery and abstruse speculations on the 
normal strength and composition of a brigade occupy attention, 
the great defects and evils of the German military system are 
unheeded. What, indeed, are we to think of officers who most 
furiously discuss the cut of a pair of pantaloons, or of a collar, and 
who submit quietly to have in the German federal277  army some 
twenty different calibers of field artillery, and an almost incalcula­
ble variety of calibers for small-arms? The introduction of rifled 
muskets, which offered such a splendid occasion for equalizing the 
calibers all over Germany, has not only been shamefully neglected, 
but has made matters worse. It is worth while to look for a 
moment at this confusion of calibers. Austria, Bavaria, Württem­
berg, Baden, and Hesse-Darmstadt, have one caliber—0.53 of an 
inch. With that practical good sense which the South Germans 
have shown in many instances, they have carried this most 
important reform, which establishes unity of caliber for five corps 
of the federal army. Prussia has two calibers; one the so-called 
Zündnadelgewehr, or needle-gun, a about 0.60 of an inch, and the 
old smooth-bore musket, lately rifled on Minié's principle, about 
0.68. The latter, however, is to be superseded by the former as 
soon as possible. The Ninth Army Corps has three different rifled 
and two or three different smooth-bore calibers; the Tenth has at 
least ten, and the reserved division has as many calibers almost as 
battalions. Now imagine this motley army in an active campaign. 
How is it possible that the ammunition belonging to each 
contingent can always be at hand when wanted, and if not, that 
contingent is helpless and useless? Excepting Austria, the South 
Germans and Prussia, no contingent can, from this circumstance 
alone, be of any real use in a lengthened contest. The same is true 
of the artillery. Instead of fixing at once upon one common 
caliber at least corresponding to the old six-pounder, which would 
a See Frederick Engels' The History of the Rifle, present edition, Vol.  18.—  Ed. 

=====第373页=====
Military Reform in Germany 349 
thus in time become the universal caliber of rifled field guns, the 
Prussians, the Austrians, the Bavarians are now casting rifled 
ordnance quite independently of each other, which will only serve 
to increase the diversity of calibers already existing. An army in 
which such fundamental defects exist might do better than spend 
its time in quarreling about collars and inexpressibles, and the 
normal strength of brigades and battalions. 
There can be no military progress in Germany so long as the 
idea is cherished in high quarters that armies are made for parade 
and not for battle. Crushed for a while by Austerlitz, Wagram, 
and Jena,278  and by the popular enthusiasm of 1813-15, this 
pedantry soon raised its head again, reigned supreme until 1848, 
and, in Prussia, at least, seems to have attained its culminating 
point during the last ten years. Had Prussia been involved in the 
Italian war, Pélissier could scarcely have helped inflicting another 
Jena upon her army, and the fortresses on the Rhine alone would 
have saved her. Such is the condition to which an army has been 
reduced which, in respect of its men, stands second to none in the 
world. In any future conflict between the French and the 
Germans, we may reasonably expect to see reproduced the 
features of Magenta and Solferino. 
Written in late January and early Feb- Reproduced from the newspaper 
ruary 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  5873,  February 20, 1860 as 
a leading article 

=====第374页=====
350 
Karl Marx 
THE ENGLISH BUDGET 
London, Feb. 11, 1860 
The last was a great night, in the Parliamentary sense of the 
word. Mr. Gladstone, in an immense speech, 3 simultaneously 
divulged the mysteries of his budget and of the commercial treaty, 
linking both carefully together, and propping the frailty of the 
one by the boldness of the other. As to the treaty, now laid with all 
its details before the world, you will find the sketch I gave you 
many weeks agob to have been quite correct, and, in fact, I have 
nothing to add to the general criticism I ventured upon at the 
time.  Consequently, I propose considering Mr. Gladstone's budget 
as a simple operation of English finance, a treatment of the 
subject the more called for since the impending Parliamentary 
debates are sure to enlighten us, by the by, on the diplomatic 
undercurrent of Mr. Gladstone's facts and figures. 
Now, whatever inconsistencies may be traced in the details of 
the budget; whatever political objections may be raised against the 
prudence of answering a deficit of more than 14 per cent on the 
total revenue, and a vast increase of expenditure, by one full 
sweep of many existing duties, part of which did hardly weigh 
upon the mass of the people; nevertheless, common fairness 
obliges me to say that Mr. Gladstone's budget is a great and bold 
stroke of financial ingenuity, and that the British Free-Trade 
doctrines once accepted—apart from some glaring incongruities 
necessitated by the treaty with France, as well as by the tenderness 
every British Chancellor of the Exchequer will always bring to 
a Marx analyses the Budget for  1860-61,  introduced by Gladstone, Chancellor 
of the Exchequer, in his speech in the House of Commons on February 10, 1860 
(The Times, No. 23540, February 11, I860).— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 341-44.— Ed. 

=====第375页=====
The English Budget 351 
bear upon the rent-rolls of the 50,000 paramount landlords—it is 
a fair budget. The position of Mr. Gladstone was fraught with 
difficulties created by  himself.  He was the man, who in 1853, in 
his so-called standard budget prospectively extending over a space 
of seven years, had pledged himself to definitely do away with the 
income tax in 1860-6l.a He again, in a supplementary budget,b 
called into life by the Russian war, had promised to abolish, at no 
distant date, the war duty on tea and sugar. The same man, now 
that his promissory bills have fallen due, comes forward with a 
scheme in which the latter duty is maintained, while the income 
tax is enhanced from 9d. to lOd. in the pound; that is to say, by 
11 1-9 per cent. But, you will remember that, in my strictures on 
his budget of 1853, I tried to prove that, if the financial legislature 
of free-trade meant anything, it meant indirect taxation being 
displaced by direct taxation.279 I dwelt at the time on the 
incompatibility of Mr. Gladstone's pledge of going on with the 
removal of custom and excise duties, with his simultaneous pledge 
of altogether expunging the income tax from the tax-gatherer's 
list. The income tax, only that it is partially, unjustly, and even 
stupidly laid on, is the best item in English financial law. That Mr. 
Gladstone, instead of seriously taxing landed property, maintains a 
war duty upon such first necessities as tea and sugar, is a 
cowardice due much more to the aristocratic structure of 
Parliament than to any narrowness of mind on his part. If he had 
dared lay his hands on the rent-rolls, the Cabinet, whose prospects 
of life are precarious enough, would have gone to the wall in no 
time.  It is an old proverb that the belly has no ears, but it is no 
less true that rent-rolls have no conscience. 
Before giving a succinct statement of the alterations contem­
plated by Mr Gladstone, I shall first call the attention of the reader 
to some incidental remarks dropped in the course of his speech. 
First, then, the Chancellor of the Exchequer admitted that the 
common opinion of free-trade being incarnated in the English 
financial system was mere slang. Secondly, he admitted that 
England had no commerce worth speaking of with France, while 
France, on the contrary, had a very extensive and expanding trade 
with England. Thirdly, he could not help confessing that Palmer-
stonian policy, embarking upon "friendly expeditions" behind the 
a Gladstone's speeches in the House of Commons on April 18, 1853, The Times, 
No. 21406, April 19, 1853 and February 10, 1860, The Times, No. 23540, February 
11, I860.— Ed. 
b Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on May 8, 1854, The Times, 
No. 21736, May 9, 1854.— Ed. 

=====第376页=====
352 Karl Marx 
back  of Parliament,  had  turned  the  scale,  and  paralyzed  the in­
crease accruing  to the  Exchequer from  the  extension  of British 
commerce  and  industry. Lastly, although gilding  the bitter pill with 
a sweet envelope,  and  presenting  it in as  handy  a shape  as French 
apothecaries  are  used  to present  you the  most abominable pharma­
ceutical  stuff, he  could  not but own  that  the  same dear ally,  to 
whom Great Britain  is just about sacrificing nearly  two  millions  of 
income,  is the  mainspring  of British military  and  naval expenditure 
being swollen,  for the  year  1860-61,  to the  stupendous amount  of 
30 millions. Eighteen millions,  it should  be recorded,  was the 
maximum  of war  expenditure, which  the  Iron Duke, a twenty-four 
years since, entreated English rationalism  to swallow. 
After these preliminary remarks  I come  to the  changes 
proposed  by Mr.  Gladstone. They  are  divided into  two  categories, 
the one  resulting from  the  treaty with France,  the other embracing 
subsidiary changes which  Mr.  Gladstone  was  compelled  to 
introduce  in order  to free  his budget from  the  reproach  of being  a 
concession extorted from  a foreign despotic power,  and  imparting 
to it the  more acceptable color  of being  a general reform  of the 
existing  tariff. 
The changes introduced  by the  commercial treaty with France 
are these: There will  at once  be a  clean sweep, absolutely  and 
entirely,  of manufactured goods  off the  British  tariff,  with  the 
exception,  for a  limited period,  of three articles only,  viz.:  cork, 
gloves,  and  another trifling article.  The  brandy duty will  be 
reduced from  15s. a  gallon  to the  level  of the  colonial duty  of 8s. 
The duty  on all  foreign wines will  be immediately diminished 
from nearly  5s. lOd. per  gallon  to 3s. a  gallon. England engages 
further  to  reduce  the  duty from April  1, 1861, to a  scale 
proportioned  to the  quantity  of spirit contained  in the  wine.  All 
duties upon foreign articles which  are  also produced  in England, 
and there subject  to an  excise duty, will  be reduced  to the 
standard  of the  home excise. Such  is the  pith  of the  first  set of 
changes  to be  introduced. 
The alterations which, independently  of the  treaty with France, 
are to give  the  present budget  the  character  of a  general 
reformation  of British financial legislature  are  these: 
There  are to be  abolished immediately  and  entirely  the  duties 
on butter, tallow, cheese, oranges,  and  lemons, eggs, nutmegs, 
pepper, licorice,  and  various other articles,  of which  the  total duty 
is about £382,000  a year. Reductions  are to  take place  in the 
a The  Duke  of Wellington.—  Ed. 

=====第377页=====
The English Budget 353 
present duty raised on timber from 7/ and 7/6 to the colonial rate 
of 1/ and l/6.a On currants, from 15/9 to 7/; on raisins and figs, 
from 10/ to 7/; on hops, from 45/ to 15/. Lastly, the excise upon 
paper is to be abolished. 
The account of the financial year 1860[-61] stands thusb: 
EXPENDITURE. 
Funded and Unfunded Debt £26,200,000 
Consolidated Fund Charges 2,000,000 
Army and Militia 15,800,000 
Navy and Packet Service 13,900,000 
Miscellaneous and Civil Service 7,500,000 
Revenue Department 4,700,000 
Total £70,100,000 
INCOME. 
Customs £22,700,000 
Excise 19,170,000 
Stamps 8,000,000 
Other Taxes 3,250,000 
Income Tax 2,400,000 
Post-Office  3,400,000 
Crown Lands 280,000 
Miscellaneous Revenue  1,500,000 
Total £60,700,000 
Now, on comparing expenditure with income, it will be found 
that a deficit to the amount of nearly £10,000,000 sterling is avowed, 
for which Mr. Gladstone, as already said, thinks to make up by the 
increase of the Income Tax from 9/ to 10/ and by the 
maintenance of the war duties on tea and sugar. The minor 
alterations, by which he proposes getting a penny here, and 
another penny there, it is not necessary to dwell upon in this 
general survey of the British Budget for  1860-61. 
Written on February 11, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5878, February 25, 1860 
a Gladstone has these figures in his speech: "I propose to reduce the duty on 
timber from 7s. 6d. and 15s. to the colonial rate of Is. and  2s."—Ed. 
»> The Times, No. 23540, February 11, I860.— Ed. 

=====第378页=====
354 
Frederick Engels 
ON RIFLED CANNON 
I 
[New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5914, April 7, 1860] 
The first attempts at increasing the range and precision of 
ordnance by rifling the bore, and thereby giving the shot a 
rotation vertical to the line of propulsion, date from the 17th 
century. There is a small rifled gun at Munich, manufactured in 
Nuremberg in 1694; it has eight grooves and a bore of about two 
inches diameter. During the whole of the 18th century, experi­
ments were made, both in Germany and in England, with rifled 
cannon, some of them breech-loading. Though the calibers were 
small, the results obtained were very satisfactory; the English 
two-pounders in 1776, at a range of 1,300 yards, gave a lateral 
deflection of two feet only—a degree of precision which no other 
gun at the time was capable of approaching. In the same year, 
these rifled cannon were for the first time used for projecting 
oblong shot. 
These experiments, however, remained for a long while without 
any practical results. The current of military opinion at that time 
altogether went against rifled arms. The rifle itself was then a very 
clumsy instrument, its loading was a slow and tedious operation, 
requiring considerable skill. It was a weapon unfit for general 
warfare at a period when rapid firing, whether of deployed lines, 
of heads of columns, or of skirmishers, was one of the chief 
desiderata in battle. Napoleon would have no rifles in his army; in 
England and Germany, a few battalions only were equipped with 
them; in America and Switzerland alone, the rifle remained the 
national weapon. 
The Algerian war was the occasion to bring the rifle again into 
credit, and to cause improvements in its construction which were 
but the beginning of that colossal revolution in the whole system 

=====第379页=====
On Rifled Cannon 355 
of firearms which is even now far from its conclusion. The 
smooth-bore muskets of the French were no match for the long 
espingardas of the Arabs; their greater length and better material, 
which admitted of a heavier charge, enabled the Kabyles and 
Bedouins to fire on the French at distances where the regulation 
musket was utterly powerless. The Duke of Orleans, 3 having seen 
and admired the Prussian and Austrian chasseurs, organized the 
French chasseurs on their model, who soon, for armament, 
equipment, and tactics, became the first troops of their class in the 
world. The rifle with which they were armed was far superior to 
the old rifle, and it soon underwent further changes, resulting, 
finally, in the general introduction of rifled muskets in the whole 
of the infantry of Europe. 
The range of infantry fire having thus been increased from 300 
to 800, and even 1,000 yards, the question arose whether field 
artillery, which hitherto had commanded all distances from 300 up 
to 1,500 yards, would still be able to hold its own against the new 
small-arms. The fact was, that the greatest efficacy of common 
field guns lay just within that range which was now disputed to it 
by the rifle; canister was scarcely effective beyond 600 or 700 
yards;  round shot gave no very satisfactory results, with the six or 
nine-pounder, beyond 1,000 yards; and shrapnel (spherical 
case-shot), to be very formidable, required a coolness and a correct 
estimation of distances which are not always to be found on the 
field of battle, when the enemy is advancing; while the shell-
practice of the old howitzers against troops was anything but 
satisfactory. The armies which had the nine-pounder gun for their 
smallest caliber, such as the English, were still the best off; the 
French eight-pounder, and, still more, the German six-pounder, 
became almost useless. To obviate this, the French introduced, 
about the beginning of the Crimean war, Louis Napoleon's 
so-called invention, the light twelve-pounder, canon obusier,b from 
which solid shot, with a charge of one-fourth instead of one-third 
its weight, as well as shell, was to be fired. This gun was a mere 
plagiarism upon the English light twelve-pounder, which had 
already been again abandoned by the English; the system of firing 
shells from long guns had been long in practice in Germany; so 
that there was nothing at all new in this pretended improvement. 
Still, the arming of the whole French artillery with 12-pounders, 
even of a diminished range, would have given it a decided 
a Ferdinand.— Ed. 
b Howitzer.— Ed. 

=====第380页=====
356 Frederick Engels 
superiority over the old 6 and 8-pounders; and to counteract this, 
the Prussian Government, in 1859, resolved upon giving heavy 
12-pounders to all its foot batteries. This was the last move in the 
cause of the smooth-bore gun; it showed that the whole subject 
was exhausted, and the defenders of the smooth-bore driven ad 
absurdum. There could, indeed, not be anything more absurd than 
to arm the whole artillery of an army with those lumbering, 
stick-in-the-mud Prussian 12-pounders, and that at a time when 
mobility and rapidity of maneuvering is the greatest desideratum 
of all. The French light 12-pounder having a relative superiority 
only to other artillery, and none at all as regarded the new 
small-arms, and the Prussian heavy 12-pounder being a palpable 
absurdity, there remained nothing but either to drop field artillery 
altogether, or to adopt rifled cannon. 
In the mean time, experiments with rifled cannon had 
continually been carried on in various countries. In Germany, the 
Bavarian Lieut.-Col. Reichenbach experimented with a small rifled 
gun and cylindro-conoidal shot, as early as 1816. The results were 
very satisfactory as to range and precision, but the difficulties of 
loading and extraneous obstacles prevented the subject from being 
followed up. In 1846, the Piedmontese Major Cavalli constructed a 
breech-loading rifled gun which attracted considerable attention. 
His first gun was a thirty-pounder, charged with a cylindro-
conoidal hollow shot weighing 64 pounds, and 5 pounds powder; 
at 14 3/4 degrees elevation he obtained a range (of first gauge) of 
3,050 metres or 3,400 yards. His experiments (continued up to the 
latest period, partly in Sweden, partly in Piedmont) had the 
important result of leading to the discovery of the regular lateral 
deflection of all shot fired from rifled ordnance, which is caused 
by the pitch of the grooves, and which is always in the direction to 
which the grooves turn; this once being ascertained, its correction 
by what is called a lateral or horizontal tangent-scale, was also 
invented by Cavalli. The results of his experiments were highly 
satisfactory. At Turin, in 1854, his thirty-pounder, with 8-pound 
charges, 64-pound shot, gave the following results: 
Lateral irregu-
Elevation. Range. lar deflection. 
10° 2,806 metres 2.81 metres 
15° 3,785 metres 3.21 metres 
20° 4,511 metres 3.72 metres 
25° 5,103 metres 4.77 metres 
giving a range, at 25 degrees, of above three miles, with a lateral 
deflection from the line of aim (as corrected by the horizontal 

=====第381页=====
On Rifled Cannon 357 
tangent-scale) of less than 16 feet! The largest French field 
howitzer, at a range of 2,400 metres, equal to 2,650 yards, gave 
lateral deflections averaging 47 metres, or 155 feet; ten times as 
large as those of the rifled gun at twice the range. 
Another system of rifled ordnance which created attention, a 
little after Cavalli's first experiments, was that of the Swedish 
Baron Wahrendorff. His gun was also breech-loading, and his shot 
cylindro-conoidal. The difference, however, in the shot was this: 
while Cavalli's shot was of hard metal, and had wings to fit in the 
grooves, Wahrendorff's shot was covered with a thin layer of lead, 
and slightly larger in diameter than the bore of the rifled portion 
of the gun. After being introduced into the chamber, which was 
large enough to receive it, the shot was propelled by the explosion 
into the rifled bore, and the lead being pressed into the grooves 
effectually, did away with all windage, and prevented the escape of 
any portion of the gases formed by the explosion. The results 
obtained with these guns in Sweden and elsewhere were quite 
satisfactory, and if Cavalli's guns were introduced into the 
armament of Genoa, those of Wahrendorff figure in the casemates 
of Waxholm in Sweden, Portsmouth in England, and in some 
Prussian fortresses. Thus, the introduction of rifled ordnance into 
practical use had begun, although only for fortresses. There 
remained only the one step to introduce them into field artillery, 
and this has been done in France and is now being done in all 
European artilleries. The various systems on which the rifling of 
field ordnance is now, or may be, profitably carried on, will form 
the subject of a second paper. 
II 
[New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5926, April 21, 1860] 
The French were, as we said in our preceding paper, the first to 
introduce rifled cannon into practical warfare. For five or six years 
past, two officers, Col. Tamisier and Lieut.-Col. (now Col.) 
Treuille de Beaulieu, had experimentalized on the subject by 
order of the Government, and the results arrived at were found 
satisfactory enough to warrant their being made the base of a 
reorganization of the French artillery immediately before the 
outbreak of the late Italian war. Without entering upon the history 
of the experiments, we will at once pass to a description of the 
system now adopted in the French artillery. 

=====第382页=====
358 Frederick Engels 
In accordance with that desire for unity so characteristic of the 
French, they adopted one caliber only for field artillery (the old 
French four-pounder bore of 851/2 millimetres, or nearly 3  V2 
inches), and one for siege artillery (the old 12-pounder of 120 
millimetres, or 43/4  inches). All other guns, except mortars, are to 
be done away with. The material selected is generally the common 
gun-metal, but also cast-steel, in some cases. The guns are 
muzzle-loading, as the French experiments with breech-loaders 
gave no satisfaction. There are six grooves in each gun, 5 
millimetres deep and 16mm. broad, of a rounded form; the pitch 
of the rifling appears to be but low, but there are no details 
known respecting it. The windage on the body of the shot is about 
V2 t° 1 mm.; that on the ailettes or warts which enter the grooves 
rather less than 1 mm. The shot is cylindro-ogival, and hollow, 
weighing about 12 pounds when filled; it has six ailettes, one for 
every groove, three standing near the point, and three near the 
base;  they are very short—about 15 mm. long. The fuse-hole 
passes downward from the point, and is closed by a fuse or by a 
piston, with a percussion-cap for shot filled with powder, and by 
an iron screw, when the shot is not to explode; in this latter case it 
is filled with a mixture of sawdust and sand, so as to give it the 
same weight as when filled with powder. The length of bore of the 
gun is 1,385 mm., or 16 times its diameter; the weight of the brass 
gun is but 237 kilogrammes (518 pounds). To regulate the line of 
aim by the deviation (lateral deflection) of the shot in the direction 
of the pitch of the rifling—a deviation common to all projectiles 
launched from rifled barrels—the right trunnion carries what is 
called a horizontal tangent-scale. The gun, as well as its carriage, is 
reported to be of very elegant workmanship, and, from its small 
size and neatness, to look more like a model than a real engine of 
war. 
Armed with this gun, the French artillery entered upon the 
Italian campaign, where it indeed astonished the Austrians by its 
great range, but certainly not by its accuracy of fire. The guns 
very often, indeed generally, overshot the mark, and were more 
dangerous to reserves than to first lines—in other words, where 
they hit better than the common guns, they hit people at whom 
they were not aimed at all. This is certainly a very questionable 
advantage, as in nine cases out of ten it implies that the objects at 
which the guns were aimed were not hit. The Austrian artillery, 
with as clumsy a material as any in Europe, made a very decent 
appearance when opposed to them, and came up to close quarters 
(that is, 500 or 600 yards) with these formidable opponents, 

=====第383页=====
On Rifled Cannon 359 
unlimbering under their most effective fire. There is no doubt 
that, great as the superiority of the new French guns is over their 
old smooth-bored ones, they did not perform anything like what 
was expected from them. Their extreme practicable range was 
4,000 metres (4,400 yards), and undoubtedly it was but an 
impudent Bonapartist exaggeration when it was said that they 
could easily hit a single horseman at 3,300 yards. 
The reasons for these unsatisfactory performances, in actual 
war, are very simple. The construction of these guns is utterly 
imperfect, and if the French adhere to it, in two or three years 
their artillery will possess the worst materiel in Europe. The first 
principle in rifled arms is that there must be no windage; otherwise 
the shot, loosely rolling about in the barrel and grooves, will not 
rotate round its own longitudinal axis, but rotate, in a spiral line 
of flight, round an imaginary line, the direction of which is 
determined by the accidental position of the shot when leaving the 
muzzle, and the spiral rounds will increase in diameter with the 
distance. Now, the French guns have considerable windage, and 
cannot do without it so long as the explosion of the charge is 
relied upon to light the fuse of the shell. This, then, is one 
circumstance which explains the want of accuracy. The second is 
the irregularity of the propelling force created by the greater or 
less escape of gas through windage during the explosion of the 
charge. The third is the greater elevation, with the same charge, 
necessitated through this windage; it stands to reason that where 
no gas at all can escape between shot and bore, the same charge 
propels further than where part of the gas escapes. Now, the 
French guns appear to require not only a very great charge for 
rifled guns (one-fifth of the weight of the shot), but also a pretty 
high elevation. The greater range obtained by rifled bores over 
smooth ones, even with smaller charges, is chiefly obtained by the 
absence of windage, and the certainty of having the whole 
explosive force of the charge applied to the expulsion of the shot. 
By admitting windage, the French sacrifice part of the propelling 
force, and have to replace it by increased charges to a limited 
degree, and by greater elevation beyond that. Now, there is 
nothing so contrary to accuracy at any distances as great elevation. 
So long as the line of flight of the shot does not, at its highest 
point, much exceed the hight of the object aimed at, so long a 
mistake in estimating the distance is of little importance; but at 
long range, the shot takes a very high flight, and comes down at 
an angle on an average twice as great as that under which it began 
its flight (this, of course, is confined to elevations up to about 15 
13-13(15 

=====第384页=====
360 Frederick Engels 
degrees). Thus, the higher the elevation the more the line in 
which the shot strikes the ground approaches the vertical; and an 
error in estimating the distance of not more than ten or twenty 
yards may preclude the possibility of hitting at all. At ranges 
beyond even 400 or 500 yards, such errors are unavoidable, and 
the consequence is the astonishing difference between the capital 
shooting on the practice-ground, with measured distances, and the 
execrable practice on the battle-field, where the distances are 
unknown, the objects moving, and the moments for reflection very 
short. Thus, with the new rifles, the chance of hitting beyond 
three hundred yards on the battle-field is very small, while under 
three hundred yards, from the low flight of the ball, it is very 
great; in consequence of which, the charge with the bayonet 
becomes the most effective means of dislodging an enemy, as soon 
as the attacking body has come up to that distance. Suppose one 
army to carry rifles which at 400 yards give no higher trajectory 
than the rifles of their opponents give at 300 yards, the former 
will have the advantage of beginning an effective fire at 100 yards 
greater distance, and as but three or four minutes are required to 
charge through 400 yards, this advantage is not a mean one in the 
decisive moment of a battle. It is similar with cannon. Sir Howard 
Douglas, ten years ago, declared3 that gun far the best which gives 
the greatest range with the least elevation. With rifled cannon the 
importance of this point is still greater, as the chance of error in 
estimating distance increases with the longer range, and as the 
ricochets of any other than spherical shot cannot be relied upon. 
This is one of the disadvantages of rifled guns; they must hit with 
the first impact, if they are to hit at all, while round-shot, if it falls 
short, will rebound and continue its flight in very nearly its 
original direction. Here, then, a low trajectory is of the very 
highest importance, as every degree more of elevation reduces the 
chance of hitting with the first impact in an increasing ratio, and 
therefore the high line of flight produced by the French guns is 
one of their most serious defects. 
But the whole of the deficiencies of these guns are crowned and 
enhanced by one defect, which suffices to stamp the whole system. 
They are produced by the machinery and on the principles 
formerly serving for the manufacture of the old smooth-bored 
guns.  With the very great windage of these old guns, and the 
varying weights and diameters of the shot, mathematical precision 
a Howard Douglas, A Treatise on Naval Gunnery. Dedicated by Special Permission to 
the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, London,  1851.—  Ed. 

=====第385页=====
On Rifled Cannon 361 
in the manufacture was but a secondary consideration. The 
manufacture of firearms, up to a very few years ago, was the most 
backward branch of modern industry. There was far too much 
hand labor and far too little machinery. For the old smooth-bore 
arms this might be allowable; but when arms were to be 
manufactured which were expected to have great precision at long 
distances, this system became intolerable. To insure the certainty 
that every musket should shoot perfectly alike at 600, 800, 1,000 
yards,  and every cannon at 2,000, 4,000, 6,000 yards, it became 
necessary that every part of every operation should be performed 
by the most perfect and self-acting machinery, so as to turn out 
one weapon the mathematical counterpart of the other. Deviations 
from mathematical precision, inappreciable under the old system, 
now became defects rendering the whole weapon useless. The 
French have not improved their old machinery to any noticeable 
extent, and hence the irregularities in their firing. How can guns 
be made to give the same range at the same elevation, all other 
circumstances being alike, when none of them is identical with the 
other in every particular? But irregularities in manufacture which 
at 800 yards produce differences of a yard, at 4,000 will produce 
differences of a hundred yards in range. How, then, can such 
guns be expected to be true at long ranges? 
To recapitulate: the French rifled guns are bad, because they 
must have windage; because they require, comparatively, great 
elevations, and because their workmanship is not at all up to the 
requirements of rifled long-range guns. They must soon be 
superseded by different constructions, or they will reduce the 
French artillery practice to the worst in Europe. 
We have purposely examined these guns a little in detail, as they 
gave us, thereby, an opportunity of explaining the chief principles 
of rifled ordnance. In a concluding article we shall consider the 
two systems proposed, which in England are now contesting for 
superiority—systems both of which are founded upon loading by 
the breech, absence of windage, and perfect workmanship—the 
Armstrong system and that of Whitworth. 
Ill 
[New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5938, May 5, 1860] 
We now come to the description of the two kinds of 
breech-loading rifled cannon which at the present moment 
contend for superiority in England, and which, both invented by 
13* 

=====第386页=====
362 Frederick Engels 
civilians, certainly surpass in efficiency anything hitherto produced 
by professional artillerists—the Armstrong gun and the Whit-
worth gun. 
Sir William Armstrong's gun had the advantage of priority, and 
of being praised by the whole press3 and official world of 
England. It is, undoubtedly, a highly effective machine of war, 
and far superior to the French rifled gun; but whether it can beat 
Whitworth's gun may well be doubted. 
Sir Wm. Armstrong constructs his gun by wrapping, round a 
tube of cast steel, two layers of wrought-iron tubes in a spiral 
form, the upper layer laid on in the opposite direction to the 
lower one, in the same way as gun-barrels are made from layers of 
wire.  This system gives a very strong and tough material, though a 
very expensive one. The bore is rifled with numerous narrow 
grooves, one close to the other, and having one turn in the length 
of the gun. The oblong—cylindro-ogival—shot is of cast iron, 
but covered with a mantle of lead, which gives it a diameter 
somewhat larger than the bore; this shot, along with the charge, is 
introduced by the breech into a chamber wide enough to receive 
it; the explosion propels the shot into the narrow bore, where the 
soft lead is pressed into the grooves, and thus does away with all 
windage while giving the projectile the spiral rotation indicated by 
the pitch of the grooves. This mode of pressing the shot into the 
grooves, and the coating of soft material required for it, are the 
characteristic features of Armstrong's system; and if the reader 
will refer to the principles of rifled ordnance, as developed in our 
preceding articles, he will agree that, in principle, Armstrong is 
decidedly in the right. The shot being larger in diameter than the 
bore,  the gun is necessarily breech-loading, which, to us, also 
seems a necessary feature in all rifled ordnance. The breech-
loading apparatus  itself,  however, has nothing whatever to do with 
the principle of any particular system of rifling, but may be 
transferred from one to the other; we leave it, therefore, entirely 
out of our consideration. 
The range and precision attained with this new gun are 
something wonderful. The shot was thrown to some  8,500  yards, 
or nearly five miles, and the certainty with which the target was hit 
at 2,000 or 3,000 yards much exceeded what the old, smooth-bore 
guns could show at one-third of these distances. Still, with all the 
puffing of the English press, the scientifically interesting details of 
a See The Times, Nos. 23524, 23526, 23545, 23547 and 23585, January 24 and 26, 
February 17 and 20, and April 4, I860.— Ed. 

=====第387页=====
On Rifled Cannon 363 
all these experiments were studiously kept secret. It was never 
stated with what elevation and charge these ranges were obtained; 
the weight of the shot and that of the gun  itself,  the exact lateral 
and longitudinal deviations, &c, were never particularized. Now, 
at last, when the Whitworth gun has made its appearance, we 
learn some details of one set of experiments at least. Mr. Sidney 
Herbert, Secretary of War, has stated in Parliament3 that a 
12-pounder gun of 8 cwt., with 1 lb. 8 oz. of powder, gave a range 
of 2,460 yards, at 7 degrees elevation, with an extreme lateral 
deviation of three, and an extreme longitudinal deviation of 65 
yards.  At eight degrees elevation, the range was 2,797 yards; at 
nine,  above 3,000 yards; the deviations remaining nearly the same. 
Now, an elevation of seven to nine degrees is a thing unknown in 
the practice of smooth-bore field artillery. The official tables, for 
instance, do not go beyond four degrees elevation, at which the 
12-pounder and 9-pounder give a range of 1,400 yards. Any 
higher elevation in field guns would be useless, from giving too 
high a line of flight, and thereby immensely reducing the chance 
of hitting the mark. But we have some experiments (quoted in Sir 
Howard Douglas's Naval Gunnery) with heavy ship guns of smooth 
bore at higher elevations. The English long 32-pounder at Deal, in 
1839,  gave ranges, at 7 degrees, of 2,231 to 2,318; at 9 degrees, 
from 2,498 to 2,682 yards.b The French 36-pounder, in 1846 and 
'47, gave ranges, at 7 degrees, of 2,270; at 9 degrees, of 2,636 
yards. 0 This shows that, at equal elevations, the ranges of rifled 
guns are not so very superior to those of smooth-bore cannon. 
The Whitworth gun, in almost every respect, is the opposite of 
the Armstrong gun. Its bore is not circular, but hexagonal; the 
pitch of its rifling is very near twice as high as that of the 
Armstrong gun; the shot is of a very hard material, without any 
coating of lead; and, if it is breech-loading, it is not necessarily so, 
but merely as a matter of convenience and of fashion. This gun is 
of a recently-patented material, called "homogeneous iron," of 
great strength, elasticity, and toughness; the shot is a mathemati­
cally exact fit to the bore, and cannot, therefore, be introduced 
without the bore being lubricated. This is done by a composition 
of wax and grease being inserted between charge and shot, which 
at the same time tends to decrease whatever windage there may be 
a In his speech in the House of Commons on February 17, 1860 (see The 
Times, No. 23546, February 18, I860.— Ed. 
b See Howard Douglas' A Treatise on Naval Gunnery, London, 1851, 
p. 563.—  Ed. 
c ibid., p. 585.—  Ed. 

=====第388页=====
364 Frederick Engels 
left. The material of the gun is so tough that it will easily stand 
3,000 rounds without any damage to the bore. 
The Whitworth gun was brought before the public in February 
last, when a series of experiments were made with it at Southport, 
on the Lancashire coast. There were three guns—a 3-pounder, 
12-pounder, and 80-pounder; from the long reports3 we select the 
12-pounder as an illustration. This gun was 7 feet 9 inches long, 
and weighed 8 cwt. The common 12-pounder, for round shot, is 6 
feet 6 inches long, and weighs 18 cwt. The ranges obtained with 
Whitworth's gun were as follows: At 2 degrees elevation (where 
the old 12-pounder gives 1,000 yards), with a charge of  1 s/4 lb., 
the range varied from 1,208 to 1,281 yards. At 5 degrees (where 
the old 32-pounder gives 1,940 yards), it ranged from 2,298 to 
2,342 yards. At 10 degrees (range of old 32-pounder, 2,800 
yards),  it averaged 4,000 yards. For higher elevations a 3-pounder 
gun was used, with 8 oz. charge; with 20 degrees, it ranged from 
6,300 to 6,800, with 33 and 35 degrees, 9,400 to 9,700 yards. The 
old 56-pounder, of smooth bore, gives, at 20 degrees, a range of 
4,381 yards, at 32 degrees, of  5,680  yards. The precision obtained 
by the Whitworth gun was very satisfactory, and at least as good as 
that of the Armstrong gun in lateral deflection; as to longitudinal 
variations, the experiments do not admit of a satisfactory 
conclusion. 
IVb 
[New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5950, May 19, 1860] 
The Whitworth gun is constructed upon the principle of 
reducing windage to the utmost minimum, by a mathematical fit 
of the shot to the bore, and doing away with what little may 
remain by the effect of the lubricating composition. In this respect 
it is inferior to Armstrong's gun, which has no windage at all; and 
this we consider its principal defect. The polygonal bore, however, 
would be impossible without this defect, and at all events it 
deserves to be acknowledged that with such an originally defective 
system, such great results have been obtained. Whitworth has 
undoubtedly brought to its highest perfection the system which 
a See "Experiments with Mr. Whitworth's Breech-Loading Cannon", The Times, 
No. 23547, February 20, I860.— Ed. 
b This section was discovered to have been by Engels after the publication of the 
German and the Russian editions of the Collected Works, and appears here for the first 
time since its publication in the newspaper.— Ed. 

=====第389页=====
On Rifled Cannon 365 
gives hard, unyielding shot and allows windage. His gun is 
immensely superior to the rough empiricism of the French rifled 
ordnance. But while Armstrong's gun, and other guns depending 
on soft-coated shot to be forced into the grooves by pressure, may 
be perfected ad infinitum, Whitworth's gun will have no such 
future; it has already attained the highest perfection compatible 
with its fundamental principles. 
To recapitulate: 
We find that at the practicable elevation of field-artillery, the best 
rifled guns known give a range but very little superior to the old 
smooth-bored gun. There is, however, some advantage, and this 
remains an item in their favor. But the great advantages of rifled 
ordnance for field-artillery are these: 
1. The same weight of shot can be projected by a gun having a 
much smaller bore, and with a much smaller charge than with the 
old smooth-bored gun, which was only fit for spherical shot. 
Consequently, the weight of the gun is considerably reduced. The 
old 12-pounder had a bore of about 4  V2 inches, and weighed 18 
cwt.; its charge was four pounds of powder. The new 12-pounder 
has a bore of about 3  V2 inches, or nearly that of the old 
9-pounder; its weight, 8 cwt.; charge, from 11/2 to 13/4 pounds. 
The French new 12-pounders, with the old 4-pounder's bore, are 
still lighter. This is an immense advantage. It gives to the field-gun 
a mobility hitherto unknown, and renders it almost as fit to go 
over any ground as infantry. More than four horses to a gun will 
henceforth be useless. 
2. At the distances hitherto practicable for field-artillery, it gives 
a far greater chance of hitting; it lowers the trajectory, and 
reduces to a minimum both lateral and longitudinal deflections. At 
an exchange of round shot and shells with percussion fuses, a 
rifled battery will always beat a smooth-bored one of equal weight 
of shot. 
As to heavy ordnance, it will be all-powerful against stone walls, 
especially by shell-practice with percussion fuses. This has already 
been proved by experiment, both in France and Germany. It will 
give ships and siege batteries a chance of bombarding towns at 
distances from 4,000 to 9,000 yards. In every other respect it will 
not alter materially the hitherto existing relations of besiegers and 
besieged, and of ships against batteries on shore. 
On the other hand, the disadvantages of rifled ordnance are: 
1. The common case-shot becomes either impossible or ineffec­
tive from the irregular line of flight imparted to the balls by the 
spiral rotation. 

=====第390页=====
366 Frederick Engels 
2. Firing with shell with time-fuses (and shrapnel shot with 
ditto) becomes almost impracticable, as the absence or reduction of 
windage prevents the flame of the explosion from communicating 
with the fuse which necessarily must be at the point of the oblong 
shot. 
In spite of these drawbacks, rifled ordnance has now become a 
matter of necessity for every army. The question now is only, how 
these drawbacks can be obviated. That they will be so there can be 
no doubt. But it is certain that the same rules obtain in rifled 
ordnance which regulate the construction and use of rifled small 
arms.  The exaggerated ideas of five-mile ranges in the one are as 
ridiculous as the notion of hitting a man with the new rifles at 800 
or 1,000 yards; and still the advantages given by rifled bores in 
either case, are so great that it is imperative upon every army 
which may ever be called upon to fight with civilized foes, to do 
away with all smooth-bored barrels, both in small arms and 
artillery. 
Written in March and May 1860 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, Nos. 5914 (as a leading article), 
5926,  5938 and 5950, April 7 and 21, 
May 5 and 19, 1860; parts I and II 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, Nos. 1556 and 1558, April 24 
and May 1, 1860 

=====第391页=====
367 
Karl Marx 
PUBLIC FEELING IN BERLIN 
Berlin, April 10, 1860 
If an intelligent foreigner who had visited Berlin but two 
months ago and then left it were now to return to the "metropolis 
of intelligence," the thorough change in the physiognomy, tone 
and temper "meiner lieben Berliner'''' (of my beloved Berliners) 3 
could not fail to strike his mental eye. Still, some months ago small 
talk obtained in all the ranks of the metropolitan society. People 
congratulated each other, in subdued accents, on the nightmare of 
a decennial reaction having at last ceased to crush their 
brains—that the worst was over. This silly theme was sounded to 
all keys, and the unavoidable afterthought that the change had 
been brought about not by any vigorous and healthy effort on the 
part of the Prussian subjects, but rather by the sickly affection of 
the Prussian King's head; that the change was therefore the work 
of nature, not the deed of man. This uncomfortable afterthought 
falsified even the first joys of the new era280 triumphantly 
announced by the dully-deadly pens of the Berlin daily press. 
Such was the pusillanimity prevailing that, not to frighten the 
Prince Regentb out of his new-fangled liberalism, all the candi­
dates in the general election to the Second Chamber were put to 
this simple test: Did they profess confidence in the Hohenzollern 
Cabinet0 installed by the Prince Regent? Were their names in no 
way obnoxious to the mild liberalism of the new Government? 
Instead of men to take up the grievances of the country, there 
were wanted bottle-holders with ready-cut votes for the Cabinet. 
That the new Cabinet actually did not touch the bureaucratic and 
police shackles forged by its predecessors, while its very profes-
a An allusion to Frederick William IV's address to the Berlin population on 
March 19, 1848 (see the Allgemeine Preussische Zeitung, No. 80, March 20, 
1848).—  Ed. 
h William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 
r The Cabinet headed by Karl Anton Hohenzollern.— Ed. 

=====第392页=====
368 Karl Marx 
sions of faith were characterized by weak duplicity, shy reserve, 
and equivocal reticence—these facts were hoodwinked; and it was 
furthermore proclaimed a patriotic duty to hoodwink them. All 
the opposition papers, whether styling themselves Constitutional 
or Democratic, turned downright Ministerial. 
After the peace of Villafranca, when Herr von Schleinitz, the 
Prussian Minister of Foreign Affairs, published a sort of Blue 
Book on the Italian war 281—when his dispatches, true patterns of 
weak-minded verbosity, showed him up the worthy successor of 
the man3 who, in the last century, had concluded the peace of 
Basle, and, in this century, had prepared the catastrophe of 
Jena282—when we saw him humbly receiving lessons of con­
stitutionalism on the part of Little Johnny,b the British Jack-of-all-
Trades, crouching in the dust before Prince Gorchakoff, exchang­
ing billets-doux with the Man of December,0 superciliously frown­
ing upon his Austrian colleague,*1 to be finally kicked by all his 
correspondents—even then the Prussian press and our Berlin 
Liberals worked themselves into real fits of enthusiasm with 
respect to the superhuman wisdom evinced by the Prussian 
Government, which, not content with doing nothing  itself,  had 
contrived to preclude Germany from all action. 
Soon after there took place at Breslau 6 a meeting between the 
Russian Czar and Gorchakoff on the one side, and the Prince 
Regent with his Ministerial satellites on the other. 283 A new deed 
of enfeoffment of Prussia to her Muscovite neighbor was duly 
signed—the first, but necessary result, this, of the peace of 
Villafranca. Even in 1844 such an event would have aroused a 
storm of opposition throughout the country. Now it was extolled 
as an earnest of far-seeing statecraft. The nihilism of the Prince 
Regent's foreign policy coupled with the continuance of the old 
reactionary system of mingled feudalism and bureaucratism, which 
was forsaken in name only, seemed to our friends, the Berlin 
Liberals, and the Prussian press of all colors, save the special 
organs of the old Camarilla, sufficient reasons to claim the 
Imperial crown of little Germany (that is to say, Germany minus 
German Austria) for the representative of the Prussian dynasty. It 
is difficult to find in the records of history a similar piece of 
judicial blindness, but we remember that after the battle of 
a Karl August Hardenberg. — Ed. 
b John Russell.— Ed. 
c Napoleon III.— Ed. 
d Johann Bernhard Rechberg. — Ed. 
e Wroclaw.— Ed. 

=====第393页=====
Public Feeling in Berlin 369 
Austerlitz,284 Prussia also crowed for some days on her own 
dunghill, quasi re bene gestae 
After the termination of the Italian war, it was a spectacle as 
pitiful as it was disgusting to hear the Prussian press, with the 
Berlin papers at its head, instead of venturing upon the faintest 
criticism of the stupid diplomacy of herb  native rulers; instead of 
boldly challenging the "liberal" Ministry to bridge at last, in 
internal affairs, the broad chasm between the nominal and the 
real; instead of denouncing the silent but obstinate encroachments 
on civil liberty dared upon by the host of Manteuffel's officials, 
still snugly ensconced in their old strongholds; instead of all that, 
to hear them sing panegyrics on the splendor of renovated 
Prussia; to see them dart their poindess shafts at humbled Austria; 
to see them stretch their unnerved hands at the German Imperial 
crown, and, to the utter astonishment of all Europe, demean 
themselves like maniacs in a fool's paradise. Altogether, it seemed 
as if the great international drama now enacted on the European 
stage, did only concern our Berlin friends as spectators who, from 
the gallery or pit, have to applaud or hoot, but not to act. 
All this has been changed now as by a magician's wand. Berlin is 
at this moment, with the exception perhaps of Palermo and 
Vienna, the most revolutionary town in Europe. The fermentation 
pervades all ranks, and seems more intense than in the days of 
March, 1848. How has this phenomenon been brought about, and 
so suddenly, too? By a combination of events at the top of which 
range Louis Bonaparte's last exploits on the one hand, and the 
new army reforms0 proposed by the liberal Government on the 
other. Then, of course, the state of confidence and of willful 
self-delusion could not last forever. The incidents, furthermore, by 
which the Ministry has been forced to dismiss Stieber,285 the Police 
Director, the low criminal, who, together with his master, the late 
Hinckeldey, had swayed supreme power in Prussia ever since 
1852;  and last, not least, the publication of Humboldt's correspon­
dence with Varnhagen von Ensed have done the rest. The fool's 
paradise has vanished before the breath from beyond the grave. 
Written on April 10, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5932, April 28, 1860 
a As if everything were well.— Ed. 
b i.e. Prussia's.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 345-49.— Ed. 
d Briefe von Alexander von Humboldt an Varnhagen von Ense aus den Jahren 1827 bis 
1858, Leipzig, 1860. Humboldt's letters contain sharp criticism of the Prussian 
Government.— Ed. 

=====第394页=====
370 
Karl Marx 
SICILY AND THE SICILIANS 
Throughout the history of the human race no land and no 
people have suffered so terribly from slavery, from foreign 
conquests and oppressions, and none have struggled so irrepressi-
bly for emancipation as Sicily and the Sicilians. Almost from the 
time when Polyphemus promenaded around Etna, or when Ceres 
taught the Siculi286 the culture of grain, to our day, Sicily has been 
the theater of uninterrupted invasions and wars, and of unflinch­
ing resistance. The Sicilians are a mixture of almost all southern 
and northern races; first, of the aboriginal Sicanians, with 
Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Greeks, and slaves from all regions 
under heaven, imported into the island by traffic or war; and then 
of Arabs, Normans, and Italians. The Sicilians, in all these 
transformations and modifications, have battled, and still battle, 
for their freedom. 
More than thirty centuries ago the aborigines of Sicily resisted as 
best they could the superior weapons and military skill of 
Carthaginian and Greek invaders. They were made tributary, but 
never wholly subdued by the one or the other. For a long time 
Sicily was the battle-field of Greeks and Carthaginians; her people 
were ruined and partly enslaved; her cities, inhabited by Carthagi­
nians and Greeks, were the central points whence oppression and 
slavery radiated through the interior of the island. These early 
Sicilians, however, never missed an opportunity to strike for 
liberty, or at least to take as much revenge as possible on their 
Carthaginian masters and on Syracuse. The Romans finally 
subdued Carthaginians and Syracusans, selling into slavery as 
many of them as possible. On one occasion 30,000 inhabitants of 
Panormus, the modern Palermo, were thus sold. The Romans 

=====第395页=====
Sicily and the Sicilians 371 
worked Sicily with numberless gangs of slaves, in order to feed 
with Sicilian wheat the poor proletarians of the Eternal City. For 
this purpose, they not only enslaved the inhabitants of the island, 
but imported slaves from all their other dominions. The terrible 
cruelties of Roman Proconsuls, Praetors, Praefects, are known to 
every one who is in any degree familiar with the history of Rome, 
or with the oratory of Cicero. Nowhere else, perhaps, did Roman 
cruelty hold such saturnalia. The poor freemen and yeomen, if 
unable to pay the crushing tribute exacted of them, were pitilessly 
sold into bondage, themselves or their children, by the tax-
gatherers. 
But both under the Syracusan Dionysius and under the Roman 
rule,  the most terrible slave insurrections took place in Sicily, in 
which the native people and the imported slaves often made 
common cause. During the breaking up of the Roman Empire, 
Sicily was visited by various invaders. Then the Moors got hold of 
it for a time; but the Sicilians, and above all the genuine people of 
the interior, resisted always, more or less successfully, and step by 
step maintained or conquered various small franchises. The dawn 
had scarcely begun to spread over the medieval darkness, when 
the Sicilians stood forth, already armed, not only with various 
municipal liberties, but with rudiments of a constitutional govern­
ment, such as at that time existed nowhere else. Earlier than any 
other European nation, the Sicilians regulated by vote the income 
of their Governments and Sovereigns. Thus the Sicilian soil has 
ever proved deadly to oppressors and invaders, and the Sicilian 
Vespers287  stand immortal in history. When the House of Aragon 
brought the Sicilians into dependence on Spain, they knew how to 
preserve their political immunities more or less intact; and this 
they did alike under the Hapsburgs and the Bourbons. When the 
French Revolution and Napoleon expelled the tyrannical reigning 
family from Naples, the Sicilians—incited and seduced by English 
promises and guaranties—received the fugitives, and in their 
struggles against Napoleon sustained them both with their blood 
and their money. Every one knows the subsequent treachery of 
the Bourbons, and the subterfuges or impudent denials by which 
England has tried and still tries to varnish her own faithless 
abandonment of the Sicilians and of their liberties to the tender 
mercies of the Bourbons. 
At the present day, political, administrative, and fiscal oppres­
sion crushes all classes of the people; and these grievances 
therefore stand in the foreground. But nearly the whole soil is still 
in the hands of comparatively few large landowners or barons. 

=====第396页=====
372 Karl Marx 
The medieval tenures of land are still preserved in Sicily, except 
that the tiller is not a  serf;  he ceased to be such about the eleventh 
century, when he became a free tenant. The conditions of his 
tenure are, however, generally so oppressive, that the immense 
majority of agriculturists work exclusively for the advantage of the 
tax-gatherer and of the baron, producing scarcely anything 
beyond the taxes and rents, and themselves remaining either 
wretchedly, or, at least, comparatively poor. Producing the 
celebrated Sicilian wheat and excellent fruits, they themselves live 
poorly on beans the whole year through. 
Sicily now bleeds again, and England looks calmly on at these 
new saturnalia of the infamous Bourbon, and his not less 
infamous minions, lay or clerical, Jesuits or Guardsmen.288 The 
fussy declaimers of the British Parliament rend the air with their 
empty talk about Savoy and the dangers of Switzerland, but have 
not a word to say of the massacres in the Sicilian cities. No voice 
raises the cry of indignation throughout Europe. No ruler and no 
Parliament proclaims outlawry against the bloodthirsty idiot of 
Naples.3 Louis Napoleon, alone, for this or that purpose—of 
course not for any love of liberty, but for the aggrandizement of 
his family or of French influence—may perhaps stop the butcher 
in his work of destruction. England will howl about perfidy, will 
spout fire and flames against Napoleonic treachery and ambition; 
but the Neapolitans and the Sicilians must eventually be gainers, 
even under a Murat or any other new ruler. Any change must be 
for the better. 
Written in late April and early May 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5948, May 17, 1860 as a 
leading article; reprinted in the New-York 
Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1563, May 18, 
1860 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
a Francis II.— Ed. 

=====第397页=====
373 
Karl Marx 
PREPARATIONS FOR NAPOLEON'S COMING WAR 
ON THE RHINE 
I 
Berlin, May 1, 1860 
The notion that Louis Bonaparte is about to put the German 
question on the tapis prevails here among all classes of society. In 
to-day's National-Zeitung, a correspondent even affirms that he 
knows, from sources most authentic, that Badinguet (as Louis 
Bonaparte is familiarly styled at Paris) has definitely resolved upon 
a Rhenish campaign, and that Lord John Russell had just been 
informed of this scheme when, some weeks ago, he rose from his 
seat to frighten the House of Commons by fierce invectives against 
the Emperor of the French, and the sudden announcement that 
England was now going in search for new alliances. The tone and 
temper of French semi-official prints are far from allaying these 
apprehensions. Read, for instance, the following extract from 
Bullier's Correspondence,289 a Paris publication from which most of 
the provincial journalists in France derive their inspiration: 
"A friend of mine, who is addicted to prophetic pleasantries, said to me the 
other day: 'You'll see the Emperor go to the Rhine to offer his alliance to the King 
of Prussia,3  coupled with a slight rectification of frontiers.' I replied by a quotation 
from the pamphlet Napoleon HI et l'Italie b: It is better to settle a Territorial 
modification in a friendly way than to have to do it the day after a victory." 
Not long after the treaty of commerce with England0 was 
concluded, the French Government threw out a hint to the 
Prussian Embassador0  at Paris that an application for a similar 
treaty between France and the Zollverein 290 would be favorably 
received, but the Prussian Government answering that the 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
b La Guéronnière, L'empereur Napoléon HI et l'Italie, Paris, 1859, pp. 63-64.— Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 341-44.— Ed. 
d A. Pourtalès. — Ed. 

=====第398页=====
374 Karl Marx 
Zollverein was not at all desirous to make such a treaty, surprise 
and displeasure were expressed in terms far from courteous. 
Moreover, the Prussian Government was, at the time, fully 
informed of the negotiations which the agents of Louis Bonaparte 
had recently opened with the Bavarian Court, in order to induce 
the latter to cede to France the fortress of Landau, which, it was 
said, having been left to France by the treaty of 1814, had been 
unjustly taken from her by the treaty of 1815. 291 The popular 
rumors of an impending rupture with France are, consequently, 
strengthened by official suspicion. 
Prussia's position at present bears, in some respects, a strong 
likeness to that of Austria after the conclusion of the Oriental war. 
Austria seemed then to have got off best of all the Powers. She 
flattered herself that she had humbled Russia, her dangerous 
neighbor, without incurring any trouble beyond the mobilization 
of her forces. Having played the armed mediator while the 
Western Powers had to bear the brunt of war, she might, after the 
proclamation of peace, fancy she had broken, by the arms of the 
Western Alliance, the ascendency Russia had won over her since 
the Hungarian events of 1849, and there were indeed at that time 
many compliments bestowed upon the clever diplomatic tactics of 
the Vienna Cabinet. In point of fact, however, the ambiguous 
attitude maintained by Austria during the Oriental war, left her 
without allies, and enabled Louis Bonaparte to localize the Italian 
war. Prussia, in her turn, maintained her resources intact during 
the Italian war. She shouldered her arms, but had not used them, 
and contented herself with spilling, instead of blood, the patient 
ink of her political wiseacres. After the peace of Villafranca, 
Prussia seemed to have weakened the rival House of Hapsburg 
through the instrumentality of French victories, and opened to 
herself the road to paramount power in Germany. Still, the very 
pretexts on which the treaty of Villafranca was proclaimed ought 
to have rent the delusions she labored under. While Louis 
Bonaparte declared that Prussia's armaments and threats of an 
eventual intervention had blunted the sword of France, Austria 
declared that her own power of resistance had split upon the 
equivocal neutrality of Prussia. During the whole war, Prussia had 
displayed pretensions ludicrously contradicted by her acts. Before 
Austria and the minor German States she appealed to her duties 
as a European Power; before England and Russia she appealed to 
her obligations as the paramount German Power; and, resting her 
claims on these double pretensions, she demanded from France to 
be acknowledged as the armed mediator of Europe. To her claims 

=====第399页=====
Preparations for Napoleon's Coming War on the Rhine 375 
as the German Power, par excellence, she acted up by allowing 
Russia to intimidate, in a circular3  of unprecedented insolence, the 
minor German courts, and by timidly listening, in the person of 
Herr von Schleinitz, to Lord John Russell's flippant lectures on the 
"constitutional" law of nations. 
Her claims as a European Power she made good by hushing up 
the warlike impulses of the minor German princes, and by an 
attempt to turn the military defeats of Austria into as many titles 
for usurping the place formerly held by her rival in the councils of 
the German Confederation. When at last forced, by the progress 
of the French arms, to assume something like a warlike attitude, 
she met with the cold resistance of the minor German States, 
which hardly thought it worth while to dissimulate their distrust as 
to the ultimate intentions of the Prussian Court. The peace of 
Villafranca found Prussia completely insulated, not only in 
Europe, but in Germany, while the subsequent annexation of 
Savoy, by greatly contracting the exposed front of France, greatly 
improved her chances of a victorious campaign on the Rhine. 
Under these circumstances, the line of policy which Prussia now 
affected to follow, both in her internal and external relations, 
appears alike faulty. Despite all the vainglorious declamations of 
the Prussian newspapers and Representative Chambers, nothing 
has been altered in her internal affairs, save the phraseology of 
her officials. The propositions on army reform,b  while not at all 
strengthening her military force for the impending emergency, 
aim at a permanent enlargement of the standing army, already too 
large; the overburdening of the financial resources, already 
overstrained, and the annihilation of the only democratic institu­
tion of the country—the Landwehr. 292 All the reactionary laws on 
the press, the right of association, the municipal administration, 
the relations of landlords and peasants, the bureaucratic tutelage, 
the ubiquity of the police, have been carefully maintained. Even 
the infamous statutes relating to marriages contracted between 
nobles and the common stock of mankind, have not been 
rescinded. The very idea of restoring the Constitution, overthrown 
by a coup d'état, is hooted at as a wild dream. 
I will give you one single instance of the civil liberty now 
enjoyed by a Prussian subject. A native of Rhenish Prussia' had, 
a Gorchakov's "Circularschreiben an die russischen Gesendtschaften vom 15. 
(27.) Mai 1859", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 167, June 10, 1859.— Ed. 
h See this volume, pp. 345-49.— Ed. 
c Peter Nothjung. See Engels' letter to Ferdinand Lassalle of March 15, I860, 
present edition. Vol.  41.—  Ed. 

=====第400页=====
376 Karl Marx 
during the worst period of the reaction, been condemned by a 
packed Jury, because of what was then called a political crime, to 
seven years imprisonment in a Prussian fortress. The period of his 
punishment, not abridged by the liberal ministry, having come to 
an end, he repaired to Cologne, there to be driven out by order of 
the police. He then set out for his native town, but, strange to say, 
was informed by the authorities that, having absented himself for 
seven years from the place, he had lost his citizenship, and must 
look for another abode. He retorted that his absence had not been 
a voluntary one, but all in vain. From Berlin, where he then 
resorted, he was again ejected on the plea that he had no means 
of existence to show, except his personal resources of labor and 
knowledge; all his property having been consumed during his 
imprisonment. He at last betook himself to Breslau, where an old 
acquaintance of his employed him as one of his agents, but being 
one morning summoned to the police, he was told that his 
permission of residence could be prolonged only for a few weeks, 
if, in the mean while, he should not have procured citizenship in 
Breslau. On his appliance to the Breslau municipal authority, 
many petty difficulties were thrown in his way, which, being 
removed by the interference of zealous friends, his petition for 
citizenship was at last granted, but, together with the grant, he 
received a big bill, parading an array of fees, all to be paid by any 
happy mortal on his entrance into the ranks of Breslau citizens. If 
his friends had not possessed the means by clubbing, to raise the 
sum required, this Prussian subject would, like the Wandering 
Jew, have found no place in his glorious fatherland where to rest 
his head. 
II 
Berlin, May 2, 1860 
After the conclusion of the peace of Villafranca, the Prussian 
Government, which for months had flattered itself with the idle 
hope of being acknowledged as the armed mediator of Europe, 
and of rearing, upon the ruins of the Hapsburg Empire, the 
edifice of Hohenzollern greatness, seemed to have awakened to a 
sense of the immense dangers looming in the future. Their policy, 
at once irresolute, vacillating, and perfidious, had left them 
without allies, and even von Schleinitz, whose long-winded 
dispatches had become a standing joke with the diplomatic world, 
could hardly conceal from himself the truth that, so soon as the 

=====第401页=====
Preparations for Napoleon's Coming War on the Rhine 377 
internal state of France should again drive the Man of December 
beyond the French frontiers, Prussia was to be the predestined 
object of another localized war. 
Had not Louis Napoleon, in a moment of apparent openheart-
edness, dropped some words to the effect that he knew what 
Germany stood in need of—unity, that he was the man to impart 
it; and that the Rhenish Provinces would be not too high a price 
for the purchase of so precious a commodity. Quite true to the 
tradition of Prussia's past, the first idea of the Prince Regent8 and 
his satellites was to throw themselves upon the mercy of Russia. 
Had not Frederick William I acquired Pomerania by a treaty of 
division concluded with Peter the Great against Charles XII of Swe­
den? 293 Had not Frederick II carried the day in the Seven Years' 
War, and annexed Silesia by the withdrawal of Russia from her 
Austrian ally?294 Had not the several divisions of Poland,295 
planned between the Court of Berlin and the Court of Petersburg, 
swelled out the diminutive dimensions of the Prussian monarchy? 
Had not, at the Congress of Vienna, the unbounded servility of 
Frederick William III, who stood by Alexander I, when, in 1814, 
England, Austria, and France showed some indication to opposi­
tion and resistance, been rewarded by the annexation of Saxony 
and the Rhenish Provinces to Prussia?296  Prussia, in one word, had 
in its encroachments upon Germany, always enjoyed the patron­
age and the support of Russia, on the express condition, of course, 
of helping that latter Power to subject the countries bordering on 
the fatherland, and of playing the part of its humble vassal on the 
European stage. In October, 1859, the Prince Regent and 
Alexander II, surrounded by diplomatists, generals and courtiers, 
met each other at Breslau, there to conclude a treaty, 297 the articles 
of which have, till now, remained an unfathomable secret, not for 
Louis Bonaparte or Lord Palmerston, but for Prussian subjects, 
whose liberal representatives have proved themselves, of course, 
much too polite to interpellate Herr von Schleinitz, the Foreign 
Minister, on such a delicate question. This much, however, is sure, 
that the Bonapartist press took no fright at the Breslau 
conference; that ever since then the relations between Russia and 
France have grown more ostentatiously intimate; that that 
conference did not prevent Louis Bonaparte, either from seizing 
upon Savoy, or threatening Switzerland, and throwing out hints 
upon some unavoidable "rectification of the Rhenish frontiers," 
and, finally, that Prussia  herself,  despite the comfortable prospect 
a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 

=====第402页=====
378 Karl Marx 
of again being allowed to form Russia's vanguard, has, in these 
latter times, eagerly seized upon the bait of an English alliance, 
only thrown out at London to amuse the British House of 
Commons for a week or two. 
However, Lord John Russell's indiscreet betrayal in the shape of 
a Blue Book,3  of Herr von Schleinitz's coquetry with the Tuileries 
during the last Italian war, gave the death-blow to the Anglo-
Prussian alliance, which the Prussian Government considered for a 
moment as a scheme really entertained, but which was known at 
London to be nothing beyond a phrase hiding a Parliamentary 
trick. After all, despite the conference with Alexander II, at 
Breslau, and Lord John Russell's "search for new alliances," 
Prussia now, as after the treaty of Villafranca, finds herself 
completely insulated and singly exposed to the French theory of 
the natural frontiers. 298 
Can it be believed that under such trying circumstances the only 
expedient which the Prussian Government has hit upon is to 
renew its scheme of a little Germany with a Hohenzollern at its 
head, and, by the most insolent provocations, not only to drive 
Austria into the hostile camp, but to estrange the whole of 
Southern Germany? Yet, incredible as it may appear, and the 
more incredible since this line of policy is fervently recommended 
by the Bonapartist press, such is the case. The nearer the danger 
draws, the more anxious appears Prussia to display her hunger for 
a new division of Germany. By the way, it is likely enough that, 
after the blow dealt to Austria, Germany stands in need of a 
similar blow being dealt to Prussia, in order to get rid of "both the 
houses,"b  but at all events nobody will suspect the Prince Regent 
and Herr von Schleinitz of acting upon such pessimist principles. 
Ever since the treaty of Villafranca the leanings of the Regent's 
policy have been betrayed in little press skirmishes and small 
occasional debates on the Italian question, but, on the 20th 
of April, in the Prussian Lower House, on [the] occasion of the 
debates on the Kurhessian question, 0 the cat was let out of the 
bag. 
I have before explained this Kurhessian question to your 
readers,d and shall therefore now limit myself to explaining in a 
a Correspondence respecting the Affairs of Italy from the Signing of Preliminaries of 
Villafranca to the Postponement of the Congress, London, 1860.— Ed. 
Cf. "a plague o'both your houses", Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet, Act III, Scene 
1.— Ed. 
See the Königlich privilegirle Berlinische Zeitung, No. 93, April 20, 1860.— Ed. 
Karl Marx, "Trouble in Germany", present edition, Vol. 16.— Ed. 

=====第403页=====
Preparations  for  Napoleon's Coming War  on the  Rhine  379 
few words the main points upon which the debates turned. The 
Kurhessian Constitution of 1831 having been destroyed by the 
Arch-Electora  in 1849-50, under Austrian auspices, Prussia for a 
moment affected a desire to draw the sword on behalf of the 
protesting representative Chamber, but in November, 1850, on the 
meeting between Prince Schwarzenberg and Baron Manteuffel at 
Olmütz, when Prussia altogether surrendered to Austria, acknowl­
edged the restoration of the old German Diet, 299 betrayed 
Schleswig-Holstein, and recanted all her pretensions to supremacy, 
she also yielded her knight-errantry on behalf of the Kurhessian 
Constitution of 1831. 
In 1852, the Arch-Elector octroyed a new constitution which was 
guaranteed by the German Diet, despite the protest of the 
Kurhessian people. After the Italian war, the question, on the 
secret instigation of Prussia, was again mooted. The Kurhessian 
Chambers again declared for the validity of the Constitution of 
1831,  and fresh petitions for its reestablishment went up to the 
Diet at Frankfort. Prussia then asserted the Constitution of 1831 
to be alone valid, but, as she cautiously added, it ought to be 
adapted to the monarchical principles of the Diet. Austria, on the 
other hand, insisted that the Constitution of 1852 was legal, but 
ought to be amended in a liberal sense. Thus the dispute was a 
verbal one, a mere quibble, the gist of which was a trial of the 
respective power wielded by the Hohenzollern and the Hapsburg 
over the German Confederation. A vast majority of the Diet 
decided at last for the validity of the Constitution of 1852; viz., on 
the Austrian side, and against Prussia. The motives which swayed 
the votes of the minor German States were transparent. Austria 
they knew to be too much involved in foreign difficulties, and too 
unpopular, to attempt anything beyond the conservation of the 
general status quo in Germany, while they suspected Prussia of 
ambitious schemes of innovation. By not acknowledging the 
competency of the vote of the Diet of 1851, they would have put 
in jeopardy the competency of all the other resolutions of the Diet 
since 1848. Last, not least, they did not like the Prussian strategy 
of dictating to the minor German Princes and encroaching upon 
their sovereignty, by affecting to take up the grievances of the 
Kurhessian people against the Arch-Elector. Consequently the 
motion of Prussia was lost. 
Now, on the 20th of April, when this matter came to be debated 
at Berlin in the House of Deputies, Herr von Schleinitz, in the 
a Friedrich Wilhelm l. — Ed. 

=====第404页=====
380 Karl Marx 
name of the Prussian Government, explicitly declareda that Prussia 
would not think herself bound by the vote of the German Diet; 
that, in 1850, when the Prussian Constitution was fabricated, there 
existed no German Diet, that body having been swept away by the 
earthquake of 1848, whence it followed that all resolutions of the 
German Diet which should run counter to the plans of the 
Prussian Government were void of legal force; and, lastly, that, in 
fact, the German Diet belonged to the dead, although the German 
Confederation, of course, continued to exist. Now, is it possible to 
imagine any step more foolish on the part of the Prussian 
Government? The Austrian Government declared the old Con­
stitution of the German Empire to be defunct, after Napoleon I 
had really put the extinguisher upon it. The Hapsburg then 
proclaimed only a fact. The Hohenzollern, on the contrary, now 
proclaims the nullity of the Federal Constitution of Germany at a 
moment when Germany is threatened with a foreign war, as if to 
afford the Man of December legal pretexts for entering into 
separate alliances with the minor German States, which, till now, 
were precluded from such a course of action by the laws of the 
Diet. If Prussia had proclaimed the right of the Revolution of 
1848,  the nullity of all the counter-revolutionary acts committed by 
herself and the Diet since that time, and the restoration of the 
institutions and laws of the Revolutionary epoch, she would have 
commanded the sympathies of all Germany, Austrian Germany 
included. 
As it is, she has only divided the German Princes without 
uniting the German people. She has, in fact, opened the door by 
which to let in the Zouaves. 
Written on May 3-4, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5950, May 19, 1860 
a Von Schleinitz's speech in the Prussian Diet on April 20, 1860, Stenographischer 
Bericht, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1860, S. 794-95. Presumably Marx used the material from 
"Debates in the Prussian Chamber", The Times, No. 23604, April 26, 1860.— Ed. 

=====第405页=====
381 
Karl Marx 
[GARIBALDI IN SICILY.—] 
AFFAIRS IN PRUSSIA 
Berlin, May 28, 1860 
The prevailing topic of conversation here, as everywhere all 
over Europe, is, of course, Garibaldi's adventures in Sicily. Now, 
you are aware that never before has the telegraph been put to 
such impudent work as in the present instance, both on the part 
of Naples and Genoa or Turin. Locusts have never poured upon 
Europe in such multitude as do now the electric canards. It seems, 
therefore, worth while to state, in a few words, the views here 
entertained of Sicilian affairs in the most competent military 
circles. In the first instance, the insurrection, as is generally 
known, was kept up for a whole month before the arrival of 
Garibaldi; but, of paramount importance as this fact is, it may be 
overvalued, as shown by the Paris Constitutionnel. The military 
forces Naples disposed of in Sicily before Gen. Lanza was sent 
over with fresh troops could hardly amount to 20,000 men, the far 
greater part of whom had to be concentrated in the fortresses of 
Palermo and Messina, so that the flying corps left available for the 
pursuit of the insurgents might boast of several successful 
encounters, disperse the enemy on certain points, and harass him 
in different directions, but must prove altogether insufficient to 
thoroughly stifle the insurrection. At the present moment, there 
seem to be about 30,000 Neapolitan troops gathered at Palermo, 
two-thirds of them holding the fortress, while one-third encamp 
beyond its precincts. Fifteen thousand Neapolitans are said to 
hold Messina. Now Garibaldi had, according to the latest news, not 
pushed beyond Monreale. It is true that this place is situated on 
hills which command Palermo from the land side, but to improve 
the opportunities offered by this position, Garibaldi as yet lacks 
the principal requisite—siege artillery. The immediate chances of 

=====第406页=====
382 Karl Marx 
Garibaldi, whose army musters about 12,000 men, will consequent­
ly depend upon two main circumstances—the rapid spread of the 
insurrection throughout the island, and the attitude of the 
Neapolitan soldiers at Palermo. If the latter waver, and get into 
quarrels with the foreign mercenaries intermingled with them, 
Lanza's means of defense may break up in his own hands. If the 
insurrection develops much vital power, Garibaldi's army will be 
swelled to more formidable dimensions. If Garibaldi should get 
into Palermo, he will sweep everything before him save Messina, 
where the difficult task will again begin. You remember that, in 
1848-49, the Neapolitans had lost everything save Messina, serving 
as a tête-de-pont between Sicily and Naples; but Messina then 
sufficed to regain the whole island. The fall of Palermo, and the 
military hold by the patriots of the whole island, except Messina, 
would, however, this time prove more decisive than in 1848-49, 
because of the altered political conjunctures. If Garibaldi masters 
Palermo, he will be officially supported by the "King of Italy." If 
he fails, his invasion will be disavowed as a private adventure. 
There is something of ironical pathos in the words addressed to 
Victor Emmanuel by Garibaldi, who tells the King that he will 
conquer for him a new province, which he hopes the King will not 
again bargain away, like Nice, Garibaldi's birthplace. 3 
Among the topics of Prussian politics, the first place in the 
public mind is naturally occupied by the Prince of Prussia's private 
letter to the Prince Consort of England,300  of which the Prince de 
La Tour d'Auvergne, Louis Bonaparte's Embassador at the Court 
of Berlin, had not only the impudence to present a copy to Herr 
von Schleinitz, the Prussian Foreign Minister, but went the length 
of asking explanations on some of its passages reflecting on the 
character and plans of the great Paris saltimbanque} 3 This incident 
reminds one of a similar accident that happened shortly before the 
ratification of the treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi,  1833. 301 The Grand 
Vizier having at that time communicated a copy of the secret 
treaty, drawn up by Count  Orloff,  to the British Embassy at 
Constantinople, was much bewildered when a day later, to his not 
agreeable surprise, Count Orloff returned him the identical copy, 
with the spiteful advice, to find better confidants for the future. 
At Berlin everybody feels sure that the Prince Regent's letter, 
having been transmitted by post via  Ostend,  not via Calais, was 
a Giuseppe Garibaldi's address to Victor Emmanuel, Allgemeine Zeitung, 
No. 143, May 22, I860.— Ed, 
b Quack.—Ed. 

=====第407页=====
Garibaldi in Sicily.—Affairs in Prussia 383 
tampered with at the English Post-Office, where a numerous 
personnel is notoriously employed in prying into suspected 
letters—a practice carried to such a degree that at the time of the 
Coalition-Cabinet, the Earl of Aberdeen confessed that he dared 
not confide to the post his own letters addressed to his 
metropolitan friends. Lord Palmerston, having thus got a copy of 
the Prince Regent's letter, is supposed, out of spite against Prince 
Albert and in the interest of the Anglo-French-Russian alliance, to 
have placed a copy of that letter into the hands of the French 
Embassador3 at London. At all events the course of the intended 
and much talked-of Anglo-Prussian alliance runs anything but 
smooth. 
Some months ago, when Lord John Russell one fine morning 
discovered that England must go in search of new alliances,b and 
when that intimation was received with much childish enthusiasm 
in the official circles of Berlin, out came all at once, in the form of 
an English Parliamentary paper, a dispatch addressed by Lord 
Bloomfieldc  to the Foreign Office at Downing street, narrating a 
private conversation he had held during the last Italian war with 
Herr von Schleinitz, and sadly compromising the good faith of 
Prussian foreign policy. Lord John at the time pleaded guilty of a 
most strange indiscretion, but the first blow to the new alliance 
was dealt. The second blow has been given by the miscarriage of 
the Prince Regent's letter. 
You will have seen that in his speech from the throne the 
Princed  speaks very emphatically of the maintenance of treaty 
rights and the united front Germany is ready to show against any 
encroachment upon the independence and integrity of the 
common fatherland. The unpleasant impression produced upon 
the Paris stock exchange by the apparent menace has been allayed 
through the Russian journal Le Nord, e which, in a tone of 
ironically condescending  bonhommie,*  divests the Prince's speech of 
all serious meaning, calls to mind similar phrases uttered by him 
a Jean Gilbert Persigny.— Ed. 
h John Russell's speech in the House of Commons on March 26, 1860, The Times, 
No. 23578, March 27, I860.—Ed. 
c For Lord Bloomfield's dispatch to Lord John Russell see "Nouvelles de 
l'Angleterre. Berlin, 14 janvier, 1860", L'Indépendance belge, No. 73, March 13, 
I860.— Ed. 
cl The Prince of Prussia's speech from the throne at the closing of the Prussian 
Diet on May 23, 1860, Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung, No. 120, May 24, 
I860.—Ed. 
e "Resume politique", I.e.  Nord,  No. 148, May 27, I860.— Ed. 
f Good nature.— Ed. 

=====第408页=====
384 Karl Marx 
during the Italian war, and, in conclusion, characterizes the whole 
passage as a mere compliment paid to popular feeling. As to the 
rest of the Prince's speech, it is, in fact, but a summary of 
legislative failures. The only important projects debated by the 
Chambers—the projected laws on marriage, municipal administra­
tion, and reform of the land tax, from which the nobility in the 
greater part of the monarchy still remain exempt, have all proved 
abortive. The Prince, moreover, complains of his pet measures 
relating to the army reform not having yet received legislative 
sanction. 
Though the Government has proved unable, even with the 
present Chamber of Representatives—whose large majority con­
sists of Ministerialists—to carry its proposed army reform, it has at 
last got an extra vote of nine millions and a half of dollars, to be 
laid out in military expenditures; while simultaneously, as I am 
informed by letters from the provinces, the intended changes in 
the army organization are quietly but practically introduced, so as 
to leave to the Chambers, when reassembling, no other alternative 
than that of sanctioning what will then have become a fait accompli. 
The gist of the intended army reform is pointed out in the 
Baltische Monatsschrift, a Russian-German monthly, published at 
Riga, and printed under the sanction of the Russian Governor-
General of Livonia, Esthonia, and Courland. 
"The Prussian army reform," says that paper, "which was introduced 
immediately after the peace of Villafranca, can hardly serve any other purpose 
than that of emancipating the Government from the direct appeal to the whole 
people—[an appeal] which, with the old military system, became unavoidable, 
whenever the Government thought it necessary to support its policy by warlike 
demonstrations. Under the present political combinations of Europe, a State like 
Prussia, still striving for its full acknowledgment as one of the great Powers, can 
neither suspend its whole pacific life on every occasion that seems to necessitate the 
employment of its military forces, nor can it in every case guarantee to the nation 
when once called to arms the ensuing of actual war. There lies hidden in the 
Landwehr system a certain democratical antagonism against the monarchic 
principle. The mobilizations of 1850 and 1859, following each other within a 
relatively short interval, and leading both times to no warlike action, but only to 
demobilization, seem to have impaired with the great part of the Prussian people 
the authority of the State, even in foreign affairs. From the very circumstances 
accompanying both mobilizations, the conclusion seemed to have been drawn by 
the popular mind that the Government was bound to obtain the consent of public 
opinion in every instance of a general armament. Even the official declarations 
made by Prussia in regard to the attitude she observed during the Italian conflict 
contain the confession of the mobilization of the Landwehr having encountered 
unexpected difficulties." ,a 
a The Baltische Monatsschrift, 1859, Bd. I, Heft I, S. 47-48.—Ed. 

=====第409页=====
Garibaldi in Sicily.—Affairs in Prussia 385 
Hence the Russian-German paper concludes that Prussia ought 
to get rid of the Landwehr system, in its present form, but, at the 
same time, intimates with an ironical sneer that "such an alteration 
of one of the most popular institutions, just at a moment when 
Prussia affects to stand on liberalism," is a very delicate operation. 
I may here remark that this Baltische Monatsschrift, published 
under Czarist auspices at Riga, forms to some degree the 
counterpart of the Strassburger Correspondent, published under 
Bonapartist auspices at Strassburg. Both skirmish on the German 
frontiers, the one from the east, the other from the west. The 
writers of the one may be considered as literary Cossacks, the 
writers of the other as literary Zouaves. 3 Both affect great 
tenderness for Germany, and abound in wise counsels to the land 
whose vernacular they still condescend to use. Both try to prepare 
the fatherland for great changes impending, and both smell of the 
entente cordiale just now linking the Caesarism of Paris to the 
Czarism of Petersburg; but here the likeness ends. The Strassburg 
paper, although perfumed with that peculiar scent of false 
melodramatic dignity characteristic of the Bohemian literature of 
the Second French Empire, is still written in the homely style that 
belongs to Southern Germany. It affects common sense, and 
certainly does not pretend to any literary distinction. The Riga 
monthly, on the contrary, struts with a didactic stateliness and a 
metaphysical profoundness savoring of the traditions of the 
Königsberg University. After all, I consider the ebullitions of 
patriotic rage with which the German press assails both the 
Monatsschrift and the Correspondent, but mainly the latter, as silly 
exhibitions of childish incompetency. 
Written on May 28, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5972, June 14, 1860 
a See Marx's letter to Engels of April 24, 1860, present edition, Vol.  41.—  Ed. 

=====第410页=====
386 
Frederick Engels 
GARIBALDI IN SICILY 
After a variety of the most contradictory information, we 
receive, at last, something like trustworthy news of the details of 
Garibaldi's wonderful march from Marsala to Palermo. It is, 
indeed, one of the most astonishing military feats of the century, 
and it would be almost unaccountable were it not for the prestige 
preceding the march of a triumphant revolutionary general. The 
success of Garibaldi proves that the Royalist troops of Naples still 
hold in terror the man who has borne high the flag of Italian 
revolution in the face of French, Neapolitan, and Austrian 
battalions, and that the people of Sicily have not lost their faith in 
him, or in the national cause. 
On the 6th of May, two steamers leave the coast of Genoa with 
about 1,400 armed men, organized in seven companies, each of 
them, evidently, destined to become the nucleus of a battalion to 
be recruited among the insurgents. On the 8th, they land at 
Talamone on the Tuscan coast, and persuade the commander of 
the fort there, by some sort of argument or other, to furnish them 
with coal, ammunition, and four field pieces. On the 10th, they 
enter the harbor of Marsala, at the extreme western end of Sicily, 
and disembark with all their material, in spite of the arrival of two 
Neapolitan men-of-war, who are powerless, at the right moment, 
to prevent them; the story about British interference in favor of 
the invaders has proved false, and is now abandoned even by the 
Neapolitans themselves. On the 12th, the small band had marched 
to Salemi, 18 miles distant in the interior, and on the road toward 
Palermo. Here the chief men of the revolutionary party appear to 
have met Garibaldi, to have consulted with him, and collected 
insurrectionary reenforcements amounting to some 4,000 men; 

=====第411页=====
Garibaldi in Sicily 387 
while these were being organized, the insurrection, repressed but 
not quelled a few weeks before, was kindled afresh all over the 
mountains of Western Sicily, and, as was proved on the 16th, not 
without effect. On the 15th, Garibaldi, with his 1,400 organized 
volunteers and 4,000 armed peasantry, advances northward across 
the hills upon Calatafimi, where the country road from Marsala 
joins the high road from Trapani to Marsala. The defiles leading 
to Calatafimi, across a spur of the lofty Monte Cerrara, called the 
Monte di Pianto Romano, were defended by three battalions of 
Royal troops, with cavalry and artillery, under Gen. Landi. 
Garibaldi at once attacked this position, which was at first 
obstinately defended; but although in this attack Garibaldi could 
not have employed against the 3,000 or 3,500 Neapolitans more 
than his volunteers and a very small portion of the Sicilian 
insurgents, the Royalists were successively driven out of five strong 
positions, with the loss of one mountain-gun and numerous killed 
and wounded. The loss of the Garibaldians is stated by themselves 
at 18 killed and 128 wounded. The Neapolitans profess to have 
conquered one of Garibaldi's flags in this engagement, but, as they 
found a flag left behind on board one of the abandoned steamers 
at Marsala, they are quite capable of having exhibited this same 
flag at Naples as a proof of their pretended victory. Their defeat 
at Calatafimi, however, did not compel them to abandon that town 
the same evening. They left it on the following morning only, and 
after that they appear not to have offered any further resistance 
to Garibaldi until they reached Palermo. They did reach it, but in 
a terrible state of dissolution and disorder. The certainty of having 
succumbed to mere "filibusters and armed rabble" reproduced in 
their minds all at once the terrible image of that Garibaldi, who, 
while defending Rome against the French, could yet find time to 
march to Velletri and send to the right-about the advanced guard 
of the whole Neapolitan army, and who had since conquered, on 
the slopes of the Alps, warriors of a far superior mettle to any that 
Naples produces.303 The hurried retreat, without a show even of 
further resistance, must have still increased their despondency and 
the tendency to desertion which already existed in their ranks; and 
when all at once they found themselves surrounded and harassed 
by that insurrection which had been prepared at the meeting at 
Salemi, their cohesion was utterly lost; of Landi's brigade nothing 
but a disorderly and dispirited mob, greatly reduced in numbers, 
reentered Palermo in small successive bands. 
Garibaldi entered Calatafimi on the day that Landi had left 
it—on the 16th; marched on the 17th to Alcamo (10 miles); on 

=====第412页=====
388 Frederick Engels 
the 18th to Partinico (10 miles), and beyond that place toward 
Palermo. On the 19th, incessant torrents of rain prevented the 
troops from moving. 
In the mean time, Garibaldi had ascertained that the Neapoli­
tans were throwing up intrenchments around Palermo, and 
strengthening the old, decayed ramparts of the town on the side 
facing the Partinico road. They were still at least 22,000 strong, 
and thus far superior to any forces that he could bring against 
them. But they were dispirited; their discipline was loosened; 
many of them began to think of passing over to the insurgents; 
while their generals were known, both to their own soldiers and to 
their enemy, to be imbeciles. The only trustworthy troops among 
them were the two foreign battalions. As matters stood, Garibaldi 
could not have ventured upon a direct front attack upon the town, 
while the Neapolitans could not undertake anything decisive 
against him, even if their troops were fit for it, as they must always 
leave a strong garrison in the town and never move too far away 
from it. With a General of the common stamp in the place of 
Garibaldi, this state of things would have led to a series of 
desultory and undecisive engagements, in which he might have 
trained a portion of his levies to warfare, but in which also the 
Royal troops would very soon have recovered a good deal of 
their lost confidence and discipline, for they could not help 
being successful in some of them. But such a kind of warfare 
would neither suit an insurrection nor a Garibaldi. A bold offen­
sive was the only system of tactics permitted to a revolution; 
a striking success, such as the deliverance of Palermo, became 
a necessity as soon as the insurgents had arrived in sight of the 
city. 
But how was this to be done? Here it was that Garibaldi 
brilliantly proved himself a General, fit not for petty partisan 
warfare only, but also for more important operations. 
On the 20th and succeeding days, Garibaldi attacked the 
Neapolitan outposts and positions in the neighborhood of 
Monreale and Parco, on the roads leading to Palermo from 
Trapani and Corleone, thus making the enemy believe that his 
attack would take place chiefly against the south-western face of 
the town, and that here his main forces were concentrated. By a 
skillful combination of attacks and feigned retreats, he induced the 
Neapolitan General to send more and more troops out of the town 
in this direction, until, on the 24th, some 10,000 Neapolitans 
appeared outside the town, toward Parco. This was what Garibaldi 
intended. He at once engaged them with part of his forces, slowly 

=====第413页=====
Garibaldi in Sicily 389 
retreated before them so as to draw them further and further 
away from the town, and when he had got them as far as Piana,a 
across the main range of hills, which run across Sicily, and here 
divide the Conca d'Oro (the golden shell, the Valley of Palermo) 
from the Valley of Corleone, he at once threw the main body of 
his troops across another part of the same ridge, into the Valley of 
Misilmeri, which opens out to the sea, close to Palermo. On the 
25th he took up his headquarters at Misilmeri, eight miles from 
the capital. What he further did with the 10,000 men entangled 
on a single line of bad road in the mountains, we are not 
informed, but we may be sure that he kept them well occupied 
with some fresh apparent victories, so as to make sure they would 
not come back too soon to Palermo. Having thus reduced the 
defenders of the town by nearly  one-half,  and transferred his line 
of attack from the Trapani road to the Catania road, he could 
proceed to the grand attack. Whether the insurrection in the town 
preceded Garibaldi's assault, or whether it was produced by his 
knocking at the gates, the conflicting dispatches leave unsettled; 
but certain it is, that on the morning of the 27th, all Palermo rose 
in arms and Garibaldi thundered at the Porta Termini, on the 
south-east face of the town, where no Neapolitan expected him. 
The remainder is known—the gradual clearing of the town, with 
the exception of the batteries, the citadel, and the Royal palace, 
from the troops; the subsequent bombardment, the armistice, the 
capitulation. Authentic details of all these proceedings are still 
wanting; but the main facts are pretty certain. 
In the mean time, we must declare that Garibaldi's maneuvers 
preparatory to the attack on Palermo at once stamp him as a 
General of a very high order. Hitherto we knew him as a very 
skillful and very lucky guerrilla-chief only; even in the siege of 
Rome his mode of defending the town by constant sallies gave him 
scarcely an opportunity of rising above that level. But here we 
have him on fair strategic ground, and he comes from the trial a 
proven master of his art. His manner of enticing the Neapolitan 
commander into the blunder of sending one-half of his troops out 
of reach, his sudden flank-march and reappearance before 
Palermo, on the side where he was least expected, and his 
energetic attack while the garrison was weakened, are operations 
far more imprinted with the stamp of military genius than 
anything that occurred during the Italian war of 1859. The 
a Piana dei Greci.— Ed. 

=====第414页=====
390 Frederick Engels 
Sicilian insurrection has found a first-rate military  chief;  let us 
hope that the politician Garibaldi, who will soon have to appear on 
the stage, may keep unsullied the glory of the General. 
Written about June 7, 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5979, June 22, 1860 as a 
leading article; reprinted in the New-York 
Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1573, June 22, 
1860 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第415页=====
391 
Karl Marx 
THE EMPEROR NAPOLEON III AND PRUSSIA 
Berlin, June 12, 1860 
The following are extracts from Mr. About's newest pamphlet,3 
which will be published in Paris in the course of a few days: 
"Let Germany know that the friendship of France has its value. [...] Did not our 
soldiers rush to the Black Sea to rescue the Ottoman Empire from destruction? [...] 
Has not the emancipation of the Moldo-Wallachians [...] been effected solely by our 
influence, without bloodshed? Italy [...] has entered the paths of independence and 
unity under our auspices—our armies paved the way along which it now marches 
onward, led by Piedmont; and if Heaven shall permit this great work to be 
accomplished, and that a nation of 26,000,000 of souls shall be organized at our 
gates,  France will not take umbrage, [...] for she feels that order cannot be 
established in Europe so long as there are oppressed nationalities and kings who are 
insupportable to their subjects." 
"Never was that noble nation" (Germany) "so great as from 1813 to 1815, for 
never was it so united. When a Frenchman speaks with admiration of the 
campaigns which were so terrible to France, his testimony is worthy of attention. 
The sentiment of German honor and independence, surging up against conquest, 
worked miracles. Germany has but one passion—one heart. It raised itself up as 
one man, and the defeat of our incomparable armies showed what united Germany 
could do." 
"Well, let Germany be again united. France ardently desires it, for she loves the 
Germanic nation with disinterested affection. Were we devoured by that brutal 
ambition attributed to us by certain Princes, we should not impel Germany to unity. 
[...] Let Germany be united and form so compact a body as to render invasion 
impossible. France sees without fear an Italy of 26 millions of souls rising on her 
southern frontier; she would not fear to see one of 32 millions of Germans on her 
eastern confines." 
"The Germans begin to see [...] the folly of keeping up 37 different 
Governments," and are resolved to become united. 
Prussia will be their nucleus, because Prussia represents freedom of trade and 
thought, whereas Austria represents prohibition, despotism and all the horrors 
a Edmond About, La Prusse en 1860, Paris, 1860.— Ed. 
14-1305 

=====第416页=====
392 Karl Marx 
engendered by its Concordat.305 Therefore will they rally round Prussia. But 
Prussia must choose between the right divine and the rights of the people. "While 
some Princes are clinging to a false legitimacy, really legitimate empires are being 
founded on the basis of universal suffrage. The King of Naples3 affirms that his 
subjects belong to him, and they oppose an armed repudiation of these 
pretensions. The Emperor of the Frenchb and the King of Sardiniac declare with 
modern philosophy that peoples belong to themselves alone, and two great nations 
with all but unanimity select them for their chiefs. Will the Prince of Prussia 
declare for the right divine [...] or the rights of the people? [...] It is the more 
necessary [...] that he should make this declaration, as in 1849, [...] a National 
Assembly, the issue of universal suffrage, brought a legitimate crown to the Kinge 
in his palace. What did he? He declared for the right divine against the popular 
right; he would not accept the crown unless offered to him by Princes, and the 
Prussian clodhoppers applauded saying: '[...] We would not have a throne on which 
Democracy has spat.' [...] Saxony and Baden had dismissed their Sovereigns. Two 
Prussian armies marched in the name of divine right and invaded Saxony and Baden. 
The Saxon King was replaced on his throne, as was also the Duke of Baden g; and 
after all had thus been adjusted, and the Baden Democratic Army had sought shelter 
in Switzerland, the Prussians shot in cold blood 26 German patriots. 
"A Prussian Democrat lately wrote to the people in Württemberg, 'Why don't 
you join us?' They replied, 'If we were Prussians we should all be exiled, with the poet 
Unland at our head.' 
"Nothing is more strange nor more true than this assertion. Since 1848 all the 
princes of Europe, including even the Pope, have granted amnesties. The Prussian 
amnesty has not yet appeared. If the Regent" wishes to deserve well of his country, 
"let him summon back the exiles [...] and become the testamentary executor of the 
Parliament of 1849, as the Napoleons are testamentary executors of the French 
Revolution! 
"Let us here correct certain erroneous notions which exist in Germany. They 
suppose, on the strength of certain feudal journals, that the French Empire is in a 
state of slavery—that the Imperial rule has gagged thought, suppressed the 
national representation, and tossed our liberties to the dogs. 
"The Prussians believe themselves to be more free and happy than we are, 
under their liberal and parliamentary Government. It is true that the Emperor of 
the French works out the grandeur and prosperity of France" with a dictatorial 
power: but it is essentially democratic, "as it was confided to him by the people."1 
But is not feudalism rampant in Prussia? 
"The French army is devoted to the Emperor, but it does not belong to him but 
to the nation. Does the Prussian army belong to the King or to the nation? 'To the 
a Francis II.— Ed. 
b Napoleon III.— Ed. 
c Victor Emmanuel II.— Ed. 
d William.— Ed. 
e Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
f Frederick Augustus II.— Ed. 
s Leopold.— Ed. 
h Edmond About has "la nation française". — Ed. 
1 This sentence reads as follows in the French original: "Il est vrai que 
l'empereur Napoléon travaille à la grandeur et à la prospérité de la France avec un 
pouvoir très-étendu. Mais ce pouvoir, c'est la nation qui le lui a confié." —Ed. 

=====第417页=====
The Emperor Napoleon III and Prussia 393 
King,' said the other day the Prime Minister Hohenzollern, 'the Deputies of 
the nation have nothing to do with the affairs of the army.' 
"It is true that with us the liberty of the press is subjected to severe restrictions, 
but the right to print and publish is not confiscated; it is only postponed. The 
nation consents to remain silent around a Prince who does great things, as the 
friends of a philosopher or a great writer keep silent in his cabinet. As for the 
right, it remains intact, and Frenchmen [...] will have the right to reclaim it, in 
good time and place, should the Emperor forget (!) to restore it to them. The 
writers of Berlin are more free, perhaps," despite their taxes, and caution-money, 
etc., "but who shall guarantee to them the duration of their privilege? [...] The 
hand which gave may take away. The difference between us and them is that we 
lend our liberties to the Emperor, whereas they borrow theirs from the Regent. 
"The Germans fancy that we have allowed ourselves to be despoiled of our 
Parliamentary régime. True. Our Parliament has changed since 1848. It is no 
longer a coterie representing 400,000 or 500,000 persons; it is the whole nation 
which sends its Deputies to the Corps  Législatif.  This Assembly, chosen, like the 
Emperor  himself,  by universal suffrage, no longer enjoys the ridiculous privilege (!) 
of interrupting the march of public affairs, of replacing action by speeches, union 
by coalition, the public interest by private vanity, the serious progress of a great 
people by the flattering of some petty oratorical ambition—but it enjoys the 
inestimable right of voting all the taxes and all the laws of the Empire." "Have we 
any reason to be jealous of the Prussian Constitution? Is the principle of Ministerial 
responsibility applied in Prussia? Not yet. Have the Chambers the recognized right 
to refuse to vote the taxes? No. And what are the Prussian Chambers? That which 
corresponds with our Corps  Législatif,  or (!) the House of Commons,is united by a 
mechanism rather ingenious than democratic." [...] A District is given, which pays 
300,000 francs direct taxation. The tax-payers are separated into three squads, the 
15 or 20 large proprietors who pay 100,000 francs, are the first class of electors; 
the second class consists of 200 or 300 who pay another 100,000 francs, and the 
third, of the 2,000 or 3,000 who pay the remainder. Each of these classes elect [...] 
six Electors, and these eighteen Electors elect a Deputy. Therefore the middling 
classes can never be represented, and "this is why M. de Vincke, who sat on the 
Conservative side in the Frankfort Parliament, is now, without having changed his 
opinions, the most advanced democrat of the Prussian Chambers. Can liberal 
Germany do much with such a Chamber?" And even when it evinces some desire 
for progress, is it not cramped and pushed back by the Upper House? — "an 
Assembly consisting of nobles who have seats by right or by birth, and members 
selected by the King from candidates presented to him by the nobility, the 
Universities and large towns—on one side the right of birth, on the other the 
Sovereign's choice. It is recruited from no other sources, therefore is it opposed to 
all liberal measures." It lately "rejected the principle of civil marriages by a large 
majority. It nearly raised an insurrection against the Minister 3 who proposed that 
the nobles should be compelled to pay taxes like the other classes of the citizens. 
"This Constitution is not perfect. They will do well to modify it if Germany 
should resolve to throw itself into the arms of Prussia. 
"It is very desirable that Prussia should show a little more fairness toward the 
Governments which are based on universal suffrage. We do not reproach the Court 
of Berlin for the violence of the German press, nor do we expect the Prince Regent 
to gag his subjects even when they insult us; but we must be permitted to remark 
that if the Siècle and Opinion nationale express themselves in offensive terms 
a Count von Roon.— Ed. 
14* 

=====第418页=====
394 Karl Marx 
against a Sovereign who is not the enemy of France, the Moniteur, or at least the 
semi-official journals hasten to repair the injury by administering a severe 
reprimand. 
"It would also be extremely desirable that the political men of Prussia should 
abstain from fulminating in the Prussian Parliament attacks openly directed against 
France. When M. de Vincke talks in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies of 
reconquering from us Alsace and Lorraine, the French nation is not sufficiently 
excited by this frivolity to take up arms; but it takes pleasure in declaring that such 
imprudences are never committed in France." 
"Since the accession of Napoleon III, and especially since the annexation of 
Nice and3 Savoy, German writers and perhaps even German Princes have 
somewhat loudly manifested an unjust mistrust of French policy. They persist in 
attributing to us the project of annexing the Rhenish Provinces, and encroaching 
on the soil of Germany. This groundless alarm is so loudly expressed and so 
obstinately persevered in that it might inspire us with bad thoughts were we  less equitable. 
It is certain that if you accost in the street the most gentle and inoffensive man, and you say 
to him: Sir, you mean to slap my face, you may swear that you have no such intention, but I 
know that you intend to slap my face. You need not swear to the  contrary,  for I won't believe 
you on your oath, for I know that you do mean to slap my face. But I am stronger than you. 
I am not afraid of you. I will crush you like a fly, and I defy you to slap my face. Would 
not the gentlest and most inoffensive man find good reason to do what was demanded of 
him, and would he not inflict the slap on the face of his provoker? 
"But, no provocations will cause France to depart from the line which she has 
traced for  herself.  [...] We have too much justice to think of conquering the 
territory of a foreign nationality. Would to Heaven that the German Confederation 
was animated by the same ideas! It would not have taken the Duchy of Posen, nor 
attacked the north of Schleswig, nor declared Trieste to be a German town. As for 
us, we do not fear to affirm that Lorraine and Alsace are French, because they 
themselves have proved it against Germans. We keep what belongs to us. We demand 
nothing more! We believe that all the natural frontiers, all the rivers of Europe, are 
not worth half so much for the defense of our territory as a regiment of Zouaves 
or Chasseurs-à-pied with fixed bayonets. 
"May we be permitted to add one piece of advice to these friendly counsels? It 
will prove how deeply we are interested in German unity and the future of Prussia. 
"Much as the name of Prussia, its Constitution, the person of its august Regent 
excite the sympathies of Germany, still more so, perhaps, does its bureaucracy 
inspire feelings of abhorrence, not only in Germany but among honest men of all 
countries. On the 12th of May, 1860, a ray of light fell on the maneuvers of the 
Prussian police, and revealed the most singular admixture of clumsiness and 
immorality, zeal, and imprudence, incendiary provocation and splashing Machiavel-
lism. 
"Here are the facts as they have been narrated to the Prussian Parliament by an 
honorable deputy of the Grand Duchy of Posen, Mr. Niegolewscki. Three Prussian 
bureaucrats, M. de Puttkammer, President of the Province of Posen, M. de 
Baerensprung, President of the Police, and Mr. Post, Secretary-Interpreter, were in 
search of some means whereby they might make manifest their zeal and entitle 
themselves to the gratitude of the Government. M. de Puttkammer is a great 
personage, something more than a Prefect, something less than a Minister, M. de 
Baerensprung is a man of note and importance. Post is a poor devil of no note. 
a The words "Nice and" were introduced by Marx.— Ed. 
b Italicised by Marx.— Ed. 

=====第419页=====
The Emperor Napoleon III and Prussia 395 
"The first thinks, the second dictates, the third writes. These three worthies, by 
dint of digging into their bureaucratic brains, conceive the grand idea of getting up 
an insurrection in Posen, that they may have the honor and glory of putting it 
down. The part of a provocative agent, against which even Vidocq recoiled, 
inspired them with no disgust. They disguise themselves as Poles discontented with 
Prussian rule. They establish in their bureaus a false democratic committee, and 
put themselves in communication with the Central Committee residing in London. 
'Send us,' they write, 'send us emissaries, proclamations, arms.' On the other hand, 
they send money to London, the money of the Budget, the thalers wrung from 
unfortunate tax-payers. Here are taxes well employed. The treasurer of the 
enterprise was M. Stolzenberg, the Secretary of Police. The letters were to be 
addressed to Madame Ruch, wife of a counselor in the Supreme Tribunal. 
"The London Committee did not take the bait very readily. It hesitated, was 
mistrustful. It seemed to scent the treason. But the bureaucratic trio implored with 
such humility for some letters and circulars; it spoke with such admiration of 
General Mazzini; with so much emotion of the prose of Félix Pyat, the very bread 
of life, that some revolutionary men in London, including even Mazzini  himself, 
entered into correspondence with them. This perfidious game was played for three 
years,  and would have been played on till now, had it not been suddenly stopped 
by a thunderbolt from M. Niegolewscki. 
"The eloquent orator of Posen laid on the table the original text of 24 letters, 
written by Mr. Post, dictated by M. Baerensprung and inspired by Mr. 
Puttkammer. The first is dated August 19, 1858; the last April, 1860. No one, not 
even the Minister of the Interior, M. de Schwerin, ventured to contest the 
authenticity of these documents. We have had them translated by a sworn 
interpreter. They prove that the Prussian police excited the Committee in London 
to send incendiary proclamations to the Grand Duchy of Posen; that it paid the 
expenses for printing them in London, and caused them to be distributed to 
suspected persons, that they might afterward be seized and the police might then 
manifest their zeal to the detriment of some of the King of Prussia's subjects; that 
Puttkammer, Baerensprung, and their accomplices, by means of entreaties and 
promises, induced the Committee in London to dispatch to them an emissary 
named Rewitt, who was furnished by them" (the Police) "with a passport; that they 
allowed him to circulate freely, that he might compromise as many people as 
possible; that they then arrested him, and had him condemned to two years' 
imprisonment". After this fine exploit, M. de Baerensprung, the savior of order, 
which he had disturbed, [...] set up as a candidate for Parliament, and was rejected. 
"But he still carried on his correspondence with Mazzini, and the Committee in 
London, swearing to them that Rewitt had been betrayed by the Polish nobility 
(letter of July 5, 1859), and that numbers of the nobility were in the police. (Letter 
of July 19, 1859.) 
"These functionaries, in their letters, held up the nobility and clergy, including 
Prince C/artoryski, to the execration of the London Committee. They talk about 
seizing the estates of the nobles, and parceling them out among the people. [...] On 
the 27th March, 1859, they see that the Emperor of the French is about to make a 
generous effort in favor of Italian independence. They write to the London 
Committee to forestall it. They beg Mazzini to stir up the country before the arrival 
of the French army. [...] They beg him to hoist the red flag before Napoleon shall 
be able to mix himself up in Italian affairs. [...] On the 21st of May, they thank the 
a Niegolewscki's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on May 12, 1860, Allgemeine 
Zeitung, No. 136, May 15, I860.— Ed. 

=====第420页=====
396 Karl Marx 
Committee in London for sending them [...] the 'receipt for making Orsini's shells.' 
It needs no ghost to tell us for what purpose they obtained this receipt. We know 
that these gentlemen belonged to the police, therefore they could not be 
conspirators; their intentions must have been pure. They doubtless intended to 
warn the Emperor against danger, and this was their reason for putting a 
postscript to their letter: 'How long will the French democrats delay making 
another attempt against Napoleon?' [...] After Villafranca, you might have 
supposed that every German would have been pleased that Venice was preserved 
to Austria; but they wrote to Mazzini: 'The revolution will break out in Italy, 
Hungary, Germany, Prussia, and perhaps in France, and even in Poland. The eyes 
of the world are opened to the treachery of Napoleon, and all oppressed nations 
are glad to get rid of him.' And, further on, these Prussian police agents write: 
'What is going on in France? Will no second Orsini come forth? Do the 
Republicans mean to do nothing to overthrow the tyrant?' (Aug. 20, 1859.) 
"We do not wish to fix too high the responsibility for these imprudences. The 
police has been more clumsy than culpable, for it has not had the tact to conceal its 
most secret papers from the gaze of honest men. But the Prussian Government 
should lead its police out of these tortuous paths; it is always wrong to counsel 
crime, even as a means for trying of what stuff men are made. 
"Every one knows that if Orsini had succeeded in his criminal attempt he would 
have assassinated the future liberator of Italy, and have done more harm than 
good to his country. We may also add that if these Prussian police, without any evil 
intent, and simply out of a stupid zeal, had got up another Orsini, they would have 
deprived Prussia of a useful ally, who is still ready to render her good service, 
provided that she will help  herself." 3 
Compiled on June 12, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5986, June 30, 1860 
a The concluding words from Edmond About's pamphlet, beginning with "a 
useful ally", are cited by Marx at the end of Herr Vogt (see this volume, 
p. 329).— Ed. 

=====第421页=====
397 
Karl Marx 
INTERESTING FROM PRUSSIA 
Berlin, June 13, 1860 
This evening the Prince Regent3 will leave for Baden-Baden, 
where a sort of conference between Louis Napoleon and a council 
of crowned German heads is to take place on the 16th and 17th 
inst.306  The Prince Regent's suite will be formed by Gen. von 
Manteuffel, the chief of the Military Cabinet; Gen. von Alvensle-
ben, Lieut.-Col. von Schimmelmann, von Loë, chef d'escadron, 
Count von Pückler, the Court Marshal, Privy Councilor von Illaire, 
Mr. Borkmann, the Regent's Secretary, and Prince von Hohenzol-
lern-Sigmaringen, the chief of the Cabinet and a member of the 
Royal family. You will remember that on the occasion of the pri­
vate letter addressed by the Prince Regent to the Prince Consort 
of England, intercepted at London and thence communicated to 
Louis Bonaparte,* 3 the latter insisted upon a personal interview 
with the Prince Regent as the best means of clearing away the 
misunderstanding that seemed to have sprung up between France 
and Prussia. Shortly afterward, on the Prince Regent's visit to 
Saarbrücken and Trier, towns situated on the confines of France, 
Louis Napoleon again intimated his wish to improve this 
opportunity for meeting the Prince. This proposal was, however, 
declined. Meanwhile, the rumor having got abroad of the Prince 
Regent's intention to stay for a month at Baden-Baden, Max, the 
King of Bavaria, 0 took it into his head to propose to the Regent a 
sort of conference at the watering-place with the Princes of 
Southern Germany, who wanted to come to a friendly understand-
a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 382.— Ed. 
c Maximilian II.— Ed. 

=====第422页=====
398 Karl Marx 
ing with Prussia, and by this very meeting to show a united front 
against France. The Prince Regent, jumping at once into this 
scheme, which was also embraced by the Grand Duke of Baden, 
the King of Württemberg, and the Grand Duke of Hessen-
Darmstadt, a one fine morning the French Embassador at Berlinb 
officially notified Herr von Schleinitz, the Prussian Foreign 
Minister, that his august master, in order to dispel the distrust, 
whose innocent object France appeared to be, thought a friendly 
interview at Baden-Baden, with the actual chief of the Prussian 
State, a great benefit to both Germany and France. On the 
Prussian Minister's reply that unjust suspicions, not likely to be 
dispelled by such an interview, hovered also over Prussia, and that 
besides a confidential conference of German Princes at Baden-
Baden had already been convened, the French Embassador, on 
further information from Paris, rejoined that Louis Napoleon 
would delight in finding together the greatest possible number of 
German Princes, and that, moreover, he had some important 
communication to personally impart, which would allow of no 
further delay. At this point the Hohenzollern power of resistance 
gave way. c A Vienna dispatch conveyed at once to Berlin the 
expression of Austria's displeasure at the intended rendezvous, but 
the other German Courts were more or less soothed by a circular 
note of the Prussian Foreign Minister.d Consequent upon this 
circular note, the King of Hanovere unexpectedly arrived at Berlin 
this morning, and declared spontaneously his willingness of 
accompanying to Baden-Baden the Prince Regent, who then, by a 
telegraphic dispatch, summoned also the King of Saxonyf  to the 
conference. It need hardly be said, that the Dukes of Coburg-
Gotha and Nassau 8 will follow in the track. 
Thus,  a meeting of German Princes, originally purporting to 
mean a demonstration against France, has turned into a sort of 
levee, held by Louis Bonaparte, on German soil, and crowded by 
the Kings, Grand Dukes, and other little potentates of the German 
Confederation. On the part of the Prince Regent it looks like 
3 Friedrich I Wilhelm Ludwig, William I and Ludwig III.— Ed. 
b La Tour d'Auvergne-Lauraguais.— Ed. 
c For the preparation for a friendly interview at Baden-Baden see "Prusse", Le 
Nord,  June 15, I860.— Ed. 
d Alexander Schleinitz, "Preussische Circulardepesche, 6. Juni, 1860", Allgemeine 
Zeitung, No. 261, September 17, I860.— Ed. 
e Ernest Augustus.— Ed. 
f Johann Nepomuk Maria Joseph.— Ed. 
s Ernst II and  Adolf.—  Ed. 

=====第423页=====
Interesting from Prussia 399 
contrition for the sin of having uttered his suspicions as to the 
French usurper's aggressive schemes, and on the part of the 
smaller princely fry as a precaution taken for not being sold by 
their huger confrère 3 to their common enemy. The lead in the 
humiliation of the crowned heads before the Quasimodo of the 
French Revolution was notoriously taken by Queen Victoria and 
the King of Sardinia. 307 The Czar's personal interview at Stuttgart 
with the Man of December, in 1857,308  could surprise nobody 
beyond the coffee-house politicians, duped by the ostentatious 
coquetry of the Petersburg Court with the tenets of legitimacy. 
After the battle of Solferino, the Hapsburg's Villafranca meeting 
with his victor was a matter of business, not of courtesy. The 
Prince Regent, together with the minor stars clustering around 
him, has neither to plead an alliance, like Victoria and Victor 
Emmanuel, nor a conspiracy, like Alexander II, nor a defeat, like 
Francis Joseph; but, leaving the motives aside, he may plead the 
general precedent put by his betters. At all events, he has seriously 
impaired his factitious popularity by the acceptance of Louis 
Bonaparte's overture, and the more so since the latter, only a few 
weeks ago, had the impudence of intimating, through a dispatch 
of his Foreign Minister, M. de Thouvenel, to the Grand Dukes of 
Hessen-Darmstadt and Baden, that, for the future, they ought to 
sign their letters to the French Emperor with the words: " Votre 
frère et serviteur. ,,b Such was, indeed, the formula Napoleon I had 
invented for the German Princes, forming part of the Rhenish 
Confederation, of which he was the protector, and to which 
belonged Baden and Hessen-Darmstadt, together with Württem­
berg, Bavaria, and other German principalities. 309 In order to 
prevent Louis Bonaparte from introducing M. de Thouvenel into 
the presence of the highly-offended monarchs of Baden and 
Hessen-Darmstadt, the Prince Regent and his crowned associates 
have unanimously forborne to be accompanied by their respective 
Foreign Ministers; but, then, do these gentlemen really fancy that 
the affront was offered to them by the servant, instead of the 
servant's master? 
As to the "important communication" which the Dutch savior of 
society is about to impart to the crowned heads of Germany, there 
is every reason to believe that, imitating Metternich's operations on 
the successive Congresses of Vienna, Aix-la-Chapelle,c Troppau, 
a Colleague.— Ed. 
b "Your brother and servant."—Ed. 
c Aachen.— Ed. 

=====第424页=====
400 Karl Marx 
Laibach and Verona,310  Louis Napoleon will try his utmost to 
convince the Prince Regent of the existence of a vast conspiracy 
among the revolutionists, straining every nerve to bring about a 
collision between France and Prussia, in order to enthrone the 
Red Republic in Paris and a Central Republic in Germany. All the 
Bonapartist organs in Switzerland, Belgium, and Germany, swarm, 
since a fortnight, with paragraphs full of similar dark insinuations; 
and a confidential Bonapartist agent at Geneva—a well-known 
German naturalist 3—has already triumphantly announced that the 
anti-Bonapartists' eruptions of the German press would very soon 
be stopped by the competent authorities. 
While the Prince Regent and his German dii minorum gentium* 3 
are thus to be convinced of the necessity to gather round the 
general savior of society, the Prussian people is to be belabored in 
the opposite sense by M. About's new pamphlet, "The Emperor 
Napoleon III and Prussia."0  Although this pamphlet has as yet 
been retained, some stray copies of it have already found their 
way to Berlin, and by another letter I have sent you the most 
remarkable passages from this newest Tuileries manifesto. d The 
Prussian people must choose, says the oracle from the Seine, 
between the feudalism of Austria and the democratic principle of 
the French Empire. It is only by the latter that, resolving of course 
to give its mighty neighbor some material guaranties, the German 
people can hope to realize the unity so much coveted by it. Having 
traced the shortcomings of the present Prussian Government in a 
very superficial manner, the author of the pamphlet sets out on 
informing the Prussians of the true nature of the "democratic 
principle" so characteristic of the second French Empire, and 
which consists, to say it shortly, in the election of its chief by what 
is called in modern Gaul, "general suffrage." It is true, and M 
About does hardly dare deny it, that every sort of liberty has been 
sequestrated in France to the profit of the Dutch adventurer, but 
then, this sequestration was based on general suffrage. It is in this 
way, with the aid of France, and on the same democratic basis, 
that a Teutonic Empire under the auspices of a Hohenzollern 
ought to be reared in Germany. The operation is a very simple 
one. Prussia has only to cede part of her "legitimate" possessions 
a Karl Vogt.— Ed. 
b Literally, "lesser gods"; here, minor princes.— Ed. 
c The reference is to Edmond About's La Prusse en I860, Paris, 1860.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 391-96.— Ed. 

=====第425页=====
Interesting from Prussia 401 
to France and to simultaneously encroach, under the form of an 
appeal to general suffrage, on the possessions of the minor 
princes, and she will at once be transformed from a feudal into a 
democratic state. It must be owned that this new "democratic 
principle" discovered by Louis Bonaparte and his sycophants is no 
innovation, but, on the contrary, has for about two centuries been 
flourishing in holy Russia. The Romanoff family was seated on the 
throne by general suffrage. Hence democracy reigns from the 
Niémen to the Amoor. Perhaps it might be retorted by the 
prophets of the new "democratic principle" that the Romanoffs 
were freely elected; that no coup d'état preceded the appeal to the 
people; and that, on their accession to the throne, a general state 
of siege failed to keep the electoral urns within the proper limits 
of the democratic principle. At all events, since Louis Bonaparte 
cannot afford to become a "legitimate" prince, the next best thing 
he can do is to convert his brother sovereigns of Italy and 
Germany into "democratic" princes, after the pattern of the 
Lesser Empire. The Roman Emperors, of course, were no truly 
"democratic" sovereigns, because modern progress requires the 
principle of hereditary monarchy to be engrafted upon the 
principle of "general suffrage," so that, when a fellow by hook or 
crook has once succeeded in usurping a throne, and coloring his 
usurpation by the farce of general election, his dynasty must 
forever be supposed to remain the living incarnation of the 
people's general will. (Rousseau's volonté générale.) 3 
In another letter I propose surveying the state of the 
Schleswig-Holstein complications, which impart to the Baden-
Baden Conference its actual importance. For the present, I shall 
only mention that on the 10th of June an interview took place at 
the castle of Kronburg between the King of Sweden and the King 
of Denmark. 0 A fortnight before this rendezvous the Swedish 
Foreign Ministerc had sent to the Danish Foreign Ministerd a note 
to the purport that it was very desirable that the King of 
Denmark's suite should contain no persons the encounter with 
whom might prove embarrassing for his Swedish Majesty. In other 
words, the King of Denmark was called upon to clear his company 
a Marx refers to Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Contrat social ou principes du droit 
politique, London, 1782, v. 5, p. 254.— Ed. 
b Charles XV and Frederick VIL— Ed. 
c Kristoffer Rutger Ludvig Mandeström. — Ed. 
d Carl Christian Hall.— Ed. 

=====第426页=====
402 Karl Marx 
from the presence of his wife, the Countess Daner, ci-devant* 
Mademoiselle Ramussen. Accordingly, the King of Denmark 
thought fit to leave his girl behind him. 
Written on June 13, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5986, June 30, 1860 
a Formerly.— Ed. 

=====第427页=====
403 
Frederick Engels 
THE BRITISH VOLUNTEER FORCE 
The great review of volunteers which took place in London a 
few weeks ago has attracted attention to the citizen soldiers of 
Great Britain. The volunteers must not be confounded with the 
militia, which is a separate arm of her Majesty's service. On the 1st 
of April, the militia numbered, according to Government statistics, 
50,000. Of these, 23,735 were embodied, England contributing 
13,580, Ireland  7,471,  and Scotland 2,684. The militia represents 
the lower classes; the volunteers the middle class. The assertion of 
the London Times* that in the ranks of the troops reviewed on the 
22d "all classes were represented" is merely a way of giving things 
a popular coloring. It is not quite three months since a deputation 
of respectable mechanics waited on the authorities for the purpose 
of being supplied with arms, to "defend their country," in case of 
invasion. Their application was refused. The only working men 
admitted into the volunteer corps are those whose outfit and 
expenses their employers provide, and whose services are under­
stood to be permanently at the command of those employers. 
The total strength of the British volunteer force, notwithstand­
ing the larger figures of many recent statistical tables, is short of 
90,000. It is true that Col. Macmurdo declared, at a dinner given 
some time since to the St. George's Rifle Corps, that there were 
124,000 registered for voluntary service; but when pushed for 
particulars he included half the militia in his estimate. The 
newspapers count every regiment at the nominal strength of 800 
or 1,000 men, when in reality few ever muster on parade more 
a The Times, Nos. 23655 and 23658, June 25 and 28, I860.— Ed. 

=====第428页=====
404 Frederick Engels 
than 500 or 600. Mr. Sidney Herbert, whose position at the Horse 
Guards entitles him to be an authority on the subject, stated in 
Parliament a day or two before the great turnout in London, that 
"on paper, the force has maintained considerable numbers, who, 
however, cannot be accounted for, and never answer at  roll-call.  "a 
The speech in which this passage occurs appears in the same 
number of The Times that chronicles "the magnificent success" of 
the national volunteer review. Even the Hyde Park parade itself 
furnishes a striking illustration of the exaggerated manner in 
which the London Press speak of such matters. The Times of the 
20th anticipated that "no less than 35,000 men would appear 
before her Majesty."b Tom Taylor, writing to The Manchester 
Guardian from London on the 21st, says that there were over 
46,000 in the Metropolis. Yet the whole number of soldiers who 
passed before the Queen, according to Col. Macmurdo, who 
would hardly underestimate them, was 18,300. Certainly, this is 
not a very extraordinary army to be over-jubilant about. In 
October, 1803, nearly 13,000 native Londoners were inspected in 
the garb of volunteers; and, by way of comparing British military 
valor of those days with that of the present time, we subjoin a 
brief statement of the volunteer force, registered in Jan., 1804: 
Total of effective rank and file 341,687 
Field-officers 1,246 
Captains 4,472 
Subalterns 9,918 
Staff-officers 1,100 
Sergeants 14,787 
Drummers 6,733 
Grand total 379,943 
Even the 124,000, to which England hopes to raise her present 
voluntary army, would not figure creditably beside this table. One 
man in every ten of the present able-bodied of Great Britain's 
male population would amount to 500,000 men. It does not 
appear from these facts that Englishmen are becoming more 
a Sidney Herbert's speech in the House of Commons on June 26, 1860, The 
Times, No. 23657, June 27, 1860. Instead of "and never answer at roll-call", The 
Times has "and never appear on parade".— Ed. 
b "London, Friday, June 22, 1860", The Times, No. 23653, June 22, 1860. The 
figure in The Times is 30,000.— Ed. 

=====第429页=====
The British Volunteer Force 405 
desirous to take up arms in defense of their native land than they 
ever were before, the statements of London journals to the 
contrary notwithstanding. According to the careful statistics of a 
writer in The Army and Navy Gazette, we find the total militia and 
volunteer force of England to be, of militia 50,160, and of 
volunteers 88,400, making 138,560 in all. Of these, the writer of 
The Gazette states that at least 20,000 would, from various causes, 
prove unavailable in case of need, so that 118,560 men constitute 
the grand total of England's militia and volunteers. 
Written between June 25 and 28, 1860 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5994, July 11, 1860 as a 
leading article; reprinted in the New-York 
Semi-Weekly Tribune. No. 1579, July 13, 
1860 

=====第430页=====
406 
Karl Marx 
BRITISH COMMERCE 
The Board of Trade Returns 3 for the five months ending May 
31, 1860, which have just been issued at London, show but a 
trifling change in the movement of British exports, if compared 
with the exports during the first five months of 1859. 
From £52,337,268, to which they had amounted in 1859, they 
rose to £52,783,535 in 1860b—this small surplus being altogether 
due to an increase in the month of May last. 
The first feature that strikes us on comparing the respective 
exports during the first five months of 1860 and 1859, is a 
considerable decline in the British export trade to the British East 
Indies, as will be seen from the following statement: 
PRINCIPAL BRITISH ARTICLES EXPORTED TO THE EAST INDIES 
IN THE FIVE MONTHS ENDING MAY 31. 
Quantities. Value. 
1859.  1860. 1859. 1860. 
Beer and ale, barrels 168,355 166,461 £507,308 £491,609 
Cottons, yards 396,022,733 311,163,765 4,884,982 3,977,289 
Cotton yarn, lbs 17,411,542 15,044,812  1,002,439  903,516 
Iron (bar, bolt, rod), 
tuns 16,851 12,194 127,678 90,954 
Iron (cast), tuns 12,138 4,108 132,946 42,912 
Iron (wrought), tuns 11,823 10,554 188,126 195,659 
Sheets and rails c 31,582 79,117 169,072 437,170 
a For the analysis of the British commerce Marx makes use of the table 
"Exports of the Principal and other Articles of British and Irish Produce and 
Manufactures in the Five Months ended 31st May, 1860, compared with the 
corresponding Months of the Year 1859", The Economist, No. 879, June 30, 1860, 
pp. 36-38.— Ed. 
b ibid., p. 38.—  Ed. 
c The Economist has "nails" here and in the table on p. 409.— Ed. 

=====第431页=====
British Commerce 407 
Quantities. Value. 
1859.  1860. 1859. 1860. 
Earthen ware and por­
celain .... .... £34,530 £24,039 
Haberdashery and millin­
ery .... .... 83,832 42,126 
Leather—saddlery and 
harness .... .... 16,780 15,600 
Machinery—steam en­
gines .... .... 73,087 100,846 
Other kinds .... .... 165,899 196,928 
Tin plates .... .... 19,127 6,441 
Total £7,405,806 £6,525,089 
Decrease £876,717 
From the above table it appears that the aggregate decrease in 
the main exports to the East Indies amounts to about one million 
sterling; that it is heaviest in the leading articles (cotton and cotton 
yarns);  and that the only exception consists of commodities 
immediately connected with railway building. It ought, moreover, 
to be kept in view that the commercial news received by the last 
Overland Mail is highly unfavorable, and points to an overcharged 
market; so that, consequently, the value of the exports as declared 
in England, and as estimated on a range of prices far beyond the 
average, will by no means be realized in India. Now, there can be 
no doubt that the Indian trade has been overdone. The artificial 
demand raised by the Government during the Indian rebellion 3U; 
the stimulus given to commercial activity by the subsiding of the 
revolutionary disturbances, and the contraction of most of the 
other markets of the world, consequent upon the general crisis of 
1857-58 — all these circumstances concurred to swell the bulk of 
the Indian trade beyond its natural capacities. Still, according to all 
past experience, the newfangled prosperity market might have 
borne the bombardment by cotton goods for some years longer, 
but for the sage interference of the British Government. Mr. 
Wilson, it seems, was expressly dispatched to Calcutta for the 
purpose of convulsing the Anglo-Indian trade, by the joint 
operation of clumsy fiscal measures in the interior, and of 
burdensome customs duties levied on imports from abroad. Has 
ever, in the whole history of commerce, such a spectacle been 
witnessed as that of the United Kingdom allowing its most 
important colonial market to be crippled by the spontaneous acts 

=====第432页=====
408 Karl Marx 
of its own Government, at the very same time that it cringes 
before the French Emperor,3 and bears with his political encroach­
ments, on the pretext of a factitious alleviation in the French 
customs duties? 
The exports to the Australian market, although they show some 
decline in cottons, exhibit, on the whole, an increase both in 
quantity and value. However, to arrive at a just appreciation of the 
present state of the markets in the Australian Colonies, we ought 
to turn from the Board-of-Trade returns to the last commercial 
intelligence received. Advices from Adelaide to the 26th of April 
complain of a continuance of excessive shipments from England, 
and a general prevalence of speculation, swindling and overtrad­
ing. An extensive weeding out, it was said, of insolvent firms had 
become necessary. In Sydney, New South Wales, several failures 
had already taken place, including nine houses with an aggregate 
of liabilities of £400,000, of which amount three-fourths was 
expected to be ultimately deficient, the loss falling on the banks 
and English creditors. From a list just received of Australian 
insolvencies during the last 17 years, it appears that the number in 
1858 was three times as great as in 1857, and in 1859 there was a 
further increase of 50 per cent; and this year, up to the middle of 
April, the rate had experienced a fresh advance of about 7 per 
cent. The total liabilities of failed firms from 1822 to 1859 were 
£5,981,026; and the assets, stated in schedules, amounted to 
£3,735,613;  but of the latter amount, not 50 per cent was ever 
realized. 
The considerable decline that has taken place in the value, and 
in most cases, also, in the quantity of the British goods exported to 
the United States, will be illustrated by the following extract: 
PRINCIPAL ARTICLES EXPORTED TO THE UNITED STATES IN 
THE FIVE MONTHS ENDING MAY 31.b 
Quantities. Value. 
1859.  1860. 1859. 1860. 
Coals,  tuns 68,020 
Cotton, yards 88,441,112 
Linens, yards 25,476,444 
Pig Iron, tuns 37,510 
Bar, bolt, rod, tuns 48,063 106,925 £67,785 £66,196 
84,208,598  1,562,918  1,491,721 
20,974,699 776,780 643,676 
21,497 106,476 62,919 
37,824 394,426 293,294 
a Napoleon III.— Ed. 
b The New-York Daily Tribune has a misprint here, "May 1" instead of "May 
31".—  Ed. 

=====第433页=====
British Commerce 409 
Quantities. Value. 
Wrought, tuns 
Sheets and rails, tuns 
Seed Oil, gals 
Silk manufacture, lb 
Woolens, mix. stff.,yds 22,697,619 
Earthenw'e & porcel'n 
Haberdash'y & milli'y 
Tin plates 1859. 1860. 1859. 1860. 
16,024 16,488 £200,576 £189,854 
12,107 4,622 61,721 24,559 
795,808 511,602 95,154 57,230 
119,719 58,836 128,133 68,866 
,697,619 18,250,639 892,026 733,000 
234,492 281,532 
719,754 637,035 
524,615 464,630 
France was, of course, the country to make up for the 
contraction of the markets of the East Indies, the Australian 
Colonies, and the United States. However, on a closer examina­
tion, the English export trade to France will be found to have lost 
nothing of its traditionally diminutive dimensions. As to cottons 
and twist, Mr. Milner Gibson, the President of the Board of 
Trade, seems to have been ashamed of the sorry figure he cut, 
and, consequently, thought fit to altogether expunge them from 
the returns. Ditto with linens and linen yarns, and silk manufac­
tures.  The value of the exports during the respective epochs of 
1859 and 1860 shows a falling off for the current year in thrown 
silk from £130,260 to  £88,441, b in silk twist and yarn from 
£50,520 to £29,643, in machinery from £98,551 to £64,107, and 
in coals from £253,008 to £206,317, while some increase has taken 
place in the export of iron, copper, wool, woolens, and worsted 
yarns. 
The import of French wine has increased, but in no greater 
proportion than that of all other descriptions of wine. In 
conclusion, we may remark that the symptoms of contraction in 
the principal markets, if taken together with the very distressing 
harvest prospects, the heavy calls upon the money market by the 
English and other Governments, and the unsettled political state 
of Europe, seem to forebode anything but a prosperous season for 
the Autumn of 1860. 
Written in late June and early July 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily •> 
Tribune, No. 5998, July 16, 1860 as a 
leading article 
a The figure in the New-York Daily Tribune is 199,859, which is a misprint.— Ed. 
b The Economist, No. 879, June 30, 1860, pp. 37, 38, 36.— Ed. 

=====第434页=====
410 
Karl Marx 
THE STATE OF BRITISH MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY 
I 
[New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6016, August 6, 1860] 
London, July 10, 1860 
The reports of the Inspectors of Factories,3 which have just been 
issued, comprise three reports only; the district lately vacated by 
Mr. Leonard Horner having been annexed partly to Sir John 
Kincaid's district (Scotland), and partly to Mr. Redgrave's district, 
now comprising 3,075 factories and printworks; while Mr. Robert 
Baker's district (Ireland, and some parts of England) remains 
within its old boundaries. The following is a general abstract, 
showing the total number of accidents reported to the three 
Inspectors during the six months ended the 30th April, 1860: 
ACCIDENTS ARISING FROM MACHINERY. b 
Ad'ts.  Y'g per. Child. Total. 
Nature of Injury M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. Total. 
Causing death 14 3 7 2 2 2 23 7 30 
Amputat'n of right 
hand or arm 5 6 3 I 1 9 7 16 
Amputat'n of left 
hand or arm 4 1 7 3 1 _ 12 4 16 
Amputat'n of part 
of right hand 23 24 29 22 15 7 67 53 120 
Amputat'n of part 
of left hand 16 17 21 18 8 7 45 42 87 
a In writing this article Marx made use of the Reports of the Inspectors of  Factories 
to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, for the Half Year 
ending 30th April 1860, London, I860.— Ed. 
b ibid., p. 4.— Ed. 

=====第435页=====
The State of British Manufacturing Industry 411 
Ad'ts.  Y'g per. Child. 
Nature of Injury M. F. M. F. M. F. 
Amp.  of any part 
of leg or foot 5 — 1 — — — 
Fract. of limbs and 
bones of trunk.... 30 11 43 11 11 4 
Fracture of hand or 
foot 39 43 30 37 20 15 
Injuries to head 
and face 20 17 23 29 11 4 
Lac'tns, contus'ns, 
and other injur's 
not enum. above 268 255 315 352 128 66 Total. 
M. F. Total. 
6 — 6 
84 26 110 
89 95 184 
54 40 94 
711 673 1,384 
Total 424 377 479 465 197 105 1,100 947 2,047 
ACCIDENTS NOT ARISING FROM MACHINERY. 
Total 83 30 59 26 21 10 163 66 229 
The reports are unanimous in bearing witness to the extraordi­
nary activity of trade during the half year. Such was the demand 
for work that in some branches of industry the supply of labor was 
insufficient. This difficulty was less prevalent in the woolen 
manufactures, where improved machinery allowed the manufac­
turers to dispense with manual labor, than in cotton and worsted 
factories, where much machinery has been standing for want of 
hands,  particularly of the younger. Some vicious methods have 
been adopted in past times to meet this transitory deficiency of 
labor. In the infancy of the factory system, when manufacturers 
were in want of labor, it was obtained directly by application to the 
overseers of some distant parish, who forwarded a certain number 
of apprentices, children of tender age, who were bound to the 
manufacturers for a term of years. The children being once 
apprenticed, the Poor-Law officers congratulated their respective 
parishes on their deliverance from idle mouths, while the 
manufacturer proceeded t© make the best of his bargain by 
keeping them at the most economical rate, and by screwing from 
them all the labor of which they were capable. Hence the first of 
the series of Factory acts passed in 1802, 42 Geo. Ill, Cap. 73, has 
for its title, "An Act for the Preservation of the Health and Morals 
of Apprentices and Others Employed in Cotton and Other Mills, 
and Cotton and Other Factories," and was merely intended to 
mitigate the evils of the apprenticeship system. But as improve­
ments were made in machinery, a different kind of labor was 

=====第436页=====
412 Karl Marx 
wanted, when trade became brisk and the population of the 
neighborhood failed to supply the mills with their full complement 
of hands. These manufacturers sent to Ireland, and brought over 
Irish families; but Ireland has ceased to be the market from which 
a supply of labor can be procured on English demand, and 
manufacturers have now to look to the Southern and Western 
counties of England and Wales for families which can be tempted 
by the present rate of wages in the Northern counties to 
commence a new career of industry. Agents have been sent 
throughout the country, to set forth the advantages offered to 
families by removing to the manufacturing districts, and they are 
empowered to make arrangements for the emigration to the 
North. Many families are said to have been forwarded by these 
agents. Still, the importation into a manufacturing town of a man 
with his wife and family has this peculiar disadvantage, that while 
the younger members of the family, who can soon be taught, and 
whose services become valuable in a comparatively short period, 
are most in request, there is no ready demand for the labor of the 
man and his wife, unskilled in factory labor. This has induced 
some manufacturers to return, in some measure, to the old 
apprenticeship system, and to enter into engagements for specific 
periods, with boards of guardians, for the labor of destitute 
pauper children. In these cases, the manufacturer lodges, clothes 
and feeds the children, but pays them no regular wages. With the 
return of this system, complaints of its abuse seem also to have 
revived. However, this kind of labor, it should be remembered, 
would only be sought after when none other could be procured, 
for it is a high-priced labor. The ordinary wages of a boy of 13 
would be about 4 shillings per week; but to lodge, to clothe, to 
feed and to provide medical attendance and proper superinten­
dence for 50 or 100 of these boys, and to set aside some 
remuneration for them, œuld not be accomplished for 4 shillings 
a head per week. 3 
A comparison of the rate of wages paid to factory operatives in 
1839 and that paid in 1859 proves the highly interesting fact that 
the rate of wages has risen, at least nominally, in factories where 
the hours of work were restricted to 60 per week, while, with a 
few exceptions, a real reduction has been suffered in the printing, 
bleaching, and dyeing works in which the labor of children, young 
a These facts and the following are taken from the "Report of A. Redgrave, 
Esq., Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year ending the 30th April 1860", Reports 
of the Inspectors of Factories..., pp.  26-27.—  Ed. 

=====第437页=====
The State of British Manufacturing Industry 413 
persons, and women is unrestricted, and where they are at times 
employed fourteen and fifteen hours per day. The following 
statements have reference to the cotton trade in Manchester and 
its neighborhood: 
WEEKLY WAGES." 
1839.  1859. 
Hours of work per week 69 60 
Occupations. 
Steam-engine tender 24sh. 30sh. 
Warehouse boys 7 8 
Warehouse men 18 22 
Carding department—Scutchers (young women and 
girls) 7 8 
Skippers (young men) , 11 14 
Overlookers 25 28 
Card minders (boys from 14 to 18) 6 7 
Drawing-frame tenders (young women) 6 6d 8 
Spinning department—Spinners on self-acting mules ... 16 to 18 20 to 22 
Piecers (women and young men) 8 10 
Overlookers 20 20 
Doubling department— Doublers (women) 7 9 
Doffers (girls) 4 5 
Overlookers 24 28 
Jobbers (young men) 10 13 
In the reeling, gassing, and power-loom departments, there has 
also been a slight increase of wages. The anticipations of those 
who warned the factory operatives that they would seriously suffer 
by the diminution of their hours of work, have thus been 
completely disappointed. Compare, on the other hand, the 
movement of wages in those branches where the hours of daily 
labor are legally unrestricted: 
CALICO-PRINTING, DYEING, BLEACHING, 
SIXTY HOURS PER WEEK.b 
Weekly Wages. 
1839.  1859. 
Color-mixer 35 32 
Machine-printer 40 38 
Foreman 40 40 
a op. cit., p. 31.—  Ed. 
b op. cit., p.  32.—  Ed. 

=====第438页=====
414 Karl Marx 
[Continued] 
Weekly Wages. 
1839.  1859. 
Block-cutter 35 25 
Block-printer 40 28 
Dyer 18 16 
Washer and laborer 16 and 15 16 and 15 
FUSTIAN-DYEING, SIXTY-ONE HOURS PER WEEK. 
Dressers 18 22 
Bleachers 21 18 
Dyers 21 16 
Finishers 21 22 
By far the most interesting portion of the Reports of Mr. 
Alexander Redgrave and Sir John Kincaid relates to the develop­
ment and extension of cooperative societies for the erection and 
working of mills in Lancashire, and also to some degree in 
Yorkshire. These cooperative societies, which have multiplied since 
the passing of the Limited Liability Act, are generally composed of 
operatives. Each society has a capital of £10,000 and upward, 
divided into shares of £5 and £10, with power to borrow in 
certain proportions to the capital subscribed, the money borrowed 
being made up of small loans by operatives and persons of the like 
class.  In Bury, for instance, upward of £300,000 will be required 
to put the cooperative mills there built and building into working 
order. In cotton-spinning mills the spinners and persons employed 
are frequently shareholders in the same mill, working for wages 
and receiving interest upon their shares. In cotton-weaving sheds, 
the partners frequently hire and work looms. This is attractive to 
operatives, because no great capital is required to start them in 
their undertaking. They purchase the yarn ready for the loom, 
weave the cloth, and the factory operation is completed; or else 
they receive the yarn from some manufacturer who trades with 
them, and return to him the woven fabric. But this cooperative 
system is not confined to the spinning and weaving of cotton. It 
has extended to the trade on a variety of articles of consumption, 
such as flour, groceries, draperies, etc. 
The following report, drawn up by Mr. Patrick, one of Sir John 
Kincaid's sub-inspectors, contains some valuable information in 
regard to the progress of this new system of mill-ownership, 
which, I am afraid, will be put to a severe test by the next 
industrial crisis. 

=====第439页=====
The State of British Manufacturing Industry 415 
"May 16, 1860 
"There has been a cooperative company in existence at Rochdale, under the 
style of the 'New Bacup and Wardle Commercial Company,' for about twelve years. 
They are incorporated under the Joint Stock Companies Act, and unlimited. They 
commenced operations at Clough House Mill, Wardle, near Rochdale, with power 
to raise a capital of £100,000, in shares of £12 10s., £20,000 of which was paid up. 
They then increased to £30,000, and about five years ago built a large factory, Far 
Holme Mill, near Stackstead, of 100-horse power steam, in addition to Clough 
House Mill; and the half year ending October last they paid a dividend at the rate 
of 44 per cent on the paid-up capital (Mr. Patrick reports on the 11th June, that 
the New Bacup and Wardle Commercial Company, 'Far Holme Mill, Bacup,' have 
just declared another dividend of 48 per cent on the paid-up capital), and they 
have now increased their capital to the sum of £60,000, and have largely increased 
their Far Holme Mill, near Stackstead, in this neighborhood, requiring two more 
engines of 40-horse power each, which they are about to put down. The large 
majority of shareholders are operatives who work in the factory, but receive wages 
as workmen, and have no more to do with the management than to give their vote 
to the annual election of the Committee of Management. I have been through the 
Far Holme Mill this morning, and can report that, so far as the Factory Act is 
concerned, it is as well conducted as any in my division. I think, though I did not 
ask them the question, that they have borrowed money at 5 per cent interest. 
"There has been another in existence in the neighborhood of Bacup about six 
years,  trading under the firm of the 'Rossendale Industrial Association.' 
"They built a factory; but, I am told, were not thriving, in consequence of the 
want of sufficient funds. This, also, was on the cooperative system. The firm has 
now been changed to 'The Rossendale Industrial Company,' and are incorporated 
under the Limited Liabilities Act, with power to raise a capital of £200,000. 
£40,000 has been taken in shares of £10 each, and they have borrowed about 
£4,000. This £4,000 has been borrowed from small capitalists, in sums from £150 
down to £10, without any mortgages being given. When this cooperative company 
first started, every shareholder was an operative. In addition to the Wear Mill, that 
referred to as having been built by the Rossendale Industrial Association, they have 
now bought of Messrs. R. Mum Bros., Irwell Mills, in Bacup, and are working the 
two. 
"The prosperity and success of the New Bacup and Wardle Commercial 
Company seem to have given rise to the new companies that are now formed in my 
immediate vicinity, and preparing large factories to carry on their business. One is 
the 'New-Church Cotton Spinning and Weaving Company,' under the Limited 
Liabilities Act, with power to raise £100,000 in £10 shares, £40,000 of which is 
already paid, and the Company has borrowed £5,000 on mortgage at five per cent. 
This Company has already started, having taken an unoccupied factory of 40-
horse power, Vale Mill, New-Church, and they are building the 'Victoria Works,' 
which will require an engine of 100-horse power. They calculate upon employing 
450 people when complete, which they think will be in February next. 
"Another is 'The Ravenstall Cotton Manufacturing Company,' also limited, with 
a nominal capital of £50,000, in £5 shares, with power to borrow to the extent of 
£10,000. About £20,000 is already paid up, and they are erecting at Hareholme a 
factory requiring an engine of 70-horse power. I am told that in both of these 
companies nine-tenths of the shareholders are of the operative class. 
"There is another cooperative company which has sprung up within the last six 
months. 'The Old Clough Cotton Company,' which purchased from Messrs. R. & 
J. Mum, two old mills, called Irwell Springs, and are on the same principle as the 

=====第440页=====
416 Karl Marx 
others, but not having been able to go there to-day I am not able to give all 
particulars about it. The power, however, has been returned as 13-horse and the 
number of hands employed 76, and I believe all the shareholders to be of the 
operative class. 
"There are several who take part of a factory, one or two rooms, as the case 
may be, and in some instances even part of a room, but then these are masters of 
that part, although they work with and as their own workmen, hire and pay wages 
as any other manufacturer, without the workpeople employed having interest in 
the business. There were many more of these at Bacup than there are now. Some 
have given it up, while others have succeeded and either built mills for themselves 
or rent large premises. There are more of this sort at Rochdale than any other 
place in my division."3 
II 
[New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6032, August 24, 1860] 
London, July 14, 1860 
After the resume given in my last letterb of the Factory Reports 
of Sir John Kincaid and Mr. Redgrave, it still remains for me to 
take notice of the report of Mr. Robert Baker,c Inspector of 
Factories for Ireland and part of Cheshire, Lancashire, Gloucester­
shire, Yorkshire, Staffordshire, Leicestershire, Herefordshire, 
Shropshire, Worcestershire, and Warwickshire. The total number 
of accidents in Mr. Baker's district amounted to 601, of which 9 
per cent only occurred to children, while 33 per cent happened to 
persons above 18 years of age.d A closer analysis of these accidents 
will prove, firstly, that the ratio of accidents to population is 
greatest in those branches of industry where the machinery 
employed is not subject to legal control, and, secondly, that in the 
textile fabrics, where the same sort of machinery is employed, the 
bulk of accidents falls upon the largest mills. In regard to the 
employment of 198,565 operatives, belonging to the district of Mr. 
Baker, the latter gives, for the last half year, the following 
statemente: 
a "Report of Sir John Kincaid, Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year ending 
the 30th April 1860", Reports of the Inspectors of Factories..., pp. 11-12.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 410-16.— Ed. 
c "Report of Robert Baker, Esq., Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year 
ending the 30th April 1860", Reports of the Inspectors of  Factories...,  pp. 49-85.— Ed. 
d op. cit., pp. 52, 53.—  Ed. 
e loc. cit., p.  53—Ed. 

=====第441页=====
The State of British Manufacturing Industry 417 
Persons Accidents 
employed. from machinery. 
In Cotton Mills, among 107,106 1 to every 261 
In Woolen Mills 14,982 1 to every 348 
In Flax Mills 33,918 1 to every 389 
InSilkMills 33,874 1 to every 2,251 
In Worsted Mills 2,896 1 to every 424 
In other Fabrics  5,789  nil 
In all these textile fabrics, the machinery is protected—that is to 
say, provided with such contrivances for the security of the 
operatives that use it as are prescribed by the protective clauses of 
the Factory Act. If we now turn, for example, to Nottingham, 
where a large number of persons, and especially of children, are 
employed among machinery which is not protected by the law, we 
shall find that there were entered on the books of the General 
Hospital, in 1859,  1,500;  and on those of the Dispensary, 794 
accidents; making a total of 2,294 among a population estimated 
to not exceed 62,583. This gives the number of accidents within 
the borough of Nottingham as 1 to every 27, a proportion 
compared with which the accidents in the protected textile fabrics 
appear almost insignificant. Again, in Birmingham, which is full of 
employments of every kind, both with and without connection 
with power, where there are only two small textile factories, and 
where, generally, there is no compulsory protection to the 
machinery among which the young workers are engaged, the 
proportion of accidents to population was as 1 to 34. The great 
advantages derived from the protective clauses of the Factory Act, 
and from the more general enforcement of these clauses, is also 
shown by a comparison of all the accidents reported to all the 
Inspectors for the half years ending the 31st of October, 1845, 
and the 30th of April, 1846, with the half years ending with 
October and April, 1858 and 1859. In the latter period, the gross 
diminution of accidents was equal to 29 per cent, although there 
had taken place an increase of workers of 20 per cent, at the 
lowest estimate. 
Now, as to the distribution of accidents between larger and 
smaller mills, I think the following facts, stated by Mr. Baker, to 
be decisive: During the last half year, out of the 758 cotton 
factories of his district, employing 107,000 persons, all the 
accidents which occurred happened in 167 factories, employing 
about 40,000 persons; so that in 591 factories, employing 67,000 
persons, there were no accidents at all.3 In like manner, out of 387 
a op. cit., pp. 54-55.— Ed. 

=====第442页=====
418 Karl Marx 
smaller mills all the accidents happened in 28 mills; out of 153 
flax mills all the accidents happened in 45 mills, and out of 774 
silk factories all the accidents happened in 14 mills, so that in a 
large proportion of each branch of trade there were no accidents 
whatever by machinery, and in every branch the bulk of the 
accidents happened in the largest mills. The latter phenomenon 
Mr. Baker tries to account for by the two causes, that in the largest 
mills the transition state from old, unprotected, to new machinery 
is, comparatively, most protracted and gradual; and, secondly, that 
in these larger concerns the rapidity with which the hands are 
collected together grows in the same ratio as the moral control 
exercised over such establishments diminishes. 
"These two causes," says Mr. Baker, "operate most distinctly in the production 
of accidents. In the former, the remains of the old machinery which has never 
been protected, and wherein gathering parts of wheels still remain, are even more 
destructive from that very circumstance, since, in the safety of the new, the danger 
of the remaining old is forgotten, while, in the latter, the perpetual scramble for 
every minute of time, where work is going on by an unvarying power, which is 
indicated at, perhaps, a thousand horses, necessarily leads to danger. In such mills, 
moments are the elements of profit—the attention of everybody's every instant is 
demanded. It is here, where, to borrow one of Liebig's sentiments, there may be 
seen a perpetual struggle between life and inorganic forces; where the mental 
energies must direct, and the animal energies must move and be kept equivalent to 
the revolutions of the spindles. They must not lag, notwithstanding the strain upon 
them either by excessive excitement or heat; nor be suspended for an instant by 
any counter-attention to the various movements around, for in every lagging there 
is loss. Thus it is that fingers are laid upon wheels supposed to be secure, either 
from their position, or from the slowness of their motion when the attention is 
wrongly directed elsewhere. Thus, workmen, in hastening to produce a certain 
amount of pounds weight of yarn within a given time, forget to look under their 
machines for their little 'piecers.' Thus many accidents arrive from what is called 
self-carelessness. " a 
During the last half year, all the textile manufactures, that of 
silk excepted, were highly prosperous in Ireland as well as the 
English districts of Mr. Baker. The only check which seemed to 
keep the different branches of industry within bounds, was the 
increasing scarcity of raw material. In the cotton trade, the 
erection of new mills, the formation of new systems of extension, 
and the demand for hands had, at no former time, been 
exceeded. Nothing was more remarkable than the new movements 
in search of raw material. Thus, in imitation of the Cotton Supply 
Association of Lancashire, a Flax Supply Association had been 
founded at Belfast. While "for the five years ending with 1853, 
the average importation of flax, with the flax crop of Ireland 
a op. cit., p. 56.—  Ed. 

=====第443页=====
The State of British Manufacturing Industry 419 
added, had amounted to 113,409 tuns per annum, it was, for the 
last five years, ending with 1858, only 101,672 tuns, showing a 
diminution of 12,000 tuns per annum, with an increased annual 
value of exports of £1,000,000."a The price of wool, already above 
the average, during the period over which the last Factory Reports 
extend, has since then been continually rising. The rapid 
extension of the woolen manufactories, and the increased demand 
for mutton both in Great Britain and in the Colonies, may be 
considered as the permanent causes of this rise in the wool prices. 
As an accidental cause menacing to shorten the usual supply of 
wool, must be considered the peculiar character of the season; 
many sheep having died during the Winter from bad or improper 
food, and many lambs having perished during the Spring from 
cold, want of food, and by a disease that proved fatal in a few 
hours. b 
The only trade that was seriously checked during the last six 
months, consequent upon the conclusion of the Anglo-French 
Commercial Treaty,0 and the fears entertained concerning the 
effects of foreign competition, is the silk trade. The pressure thus 
exercised has been gradual, so that at the moment I write this 
letter more than 13,000 weavers are out of employment in 
Coventry alone, every loom being stopped. This crisis is the more 
to be regretted, since, as I remarked in a letter on the Factory 
Reports of 1859, there had been springing up at Coventry a 
number of cottage silk factories, in which the workmen employed 
their own families, with now and then a little hired labor. These 
factories had, since the commencement of 1860, been considerably 
increased in number. They are, in fact, a recurrence to the former 
domestic manufacturers, only with the addition of steam-power, 
but wholly different to the new cooperative system of Lancashire 
and Yorkshire. With them the householder is the master, the 
weaver the renter of power, sometimes the employer of other 
labor, as well as that of his own family. He has either bought his 
two looms out and out, or upon credit, and is paying for them so 
much a week; or he has hired them, probably from his landlord, 
who is a builder and speculator. He, besides, hires the power 
wanted. There is said to be as much difference now between the 
work thus done upon the weaver's loom and that done upon the 
a op. cit., p. 57. Robert Baker cites the figures given by the President of the 
Chamber of Commerce in his speech of December 1859.— Ed. 
b op. cit., p. 58.—  Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 341-44.— Ed. 

=====第444页=====
420 Karl Marx 
master's, as there is almost between the French ribbon and the 
English one. Still it is apprehended, and Mr. Robert Baker, in his 
report, seems to share this apprehension, that this domestic labor, 
combined with the employment of mechanical power, will be 
unable to stand commercial shocks. It is probable that the English 
manufacturer, to cope with his French rival, will be compelled to 
recur to the employment of capital on a large scale, which must 
break up the cottage silk factories competing at his own door. 
Written on July 10 and 14, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, Nos. 6016 and 6032, August 6 
and 24, 1860 

=====第445页=====
421 
Karl Marx 
INTERESTING FROM SICILY.— 
GARIBALDI'S QUARREL WITH LA FARINA.— 
A LETTER FROM GARIBALDI 
London, July 23, 1860 
According to a telegram received to-day from Palermo, Col. 
Medici's impending attack on Milazzo had decided the King of 
Naples3 to give orders for the complete evacuation of Sicily by the 
Neapolitan army, and their withdrawal to his continental domin­
ions.  Although this telegram stands in need of confirmation, it 
seems beyond dispute that Garibaldi's cause is working on, despite 
the disease his troops suffer from, and the diplomatic intrigues his 
Government is pestered with. 
Garibaldi's open breach with the Cavour party, viz.: the 
expulsion from Sicily of La Farina, the notorious marplot, and of 
Signors Griscelli and Totti,b Corsicans by birth, and Bonapartist 
police agents by profession, has given rise to very contradictory 
comments on the part of the European press. A private letter of 
Garibaldi's to a London friend,312  which has been communicated 
to me with the permission to state its principal contents in the 
Tribune, will leave no doubt as to the real bearing of the case. 
Garibaldi's letter is of a date anterior to his decree of the 7th inst., 
by which the three aforesaid plotters were summarily removed 
from the island, but it fully explains the points at issue between 
the General and the Minister—between the popular Dictator and 
the dynastic Grand Vizier; in one word, between Garibaldi and 
Cavour. The latter, in secret understanding with Louis Bonaparte, 
whom Garibaldi stigmatizes as "cet homme faux" (that false man), 
and with whom he foresees "the necessity of measuring his sword 
some fine morning" — Cavour, then, had determined upon 
a Francis II.— Ed. 
b "Affaires des deux Siciles", Le Constitutionnel, No. 198, July 16, 1860.— Ed. 

=====第446页=====
422 Karl Marx 
annexing, piece-meal, such slices of Italian territory as Garibaldi's 
sword might cut out, or as popular risings might sever from their 
old allegiance. This process of piece-meal annexation to Piedmont 
was to be accompanied by a simultaneous process of "compensa­
tion" for the second Empire. As Savoy and Nice had to be paid 
for Lombardy and the Duchies, so Sardinia and Genoa were to 
pay for Sicily; every new act of separate annexation calling for a 
new separate diplomatic transaction with the protector of Pied­
mont. A second dismemberment to the benefit of France, quite 
apart from the outrage on the integrity and independence of Italy 
which it involved, would at once have put an extinguisher on the 
patriotic movements at Naples and Rome. The conviction spread­
ing that to coalesce under Piedmontese auspices, Italy must grow 
less and less, would have enabled Bonaparte3 to maintain at 
Naples and Rome separate governments, independent in name, 
but for all practical purposes, French vassalages. Hence Garibaldi 
thought it his principal task to cut off all pretext for French 
diplomatic interference, but, as he understood, this could only be 
done by preserving to the movement its pure popular character, 
and divesting it of all appearance of connection with mere 
schemes of dynastic aggrandizement. Sicily, Naples, and Rome 
once liberated, the moment would have come for merging them 
into the kingdom of Victor Emmanuel, if the latter would take 
upon himself to keep them, and defend them, not only from 
Austria, the enemy in front, but also from France, the enemy in 
the rear. Relying, perhaps, somewhat too much on the good will 
of the English Government, and the necessities of Louis 
Bonaparte's situation, Garibaldi presumes that so long as he does 
not annex to Piedmont any territory, and exclusively relies for the 
liberation of Italy upon Italian arms, Louis Bonaparte will not 
dare to interfere in open violation of the pretexts upon which he 
commenced the Italian crusade. However that may be, this much is 
sure—that Garibaldi's plan, whether successful or not, is the only 
one that, under present circumstances, holds out any chance of 
rescuing Italy, not only from its old tyrants and divisions, but also 
from the clutches of the new French protectorate. And to baffle 
this plan was the special errand upon which Cavour had 
dispatched La Farina to Sicily, supported by the two Corsican 
brothers. 
La Farina is a native of Sicily, where, in 1848, he distinguished 
himself among the Revolutionists by his hatred against the 
a Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第447页=====
Interesting from Sicily 423 
Republican party and his intrigues with the Piedmontese doc­
trinaires rather than by real energy or memorable exploits. After 
the failure of the Sicilian revolution and during his stay at Turin, 
he published a voluminous history of Italy,3 in which he did his 
best to exalt the Savoy dynasty, and to slander Mazzini. With soul 
and body bound to Cavour, he imbued the "National Association 
for Italian unity"313 with a Bonapartist spirit; and having become 
its chairman, handled it as an instrument not for furthering but 
for impeding all attempts at independent national action. It was 
quite in keeping with these antecedents that, when the first rumor 
got afloat of Garibaldi's intended expedition to Sicily, La Farina 
ridiculed and reviled the very idea of such an expedition. When, 
nevertheless, immediate steps were taken in preparation of the 
bold adventure, La Farina put in movement all the resources of 
the "National Association" with a view to obstruct it. When his 
opposition had failed in discouraging the general and his men, 
and when at last the expedition sailed, La Farina, with cynical 
sneers, indulged in forebodings of the most sinister kind, making 
himself bold to predict the immediate and total failure of the 
enterprise. So soon, however, as Garibaldi had taken Palermo and 
proclaimed himself Dictator, La Farina rushed to join him, being 
provided with a commission from Victor Emmanuel, or rather 
from Cavour, which gave him power to assume the command of 
the island in the name of the King, directly after the annexation 
had been voted. Being, as he himself admits, despite his 
ill-omened antecedents, at first most courteously received by 
Garibaldi, he at once began to assume the airs of the master, to 
intrigue against the Ministry of Crispi, conspire with the French 
police agents, rally around himself the aristocratic liberals eager to 
close the revolution by a vote of separate annexation, and propose, 
instead of the necessary steps for the expulsion of the Neapolitans 
from Sicily, plans for the expulsion from the public administration 
of the Mazzinians, and other men not to be relied on by his 
master, Cavour. 
Crispi, with the undermining of whose Ministry La Farina 
opened his intrigues, had for a long time been an exile in London, 
where he was counted among Mazzini's friends, and made the 
deliverance of Sicily the all-absorbing subject of his exertions. In 
the Spring of 1859 he went under a Wallachian name and 
character to Sicily at great personal risk, visited every great town 
a Giuseppe La Farina, Storia dltalia dal 1815 al 1850, Vols. I-VI, Torino, 
1851-1852.—Ed. 
15-1305 

=====第448页=====
424 Karl Marx 
there, and planned an insurrection for the month of October. The 
events of the Autumn delayed the insurrection, first till 
November, and then till the present year. In the mean time Crispi 
applied to Garibaldi, who, while refusing to excite an insurrection, 
gave the promise to aid it after it had once broken out and so far 
consolidated itself as to prove what were the real feelings of the 
Sicilians. During the expedition Crispi, with his wife, the only 
woman of the expedition, accompanied Garibaldi and fought in 
every action, his wife superintending the attendance on the sick 
and wounded. It was this man whom Signor La Farina wanted 
first to throw overboard, with the secret hope, of course, of 
flinging the Dictator after him. Garibaldi, out of consideration for 
Victor Emmanuel, and under the high pressure of the aristocratic 
liberals, consented, although under protest, to form a new 
Ministry and dismiss Crispi, whom he, however, retained as a 
personal counselor and friend. But Garibaldi had hardly made this 
sacrifice when he became aware that the dismissal of the Crispi 
Ministry had only been insisted upon in order to quarter upon 
him a Cabinet which, in all but name, was not his, but La Farina's 
or Cavour's Cabinet, and which, encouraged by the presence of La 
Farina, and relying upon Cavour's protection, would in a very 
short time counteract his whole plan of liberation, and turn all 
their influence throughout the country against the Nizzardist 
intruder, as Garibaldi was already nicknamed. It was then that he 
saved his own cause, not less than that of Sicily and Italy, by the 
expulsion of La Farina with the two Corsican brothers, the 
acceptance of the resignation of La Farina's ministerial nominees, 
and the appointment of a patriotic Ministry, among whom we may 
name Signor Mario. 
Written on July 23, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6018, August 8, 1860 

=====第449页=====
425 
Frederick Engels 
BRITISH DEFENSES 3 
The plan for the National Defenses of England, just laid before 
Parliament,3 proposes to confine all the outlay to the fortification 
of the dockyards, together with some minor works, barely 
sufficient to protect the larger harbors of the country from insult 
by small hostile squadrons, and with the erection of strong and 
extensive forts at Dover and Portland, for the purpose of securing 
sheltered anchorage to fleets and detached vessels. The whole of 
the money is to be spent on the circumference of the country, on 
the coast-line accessible to an enemy's fleet; and as it is impossible 
to defend the whole length of coast, a few important points, 
especially the naval arsenals and dockyards, are selected. The 
interior of the country is to be left entirely to its own resources. 
Now, when England once confesses that her wooden walls no 
longer protect her, and that she must have recourse to fortifica­
tion as a means of national defense, it stands to reason that she 
should first shelter from attack her naval arsenals—the cradles of 
her fleet. That Portsmouth, Plymouth, Pembroke, Sheerness, and 
Woolwich (or whatever place may be selected in its stead), should 
be made so strong as to be able to beat off any attack by sea, and 
to hold out for a reasonable time against a regular siege by land, 
nobody will doubt. But it is perfectly ridiculous to call the 
providing for this danger a system of national defense. In fact, in 
order to elevate the scheme to this dignity, it appears to have been 
necessary to make it far more complicated and expensive than was 
required for the mere protection of the dockyards. 
A country like France or Spain, which is exposed to invasion on 
its land frontier as much as to naval attacks and descents on its 
a See Report of the Commissioners appointed to consider the Defences of the United 
Kingdom; together with the Minutes of Evidence and Appendix; also Correspondence 
relative to a Site for an internal Arsenal. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by 
Command of Her Majesty, London, 1860; on the debates see The Times, No. 23680, July 
24, I860.— Ed. 
15* 

=====第450页=====
426 Frederick Engels 
coast, is obliged to make its naval depots fortresses of the first 
rank. Toulon, Carthagena, Genoa, even Cherbourg, may be 
subjected to the combined attack which destroyed the arsenals and 
dockyards of Sevastopol.315 They ought, therefore, to have a very 
strong land-front with detached forts to keep the dockyards out of 
range of a bombardment. But this does not apply to England. 
Supposing even that a naval defeat had for a moment placed in 
doubt England's maritime supremacy; even then an invading 
army, landed on British soil, could never depend upon the liberty 
of its communications, and must, therefore, act rapidly and 
decisively. This invading army would not be in a state to 
undertake a regular siege; and if it was, nobody in his senses 
would expect the invader to go and settle down quietly before 
Portsmouth and to waste his resources in a lengthened siege, 
instead of marching straight upon London, and at once provoking 
a decision on the main issue while his moral and material 
ascendency is at its hight. If it comes to that, that troops and 
material can be safely landed in England sufficient to attack 
London, and at the same time to besiege Portsmouth, then 
England is at the brink of ruin, and no land-forts around 
Portsmouth can save her. As with Portsmouth, so with the other 
naval arsenals. Let the sea-fronts be made as strong as they can; 
but on the land-fronts, everything is superfluous which goes 
beyond keeping off the enemy far enough to protect the dockyard 
from bombardment, and securing it against a fortnight's regular 
siege. But if we are to judge from the estimates, and from some 
plans respecting the proposed defenses of Portsmouth, which have 
got into the London Times, there is to be a great waste of brick 
and mortar, of ditch and parapet, of money and, in case of war, of 
men too. The engineering staff appear positively to revel in this 
luxury of planning fortifications which, to them, has so long been 
a forbidden joy. England is menaced with a vegetation of forts 
and batteries springing up as rapidly as mushrooms, and as rank as 
the creepers of a tropical forest. The Government seem to insist 
upon it that there must be something to show for the money; but that 
will be the principal use of all these splendid structures. 
So long as the dockyards are not safe against a coup de main* so 
long invasions might be undertaken, with the sole aim of 
destroying one of them, and then retiring. Thus they serve, so to 
say, as safety-valves for London. But as soon as they are secured 
against an attack by main force, and even against a regular attack, 
for fourteen days—and this is evidently necessary—there is no 
a Sudden attack.— Ed. 

=====第451页=====
British Defenses 427 
other object left for an invasion except London. All minor ends 
are secured; local invasions are no longer to any purpose; an 
invasion must go in for the chance of annihilating England or 
suffer annihilation in its turn. Thus, the very fact of the 
fortification of the dockyards weakens London. It compels the 
invading power to concentrate all its strength on the attempt at 
once upon London. London, we are told by Lord Palmerston, 
must be defended in the field. Suppose this to be so: the stronger 
the army, the safer London will be. But where is that strong army 
to come from, if Portsmouth, Plymouth, Chatham, and Sheerness, 
and, perhaps, Pembroke, are converted into first-rate fortresses of 
the size of Cherbourg, Genoa, Coblentz, or Cologne, requiring 
garrisons of from 15,000 to 20,000 men to defend them? Thus, 
the stronger you make the dockyards, the weaker you render Lon­
don and the country. And this is what you call national defenses. 
In any case, one lost battle would decide the fate of London; 
and, considering the immense commercial centralization of the 
country, and the dead lock to which the occupation of London 
would bring all the industrial and commercial machinery of 
England, there can be no doubt that one battle would decide the 
fate of the whole kingdom. And thus, while twelve millions are 
proposed to be spent on the security of the dockyards, the very 
heart of the country is to remain unprotected, and is left to hinge 
on the result of one battle! 
There is no good in mincing the matter. Let the dockyards, by 
all means, be fortified in a rational manner, which could be done 
for less than half the money now proposed to be squandered upon 
them; but if you want national defenses, set at once about 
fortifying London. It is no use saying, as Palmerston does, that 
this is impossible. It is the same talk that was heard when Paris was 
to be fortified. The surface inclosed in the continuous rampart 
round Paris is not much less than that occupied by London; the 
line of forts encircling Paris has an extent of 27 miles, and a circle 
round London six miles from Charing Cross would give a 
periphery of 37 miles. This circle might very well represent the 
average distance of the forts from the center; and ten miles more 
will not render the line too long, if a proper system of radial and 
circular railway communication facilitates the rapid movements of 
the reserves. Of course, London cannot be defended in the 
off-hand way, proposed in the Cornhill Magazine, where six large 
forts are to do all; the number of forts must be twenty at least; 
but, on the other hand, London need not be fortified in the 
pedantic style of Paris, for it will never have to stand a siege. To 

=====第452页=====
428 Frederick Engels 
defend it against a coup de main, against the resources which an 
invading army can bring against it within a fortnight after landing, 
is all that is required. The continuous inclosure may be dispensed 
with; the villages and groups of houses on the outskirts may be 
made to serve in its stead quite effectually, if the plan of defense 
be properly prepared beforehand. 
With London thus fortified, and the dockyards strengthened on 
the sea fronts and protected on the land fronts against a forcible, 
irregular attack, and even a slight siege, England might defy any 
invasion, and the whole might be done for something like fifteen 
millions sterling. The dockyards would not absorb, in all, more 
than 70,000 regulars and 15,000 volunteers; while the whole rest 
of the line, the militia, and the volunteers—say 80,000 line and 
militia, and 100,000 volunteers—would defend the intrenched 
camp around London, or accept battle in front of it; and while the 
whole country north of London would remain at full liberty to 
organize fresh bodies of volunteers and depots for the line and 
militia. The enemy would in all cases be compelled to act; he could 
not, even if he would, then escape the attraction of the great 
intrenched camp of London, and he would have only the choice 
either to attack it and be beaten, or to wait, and thereby increase 
every day the difficulties of his position. 
Instead of this, the Government plan of national defenses would 
bring matters to this pass, that if the forces of England consisted 
of 90,000 line and militia and 115,000 volunteers, the garrisons 
would, at least, absorb 25,000 regulars and 35,000 volunteers, 
leaving for the field in which to defend London, 65,000 regulars 
and 80,000 volunteers, while 35,000 men who might be very badly 
wanted on the day of battle, would be sitting quietly and 
unmenaced behind stone walls which nobody had thought of 
attacking. But not only would this army be weakened by 35,000 
men, it would be deprived of a fortified position out of which it 
could not be driven except by a regular siege; it would have to 
expose its 80,000 badly officered and inexperienced volunteers to 
a fight in the open field, and it would thus fight in circumstances 
very much less favorable than the army placed as above described. 
Written about July 24, 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6020, August 10, 1860 as a 
leading article; reprinted in the New-York 
Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1588, August 
14, 1860 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第453页=====
429 
Karl Marx 
[EVENTS IN SYRIA.— 
SESSION OF THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT.— 
THE STATE OF BRITISH COMMERCE] 
London, July 28, 1860 
The Blue Book on the Syrian disturbances3  having only just 
been issued, and Lord Stratford de Redcliffe having announced 
for Tuesday next his interpellation respecting the Syrian af­
fairs, 1'316 I delay entering on this momentous subject, and would 
only warn your readers to not be carried away by the sentimental 
declamations of the Decembrist press, the feelings of horror at the 
atrocious outrages of wild tribes, and the natural sympathy felt for 
the sufferers. But there are a few points which ought steadily to 
be fixed upon. In the first instance, the Russian Empire, 
consequent upon the internal collisions that have arisen out of the 
serf emancipation movement and the dilapidated state of finances, 
finds itself in a fix out of which the present Government knows 
not how to get itself safe by a war on a grand scale. War appears 
to them the only means of shifting off the impending revolution 
so confidentially predicted in Prince Dolgoroukow's La vérité sur la 
Russie. Consequently, it is about three months since Prince 
Gorchakoff tried to reopen the Oriental question by issuing his 
circular 0 on the grievances of the Christians in Turkey, but his 
appeal, reechoed only by a solitary voice from the Tuileries, fell 
flat on the ears of Europe. 
a Papers, 1858-1860, respecting past or apprehended Disturbances in Syria, in four 
parts,  London, 1860.— Ed. 
b Lord Stratford de Redcliffe's interpellation of August 3, 1860, The Times, 
No. 23690, August 4, I860.— Ed. 
c Gorchakov's circular of May 20, 1860 to Russian Embassies in foreign 
countries, Russky  Invalid,  No. Ill, May 26, 1860, pp. 447-48.— Ed. 

=====第454页=====
430 Karl Marx 
Even from that time Russian and French agents were bestirring 
themselves to bring about a politico-religious row—the former on 
the Dalmatian, the latter on the Syrian coast—both movements 
supporting each other, since the troubles in Montenegro and the 
Herzegovina compelled the Porte to withdraw almost the whole 
Turkish army stationed in Syria, so as to leave the arena open to 
the high-pitched antagonism of the barbarous clans of the 
Lebanon. The Emperor of the French found himself placed in the 
same necessity as the orthodox Czar,a  of looking out for some 
fresh and thrilling crusade, to plunge his Empire again into the 
Lethe of war-hallucinations. The Italian movement, slipping out of 
his leading-strings, and taking a course contrary to the direction 
he wanted to impart to it, had, as was delicately hinted in the 
Constitutionnel^ become a bore in the opinion of Paris. His 
attempts at wheedling the Prince Regent of Prussia 0 into a violent 
"consolidation of Germany," to be paid by a "moral compensa­
tion" for France in the shape of the Rhenish Provinces, turned out 
a signal failure, and even cast some ridicule on the entrepreneur of 
the emancipation-of-nationalities dodge. The conflict Louis 
Napoleon found himself involved in with the Pope317 damaged the 
prop on which his sway over the peasantry rests—the Catholic 
clergy of France. 
The Imperial exchequer was reduced for some time to, and 
continues in a state of, exhaustion, which it was vainly tried to 
cure by throwing out the hint of the expediency of an emprunt de 
la paix (a peace-loan). This was too much even for Decembrist 
France. To eke out one loan contracted on the pretext of war by a 
subsequent loan contracted on the pretext of peace, was a 
presumption abhorrent even to the Paris stock-jobbers. Some faint 
voice in the emasculated Paris press dared to insinuate that the 
blessings of the second Empire were as great as expensive, the 
nation having bought them by an increase to the amount of fifty 
per cent of the public debt. The project of a peace loan of 
500,000,000f. was consequently dropped, a retreat that only 
encouraged Mr. Favre to descant in the Corps Législatif on the 
impending "financial crash," and to tear to pieces the flowery 
gauze which the Imperial Budgetmonger had thrown over the 
State chest. The strictures in the Corps Législatif among the "  chiens 
savants" (the learned dogs) of the mock representation, hazarded 
a Alexander II.— Ed. 
b See Ernest Dréolle's article "Paris, 10 juillet", Le Constitutionnel, No. 193, July 
11, I860.— Ed. 
c William.— Ed. 

=====第455页=====
Events in Syria 431 
by Mr. Favre and Mr. Olivier, 3 on the characteristic features of the 
Decembrist régime, as well as the furious onslaught on the 
intrigues of the "old parties," 318 with which the official, the 
semi-official, and officious press of Paris teems, coincided in 
bearing witness to the stern fact, that the rebellious spirit of Gaul 
is rekindling from its cinders, and that the continuance of the 
usurper's rule again depends on the enactment of a grand 
war-spectacle, as it did two years after the coup d'état, and again 
two years after the conclusion of the Crimean episode. It is 
evident that the Autocrat of France and the Autocrat of Russia, b 
laboring both under the same urgent necessity of sounding the 
war-trumpet, act in common concert. While Bonapartist semi­
official pamphlets' offered to the Prince Regent of Prussia'1 
"German Union," backed by a "moral compensation" for France, 
the Emperor Alexander, as has just been publicly stated, without a 
denial on the part of the Berlin governmental press, in the 
publications of the German "National Association,"319 openly 
proposed to his uncled the annexation to Prussia of the whole of 
Northern Germany up to the main, on the condition of a cession 
to France of the Rhenish Provinces, and of connivance at the 
progress of Russia on the Danube. It is this fact simultaneously 
thrown out by both the Autocrats that has brought about the 
rendezvous at Teplitz between the Emperor of Austria and the 
Prince Regent.320 The conspirators of Petersburg and Paris had, 
however, in case their temptations of Prussia should fail, kept in 
reserve the thrilling incident of the Syrian massacres, to be 
followed by a French intervention which, as it would not do to 
enter through the main gate, would open the back door of a 
general European war. In respect to England I will only add, that, 
in 1841, Lord Palmerston furnished the Druses with the arms they 
kept ever since, and that, in 1846, by a convention with the Czar 
Nicholas, he abolished, in point of fact, the Turkish sway that 
curbed the wild tribes of the Lebanon, and stipulated for them a 
quasi-independence321 which, in the run of time, and under the 
a Emile Olivier's speech in the Corps Législatif on June 26, 1860, Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 180, June 28, I860.— Ed. 
b Napoleon III and Alexander II.— Ed. 
c Marx is referring to the following pamphlets published by Dentu in Paris in 
1859 and 1860: La vraie question, France-Italie-Autriche; Napoléon III et la question 
roumaine; La foi des traités, les puissances signataires et l'empereur Napoléon III; 
Edmond About, La Prusse en 1860 (concerning the last-named pamphlet, see this 
volume, pp. 391-96 and 400-01.).— Ed. 
d William.—Ed. 

=====第456页=====
432 Karl Marx 
proper management of foreign plotters, could only beget a harvest 
of blood. 
You are aware that the present Parliamentary session stands 
unrivalled by a startling succession of Government failures. Apart 
from Mr. Gladstone's abortion of protective duties, not one single 
important measure has been carried. But while the Government 
were withdrawing bill after bill, they had contrived to smuggle 
through the second reading a litde resolution,3 consisting of one 
single little clause, which, if carried, would have brought about the 
greatest constitutional change witnessed in England ever since 
1689. 322 That resolution simply proposed the abolition of the local 
English army in India, its absorption into the British army, and 
consequently the transfer of its supreme command from the 
Governor-General at Calcutta to the London Horse Guards, alias 
the Duke of Cambridge. Quite apart from the other serious 
consequences such a change must be fraught with, it would put 
part of the army out of the control of Parliament, and, on the 
grandest scale, add to the Royal patronage. It seems that some 
members of the Indian Council, who unanimously objected to the 
Government project, but, by virtue of the Indian Act of 1858,323 
can occupy no seats in the House of Commons, whispered their 
protests into the ears of some M.P.s, and so it came that when the 
Government already considered their dodge to be safe, a sudden 
Parliamentary émeute, h led by Mr. Horsman, c broke through their 
intrigue in the very nick of time. It is a truly ludicrous spectacle, 
this perplexity of a Cabinet unexpectedly found out, and the 
bewilderment of a House of Commons fretting at the snares laid 
to its own profound ignorance. 
The declared value of the exports for last month shows the 
progress of the downward movement of British commerce. I have 
singled out in a previous letter d  [that],  compared with the exports of 
June,  1859, there is a falling off of nearly a million and a half 
sterling for June, 1860. 
The returns for the month of June in the last three years are as 
follows6: 
a Moved in the House of Commons on June 12, 1860, Hansard's Parliamentary 
Debates, Vol. 159, 1860, p.  395.—  Ed. 
b Riot.— Ed. 
c Edward Horsman's speech in the House of Commons on July 26, 1860, The 
Times, No. 23683, July 27, I860.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 406-09.— Ed. 
e For these and the following data see the article "The Board of Trade 
Returns", The Economist, No. 883, July 28, I860.— Ed. 

=====第457页=====
Events in Syria 433 
1858.  1859. 1860. 
£10,241,433 £10,665,891 £9,236,454 
For the half year ending with the 30th June, the declared value 
of the exports is less by a million than in the same six months of 
last year: 
1858.  1859. 1860. 
£53,467,804 £63,003,159 £62,019,989 
The falling off of the last month is distributed over the cotton, 
cotton yarn, linen, hardware, and cutlery, iron and worsted trade. 
Even in the exports of manufactured woolen goods, the trade in 
which has hitherto shown a steadily increasing prosperity, this 
month excepted, "woolen and worsted yarn" shows a decline. The 
export of cotton goods for the six months to British India has 
declined from £6,094,430, in the first half of 1859, to £4,738,440 
in the first half of 1860, or by [about] £1,360,000 worth of goods.3 
With regard to the imports the most striking feature is the huge 
bulk of the cotton arrivals. In June, 1860, 2,102,048 cwts. have 
been received, as against  1,655,306  cwts. in the June of last year, 
and 1,339,108  cwts. in June, 1858.b The increase for the six 
months is no less than three millions of hundredweights; so that 
the half year receipts are greater by more than 60 per cent. 
The cotton imported in the month of May, 1860, is worth more by 
£1,800,000 than the import in 1859. No less than six millions and 
a half sterling have been spent in raw cotton in the first five 
months of 1860, beyond what was so spent in the same period of 
the previous year. 
If the rapid decrease in the export of cotton goods and yarns be 
compared with the still more decided increase in the cotton 
imports, it will be understood that some cotton crisis is approach­
ing, the more so since the new arrivals of the raw material fall 
upon unusually replete cotton stores. 
Written on July 28, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6021, August 11, 1860 
a op. cit. — Ed. 
b op. cit. — Ed. 

=====第458页=====
434 
Frederick Engels 
COULD THE FRENCH SACK LONDON? 
The report of the British National Defense Commission, which 
was recently published in London,3  states that if the Emperor of 
the French were disposed to send a hostile army to England, it 
would be impossible for "all the available vessels of the Royal 
Navy" to prevent it from landing at some point of the 2,147 miles 
of coast line of England and Wales, not to speak of that of 
Ireland. It having been also conceded, at various times before and 
since the publication of the famous de Joinville pamphlet, 6 that a 
landing of 100,000 or more Frenchmen could be effected in the 
British Islands, under skillful management, the only important 
point to be considered is, what power of resistance Great Britain 
has at her command to meet such an invasion. 
In compliance with an order of the House of Commons, the 
strength of the British land forces was reported in May last. It was 
as follows: Total regimental establishments, 144,148; effectives of 
all ranks on the 1st of May, 133,962; embodied militia, 19,333. 
When this statement was made public, an almost universal cry 
from all parts of the three Kingdoms was raised, as to the manner 
in which the $75,000,000 appropriated for the army estimates 
were spent, since an analysis of the 144,148 men, given as the 
available material of the line, "revealed the startling fact that 
scarcely 30,000 infantry could be mustered for offensive or 
defensive purposes, at a given place." 
a Report of the Commissioners appointed to consider the Defences of the United 
Kingdom, London, 1860. See this volume, pp. 425-28.—Ed. 
b François Ferdinand de Joinville's De  l'Etat  des forces navales  de la  France,  Francfort 
s/M., 1844.— Ed. 

=====第459页=====
Could the French Sack London? 435 
Mr. Sidney Herbert and his associates of the Horse Guards, 
immediately held a consultation, and the London Times endeav­
ored to quiet the anxiety of the people. It said3: 
"We took occasion to examine the figures by which these allegations were 
supported, and explained in some detail the actual position of affairs." 
It tried to 
"show that if by the term 'troops' it was intended to describe only infantry of 
the line, the state of the case had been pretty accurately given, but that in reality 
the force at home comprised strong divisions of other arms of the service, so that 
its aggregate strength was by no means so small as might have been imagined." 
The result of this nervousness on the part of the public, and of 
the consultation at the Horse Guards, was a completely new table 
of statistics,1' putting down the military forces of Great Britain, at 
home, at 323,259; or 179,111 men more than the statement 
submitted two months previously. The discrepancy is not difficult 
of explanation. The first was issued with the intention to show the 
number of men that could, under favorable circumstances, and on 
receiving reasonable notice, be made available for immediate duty; 
the last to supply the sum total of every man and boy entered on 
the military pay-roll, and consequently receiving a share of the 
$75,000,000, beside including 227,179 volunteers and militia, of 
whom fully 200,000 have no existence as soldiers. Then there are 
33,302 men accounted for, as belonging to "depots." Lest we may 
be charged with prejudice in describing what these "depots" are, 
we will cite the London Times as authority': 
"The troops in the depots really belong, not to the home, but the foreign 
establishments. They are portions of the battalions serving abroad, and there is 
nothing strange in their being comparatively ineffective for duty at home." 
In short they are merely an ineffective body, composed of 
recruits not over three months in the service, who are shipped off 
quarterly, or oftener, when enlisted, to the regiments abroad, and 
old invalids who have been left at home as useless, 
"so that, what with those who are exhausted and those who are untaught, the 
corps itself is never in the condition of a regular battalion." 
So much for the depots. Now as to the volunteers and militia. It 
is only necessary to repeat that at least 200,000 exist at present, 
only on paper. Mr. Maguire recently proved in Parliament that 
nearly every regiment of militia had from 200 to 300 men more 
•' "London, Saturday, June 23, 1860", The Times, No. 23654, June 23, 
I860.—Ed. 
b ibid.— Ed. 
<-• "London, Monday, June 4, 1860", The Times, No. 23637, June 4, I860.— Ed. 

=====第460页=====
436 Frederick Engels 
on the books of the Horse Guards than could ever be got together 
on parade. Mr. Sidney Herbert made a similar admission.3  Of the 
Irish militia regiments, whose members are compelled, from 
hardship and poverty, to report themselves more punctually than 
their English neighbors, many now estimated at 800—the Waterford 
for instance—have only 400. The estimate giving the strength of 
militia and volunteers of England at 138,560 is probably as near 
the mark as it is possible for an impartial statistician to make it. 
The force of the regular army at home, according to the recent 
report from the War-Office, is 68,778. The Household cavalry 
(1,317),  Royal Engineers (2,089), the Army Hospital corps of 
discarded invalids, the military train, and other partially unavaila­
ble troops, are here included. To avoid trespassing on disputed 
grounds, we will admit that the entire 68,000 are available. This, 
supposing all militia and volunteers embodied, and under arms, 
would give a grand total of 206,560 men. We will even add the 
Irish police to the list, which will increase it to about 237,000. The 
nominal strength of the regular army and embodied militia, just 
now, is given at 100,000; about 16,000 in excess of the real 
figures; but we will take it as it stands. Conceding that 15,000 of 
the volunteers could be assembled at a given point, within three 
days of the landing of the French, England would still have at her 
disposal an army of 115,000. Of these, it must be borne in mind 
that fully 25,000 are novices in the use of arms. Now, all the navy 
yards,  arsenals and Government strongholds, would require extra 
garrisons, for there are never more than  8,000  marines ashore at 
the naval ports. Ireland, without attaching any importance to the 
influence of the "national petition," in creating a friendly 
disposition to the soldiers of McMahon, will need an army. All 
volunteers or militia would not suffice to keep order in the 
Emerald Isle, with the prospect of a fight in view. Her Majesty's 
authorities should at least detail 10,000 regulars, and 25,000 
irregulars for that country, beside the police. This would make 
about 55,000 in all, and would leave only 80,000 soldiers to 
England and Wales, to guard arsenals, armories, and navy yards. 
It is idle to suppose that less than 20,000 serviceable troops would 
be sufficient for this important duty, allowing even the worn-out 
or inexperienced men in the depots to be able to hold their own. 
So Napoleon's 100,000 Frenchmen, Zouaves, &c, would be 
opposed by 60,000 red coats, of whom little more than 45,000 
a Sidney Herbert's speech in the House of Commons on June 26, 1860, The Times, 
No. 23657, June 27, I860.—£d. 

=====第461页=====
Could the French Sack London? 437 
would belong to the line. The probable result of a rencounter 
between the two forces, thus brought face to face, hardly admits of 
a doubt. 
It will be objected that France could not equip and dispatch 
across the Channel 100,000 men, without its becoming known. It 
may be; but England would not know where the blow would fall, 
and would naturally tremble for the safety of her possessions 
bordering the Mediterranean, and try to reenforce her garrisons 
there lest the threatened attack on London might be intended to 
cover ulterior designs on Malta and Gibraltar. She would send 
over to those places, in a few vessels of the Channel fleet, 20,000 
or 30,000 soldiers, who would not be "volunteers," thus throwing 
on the latter the weight of resisting the enemy at home. Some 
distinguished writers assert that even the sacking of London would 
eventually be less injurious to England, than her banishment from 
Malta and Gibraltar. 
But it will be argued that the mere announcement of national 
danger would be sufficient to arouse every Briton in the land, 
from the Cheviot Hills to Cornwall, to hurl the intruder into the 
sea. This is plausible. But experience teaches us that no matter 
how intense the patriotism of the masses may be, the fact that 
they, as a general thing, have no arms, and do not know how to 
use them if they had, renders their disposition in an emergency of 
very little value. Cane-swords and pitchforks may be weapons 
exceedingly dangerous to human life in the Seven Dials,3 or in the 
Provinces, but it is not reasonable to assume that they would be 
irrepressible in repelling the Zouaves. It may also be seriously 
doubted whether the middle classes, who almost exclusively 
represent the volunteer force, would be so ready to answer 
muster, with the French on their native island, as they are when 
summoned to receive the congratulations of her Majesty. At all 
events, it is not more absurd to admit the possibility of the 
invading army numbering 150,000 than to suppose the volunteers 
can turn out 120,000; since a cordial invitation from Buckingham 
Palace cannot succeed in bringing, at the end of a twelve months' 
recruiting, more than 18,300. 
Some doubts having been expressed as to the force actually 
reviewed at Hyde Park, we quote a paragraph from The Manchester 
Guardian, of the second day's parade. The "private correspon­
dent" alluded to is Mr. Tom Taylor, an intimate and confidential 
friend of Col. McMurdo: 
a A working-class district in the centre of London.— Ed. 

=====第462页=====
438 Frederick Engels 
"Our private correspondent, as our readers may recollect, has stated the 
number at 18,300, on the official authority of Col. McMurdo, which is a little lower 
than the amount given by Sir. John Burgoyne's calculation. But the martial bearing 
of the Volunteers evidently struck Sir John more than their mere number." 
In estimating the forces that could probably be concentrated to 
oppose invaders, we have purposely made the most liberal 
calculation in favor of Great Britain. Our statement of the regular 
army admits as efficient every man, sick and well, whose name is 
on the military books. The militia and volunteers have been 
considered as 115,000 strong, which those well informed on the 
matter may deem excessive. The acknowledged ability of French 
field officers, the excellence of French military discipline, the 
general superiority of French tactics; and, on the other hand, the 
well-established stupidity of many of the highest officers in the 
English army; the slovenly management of the regulars and 
volunteers (after five weeks' notice had been given one regiment 
of militia actually mustered, in May last, with 135 barefoot 
members); even the conceded inferiority of the ensemble of a 
British to a French fighting army—all these have not been 
considered, although they are most important elements in a 
discussion of the subject. 
In view of these facts, it appears certain that if Napoleon landed 
to-morrow, at a judiciously selected port in England, with 150,000 
or even 100,000 men, he could "sack London" and escape the 
"annihilation" which a London journal recently stated would be 
his inevitable fate "if he put a hostile foot on Saxon soil." 
Written between July 26 and 28, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6021, August 11,1860 as a 
leading article 

=====第463页=====
439 
Karl Marx 
THE RUSSO-FRENCH ALLIANCE 
London, August 3, 1860 
The observations made in my last letter 3 upon the secret 
connection between the Syrian massacres and the Russo-French 
alliance, have received unexpected confirmation from the other 
side of the Channel, in the shape of a pamphlet published at 
M. Dentu's on Tuesday last, entitled La Syrie et l'Alliance Russe, 
and ascribed to the penmanship of M. Edmond About. M. Dentu, 
as you are aware, is the French Government publisher, who has 
issued all the semi-official pamphlets which from time to time 
initiated Europe into the "studies" b just indulged at the Tuileries. 
The above-mentioned pamphlet derives a peculiar interest from 
the circumstance that its publication followed closely on the 
love-letter addressed by the Man of December to Persigny, 324 
which was destined to mesmerize John Bull, and of which Lord 
John Russell, at the very moment he refused to lay it before the 
House, forwarded a copy to the London Times.c  The subjoined 
extracts contain the substance of La Syrie et l'Alliance Russe: 
"As at the time of the Crusades, Christian Europe is moved by the horrible 
crimes of which Syria has just been the scene. Seven hundred thousand Christians 
are delivered up to the merciless fanaticism of two millions of Mussulmans, and the 
Turkish Government, by its inexplicable inaction, appears to avow itself their 
accomplice. Assuredly, France would have forgotten all her traditions had she not 
immediately claimed the honor of protecting the lives and properties of those who, 
a See this volume, pp. 429-32.— Ed. 
b Marx is evidently alluding to Carl Vogt's work Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage 
Europas, Geneva and Berne, 1859.— Ed. 
* Issue No. 23687, August 1, I860.— Ed. 

=====第464页=====
440 Karl Marx 
in former days, were the soldiers of Peter the Hermit and Philip Augustus.... It is, 
therefore, high time to think of a remedy for a situation which could not last any 
longer without leading to a great calamity—the total extermination of the Christian 
subjects of the Porte. The expedition which the Turkish Government talks so much 
about is totally insufficient to restore order. The Powers which have co­
religionists in Syria, and which are justly alarmed for their safety, must be 
prepared bodily to interfere. If they tarried, it would no longer be time to protect 
victims; their only duty would be to avenge martyrs. 
"Two nations are especially interested in defending the Cross on those distant 
shores—France and Russia. What would be the probable consequence of the union 
of their arms, and the result on the ulterior organization of Europe? This is what we 
are about to investigate. 
"At certain periods of history we find that under the impulse of certain laws of 
attraction and agglomeration peoples form political combinations unknown to the 
past. We are 'assisting' at one of these critical moments in the life of mankind. The 
Syrian question is but one of the knots of a very complicated situation. The whole 
of Europe is in a state of expectation and anxiety, waiting for a vast solution which 
may settle the basis of a lasting peace both in Europe and in the East. Now that 
object can only be attained in so far as the organization of our continent shall be in 
conformity with the wishes and requirements of the present questions of 
nationalities struggling beneath the yoke. Hostile religious tendencies, incompatibil­
ity of tempers, languages radically opposed to each other, keep up in certain 
European States an undercurrent of agitation, which prevents the restoration of 
confidence, and hinders the progress of civilization. Peace, that ultimate term of 
the ambition of all Governments, can only be permanently secured when the 
permanent causes of disturbance we have just indicated shall have disappeared. We 
therefore wish to arrive at a double result. 
"1. Wherever such a thing is possible, to favor the formation of a homogeneous 
and national State, the mission of which would be to absorb and concentrate, in a 
mighty unity, populations having ideas or tendencies in common. 
"2. To try and carry out that principle without having recourse to arms. 
"At first sight, France and Russia appear to have realized the ideal of 
monarchies. Though 400 leagues divide them, these two Powers have arrived by 
the most different roads at that unity which alone is able to create durable empires, 
not ephemeral circumscription, the limits of which may be changed any day by the 
fortune of war.... The Czars, meditating for the last 135 years over the will of Peter 
the Great,325 have not ceased to cast covetous glances on European Turkey....Must 
France continue to protest against the pretensions of the Czars to the decaying 
Empire of the Sultan? We think not. // Russia lent us her cooperation for the 
reannexation of the Rhine frontier, it appears to us that a kingdom would not be too high a 
price for her alliance. Thanks to such a combination, France might resume her real limits, 
as traced by the geographer Strabo, 18 centuries ago. [Then follows a quotation from 
Strabo, enumerating the advantages of Gaul as the seat of a powerful empire.] It 
can easily be understood that France should desire to reconstruct that divine work 
[I presume the frontiers of  Gaul],  thwarted for so many centuries by the fraud of 
man, and this is so much in the nature of things, that at a period when we were 
not thinking of territorial aggrandizement, Germany was nevertheless subject to 
periodical fits of uneasiness, and flung at us, as a pledge of defiance, Becker's 
patriotic song326.... We know that we are not alone in having plans of 
aggrandizement. Now, if Russia regards Constantinople in the same way as we look 
at the Rhine, can one not turn these analogous pretensions to some account, and 
force upon Europe the acceptance of a combination which would allot Turkey to 

=====第465页=====
The Russo-French Alliance 441 
Russia, to France that Rhine frontier, which Napoleon I considered in 1814 as a 
sine qua non condition of his existence as a sovereign? 
"There are only two millions of Turks in Europe, whereas there are thirteen 
millions of Greeks, whose spiritual head is the Czar.... The Greek insurrection,3 
which lasted nine years, was but the prelude of the movement which the massacres 
in Syria may act upon as a signal to break out. The Greek Christians are only 
waiting for an order from their Chief at St. Petersburg,0 or their Patriarch at 
Constantinople, to rise against the infidels; and there are but few far-sighted 
politicians who do not anticipate a solution of the Eastern question in a sense 
favorable to Russia, and that at no distant time. It is not, therefore, surprising, that 
at the call of their co-religionists, and encouraged by the predictions of Stalezanew, 
the Russians should be prepared to cross the Pruth at the first moment. 
"If we cast an eye on our frontiers, the considerations which justify our 
tendencies appear to be quite as important as those which actuate Russia. Let us set 
aside all historical recollections, and all geographical motives, take one by one the 
provinces inclosed by the Rhine, and examine the reasons that militate in favor of 
their annexation. 
"First we meet with Belgium. In good faith it is difficult to question the striking 
analogy which has induced some historians to call the Belgians the French of the 
North. In fact, throughout that country the educated classes use no language but 
French, and the Flemish dialect is only understood by the lower classes of the 
population in some few localities. Moreover, Belgium is throughout attached to 
Catholicism, and it is to France, her sister, by origin, idiom and religion, that she is 
indebted for her independence. We will not recall the fact that Belgium, conquered 
by our armies in 1795, formed nine French departments until 1814. Nevertheless, 
it would appear that our yoke was not so very heavy, as in 1831, Belgium,having 
been unable to obtain from the Great Powers the permission of being annexed to 
France, offered, by a vote of the two Chambers, the Belgian Crown to the Duke de 
Nemours, the son of the King of the French. The refusal of the latter induced 
them subsequently to offer it to the Duke of Saxe Coburg, now Leopold I; but the 
precedent we refer to appears to us highly important, and it leads to the 
presumption that if Belgium were consulted she would not be less generous than 
Savoy, and would prove once more the attraction of the prestige which the 
greatness of France causes her to feel. The opposition of a few members of the 
upper classes would be very soon stifled by popular acclamations. 
"Before falling into the sea, the Rhine divides itself into three branches, two of 
which run in rather northerly directions—the Yssel, which flows into the 
Zuyderzee, and the Waal, a confluent of the Meuse. If France had once more to 
trace her limits, might she not take the line of the Rhine, properly so called, 
instead of that of the Waal or the Yssel, so as to slice off as little as possible of 
Southern Holland? That is what she would assuredly do. Moreover, it is not on the 
side of Holland that it is indispensable to rectify our frontier by taking the line of 
the Rhine as a basis. Belgium, with her present frontiers, would be enough to 
satisfy the want of extension which of late has been so loudly claimed by public 
opinion. The line of the Scheldt was, moreover, the frontier conceded to France by 
the treaty of Lunéville in 1801." 
Next follows a short passage demonstrating, by similar argu­
ments, the necessity of annexing the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, 
a The reference is to the 1821-29 national uprising in Greece.— Ed. 
h A probable reference to the Russian Tsar.— Ed. 

=====第466页=====
442 Karl Marx 
"which formed under the Empire the Departement des Forêts." 3 The 
pamphleteer then proceeds to show the necessity for the 
annexation of Rhenish Prussia: 
"Belgium and Luxemburg once in our power, our task is not over.... To 
complete our frontiers we must not take less than two-thirds of Rhenish Prussia, 
the whole of Rhenish Bavaria, and about one-third of the Grand Duchy of Hesse. 
All these territories formed, under the Empire, the departments of Roer of the 
Rhine, and Moselle of the Sarre. of Mont Tonnerre, b and the Grand Duchy of 
Berg. In 1815, they were distributed among several possessors, to render their 
recovery by us more difficult. A remarkable fact is, that these provinces, annexed 
to the French Monarchy, were but a few years in direct intercourse with us, and, 
nevertheless, our temporary stay among them has left the most enduring marks. 
What sympathy is lavished on the French traveler in those parts, we willingly 
appeal to those who have traveled there. For the last 45 years not a single French 
soldier has garrisoned those towns on the banks of the Rhine, and yet it is 
marvelous to see the touching reception our uniform meets with there. Catholics 
like us—like us thev are Frenchmen. Was it not at Aix-la Chapelle c that our Emperor, 
Charlemagne, held his Court?,.. Contiguous to France, the Rhenish Provinces must 
become the political, as they are the natural dependencies of France." 
The writer then returns to Russia, and after showing that the 
Crimean war forms no barrier to the alliance between France and 
Russia, as they had not then come to an understanding, gives the 
following piece of information concerning one of the claims of 
France to the gratitude of Russia: 
"It must be kept in mind that France did not lend herself to the plans of 
England in the Baltic. We do not know whether an attack on Cronstadt would have 
succeeded in any case; it was not attempted, thanks, we have reason to believe, to 
the opposition of France." 
After an excursion to the Italian campaign, the writer does not 
doubt that in the end Prussia will join the Franco-Russian alliance: 
"But to attach the Cabinet of Berlin to our policy, it must be withdrawn from 
the influence of England. How can this be brought about? By so contriving that 
Prussia shall cease to be our neighbor on the Rhine, and by promising to support 
her legitimate pretensions to preponderance in Germany. The exchange of these 
Rhenish Provinces causes Bavaria and Prussia to take their compensations from 
Austria. The English alliance can only secure to Prussia the status quo—the French 
alliance throws open to her a boundless horizon. 
"The alliance between France, Russia, and Prussia loyally concluded, as we have 
reason to hope it will be, the consequences that flow from it are most natural.... We 
have demonstrated above what 1,800 years ago Strabo had laid down as beyond 
question — that the Rhine was the natural frontier of Northern France. Now, 
Prussia is the greatest sufferer from this extension of territory. For the last 45 years 
she has kept the Rhine as the dragon used to keep watch over the garden of the 
a Forestry Department.— Ed. 
b Ruhr-Rhine, Moselle-Saar, Donnersberg. — Ed. 
c Aachen.— Ed. 

=====第467页=====
The Russo-French Alliance 443 
Hesperides. Let this cause of hostility between France and Prussia disappear; let 
the left hand of the Rhine become French once more; in exchange for her good 
offices, Prussia would find a compensation in Austria—that Power would be 
punished for her bad faith and clumsiness. Let all be organized for a durable 
peace. 
"Let the populations be consulted, so that no violent annexation should take 
place. With Russia at Constantinople, France on the Rhine, Austria diminished, and 
Prussia preponderating in Germany, where can any cause for disturbance or 
revolution be found in Europe? Would England dare to contend single-handed 
against Russia, Prussia, and France? We cannot admit such a thing. If, however, it 
did happen, if Great Britain should venture to commit such an imprudence, she 
might receive a severe lesson. Gibraltar, Malta, the Ionian Islands are a security for 
her keeping quiet; those are the weak points of her armor. But though she will be 
reduced to a sterile agitation in her island, and be compelled to be a passive 
spectator of what takes place on the continent, she will barely be permitted to offer 
her opinion, thanks to the five or six thousand men she will send to Syria. 
"The moment has arrived when our policy must be clearly defined. It is in Syria 
that France must pacifically conquer the frontier of the Rhine, by cementing the 
alliance of Russia. But we must take care not to give Russia an unlimited extension. 
The provinces north of the Bosphorus must suffice for her ambition. Asia Minor 
must remain neutral ground. Were it, indeed, possible to look at a practical subject 
in a poetical and practical light, we would say our choice is made; a man has just 
come forward who seems the incarnation of the idea we should wish to see 
represented in Syria—Abd-el-Kader. He is sufficiently orthodox as a Moslem to 
conciliate the Mussulman population; he is sufficiently civilized to distribute justice 
equally to all; he is attached to France by ties of gratitude; he would protect the 
Christians, and reduce to obedience the turbulent tribes ever ready to disturb the 
repose of Asia Minor. To make of Abd-el-Kader the Syrian Emir would be a noble 
reward for our prisoner's services." 
The critical remarks on Edmond About's Reproduced from the newspaper 
pamphlet were written on August 3, 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6025, August 16, 1860 

=====第468页=====
444 
Karl Marx 
THE PAPER TAX.— THE EMPEROR'S LETTER 
London, Aug. 7, 1860 
The great faction fight of the session, which came off yesterday 
night, in a full House of Commons, proved a failure in the 
scenical sense, although it was a triumph in the ministerial sense. 
Mr. Gladstone's resolutions3 for reducing the customs duties on 
paper to the level of the excise duties—some slight charge being 
added to the customs duties to counterbalance the incidental 
inconveniences of the excise duty—were carried by a majority of 
33. But the House of Commons had it all their own way. There 
was the arena, and there were the gladiators, with their retainers 
behind them, but there was no audience worth mentioning. Before 
the battle had commenced, its issue was known and its bulletin 
promulgated. Hence the indifference of the public. The coalized 
parties, forming the so-called "Great Liberal Party,"327 notorious­
ly sway a Parliamentary majority, so that a defeat of the Cabinet 
could only have proceeded from a split in the ranks of the 
majority. This point, however, had been settled in Lord Palmer-
ston's official residence, whither he had summoned the liberal 
members of all shadows and shades. The resolution itself 
proceeded from the Manchester fraction of the Ministry, Lord 
Palmerston having only been able to retain the support of Messrs. 
Gladstone and Milner Gibson by pledging himself to raise Mr. 
Gladstone's resolution to the rank of a Cabinet question. He had 
betrayed them by his management of the Paper Duty Abolition 
bill. This time they had bound him over to a certain line of 
conduct. The regular Whigs were the only fraction of the majority 
a Moved on August 6, 1860. See The Times, No. 23692, August 7, I860.— Ed. 

=====第469页=====
The Paper Tax 445 
suspected of hatching treasonable designs; but the harsh voice of 
their master and the menace suspended over their heads of a new 
dissolution of Parliament sufficed to bring them back to the stern 
behests of discipline. Thus many hours before the curtain was 
drawn, all London had become acquainted with the exact result of 
the party trial, and, save the habitués of the Strangers' Gallery, 
nobody cared to assist the sham-fight at St. Stephen's. 328 It was 
indeed a rather dull affair, enlivened only by the sweeping oratory 
of Mr. Gladstone, and the highly finished pleading of Sir Hugh 
Cairns.3  Mr. Gladstone tried to represent the opposition raised 
against his bill as a last desperate stand made by Protection against 
Free Trade. When he sat down, the cheers that drowned his 
concluding words, seemed to hail him as the true chief of the 
liberal party, of which Lord Palmerston is the by no means 
beloved despot. Sir Hugh Cairns, on the part of the Conservatives, 
proved by close argumentation, and with great analytical power, 
that the reduction of the customs duty on paper to the level of 
the excise duty was in no way stipulated for by the commercial treaty 
with France. His antagonist, Sir Richard Bethell, the Whig 
Attorney-General, had the bad taste to show ill temper at the success 
of his rival, to sneer at Sir Hugh's "forensic eloquence," b and thus to 
draw upon his own devoted head a regular volley of Tory 
interruptions. 
The great faction fight of the session being over, whole flocks of 
honorable members are sure to desert the House, so that Lord 
Palmerston, by the sheer process of exhaustion, may now succeed 
in passing any little bill he has set his heart upon—i.e. the 
monstrous Indian bill for the amalgamation of the local European 
army with the British army.329  If any new striking proof were 
wanted of the depth of degradation Parliamentarism has reached 
in England, this Indian bill and the treatment it received in the 
House of Commons would afford it. Every man in the House, of 
any authority on, and any experience in, Indian affairs, had 
opposed the bill. The majority themselves confessed not only their 
complete ignorance, but they betrayed their dark suspicions as to 
the ulterior views of the f ramers of the bill. They could not but 
confess that the bill had been smuggled into the House under 
false pretenses; that the most important papers indispensable for a 
a Hugh Cairns' speech in the House of Commons on August 6, 1860, The 
Times, No. 23692, August 7, I860.— Ed. 
b Richard Bethell's speech in the House of Commons on August 6, 1860, The 
Times, No. 23692, August 7, I860.— Ed. 

=====第470页=====
446 Karl Marx 
just appreciation of the case had been fraudulently withheld; that 
the Indian Minister3 had introduced the bill despite the unanim­
ous dissent of the Indian Council, a dissent which, by an open 
infraction of the new constitution bestowed upon India in 1858,330 
he had omitted to lay on the table of the House; and lastly, that 
the Cabinet had not even attempted at showing any reason for 
driving, toward the end of the session, and after the withdrawal of 
every measure of import, with such indecent haste, a bill through 
the House which, in point of fact, radically changed the British 
Constitution by an immense addition of patronage to the crown, 
and by the creation of an army that, in every practical respect, 
would become independent of the vote of supplies. Still, this bill 
may now be carried, the chiefs of both factions having, as it 
appears, come to a secret understanding with the Court. 
Louis Napoleon's letter to his beloved Persigny continues to 
form the chief topic of conversation here and on the other side of 
the Channel. It seems that, in the first instance, the protest of the 
Porte against the Syrian expedition, as originally planned between 
France and Russia,831  met with a strong support on the part of 
Austria and Prussia, while Lord Palmerston, having just singled 
out, during the fortification debates, Louis Napoleon as the great 
object of British suspicion, could not but throw his weight into the 
balance of Turkey and the German Powers. It appears, moreover, 
that the Man of December got somewhat frightened, not only at 
the dictatorial tone assumed by Russia, but still more at the sneers 
circulated in the saloons of the "anciens partis" b and the low 
murmurs audible in the Faubourgs in regard to the "alliance 
Cosaque."c 
To make the latter palatable to Paris, a far greater complication 
of things must have been arrived at. Under these distressing 
circumstances, and in an evidently uneasy state of mind, Louis 
Napoleon penned his letter, several passages of which are highly 
perfumed with the scent of the ludicrous. 
An Englishman may indulge in a downright laugh at the phrase 
addressed by Louis Napoleon to Lord Palmerston: "Let us 
understand one another in good faith like honest men as we are, and 
not like thieves who desire to cheat each other"; but the exquisitely 
bad taste blended with the power of ridicule of the original French 
"entendons nous loyalement comme d'honnêtes gens, que nous sommes, et 
a Sir Charles Wood.— Ed. 
b Old parties. — Ed. 
c Cossack alliance. — Ed. 

=====第471页=====
The Paper Tax 447 
non comme Des Larrons qui veulent se duper mutuellement,"a  can only 
be appreciated by a French ear. No Frenchman can read that 
passage without being reminded of a similar sentence occurring in 
the famous play of "Robert Macaire." 332 
I subjoin some data for a comparison between French and 
English state expenditure.15 According to the provisional or 
prospective budget, the total revenue of France for the year 1860 
is estimated at 1,825 millions of francs, or £73,000,000 sterling, 
derived from the following sources: 
I. Direct Taxes, land, house, personal patentes  £18,800, 000 e 
II. Enregistrement (stamps and domaines)  14,300,000 
III. Woods, forests, and fisheries  1,500,000 
IV. Customs and tax on salt 9,100,000 
V. Contributions indirectes (excise, etc.) 19,500,000 
VI. Post-Office 2,300,000 
VII. Miscellaneous 7,500,000 
The English revenue for 1859 (the financial accounts for 1860 
have not yet been issued) was as follows, in both cases round 
numbers only being given: 
I. Taxes (including income tax) £10,000,000 
II. Stamps 8,250,000 
III. Crown Lands 420,000 
IV. Customs 24,380,000 
V. Excise 18,500,000 
VI. Post-Office 3,200,000 
VII. Miscellaneous 2,100,000 
The comparative public expenditure of the two countries was as 
follows: „ T7 i j 
France. England. 
Interest on the debt £22,400,000 £28,500,000 
Army and Navy 18,600,000 22,500,000 
Civil List of the Crown  1,000,000  400,000 
Cost of collecting the Revenue 8,000,000 4,500,000 
Other expenses 23,000,000 9,000,000 
Total £73,000,000 £65,000,000 
a Napoleon Ill's letter to Jean Persigny of July 25, 1859, "Paris, Ier  août", Le 
Constitutionnel, No. 215, August 2, 1860.— Ed. 
h The tables are taken from the article "Taxation in France", The Economist, 
No. 884, August 4, 1860, p. 840.— Ed. 
c The New-York Daily Tribune gives 18,000,000—a misprint.— Ed. 

=====第472页=====
448 Karl Marx 
From the last tabular statement it will be seen that the interest 
on the public debt is in Bonapartist France rapidly mounting to 
the British level; that Continental centralization keeps the Army 
and Navy at a cheaper cost than insular oligarchy; that one Louis 
Napoleon wants for his private expenses twice and a half more 
money than a British sovereign; and finally, that in a bureaucratic 
country, like France, the cost of collecting the revenue grows at a 
rate disproportionate to the amount of the revenue  itself. 
Written on August 7, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6030, August 22, 1860 

=====第473页=====
449 
Frederick Engels 
GARIBALDI'S MOVEMENTS 
London, August 8, 1860 
The crisis in Southern Italy is at hand. If we are to trust the 
French and Sardinian papers, 1,500 Garibaldians have landed on 
the coast of Calabria and Garibaldi is hourly expected.3 But even if 
this news be premature, there can be no doubt that Garibaldi will 
have transferred the seat of war to the Italian mainland before the 
middle of August. 
To understand the movements of the Neapolitans, it must be 
kept in mind that there are two opposing undercurrents at work 
in their army: the moderate Liberal party, officially in power, and 
represented by the Ministry, and the Absolutist camarilla, to which 
most of the chiefs of the army are attached. The orders of the 
Ministry are counteracted by the secret orders of the Court and by 
the intrigues of the generals. Hence conflicting movements and 
conflicting reports. To-day we hear that all royal troops are to 
leave Sicily, to-morrow we find them preparing a fresh base of 
operations at Milazzo. This state of things is inherent to all 
half-and-half revolutions; the year 1848 furnishes examples of it 
all over Europe. 
While the Ministry offered to evacuate the island, Bosco, who 
seems to be the only resolute man among the parcel of old women 
bearing Neapolitan generals' epaulettes, quietly attempted to turn 
the north-eastern corner of the island into a stronghold from 
which the reconquest of the island might be attempted, and for 
this purpose marched to Milazzo with a picked force of the best 
men to be had in Messina. Here he fell in with Medici's brigade of 
a See "Affaires des deux Sidles", Le Constitutionnel, No. 220, August 7, 
I860.—  Ed. 

=====第474页=====
450 Frederick Engels 
Garibaldians. He did not, however, venture any serious attack on 
them, until Garibaldi himself had been sent for and brought some 
reenforcements. Here the insurgent  chief,  in his turn, attacked the 
royals, and, after an obstinate fight of above twelve hours' 
duration, defeated them completely. The forces engaged on either 
side were about equal, but the position held by the Neapolitans 
was very strong. However, neither positions nor men could 
withstand the dash of the insurgents, who drove the Neapolitans 
right through the town into the citadel. Here nothing remained to 
them but to capitulate, and Garibaldi allowed them to embark, but 
without arms. After this victory, he marched at once to Messina, 
where the Neapolitan general consented to give up the outer forts 
of the town on condition of not being molested in the citadel. This 
citadel being unable to hold more than a few thousand men, will 
never be a serious obstacle to any offensive operations of 
Garibaldi, and he therefore did quite right in sparing the town of 
a bombardment, which would inevitably have followed any attack. 
As it is this series of capitulations at Palermo, Milazzo, and 
Messina, must do more to destroy the confidence of the royal 
troops in themselves and in their chiefs, than twice as many 
victories. It has become a matter of course that the Neapolitans 
always capitulate before Garibaldi. 
From this moment it became possible for the Sicilian Dictator to 
think of landing on the continent. His steam navy does not as yet 
appear to be sufficiently large to warrant him in attempting a 
landing further north, somewhere within six or eight marches 
from Naples, say in the Bay of Policastro. He, therefore, seems to 
have decided on crossing the Straits where they are narrowest, 
that is, on the extreme north-eastern point of the island, north 
of Messina. On this point he is said to have concentrated about 
1,000 vessels, very likely most of them fishing and coasting felucas, 
such as are common on those coasts, and if the landing of the 
1,500 men under Sacchi be confirmed, they will form his 
advanced guard. The point is not the most favorable for a march 
on Naples, as it is the part of the mainland furthest away from the 
Capital; but if his steam navy cannot transport something like 
10,000 men at once, he cannot select any other, and then he has at 
least this advantage, that the Calabrians will at once join him. If, 
however, he can cram some ten thousand men on board his 
steamers, and can rely on the neutrality of the Royal navy (which 
appears resolved not to fight against Italians), then he may still 
land a few men in Calabria as a feint, and himself go with the 
main body to the Bay of Policastro, or even to that of Salerno. 

=====第475页=====
Garibaldi's Movements 451 
The force at present at the disposal of Garibaldi consists of five 
brigades of regular infantry, of four battalions each; of ten 
battalions of Cacciatori dell' Etna3; of two battalions of Cacciatori 
delle Alpi,b  the élite of his army; of one foreign (now Italian) 
battalion under Col. Dunne, an Englishman; of one battalion of 
engineers; one regiment and a squadron of cavalry; and four 
battalions of field artillery; in all 34 battalions, four squadrons, 
and 32 guns, equal to some 25,000 men in all, of whom, rather 
more than one-half are North Italians, the rest Italians. The 
whole, nearly, of this force might be used for the invasion of 
Naples, as the new formations now being organized will soon 
suffice to observe the citadel of Messina, and protect Palermo and 
the other towns from insult. Still, this force looks very small when 
compared with what the Neapolitan Government disposes of on 
paper. 
The Neapolitan army consists of three regiments of the guard, 
fifteen ditto of the line, four foreign regiments, each of two 
battalions, or together 44 battalions; of 13 battalions of chasseurs; 
of nine regiments of cavalry, and two of artillery — in all 57 
battalions, and 45 squadrons, on the peace-footing. Inclusive of 
the 9,000 gens d'armes, who also are organized on a perfectly 
military footing, this army, on the peace-footing, counts 90,000 
men. But, during the last two years, it has been raised to the full 
war complement; third battalions of regiments have been orga­
nized, the depot squadrons have been put to active service, the 
garrison troops have been completed; and this army now consists, 
on paper, of above 150,000 men. 
But what an army is this! Externally fine to look at for a 
martinet, there is no life, no spirit, no patriotism, no fidelity in it. 
It has no national military traditions. When Neapolitans fought as 
such, they were always defeated. Only in the wake of Napoleon 
were they ever associated with victory. It is not a National army. It 
is a purely Royal army. It was raised and organized for the 
express and exclusive purpose of keeping down the people. And 
even for that it appears unfit; there are plenty of anti-royalist 
elements in it, and they now break forth everywhere. The 
sergeants and corporals, especially, are Liberals almost to a man. 
Whole regiments shout "Viva Garibaldi!" No army ever under­
went such disgrace as this one did from Calatafimi to Palermo; 
and if the foreign troops and some Neapolitans fought well at 
a Etna riflemen.— Ed. 
b Alpine riflemen.— Ed. 

=====第476页=====
452 Frederick Engels 
Milazzo, it is not to be forgotten that these picked men form but a 
small minority of the army. 
Thus it is almost certain that, if Garibaldi lands with a force 
sufficient to obtain a few successes on the continent, no 
concentration of Neapolitan masses will be able to oppose him 
with any chance of success; and we may next expect to hear that 
he is continuing his triumphal career, with 15,000 men against 
tenfold odds, from the Scilla to Naples. 
Written about August 7, 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6031, August 23, 1860; 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1592, August 28, 1860 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第477页=====
453 
Karl Marx 
[THE NEW SARDINIAN LOAN.—THE IMPENDING FRENCH 
AND INDIAN LOANS] 
London, Aug. 14, 1860 
The new Sardinian loan of £6,000,000 has been closed, and 
three times the sum required is said to have been subscribed. Thus 
it appears that the bonds of the new Italian Kingdom are rising in 
the market at the very time that Austria is struggling in vain with 
a debt whose magnitude ought to be measured not by the 
resources of the country, but by the weakness of its Government, 
and while Russia, mighty Russia, having been driven from the 
European loan market, was forced to recur again to its own 
paper-money machinery. Still, even in regard to Sardinia, the new 
loan reminds us of the ugly fact that in modern times almost the 
first act in a people's struggle for freedom or independence seems, 
by some monstrous fatality, to consist in contracting a new 
servitude. Is every public debt not a mortgage saddled upon the 
industry of a whole people, and a curtailment of its freedom? 
Does it not give rise to a new set of invisible tyrants, known under 
the name of public creditors? However that may be, if the French, 
in less than a decade, have almost doubled their public debt in 
order to remain slaves, the Italians must be allowed to incur the 
same liabilities in order to become freemen. 
Piedmont proper, exclusive of the provinces newly added,333 was 
in 1847 taxed to the amount of £3,813,452, while this year it will 
have to pay £6,829,000.a It has been stated by English papers, The 
Economist, for instance, that the commerce of Piedmont, con­
sequent upon the liberal changes introduced into its  tariff,  had also 
greatly increased, and in illustration of this progress we are treated 
to the following figures: 
In 1854 the imports were only £12,497,160 
In 1857 they were 19,123,040 
a Marx took all the data from The Economist, No. 885, August 11, 1860, 
pp. 867-68.— Ed. 

=====第478页=====
V 
454 Karl Marx 
In 1854 the exports were £8,595,280 
In 1857 they increased to 14,050,040 a 
Now, I beg to remark that this increase is more apparent than 
real. The leading articles of Sardinian export consist of silk, silk 
manufactures, twine, spirits, and oil; but it is generally known that 
during the first three quarters of 1857 the prices of all those 
articles had assumed a most bloated aspect, and would, con­
sequently, greatly swell the sum total of the Sardinian commercial 
returns. The official statistics of the Kingdom give, moreover, the 
values only, not the quantities of the articles exported and 
imported, so that the figures for the year 1857 may be altogether 
exceptional. No public accounts for the years 1858-60 having as 
yet been issued, it remains to be seen whether or not the 
commercial crisis in 1858 and the Italian war in 1859 have 
checked the industrial progress of the country. The following 
tabular statements, showing the official estimates of the revenue 
and expenditure for the current year (1860) of Sardinia proper, 
afford evidence that part of the new loan will be employed to 
cover the deficit, while another part of it is wanted for new 
preparations for war: 
Sardinian Revenue for 1860. 
Customs £2,411,824 
Land-tax, house-tax, stamps, etc 2,940,284 
Railroads and telegraphs 699,400 
Post-Office  242,000 
Fees received at Foreign Office 12,400 
Fees received at Home Office 21,136 
Profits on some branches of Public Instruction 580 
Mint 6,876 
Miscellaneous 193,888 
Extraordinary resources 301,440 
Total £6,829,828 
Sardinian Expenditure for 1860. 
Finance Department £4,331,676 
Public Justice 243,816 
Foreign Affairs 70,028 
Public Instruction 117,744 
Ministry of the Interior 407,152 
Public Works 854,080 
a The New-York Daily Tribune has 19,050,040 instead of 14,050,040.— Ed. 

=====第479页=====
The New Sardinian Loan 455 
Military expenditure £2,229,464 
Marine expenditure 310,360 
Extraordinary expenses  1,453,268 
Total £10,017,588 
Comparing the expenditure amounting to £10,017,588 to the 
revenue of £6,829,828, we find a deficit of £3,187,760. On the 
other hand the newly acquired provinces are estimated to yield an 
annual revenue of £3,435,552, and to cost an annual expenditure 
of £1,855,984, so that they would leave a clear surplus of 
£l,600,000.a According to this calculation, the deficit of the whole 
kingdom of Sardinia, including the newly acquired provinces, 
would be reduced to £1,608,282. It is only just that Lombardy and 
the Duchies should pay part of the expenses Piedmont has 
incurred in the Italian war; but, in the run of time, it might prove 
a highly dangerous experiment to charge taxes upon the new 
provinces, almost twice as large as their cost of administration 
requires, with a single view to relieving the exchequer of the old 
provinces. 
People conversant with the undercurrents of the Paris money 
market continue to give out that another French loan is looming 
in a not remote future. The only thing wanted is a specious 
opportunity for raising the wind. The emprunt de la paix, h as you 
know, has proved a failure. Partant pour la Syrie™ 4 has till now 
been rehearsed on too small a scale to justify a fresh appeal to the 
enthusiasm of the grande nation. It is, therefore, presumed that, 
should nothing new turn up, and the prices of corn go on 
increasing, a loan will be raised on the pretext of providing against 
the possible disasters of dearth. In connection with French 
finances it may be remarked as a curious fact, that Mr. Jules 
Favre, who dared to predict in the midst of the Corps Législatif the 
impending crash of the Imperial Exchequer, 0 has been elected 
Bâtonnier of the Paris Bar. The French advocates, as you are 
aware, have from the times of the old monarchy saved some 
tatters of their ancient feudal constitution. They still form a sort of 
corporate body, called the Barreau, the yearly elected chief of 
a This figure is cited by The Economist, p. 867. The exact figure is £1,579,568. 
Hence the figure £1,608,282 in the next sentence.— Ed. 
b The peace loan — a loan whose purpose was to increase military contingents. 
The question was debated in the Corps Législatif (see Le Moniteur universel, 
No. 117, April 27, 1859).— Ed. 
c Jules Favre's speech in the Corps Législatif on July 13, 1860, Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 195, July 15, I860.— Ed. 
16-130:5 

=====第480页=====
456 Karl Marx 
which, viz., the Bâtonnier, represents the order in its relations with 
the tribunals and the Government, at the same time that he 
watches over its internal discipline. Under the restoration, and 
under the following regime of the citizen King, 3 the election of the 
Paris Bâtonnier was always considered a great political act, 
involving a demonstration for or against the Ministry of the day. 
Mr. Jules Favre's election must, I believe, be considered the first 
anti-Bonapartist demonstration ventured upon by the Paris Bar, 
and consequently deserves to be chronicled among the events of 
the day. 
In yesterday's sitting of the House of Commons, before a House 
hardly large enough to make up a quorum, Sir Charles Wood, 
that true pattern of the genuine Whig place-hunter, carried a 
resolutionb empowering him to contract a new loan of Three 
Millions Sterling on behalf of the Indian Treasury. According to 
his statement, the Indian deficit was in 1858-59 (the financial year 
always beginning with and ending in April) £14,187,000, in 
1859-60 £9,981,000, and is estimated for 1860-61 at £7,400,000. 
Part of that deficit he promised to cover from the yield of Mr. 
Wilson's newly-introduced taxes—a very questionable prospect, 
after all—while the other part was to be provided for by the new 
loan of three millions. The public debt, which in 1856-57, the year 
before the Rebellion, amounted to £59,442,000, had now in­
creased to £97,851,000. At a still more rapid rate the interest on 
the debt had grown. From £2,525,000 in 1856-57 it had risen to 
£4,461,000 in 1859-60. Although the revenue had been forcibly 
expanded by the imposition of new taxes, still it could not keep 
pace with the expenditure which, even according to Mr. Charles 
Wood's own statement, was increasing in every direction, save that 
of Public Works. To make up for an outlay of three millions on 
fortified barracks, there has been put during the present, and will 
be put during the following year, "almost a perfect stop to public 
works and public buildings of a civic character." This "perfect 
stop"  Sir Charles seemed to consider one of the beauties of the 
system. Instead of 40,000, as in 1856-57, there are now kept 
80,000 European soldiers in India; and, instead of a native army 
of hardly 200,000, one of above 300,000 men. 
Written on August 14, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6035, August 28, 1860 
a Louis Philippe.— Ed. 
b Sir Charles Wood's resolution of August 13, 1860, The Times, No. 23698, 
August 14, I860.— Ed. 

=====第481页=====
457 
Frederick Engels 
THE SICK MAN OF AUSTRIA 
The Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria seems permitted to live 
only that he may prove the truth of the old Latin maxim, that he 
whom the gods mean to destroy they first make mad. From the 
beginning of the year 1859 he has done nothing but deliberately 
trample under foot every chance that was offered to him to save 
himself and the Austrian Empire. The sudden attack on Piedmont 
with a portion only of his forces—the superseding of Marshal 
Hess in the command of the army by the Emperor and his 
clique—the irresolution which led to the battle of Solferino—the 
sudden conclusion of peace at the very moment when the French 
had arrived before his strongest positions—the obstinate refusal of 
all concessions in the internal organization of the Empire until it 
was too late, form an unequaled series of foolish blunders to be 
committed by one individual in so short a time. 
But, as luck would have it, Francis Joseph had still another 
chance. The barefaced double-dealing of Louis Napoleon ren­
dered necessary that alliance between Prussia and Austria which 
the preceding humiliations of Austria, her daily increasing 
difficulties at home and abroad, had first rendered possible. The 
interviews of Baden and Teplitz335 sealed that alliance. Prussia, for 
the first time acting as the representative of the rest of Germany, 
promised her assistance in case Austria was attacked, not only by 
Italy, but by France also; while Austria promised to make 
concessions to public opinion, and change her internal policy. 
Here was indeed a hope for Francis Joseph. A fight with Italy 
single-handed he might not fear, even in case of troubles in 
Hungary, for his new policy was to be the best guaranty of 
security in that quarter. With a separate Constitution based upon 
16* 

=====第482页=====
458 Frederick Engels 
the one abolished in 1849, Hungary would have been satisfied; a 
liberal Constitution for the whole of the Empire would have 
fulfilled the present wishes of the German nucleus of the 
monarchy, and counteracted in a great measure the separate 
tendencies of the Slavonic provinces. The finances once under 
popular control, public credit would have recovered  itself,  and the 
same Austria, now weak, poor, prostrate, exhausted, and a prey to 
internal divisions, would have soon regained strength under the 
protection of the 700,000 bayonets which Germany held ready to 
defend her. To insure all this, but two things were required of 
Austria: to follow up a genuine liberal policy at home, sincerely 
and without reserve, and to remain on the defensive in Venice, 
abandoning the remainder of Italy to its fate. 
But neither the one nor the other, it appears, can or will Francis 
Joseph do. He can neither throw overboard his power as an 
absolute monarch, which is every day being dissolved more and 
more into vapor, nor can he forget that position of protector of 
the petty Italian tyrants, which he has already lost. Insincere, 
weak, and obstinate at the same time, he seems to fly from his 
internal difficulties to an aggressive war abroad, and rather than 
cement his Empire by the sacrifice of a power which is slipping 
from his hands, he appears to have thrown himself once more into 
the arms of his personal cronies, and to be preparing a descent 
into Italy which may end in the breaking up of the Austrian 
monarchy. 
There may or there may not be a note or other communication 
sent from Vienna to Turin, on the subject of Garibaldi's landing 
in Calabria; but it is quite probable that Francis Joseph has made 
up his mind to consider this landing a case for his intervention in 
favor of the King of Naples.3 Whether this be true, we shall soon 
see. But what can- be the cause of this sudden revulsion of 
Austrian policy? Has the recent fraternization with Prussia and 
Bavaria turned the head of Francis Joseph? It is not likely; for, 
after all, that fraternization of Teplitz was a humiliation for him, 
and a triumph for Prussia qnly. Does Francis Joseph intend to 
collect under his standard the armies of the Popeb and of the King 
of Naples before Garibaldi has shattered them to atoms and 
incorporated their Italian elements with his own followers? That 
would be a very insufficient motive. In any campaign whatever, 
these troops will want for nothing, while, in the position in which 
a Francis II.— Ed. 
b Pius  IX.—Erf. 

=====第483页=====
The Sick Man of Austria 459 
Austria will place herself by such a foolish aggression, she will 
want for everything. There can be no other cause for it than the 
state of internal Austrian politics. And here we have not to seek 
long. The Council of the Empire, reenforced by some of the most 
conservative and aristocratic elements of the different Provinces, 
and intrusted, in time of  peace,  with the control of the finances of 
the country, is about to discuss the question of popular representa­
tion and constitutions for the Empire and the single provinces 
composing it. The motions made to this effect by the Hungarian 
members have an overwhelming majority in the Committee, and 
will be passed in the same triumphant manner in the Council, in 
the face of the Government. In one word, the second Austrian 
Revolution seems to have set in. The Council of the Empire—a weak 
counterfeit of the French Notables—exactly as they did, declares 
itself incompetent, and calls for the States General.336 The 
Government, in the same financial difficulties as that of Louis 
XVI, and weaker still by the diverging tendencies of the various 
nationalities composing the Empire, is not in a position to resist. 
Concessions wrested from the Government are sure to be followed 
by fees and demands. The States General soon formed themselves 
into the National Assembly. Francis Joseph feels the ground 
tremble under his feet, and to escape from the impending 
earthquake will perhaps fly into a war. 
If Francis Joseph acts up to his menace, commencing a crusade 
for legitimacy in Naples and the Papal States, what will be the end 
of it? There is not a Power or State in Europe which has the 
slightest interest in the maintenance of the Bourbons, and if 
Francis Joseph interferes in their  behalf,  he will have to bear the 
consequences. Louis Napoleon is sure to cross the Alps in defense 
of non-intervention; and Austria, with the public opinion of all 
Europe dead against her, with ruined finances, insurrection in 
Hungary, and a brave but far outnumbered army, will be fearfully 
beaten. Perhaps she will receive her death-blow. As to Germany 
coming to her aid, it is perfectly out of the question. The Germans 
will most decidedly decline to fight either for the King of Naples 
or for the Pope. They will take care to have the territory of the 
Confederation respected (which both French and Italians will be 
but too glad to submit to), and if Hungary rises, they will look on 
quite as coolly. Nay, the German provinces of the Empire will, 
very likely, support the demands of the Hungarians, as they did in 
1848,  and demand a Constitution for themselves. The Austrian 
press,  restricted as it is by the Government, still shows unmistaka­
ble signs of the existence, even in Austria, of a widespread 

=====第484页=====
460 Frederick Engels 
sympathy with Garibaldi. The current of opinion has changed 
from the channel it followed last year; Venice is now considered a 
very bad kind of property, and the struggle of the Italians for 
independence, since it is carried on without French assistance, is 
looked on in a favorable light by the Viennese public. Francis 
Joseph will find it exceedingly difficult to make even his own 
German subjects take up the cause of the Bourbon of Naples, of 
the Pope, of the petty Dukes of Emilia. A people which is just 
entering on a revolution against absolutism, is not likely to stick up 
for the dynastic interests of its ruler. The Viennese have proved 
this before, and it is possible enough that the passage of the Po by 
the Austrian troops may become the signal for the use of more 
violent means by the movement party in Vienna as well as in 
Hungary. 
Written on August 16, 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6039, September 1, 1860 as 
a leading article; reprinted in the New-
York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1594, Sep­
tember 4, and in the New-York Weekly 
Tribune, No. 991, September 8, 1860 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第485页=====
461 
Karl Marx 
THE CROPS IN EUROPE 
London, August 21, 1860 
The more the season advances the gloomier become the harvest 
prospects and the fainter grow the hopes still founded on a 
possible return of fine weather. The character of the past Summer 
was altogether exceptional, not only throughout the United 
Kingdom, but over the whole of Northern Europe, Northern 
France, Belgium, and the Rhenish Provinces included. In regard 
to this country the season has been justly described in these words: 
"After the cold, backward Spring, June proved so extremely wet that in many 
districts turnips could not be sown, mangel-wurzel hoed, nor any of the usual 
operations of the period performed. Then, after about ten days of fine weather, 
the season became so unsettled that two days together without rain have been 
rather a surprise. But, in addition to the excess of moisture, the present, we may 
say the past Summer, has been remarkable for the absence of sunshine and the 
very low temperature which have prevailed even when there has been no rain."3 
The average fall of rain for the year being about 20 inches, and 
the fall of rain during the months of May and June having 
reached the figure of 11.17, it appears that these two months have 
given over half a year's supply of water. During the last week, at 
the commencement of which a favorable change seemed impend­
ing, the weather proved more unsettled and boisterous than ever, 
real deluges of rain being, on the 16th and 18th inst., accom­
panied by thunder-storms and the tempests of the south-west 
wind. Consequently the wheat prices at Mark Lane337 advanced 
yesterday about two shillings the quarter over the rates of last 
Monday's15 market. 
a "The Wet Summer", The Economist, No. 886, August 18, 1860, p. 899.— Ed. 
b August 13; see The Times, Nos. 23698 and 23704, August 14 and August 21, 
I860.—Ed. 

=====第486页=====
462 Karl Marx 
Hay-making has been already seriously interfered with and 
belated by the incessant wind, rain, and cold. The grass having 
been laid and constantly saturated with water, it is feared that 
much of its nutritive substance has been washed away, so that a 
great part of it will not do for fodder, but must be used for litter, 
and will thus prove a very serious loss, greatly increasing the 
consumption of Spring corn. Much of it is still to be gathered, and 
much is irretrievably lost. 
"There can be little doubt," says The Gardeners' Chronicle of Saturday last, "that 
the wheat crop generally is considerably injured. Of 140 reports received from as 
many correspondents in England and Scotland, no fewer than 91 declare the crop 
to be below the average, and if the chief wheat-growing districts be selected, it will 
be found that the proportion of unfavorable returns is quite as large. Thus, five 
out of six reports from Lincolnshire, three out of five from Norfolk and Suffolk, 
and all from the counties of Oxford, Gloucestershire, Wilts, Hants, and Kent, are 
unfavorable." 
A great deal of the wheat crop has rotted at the root before the 
grain was mature, and in many districts it has been blighted and 
mildewed. While wheat is thus attacked by the disease, and in 
many districts to a large extent, the potato disease, which 
commenced in 1845, continued with great virulence for the four 
subsequent years, and gradually abated since 1850, has reappeared 
in an aggravated form, not only in Ireland, but in many districts 
of England and the Northern Continent. 
The Freeman's Journal thus resumes the general harvest pros­
pects of Ireland: 
"The oat crop is generally looked upon as all but lost. Except in a few 
inconsiderable districts, it has not yet ripened; but remains perfectly green, and 
beaten to the ground by the violence of the weather. Wheat promises to share in the 
calamity which generally threatens the grain crops. Little of it has been yet cut, and 
this crop, the condition of which inspired the most sanguine expectations only a few 
weeks since, is now causing farmers the deepest concern. [...] With regard to the 
potato crop, the general opinion is, that if the present weather continues for another 
month, it must be inevitably lost."3 
According to the Wexford Independent, 
"the potato disease is progressing, and in some places fully one-third of the 
produce is found affected, irrespective alike of size and description, and in 
proportion to the time of planting." 
This much appears, therefore, certain: The general harvest will 
be much belated beyond its usual term, and the existing stores 
a Quotations from The Freeman's Journal were given in the article "The 
Harvest" in The Times, No. 23703, August 20, I860.— Ed. 

=====第487页=====
The Crops in Europe 463 
consequently be run short. The partial failure of hay, coupled with 
the potato disease, will press to an unwonted extent upon the 
cereals; and the yield of all sorts of corn, especially wheat, will fall 
far below the average. Till now, the imports from abroad, instead 
of showing an excess over the imports during the years 1858 and 
1859,  exhibit, on the contrary, a marked comparative decline. On 
the other hand, corn prices, although, on an average, they rule 
now 26 per cent higher than at the same period of last year, have 
as yet been kept down by the news of the plentiful harvests in 
America and Southern Russia, by the hope of a favorable turn in 
the weather, and by the extreme caution the late collapse in the 
leather trade had imposed upon all monetary transactions. The 
conclusion to which I am led by a comparison of the present 
prices with those of similar seasons since 1815, is, that the average 
price of wheat, which may be taken now to amount to 58/@59/ the 
quarter, will have to rise, in England at least, to 65/@70/. The 
effect of such a rise in the price of breadstuffs will be considerably 
aggravated by its coincidence with a progressive decline in the 
export trade of the country. From £63,003,159, which sum they 
realized during the six months ending June 30, 1859, the British 
exports have sunk to £62,019,989 during the corresponding 
period of I860,3 and, as I have shown in a former letter,b the 
contraction was mainly due to a decline in the sale of cotton goods 
and yarns, consequent upon the markets of Asia and Australia 
having been glutted. While the exports are thus falling off, the 
imports have considerably risen, if compared with the correspond­
ing period of 1859. We find, in fact, the imports for the five 
months ending May 31, 1859, £44,968,863; 1860, £57,097,638. 
This excess of imports over exports must necessarily aggravate 
the drain of bullion and the consequent unsettled state of the 
money market which characterizes all periods of failing harvests, 
and extraordinary purchases of foreign corn. If, in England, the 
effect of the imminent monetary pressure is not likely to stretch 
far beyond the sphere of political economy, it is quite another 
thing on the Continent, where serious political disturbances are 
almost unavoidable whenever a monetary crisis coincides with a 
failing harvest and a great increase of taxation. Already the most 
serious apprehensions are entertained at Paris, where the magis­
trate is just busied with buying up whole lots of old houses, in 
a The figures quoted here and at the end of the paragraph were given in The 
Economist, No. 886, August 18, 1860, p.  895.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 406-08.— Ed. 

=====第488页=====
464 Karl Marx 
order to have them pulled down, and thus cut out work for the 
" ouvriers." a The Paris prices of best wheat range at this moment as 
high, if not somewhat higher than the London prices, namely at 
60/6 to 61/. The last dodges by which Louis Bonaparte tried to 
divert the public mind, viz.: the Syrian expedition, the advance­
ment of Spain to a "great power," 338 the transactions with Prussia, 
and the attempts at interference with Garibaldi's progress, having 
all turned out dead failures, he must needs meet the dangers of a 
bad season, a monetary pressure and a stinted exchequer at the 
very moment when his political "prestige" is evidently at a 
considerable discount. If any proof for the latter assertion were 
wanted, is there not his letter to "Mon cher Persigny"? b™9 
Written on August 21, 1860 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  6043,  September 6, 1860; 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1595, September 7 and in 
the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 991, 
September 8, 1860 without the last 
paragraph Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 
a "Workmen".— Ed. 
b "My dear Persigny." — Ed. 

=====第489页=====
465 
Karl Marx 
[CORN PRICES.— EUROPEAN FINANCES 
AND WAR PREPARATIONS.—THE ORIENTAL QUESTION] 
London, Aug. 25, 1860 
The state of the weather having not improved during this week, 
a rise of 6 shillings per sack took place in the value of town-made 
flour, at Mark Lane yesterday, and orders for the purchase of 
nearly  1,000,000  quarters of produce were at once forwarded to 
foreign ports. Importers share now pretty generally the opinion I 
advanced in a late letter3  as to the inevitable further rise in the 
quotations of the grain market. The recent measures taken by 
France in regard to the corn trade bring that country into direct 
competition with the British corn merchant. You are aware that 
there exists in France a sliding scale, regulating the import and 
export duties on grain, and that this sliding scale varies for the 
eight different circles which the whole country is divided into with 
respect to the corn trade. Now, by a decree published in the 
Moniteur of the 23d inst., b this sliding scale has been altogether 
suspended. The decree enacts that grain and flour imported by 
land or by sea, in French or foreign vessels, shall, wherever they 
may come from, only pay, up to the 30th of September, 1861, the 
minimum of duties fixed by the law of the 15th of April, 1832c; 
also,  that vessels laden with grain and flour shall be exempt from 
tunnage dues; and finally, that vessels so laden leaving any foreign 
port at any date previous to the said 30th of September, 1861, 
shall only pay the said minimum, and shall be free from tunnage 
a See this volume, p.  461.—  Ed. 
b Le Moniteur universel, No. 235.—  Ed. 
c "Loi relative à l'importation et à l'exportation des céréales [le 15 avril 1832]", Le 
Moniteur universel, No. 109, April 18, 1832.— Ed. 

=====第490页=====
466 Karl Marx 
dues.  The minimum referred to, is 25 cents the hectolitre (about 
23/4 bushels).1 Consequently, while France in the years 1858 and 
1859 sent more wheat—2,014,923 quarters—and more flour— 
4,326,435 cwt. to England than any other country, it will now 
seriously compete with England in the purchase of grain in the 
foreign markets—the provisional suspension of the French sliding 
scale affording the wanted facilities for such competition. 
The two main markets of export which both England and 
France find themselves limited to are the United States and 
Southern Russia. In regard to the latter country, the news as to 
the state of the harvest is of the most contradictory character. On 
the one hand, it is asserted that the harvest is most plentiful; on 
the other, that heavy rains and high floods having damaged the 
crops in all parts of the Empire, the roads and corn-fields of the 
southern provinces had been greatly devastated by locusts, a 
scourge which made its first appearance in Bessarabia, and whose 
depredations it was vainly attempted to circumscribe within a 
limited area by an army of 20,000 men drawing a cordon around 
them. The ultimate extent of the disaster cannot, of course, be 
estimated, but at all events it must tend to accelerate the upward 
movement of food prices. Some London papers fancy that the 
drain of bullion inseparable from large and sudden corn imports 
may be counterbalanced in its usual effect upon the money market 
by the gold supplies from Australia. No notion could be more 
preposterous. We witnessed, during the crisis of 1857, a lower ebb 
of the bullion reserves than in any similar epoch before the 
discovery of Australia and California. On former occasions I have 
shown by incontrovertible facts and figures that the extraordinary 
gold imports into England since 1851 have been more than 
counterbalanced by extraordinary gold exports. There is, 
moreover, the fact that the bullion reserves in the Bank of 
England have, since 1857, not only not exceeded the average 
amount, but were continually falling off. While they amounted in 
August, 1858, to £17,654,506, they had declined to £16,877,255 
in August, 1859, and to £15,680,840 in August, 1860.b As the gold 
drain has not yet set in, this phenomenon may be accounted for 
by the circumstance that the prospect of a failing harvest is only 
beginning to operate, while, till now, the rate of interest has 
a "Foreign correspondence", The Economist, No. 887, August 25, 1860, 
p. 931.—  Ed. 
h "Bank Returns and Money Market", The Economist, No. 887, August 25, 
1860,  p. 934.— Ed. 

=====第491页=====
Corn Prices 467 
continued to be higher at London than at the other principal 
exchanges of the Continent, viz.: Amsterdam, Frankfort, Ham­
burg, and Paris. 
Continental Europe exhibits at this moment a very curious 
spectacle. France is known to labor under heavy financial 
difficulties, but she is creating armaments on a scale as gigantic, 
with an energy as untiring, as if she owned Aladdin's lamp. 
Austria totters on the very brink of bankruptcy, but, somehow or 
other, the money is found for feeding an immense army, and 
crowding the fortresses of the Quadrilateral3 with rifle cannon. 
And Russia, where all the monetary operations of the Government 
have failed, and the national bankruptcy is talked of as a probable 
event—where the army grumbles in consequence of arrears not 
paid, and even the loyalty of the Imperial Guard is put to a severe 
test, their pay having been withheld for the last five months— 
Russia, nevertheless, is pouring her troops down to the Black Sea, 
and holds 200 ships ready at  Nicolaieff,  in order to embark them 
for Turkey. The inability of the Russian Government to cope with 
the slave question, the money question, and the reviving Polish 
question, seems to have decided it to try war as a last resource of 
national soporification. The complaints arising from all parts of 
the Empire, and all ranks of Russian society, are consequently, by 
Government order, drowned in the fanatical cry of revenge for 
the poor, down-trodden Christians of Turkey. Day by day the 
Russian press teems with illustrations and demonstrations as to the 
necessity of an intervention in Turkey. The following extract from 
the Invalid h may be considered a fair sampleM0. 
"The Oriental question has reached a stage which is certain to keep it before 
the Powers for a long time to come, and, as it now engrosses the attention of all 
Europe, it would ill become us to leave it undiscussed in our columns. Those only 
who are indifferent to the interests of humanity can allow this topic to pass by 
unnoticed. We, however, are obliged not only to relate the details of Oriental 
occurrences, but also to allude to the eventualities of the future, especially as it 
behooves us to show the public what measures must be taken in order to do away 
with such an unnatural state of things, forming, as it does, the disgrace of our 
century and civilization. 
"Considering what acts of barbarism the Turks are allowed to commit, we are, 
in deference to truth and justice, compelled to acknowledge that Europe must be 
held accountable for the origin and consequences of Mussulman fanaticism. We will 
not hesitate to speak out frankly. What were the motives that prompted Europe to 
engage in an unjust war against Russia in 1853-4? Europe herself put forward two 
a Mantua, Peschiera, Verona and Legnago (on this see Engels, "Po and Rhine", 
present edition, Vol. 16).— Ed. 
b Russky Invalid.—Ed. 

=====第492页=====
468 Karl Marx 
objects as the grounds of the Crimean campaign3: One was, to thwart the power 
and ambition of Russia; the other to prevent the oppression of Christians by the 
Turks.  Europe, consequently, acknowledged the existence of such oppression, but 
in order to remove it, declared her determination to maintain the integrity of 
Turkey as a necessary condition of the balance of power. The war being at an end, 
diplomacy began to busy itself with the means for the attainment of this double 
object. The first step was to receive Turkey into the family of European Powers, 
and to protect her against the overweening interference of any one of their 
number. This being easy enough of accomplishment, one of the two objects was 
consequently secured. But how is it with the other? Have any guarantees been 
given for the protection of Christians against murder and every description of ill 
usage? Alas! Europe in this respect put her faith in words, papers, and documents, 
without any solid security being accorded for their fulfillment. As early as the 8th 
of August, 1854, when the cessation of hostilities was contemplated,6 the Porte was 
called upon to grant an equal share of religious rights to its Christian and 
Mussulman subjects.c The same demand was raised by the St. Petersburg Cabinet in 
the memorials of the 28th December, 1854d; and finally, the preliminary 
conditions of peace drawn up at Vienna on the 1st of February, 1856, and 
afterward embodied in the minutes of the first sitting of the Paris Congress, were 
made to include the following words: 'The rights of the rayahs will be protected, 
without prejudice, however, to the independence and sovereign dignity of the 
Sultan. Austria, France, Great Britain, and the Porte, are of accord respecting the 
maintenance of the Turkish Christians in the enjoyment of their political and 
religious rights; and they will request the consent of Russia to this proposition in 
the instrument of peace.' 
"The same object occupied the Congress in various other sittings, as may be 
seen from the minutes of the 28th of February, and of the 24th and 25th of 
March. In all this, it was desirous of attaining two objects mutually destructive of 
each other—to preserve the sovereign rights of the Sultan, and to place those of 
his Christian subjects under the guardianship of Europe. The Congress altogether 
forgot that the same rights of the Christians, which it was so desirous of 
establishing, had been conceded over and over again by the Porte in its previous 
treaties with Europe—treaties which, moreover, had already abolished the 
sovereign power of that monarch, who, as Europe now said, ought to be assisted in 
its maintenance. To establish a little harmony between these two contradictory 
points, the Sultan, while induced to issue the celebrated Hatti-Humayouni, was 
acknowledged to have acted from his own free will and sovereign inclination. So he 
had to promise that he would respect and increase the rights of his Christian 
subjects, and this promise was received into the treaty of peace, by way of guaranty 
for its fulfillment as one of its constituent parts. On these conditions, the Congress, 
in the 9th clause of the treaty, resigned all further interference with the internal 
affairs of Turkey. 
"But has the Congress really obtained any guaranty for the carrying out of the 
Hatti-Humayouni? Have any effective obligations been entered into by the Sultan? 
3 The words "as the grounds of the Crimean campaign" do not occur in the 
Russky Invalid.—Ed. 
b The Russky Invalid has here "and the famous Four Points drawn up".— Ed. 
c The Russky Invalid reads "the Porte was called upon to preserve the religious 
rights of all the Christians".— Ed. 
d The Russky Invalid has "The same demand was raised in the memorials of 
the 28th December, 1854, submitted to the St. Petersburg Cabinet." — Ed. 

=====第493页=====
Corn Prices 469 
Of this, nothing was provided. For, although the wisdom of the Hatti-Humayouni 
is much extolled in the treaty, that document, as all Europe predicted, has 
remained a dead letter. But, worse than this—Europe, in virtue of the new treaty, 
is deprived of all right of legal interference,3 even though the Hatti-Humayouni 
may never have been executed, and notwithstanding the perpetration of the most 
horrible atrocities only four years after its issue. [...] Quite recently, Russia warned 
all the Cabinets of Europe that the fanaticism of the Turks had diminished 
neither in zeal nor fierceness; that new outbreaks were soon to be expected, 
although, indeed, there had never been any interval of relaxation. But even then 
Europe was satisfied with the promises of the Porte, and indulged herself in the 
hope that the guilty parties would be punished, and law and order speedily 
restored. It needed the wholesale slaughter at the hands of these savages to effect a 
change in her opinions. Then at length Europe resolved to interfere,0  though not 
without such delay and circumlocution as would justify the belief that she intended 
to let the guilty ones escape. Everything was made to depend on the letter of the 
treaty of the 30th March, 1856; and, just as in the case of Italy last year, the 
sufferings of a people weighed nothing against the text of a diplomatic documenta 
"But our opinion on all this is very different. The treaty of Europe with 
Turkey, in our eyes, guarantees the principles of humanity, religion, and 
civilization. If Turkey violates these principles, she alone brings upon herself the 
interference of Europe.e 
"Until the year 1856, the Powers of Europe, in virtue of several treaties 
concluded with the Porte, owned a legal right of remonstrance respecting the 
position of the Christian rayahs. To-day, however, it may be questioned whether or 
not this right has been abrogated by the treaty of the 30th March, 1856. Has 
Europe resigned the privileges of protecting its co-religionists? It has if it ever 
reckoned upon the execution of the Hatti-Humayouni, of the 18th February; if it 
ever believed that reforms promised are one and the same with reforms carried 
out; if it ever hoped that the customs, passions, and laws of the Mussulmansf  are 
capable of a change. But, of course, Europe never was, never could be, of that 
opinion. Carried away by the belief that the integrity of the Ottoman Empire is a 
sine qua non for the balance of power, she allowed the Sultan to enter into her 
family of States. But this was only accorded on the condition that Turkey, 
dissevering herself from Mussulman traditions, should become European in her 
institutions; that a sword should no longer be the only law-giver between believers 
and unbelievers; that the Christians should no longer be the slaves of their masters 
and the property of the royal rayahs cease to form the common plundering-ground 
of Mussulmans. This, indeed, was the leading idea of Europe in 1856. With all its 
wrath against Russia, the natural consequence of a sanguinary and unjust war, it 
did not release the Porte from its previous obligations; but, on the contrary, 
demanded a progressive improvement in the situation of the Christians. To secure 
the attainment of this object was the only purpose of the common protectorate of 
Europe over the Porte and for this price alone Europe guaranteed the integrity of 
the Sultan's dominions. Without this, neither the war nor the peace would have been 
justifiable. Without this, Turkey would never have been received into the family of 
a The Russky Invalid has "mediation" instead of "legal interference".— Ed. 
b The Russky Invalid has "Mussulmans".— Ed. 
c The Russky Invalid has "mediate".— Ed. 
d The Russky Invalid has "against the letter of the Vienna treaties".— Ed. 
e The Russky Invalid has "the mediation and its consequences".— Ed. 
f The Russky Invalid has "laws of the Koran".— Ed. 

=====第494页=====
470 Karl Marx 
Powers, nor protected in the integrity of her possessions. The two conditions are so 
intimately connected that they cannot be separated; every one can see that, who 
wishes to see at all. 
"The form of the condition, it is true, might have been less effective than it is; if 
the letter of the treaty ruled supreme. Europe, in virtue of the 9th clause, has 
formally resigned her right of interference3 in the internal affairs of Turkey; but 
even in this clause mention is made of the Hatti-Humayouni of the 18th February, 
in accordance with which the Christians are to be placed on an equal footing of 
right with the Mussulmans. It is but in harmony with the laws of sound logic to 
infer, that if the Hatti-Humayouni has been disregarded, the 9th clause falls to the 
ground. 
"In vain Turkey now affects to quell the latest outbreak in Syria. That 
outbreak was unavoidable, considering that the situation of the Christians has not 
been ameliorated, but on the contrary, rendered worse than before. In vain 
England strives to prevent the interference3 of Europe; it is just possible she has 
her own policy, and is swayed by political and commercial motives, the justice and 
importance of which we do not care to consider; but she cannot base her objections 
on the 9th clause of the Paris Treaty. [...] In vain Europe seeks to conceal the fact 
of her interference, under the plea that it has been undertaken in consequence of a 
wish of the Sultan. We say that all this is in vain; and although Ilion did not believe 
in the prophecies of Cassandra, we have at least the satisfaction of knowing that 
Ilion was destroyed." 
Written on August 25, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6046, September 10, 1860 
a The Russky Invalid has "mediation".— Ed. 
b The Russky Invalid has "In vain Turkey now vigorously opposes mediation".— 
Ed. 

=====第495页=====
471 
Frederick Engels 
GARIBALDIS PROGRESS 
As events develop themselves they begin to give us an insight 
into the plan which Garibaldi had prepared for the liberation of 
Southern Italy, and the more we see of it the more we admire the 
vastness of its proportions. Such a plan could not have been 
conceived, or its execution attempted in any country but Italy, 
where the National party is so perfectly organized, and so 
completely under the control of the one man who has drawn his 
sword with brilliant success for the cause of Italian unity and 
independence. 
The plan was not confined to the liberation of the Kingdom of 
Naples only; the Papal States were to be attacked simultaneously, 
so as to find occupation for Lamoricière's army and the French at 
Rome, 341 as well as for Bombalino's3 troops. About the 15th of 
August, 6,000 volunteers transferred gradually from Genoa to the 
Gulf of Oranges (Golfo degli Aranci), on the north-east coast of 
the Island of Sardinia, were to cross over to the Papal coast, while 
at the same time the insurrection in the various Provinces of the 
Neapolitan Continent was to break out, and Garibaldi was to cross 
the Straits of Messina into Calabria. Some reported expressions of 
Garibaldi's as to the cowardice of the Neapolitans, and the 
intelligence received by the last steamer that he had entered 
Naples, and been triumphantly received there, render it probable 
that an insurrection in the streets of that city, which the flight of 
the King rendered unnecessary, was a part of the plan. 
The landing in the Papal States, as is already known, was 
prevented partly by Victor Emmanuel's representations, partly and 
a Francis II.— Ed. 

=====第496页=====
472 Frederick Engels 
principally by Garibaldi's convincing himself that these men were 
not in a fit state to undertake an independent campaign. He 
accordingly took them to Sicily, left part at Palermo, sent the 
remainder round the island in two steamers to Taormina, where 
we shall find them again presently. In the mean time the 
Neapolitan movements in the provincial towns took place as 
agreed upon, and in a manner which showed both how well the 
revolutionary party was organized, and how much the country was 
ripe for an outbreak. On the 17th of August, the insurrection 
broke out at Foggia, in Apulia. The dragoons, forcing the garrison 
of the town, joined the people. General Flores, commanding the 
district, sent two companies of the 13th Regiment who, on arrival, 
did likewise. Then did Gen. Flores come  himself,  accompanied by 
his staff;  but he could do nothing and had to leave again. This 
proceeding clearly shows that Flores himself did not wish to offer 
serious resistance to the revolutionary party. Had he been in 
earnest he would have sent two battalions instead of two 
companies, and when he came  himself,  would have come at the 
head of as strong a force as he could muster, instead of coming 
with a few adjutants and orderlies. In fact, the circumstance alone 
that the insurgents allowed him to leave the town again is 
sufficient to show that there was at least some tacit understanding. 
Another movement broke out in the Province of Basilicata. Here 
the insurgents collected their forces at Carletto Perticara, a village 
on the River Lagni (this must be the place called Corleto by the 
telegrams). 
From this mountainous and remote district they marched to 
Potenza, the chief town of the Province, where they arrived, 6,000 
strong, on the 17th. The only resistance they found, was offered 
by about 400 gendarmes, who, after a short engagement, were 
dispersed, and afterward came in one by one to surrender. A 
provincial government was formed in the name of Garibaldi, and 
a prodictator installed.3  It is reported that the Royal Intendant 
(governor of the Province) accepts this office—another sign how 
hopeless the cause of the Bourbons is considered to be even by 
their own organs. Four companies of the Sixth Regiment of the 
line were sent from Salerno to put down this insurrection, but 
when they came to Auletta, about 23 miles from Potenza, they 
refused to march further, and cried Viva Garibaldi. These are the 
only movements of which any details have reached us. But we are 
further informed that other places have joined the insurrection; 
a See "Affaires d'Italie", Le Constitutionnel, No. 241, August 28, 1860.— Ed. 

=====第497页=====
Garibaldi's Progress 473 
for instance, Avellino, a town not 30 miles from Naples; 
Campobasso, in the Province of Molise (on the Adriatic), and 
Celenza in Apulia, for this must be the place called Cilenta in the 
telegrams; it is situated about half-way between Campobasso and 
Foggia; and now Naples itself is added to the number. 
While thus the Neapolitan provincial towns at least carried out 
their apportioned share of the work, Garibaldi was not idle. 
Scarcely returned from his trip to Sardinia, he made his final 
arrangements for crossing over to the continent. His army now 
consisted of three divisions, commanded by Türr, Cosenz, and 
Medici. The two latter, concentrated about Messina and the Faro, a 
were marched toward the northern coast of Sicily, between 
Milazzo and Faro, as if they were intended to embark there and 
land on the Calabrian coast, north of the Straits, somewhere about 
Palmi or Nicotera. Of Türr's division, the brigade Eber was 
encamped near Messina, the brigade Bixio had been sent to the 
interior, to Bronte, to repress some disorders. Both were at once 
ordered to Taormina, where, on the evening of the 18th of 
August, the brigade Bixio, along with the men brought from 
Sardinia, embarked on the two steamers, the Torino and Franklin, 
and some on transports taken in tow. 
About ten days previous Major Missori, with 300 men, had 
crossed the Straits and safely passed through the Neapolitans to 
the high and broken ground of Aspromonte. Here he was joined 
by other small bodies, thrown across the Straits from time to time, 
and by Calabrian insurgents, so that by this time he commanded a 
body of about 2,000 men. The Neapolitans had sent about 1,800 
men after his little band when landed, but these 1,800 heroes 
managed so as never to come up with the Garibaldians. 
On the 19th, at daybreak, Garibaldi's expedition (for he was on 
board himself) landed between Melito and Cape Spartivento, on 
the extreme southern end of Calabria. 
They found no resistance. The Neapolitans had been so 
completely deceived by the movements threatening ' a landing 
north of the Straits, that the country south of them was completely 
neglected by them. Thus 9,000 men were thrown across, beside 
the 2,000 got together by Missori. 
Having been joined by these, Garibaldi at once marched on 
Reggio,b which was occupied by four companies of the line and 
four of chasseurs. This garrison must, however, have received 
a Faro di Messina.— Ed. 
b Reggio di Calabria.— Ed. 

=====第498页=====
474 Frederick Engels 
some reenforcements, as some very severe fighting is reported to 
have taken place in or before Reggio on the 21st.3 After the 
storming of some outworks of Garibaldi, the artillery in the fort of 
Reggio refused to fire any longer, and Gen. Viale capitulated.b In 
this engagement Col. Deflotte (the Republican member for Paris 
in the French Legislative Assembly of 1851) was killed. 
The Neapolitan flotilla in the Straits distinguished itself by 
doing nothing. After Garibaldi had landed, a naval commander 
telegraphed to Reggio that it was impossible for the ships to offer 
any resistance, as he had with him eight large men-of-war and 
seven transports! No more did this flotilla oppose the passage by 
the division of Gen. Cosenz, which must have taken place on the 
20th or 21st, at the narrowest place of the Straits, between Scilla 
and Villa San Giovanni, on the very spot where both the ships and 
troops of the Neapolitans were most concentrated. Cosenz's 
landing was marked by a signal success. The two brigades 
Melendez and Biiganti (the Neapolitans say battalions instead of 
brigades), and the fort of Pezzo (not Pizzo, as some telegrams say; 
this place is situated far to the north, beyond Monteleone), 
surrendered to him, as it appears, without a blow. This is said to 
have taken place on the 21st, on which day also Villa San Giovanni 
was occupied after a short engagement. 0 
Thus in three days Garibaldi had made himself master of the 
whole coast of the Straits, including some of the fortified points; 
the few forts still occupied by Neapolitans were now useless to 
them. 
The two following days appear to have been occupied by the 
passage of the remainder of the troops and of the materiel—at 
least we do not hear of any further engagements until the 24th, 
when a severe contest is reported to have taken place at a place 
called in the telegrams Piale, which we do not find on the maps. It 
may be the name of some mountain torrent, the ravine formed by 
which might have served as a defensive position to the Neapoli­
tans.  This engagement is said to have been undecided. After some 
time the Garibaldians offered an armistice, which the Neapolitan 
commander referred to his General-in-Chief at Monteleone. But 
before an answer could arrive, the Neapolitan soldiers appear to 
have come to the conclusion that they had done quite enough for 
their King, and dispersed, leaving the batteries unoccupied. 
a Le Constitutionnel, No. 240, August 27, I860.— Ed. 
b Le Constitutionnel, No. 241, August 28, 1860.— Ed. 
c ibid.— Ed. 

=====第499页=====
Garibaldi's Progress 475 
The main body of the Neapolitans, under Bosco, appears 
during all this time to have quietly remained at Monteleone, some 
thirty miles from the Straits. They do not seem to have been very 
eager to fight the invaders, so Gen. Bosco went over to Naples to 
fetch six battalions of Chasseurs, which are, next to the Guards 
and foreign troops, the most reliable portions of the army. 
Whether these six battalions were themselves infected by the spirit 
of dejection and demoralization reigning in the Neapolitan army 
remains to be seen. Certain it is, that neither they nor any other 
troops have been able to prevent Garibaldi from marching 
victoriously, and probably unchecked, to Naples, to find that the 
Royal family had fled, and the gates of the city open to his 
triumphant entrance. 
Written about September 1, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6056, September 21, 1860 
as a leading article 

=====第500页=====
476 
Frederick Engels 
GARIBALDI IN CALABRIA 
We are now in possession of detailed information respecting the 
conquest of Lower Calabria by Garibaldi, and the entire dispersion 
of the Neapolitan corps charged with its defense. In this part of 
his triumphal career, Garibaldi has shown himself to be not only a 
brave leader and clever strategist, but also a scientific general. The 
attack, by main force, of a chain of coast-forts is an undertaking 
which requires not only military talent, but also military science; 
and it is gratifying to find that our hero, who never passed a 
military examination in his life, and can scarcely be said ever to 
have belonged to a regular army, was as much at home on this 
kind of battle-field as on any other. 
The toe of the Italian boot is formed by the mountain chain of 
Aspromonte, which ends in the peak of Montalto, about 4,300 feet 
high. From this peak, the waters flow toward the coast in a 
number of deep ravines, extending from Montalto as from a 
center, like the radii of a semicircle, the periphery of which is 
formed by the coast. These ravines, with the beds of their 
respective mountain torrents dried up in this season, are called 
fiumare, and form as many positions for a retreating army. They 
may indeed be turned by the Montalto, especially as there are 
bridle-paths and footpaths running along the crest of each spur 
and of the main chain of Aspromonte  itself;  but the complete 
absence of water on the high land would make it rather a difficult 
maneuver to do so in Summer with a large force. The spurs of the 
hill run down to the coast, where they descend toward the sea in 
steep and irregularly broken rocks. The forts guarding the straits 
between Reggio and Scilla are constructed partly on the beach, but 
more generally on low, projecting rocks close to the shore. The 
consequence is that they are all of them commanded and looked 
into by the more elevated rocks close to the rest, and although the 

=====第501页=====
Garibaldi in Calabria 477 
commanding points may be inaccessible to artillery, and mostly out 
of the range of old Brown Bess,342 so as to be considered of no 
consequence when the forts were erected, their importance has 
become decisive since the introduction of the modern rifle; they 
are mostly within its range, and thus they now do command the 
forts in reality. Under these circumstances, a forcible attack on 
these forts, despising the rules of regular sieges, was perfectly 
justified. What Garibaldi had to do was, evidently, to send a 
column along the high road which skirts the shore under the fire 
of the forts, for a feigned front attack on the Neapolitan troops; 
and to take another column over the hills as high up the fiumare 
as might be rendered necessary by the nature of the ground, or 
by the extent of front offered by any Neapolitan defensive 
position, thus turning both troops and fort, and having the 
advantage of the commanding position in every engagement. 
Accordingly, on the 21st August, Garibaldi sent Bixio, with part 
of his troops, along the coast toward Reggio, whilst he  himself, 
with a small detachment and the troops of Missori, which had 
rejoined him, went by the higher ground. The Neapolitans, eight 
companies, or about 1,200 men, occupied a fiumare just outside 
Reggio. Bixio, being the first to attack, sent one column to the 
extreme left on the sandy beach, while he himself advanced on the 
road. The Neapolitans very soon gave way; but their left wing, in 
the hills, held out against the few men of Garibaldi's advanced 
guard until Missori's men came up and drove them in. Then they 
retreated to the fort, which is situated in the middle of the town, 
and to a small battery on the beach. The latter was taken by a very 
gallant rush of three of Bixio's companies, who went in through 
an embrasure. The large fort was cannonaded by Bixio, who 
found two Neapolitan heavy guns, with ammunition, in this 
battery; but this would not have compelled it to surrender, had 
not Garibaldi's sharpshooters taken up the commanding hights, 
from which they could see and pick off the gunners in the 
batteries. This told; the artillerymen forsook the platforms, and 
ran into the casemates: the fort surrendered, the men partly 
joining Garibaldi, but mostly going home. While this was going on 
at Reggio, the attention of the Neapolitan steamers being engaged 
by this fight, by the destruction of the stranded steamer Torino, 
and by a sham embarcation of Medici's men in Messina, Gosenz 
succeeded in getting 1,500 men, in 60 boats, out of the Faro 
Lagore, and landing them on the north-west coast, between Scilla 
and Bagnara. 3 
a Bagnara Calabria.— Ed. 

=====第502页=====
478 Frederick Engels 
On the 23d, a small engagement took place near Salice,3  a little 
beyond Reggio; fifty Garibaldians, English and French, com­
manded by Col. De Flotte, defeated four times their number of 
Neapolitans. De Flotte fell on this occasion. On the same day, Gen. 
Brigand, who commanded a brigade in Lower Calabria under 
Viale, had an interview with Garibaldi as to the conditions of his 
passing over into the Italian camp; this interview, however, had no 
other result but to show that the Neapolitans were completely 
demoralized. From this moment, there was no longer any question 
as to victory, but only as to surrender. Briganti and Melendez, the 
chief of the second movable brigade of Lower Calabria, had taken 
up a position close to the coast, between Villa San Giovanni and 
Scilla, extending their left toward the hills near Fiumara-di-Muro. 
Their united forces might be computed at some 3,600 men. 
Garibaldi, placing himself in communication with Cosenz, who 
had landed in the rear of this body, drew a complete net round 
them and then quietly awaited their surrender, which took place 
on the 24th, toward evening. He kept their arms, and permitted 
the men to go home if they liked, which most of them did. The fort 
of Punta-di-Pezzo surrendered also, and the posts of the Alia 
Fiumare, Torre del Cavallo, and Scilla followed the example, 
discouraged as much by the rifle-shots from the commanding 
hights as by the general defection of the other forts and the troops 
in the field. Thus not only was the perfect command of both sides 
of the straits secured, but the whole of Lower Calabria conquered, 
and the troops sent to its defense taken prisoners and dismissed to 
their homes in less than five days. 
This series of defeats broke every capability of further resistance 
in the Neapolitan army. The officers of the remaining battalions 
of Viale, at Monteleone, came to the conclusion to defend their 
position for an hour, to save appearances, and then to lay down 
their arms. The insurrection in the other provinces made rapid 
progress; whole regiments refused to march against the in­
surgents, and desertions took place in bodies, even among the 
troops guarding Naples. And thus the road to Naples was finally 
opened to the hero of Italy. 
Written about September 6, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6058, September 24, 1860 
as a leading article 
a Saliche Calabria.— Ed. 

=====第503页=====
479 
Karl Marx 
BRITISH COMMERCE 
London, Sept. 8, 1860 
The Tribune was the first paper which called attention to the 
serious decline of the British export trade to the East Indies, a 
decline most conspicuous in the great staple articles, viz.: cotton 
goods and cotton yarns. 3 The reaction hence arising has begun to 
be felt in Lancashire and Yorkshire, at the very moment when the 
home market is contracting in consequence of a harvest which is 
full five weeks later than that of last year, and, despite the 
improving prospects since Thursday, the 30th of August, will, at 
all events, fall below an average yield. The British Chambers of 
Commerce have, consequently, taken the alarm, and assailed the 
central government with protests against the New Indian Customs' 
Act, by which the duty upon the staple imports from Great Britain 
was increased from 5 to 10 per cent.; that is to say, at a rate of 
100 per cent. The English press, which, till then, had cautiously 
abstained from touching this point, has thus at last been compelled 
to break through its reserve. The London Economist treats us to 
the "Trade of India", and "The Cause of its Depression."b Apart 
from the circumstance of The Economist being considered the first 
English authority in matters of this kind, its articles on India 
derive peculiar interest from their connexion with the writing-desk 
of Mr. Wilson, the present Indian Chancellor of the Exchequer. 
The first part of the article, an attempt at disengaging the late 
Indian customs legislation from all responsibility for the present 
contraction of the Indian market, is best answered by the necessity 
a See this volume, pp. 406-08.— Ed. 
b "The Trade of India. The Cause of Its Depression", The Economist, No. 889, 
September 8, I860, pp. 977,  978.—  Ed. 

=====第504页=====
480 Karl Marx 
to which the Governor-General at Calcutta has been put, of 
convening, at Calcutta, a committee, to consist of representatives 
of the Revenue Boards of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras, and 
their respective Chambers of Commerce, and to be charged with 
the task of revising and readjusting the tariff lately introduced. 
That  tariff,  as I stated when first introducing this subject to your 
readers,3 did not create the Indian commercial crisis, whose 
outbreak it, however, accelerated by its sudden introduction at a 
time when the Indian commerce was already bloated to a size 
beyond its natural capacity. The glut of British commodities in the 
Indian market and of Indian commodities in the English market is 
avowed by The Economist. 
"We believe," he says, "it will be admitted on all hands that the enormous 
profits made in the Indian trade during a portion of last year, led to a sudden and 
large increase of supplies to the market, more than was required for any 
consumption, as far as this country was concerned, and to a very extensive 
speculative trade by the native capitalists for the supply of the markets in the 
interior from the seaports. For example, the exports of cotton piece goods to 
British India amounted [...] in 1859 to the value of £12,043,000 against £9,299,000 
in 1858 and £5,714,000 in 1857; and of yarns the exports were in 1859 £2,546,000 
against £1,969,000 in 1858, and £1,147,000 in 1857. For a long time goods were 
taken off as rapidly as they arrived, and as long as prices continued to rise, there 
was no lack of speculative Mahajunsb to make purchases and to consign to the 
markets of the interior; and there is no doubt, from the best information we can 
obtain, that large stocks of  goods  accumulated at all the markets in the North-West. Upon 
this point the testimony of Mirzapur, Allahabad, Lucknow, Agra, Delhi, Amritsar and 
Lahore is uniform."c 
The Economist then proceeds to detail some circumstances which 
contributed to consolidate in a certain sense the glut in the Indian 
markets. The main cause—the continuance of large supplies from 
England—he does not even allude to. In the first instance, then, 
the Autumn crops of 1859 throughout northern India, consequent 
upon the drouth generally prevailing, fell much below an average, 
and were affected both as to quality and quantity. Hence a high 
range of the prices of provisions through the Winter and Spring, 
which, later on in the season, was still more enhanced by famine 
prospects. Furthermore, with scarcity and high prices, there was 
raging the disease. 
"Throughout the whole of the North-West, the cholera prevailed to so alarming 
an extent among the densely-peopled cities, that the ordinary business of life was in 
many cases suspended, and the population fled as from an invading enemy." 
a See this volume, pp. 406-08.— Ed. 
b Usurers.— Ed. 
c The Economist, No. 889, September 8, 1860, p. 978; Marx's italics.— Ed. 

=====第505页=====
British Commerce 481 
But, worst of all, 
"Upper India was threatened, for a month or six weeks before the departure of 
the last mail, with a misfortune most appalling. The rains, upon which alone the 
Autumn crops depend, usually fall by the middle or at latest the end of June. This 
year, up to the middle of July, not a drop of rain had fallen. From the north-west 
frontier down to Lower Bengal, from the Khyber pass to Benares, including the 
great Doabs of the  Sutlej,  the Jumna, and the Ganges, all was one arid, hard, and 
immovable surface of parched earth. It was only in the few exceptional places 
which were moistened by the rivers passing through them, or by the tributaries of 
the great irrigation works, the Jumna and Ganges canals, that any cultivation was 
possible. The prospect of a famine equal to that of 1837 and 1838 created on all 
hands the greatest apprehension. Prices rose still more. Cattle were dying in 
numbers or being drawn to the hills in place of tilling the soil, and the people are 
described as being on the borders of starvation."3 
The worst apprehensions, however, have been set to rest, 
according to the telegraphic accounts received and published at 
Calcutta during the eight days previous to the departure of the 
last mail, which left on the 27th of July. Rains had at last fallen 
copiously, and in proper time to avert a famine, if not to secure a 
good crop. 
The details given by The Economist go far to prove that for the 
next future there exists not the least prospect of a revival in the 
Indian trade, which had already fallen off about £2,000,000 for 
the first half year of 1860 as compared with the first half year of 
1859.  The Australian markets exhibit also all the symptoms of 
contraction consequent upon over-trade. The trade with France, 
which was all at once to assume immense proportions by virtue of 
the Commercial Treaty,b has on the contrary declined by more 
than £1,000,000, as will be seen by the following statement0: 
Six months ended June 30, 1859. 1860. 
Imports from France £9,615,065 £8,523,983 
Exports to France 2,358,912 2,324,665 
Total :.. £11,973,977 £10,848,648 
The heavy decline in the British import trade from France may 
be accounted for by the high prices of provisions in France during 
this year, while in 1859 corn and meal had formed a principal 
item in the French exports to England. Great stress is laid on the 
increased rate at which the United States, in return for the present 
a loc. cit.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 341-44.— Ed. 
c The Economist, No. 888, September 1, 1860, p.  953.—  Ed. 

=====第506页=====
482 Karl Marx 
large exports of provisions to the United Kingdom, are presumed 
to become consumers of English manufactures. But though there 
will always be some proportion between the exports and the 
imports of a country, the above conclusion seems somewhat rash, 
if we are to judge from the movements of the Anglo-American 
trade in the first half years of 1859 and 1860. There we shall 
find3: 
1859.  1860. 
British Export to the United States... £11,625,920 £9,366,647 
British Imports from United States... 17,301,790 25,618,472 
so that during the same epoch, in which the British imports from 
the United States increased by more than 8,000,000, the British 
exports to the United States decreased by more than 2,000,000. 
The only branches of international British trade which have 
enlarged are the Anglo-Turkish trade, the Anglo-Chinese trade, 
and the Anglo-German trade. Now Turkey is just being convulsed 
by Russian and French interference. China is convulsed by the 
English themselves, and Germany, while suffering in many parts 
from a deficient harvest, stands on the eve of grave political 
convulsions at home, and serious collisions abroad. As to the 
Anglo-Chinese trade, I still remark that some part of its increase is 
certainly due to the war demand; that part of the increased 
exports to China were only so many goods abstracted from the 
Indian market, and thrown, by way of experiment, on the Chinese 
market, and, lastly, that the import from China continues to be of 
much more importance than the export to China, as will be seen 
from the following figures3: 
Six months ending June 30. 
1859.  1860. 
Imports from China, including 
Hong Kong £5,070,691 £5,526,054 
Exports to China, exclusive of 
Hong Kong  1,001,709  1,622,525 
Exports to Hong Kong 976,703  1,236,262 
Total £7,049,103 £8,384,841 
Meanwhile, unexpected failures in most branches of business 
continue to feed a general feeling of distrust. The subjoined 
a loc. cit.— Ed. 

=====第507页=====
British Commerce 483 
summary of the till-now-ascertained liabilities and assets of the late 
failures in the leather trade will show that the assets, on an 
average, but amount to 5s. 6d. in the pound, leaving to the 
holders of the bills of the fallen firms a loss of £1,471,589. 
LIABILITIES.3 
Firms. 
In bankruptcy 9 £1,530,991 
Winding up or compromised 15 499,806 
Particulars not published 10 
Total 34 £2,030,797 
ASSETS. 
Amounts. In the £ 
In bankruptcy 9 £342,652 4s. 6d. 
Winding up or compro­
mised 15 216,556 8s. 8d. 
Particulars not published ... 10 
Total 34 £559,208 5s. 6d. £1,471,589 
Written on September 8, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  6063,  September 29, 1860 Defic'y 
£1,188,339 
283,250 
a The Economist, No. 889, September 8, 1860, p. 992.— Ed. 

=====第508页=====
484 
Karl Marx 
RUSSIA USING AUSTRIA.—THE MEETING 
AT WARSAW 
Berlin, 17th September, 1860 
Of all the countries in Europe, Germany presents, at this 
moment, the most curious, the most intricate, and the most 
lamentable spectacle. The real state of German affairs will be best 
understood from a simple juxtaposition of two facts, the recent 
meeting of the German National Association at Coburg, and the 
impending meeting of the principal German princes at Warsaw. 343 
While the former aspires to the unification of the fatherland, by 
abandoning German Austria and confiding in Prussia, the Regent 
of Prussia3 himself rests his prospects of resistance against French 
aggression upon the restoration of the Holy Alliance under 
Russian auspices. Russian foreign policy, as is well known, does 
not care one straw for principles, in the common meaning of the 
term. It is neither legitimist nor revolutionary, but improves all 
opportunities of territorial aggrandizement with the same facility, 
whether they be obtained by siding with insurgent peoples or with 
struggling princes. In regard to Germany, it has become the 
invariable policy of Russia to shift sides. She first combines with 
France, in order to break the resistance of Austria to her Oriental 
schemes, and then sides with Germany in order to enfeeble France 
and draw a bill upon German gratitude, to be discounted on the 
Vistula or the Danube. In the progress of a European complica­
tion, she will always prefer a coalition with the German princes to 
an alliance with the French upstarts, for the simple reason that her 
real force consists in her diplomatic superiority, and not in her 
material power. A war with Germany, her immediate neighbor, 
springing from an alliance with France, would reveal the real 
a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 

=====第509页=====
Russia Using Austria 485 
impotency of the Northern Colossus; while in a war with France, 
Russia must, from her geographical position, always form the 
reserve, forcing Germany to do the real work, and keeping in 
store for herself the fruits of the victory. Coalesced empires 
resemble in this point the different corps of an army. The 
vanguard and the center have to bear the decisive shock, but the 
reserve decides the battle and carries the day. German dreamers 
may flatter themselves with the delusive hope that Russia, while 
laboring under the high pressure of an internal social struggle, in 
the emancipation movement, will for once give the lie to 
Karamzin, the Russian historian's maxim that Russian foreign 
policy never changes. 
It has been presumed that an immense empire, distracted by a 
struggle of classes, and distressed by a financial crisis, would be 
but too glad to let Europe alone; but then the real nature of the 
Russian internal movement has been misunderstood. Whatever 
may have been his real intentions, it is no more possible for a 
benevolent Czara to conciliate the abolition of serfdom with the 
continuance of his own autocracy than it proved for a benevolent 
Pope,b in 1848, to reconcile Italian unity with the vital conditions 
of the Papacy. Simple as the phrase of Russian serf emancipation 
sounds, it implies meanings the most different and aspirations the 
most contradictory. The vail that, in the beginning of the 
movement, was thrown, by a kind of general enthusiasm, over the 
conflicting tendencies, must necessarily be torn asunder, so soon as 
steps are taken to proceed from the verbal to the real. Serf 
emancipation, in the sense of the Czar, amounted to the 
destruction of the last checks still restraining the Imperial 
autocracy. On the one hand the relative independence of the 
nobles, resting upon their uncontrolled sway over the majority of 
the Russian people, would have been removed; on the other hand, 
the self-administration of the rural serf communities, based on 
their common property in the enslaved soil, would have been 
broken up by the Government scheme which aimed at the 
abolition of the "communist" principle. Such was serf emancipa­
tion as understood by the Central Government. The nobles, in 
their turn—that is to say, that influential portion of the Russian 
aristocracy which despaired of maintaining the old state of 
things—had made up their minds to grant the emancipation of 
the serfs on two conditions: monetary indemnity, converting the 
a Alexander II.— Ed. 
h Pius IX — Ed. 

=====第510页=====
486 Karl Marx 
peasants from their serfs into their mortgagees, so that, so far as 
material interests go, nothing would have been changed, for two 
or three generations at least, save the form of servitude—its 
patriarchal form being supplanted by its civilized form. Beside this 
indemnity to be paid by the serfs, they wanted another indemnity 
to be paid by the State. For the local power over their serfs, which 
they declared themselves ready to surrender, they wanted to make 
up by political power to be wrested from the Central Government, 
investing them in substance with a constitutional share in the 
general management of the empire. 
Lastly, the serfs themselves preferred the simplest formula of 
the emancipation question. What they understood by it was the old 
state of things, minus their old landlords. In this mutual strife, 
where the Government, despite menaces and cajoling, split upon 
the opposition of the nobles and the peasants—the aristocracy 
upon the opposition of the Government and of their human 
chattels, the peasantry upon the combined opposition of their 
central lord and their local lords—an understanding, as is usual in 
such transactions, has been arrived at between the existing powers 
at the cost of the oppressed class. The Government and the 
aristocracy have agreed together to shelve the emancipation 
question for the present, and to again try their hands at foreign 
adventures. Hence the secret understanding with Louis Bonaparte 
in 1859344 , and the official congress at Warsaw with the German 
princes in 1860. The Italian war had sufficiently broken the 
self-reliance of Austria to transform her from an obstacle into a 
tool of the Russian schemes of foreign policy, and Prussia, which 
had made a fool of herself by combining, during the continuance 
of the war, the airs of ambitious perfidy with an utter nullity of 
action, cannot, threatened as she is by France on her Rhenish 
frontiers, but follow in the wake of Austria. It was one of the great 
delusions of the Gotha party 345 to fancy that the blows Austria was 
likely to receive on the part of France would dissolve her into her 
constituent parts, so that Austrian Germany, disconnected from its 
ties with Italy, Poland, and Hungary, might easily enter into the 
formation of one great German empire. A long historical 
experience has shown us that every war which Austria may have to 
wage with France or Russia would not free Germany from her 
weight, but only make her subservient to the schemes of France or 
Russia. To break her up into her constituent parts by one great 
blow, would be bad policy on the part of those Powers, if they 
were possessed of the force to strike the blow; but to enfeeble 
Austria, in order to turn its remaining influence to their own 

=====第511页=====
Russia Using Austria 487 
account, was and must always be the main object of their 
diplomatic and military operations. Nothing but a German 
revolution, with one of its centers at Vienna and the other at 
Berlin, could shatter to pieces the Hapsburg empire, without 
endangering the integrity of Germany, and without subjecting its 
non-German dominions to French or Russian control. 
The impending Warsaw Congress would immensely strengthen 
Louis Bonaparte's position in France, if the prospect of a conflict 
in Italy between the truly national party and the French party did 
not spoil his opportunity. As it is, one must hope that the Warsaw 
Congress will at last open the eyes of Germany, and teach her that 
either to withstand encroachments from without or realize unity 
and liberty at home, she must clear her own house of its dynastic 
landlords. 
Written on September 17, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6072, October 10, 1860 
I7-H05 

=====第512页=====
488 
Karl Marx 
AFFAIRS IN PRUSSIA. 
[—PRUSSIA, FRANCE AND ITALY] 
Berlin, September 27, 1860 
The Prince Regent3 who, as I have already told your readers, 
since his accession to supreme power, is a sullen and dogged 
Legitimist at the core of his heart, despite the gaudy insignia of 
liberalism he has been decked out with by the official oracles of 
the Prussian fool's paradise, has just caught an occasion of publicly 
giving vent to his long compressed feelings. It is a strange fact, but 
nevertheless it is a fact, that the Prince Regent of Prussia has for 
the nonce shut out the Garibaldians from the fortress of Messina, 
and saved that important military stronghold for his beloved 
brother, King Bombalinob of Naples. The Prussian Ambassador at 
Naples, Count of Perponcher, a personage as notorious for his 
staunch Legitimism as Baron of Canitz, the Prussian Ambassador 
at Rome, had, like most of his colleagues, followed King 
Bombalino to Gaeta, where the Prussian war corvette Loreley was 
placed for the protection of German subjects. Now on the 15th of 
September, the citadel of Messina was on the point of capitulating. 
The officers had declared for Victor Emmanuel, and sent a 
deputation to Gaeta in order to tell the King that the place was no 
longer tenable. On the following day that deputation was shipped 
back to Messina by the war corvette Loreley, with a Prussian 
Commissary on board, who, on the arrival of the vessel, proceeded 
immediately to the citadel, where he had a long conversation with 
the Neapolitan commander. Beside his personal eloquence, the 
Prussian agent exhibited a bundle of dispatches on the part of the 
King, encouraging the General to resistance, and strongly inveigh-
a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 
b Francis II.— Ed. 

=====第513页=====
Affairs in Prussia 489 
ing against every proposition of giving up, even under the most 
favorable conditions, the forts still sufficiently provisioned for 
several months. During the stay of the Prussian Commissary, cries 
of "Evviva il Re!" a were heard ringing from the citadel, and when 
he left, the transactions entered into, with a view to stipulate the 
terms of the capitulation, were at once broken off. On the arrival 
of this news, Count Cavour hastened to lodge a complaint at 
Berlin because of "the abuse of the Prussian flag," and the 
violation of the promise to preserve perfect neutrality in the 
revolutionary war of Italy. Despite the justness of the complaint, 
Count Cavour of all men was the man least fitted to prefer it. 
Herr von Schleinitz, whose dispatches had, during the war of 
1859, 346 obtained some notoriety for their soft-sawder style, their 
seesaw reasonings, and the incomparable art of drawing out the 
thread of their verbosity finer than the staple of their argument— 
Herr von Schleinitz eagerly improved the opportunity to insinuate 
himself with the Prince Regent, and to change for once his 
humble sotto voce b for the shrill tones of haughtiness. He 
administered a peremptory rebuke to Count Cavour, who was 
plainly told that Sicily had not yet become a Sardinian province, 
that the treaty obligations were daily violated by the Court of 
Turin, and that if Cavour wanted to protest against foreign 
intervention in Italy, he had better lodge his protest at the 
Tuileries. 
The withdrawal of the French Embassador from Turin is here 
considered a transparent dodge, since it is perfectly known that 
immediately after the meeting at Chambéry between Louis 
Bonaparte and Messrs. Farini and Cialdini, the latter was intrusted 
with the command of the Piedmontese invasion of the Papal 
States. That invasion was planned at Chambéry with a view to 
taking the game out of the hands of Garibaldi and replacing it 
into the hands of Cavour, the French Emperor's most pliant 
servant. The revolutionary war in Southern Italy is known to be 
considered at the Tuileries not as a fortuitous avalanche of a ball 
once set rolling, but as the deliberate act of the independent 
Italian party who, ever since Louis Napoleon's ingress of the via 
sacra, 347 had proclaimed the rising of the South as the only means 
of taking off the nightmare of French protection. In point of fact, 
Mazzini in his proclamation to the Italian people, dated May 16, 
1859,  stated plainly: 
a "Long Live the King!"—Ed. 
h Undertone.— Ed. 
17* 

=====第514页=====
490 Karl Marx 
"With due reserve the people of the North may rally round the banners of 
Victor Emmanuel, wherever the Austrian is encamped or neighboring; the 
insurrection of the South must take a different and more independent course. 
Rising, rising united, installing a Provisional Government, arming, selecting a 
strategical point where it may keep its ground and attract the volunteers of the 
North, Naples and Sicily may still save the cause of Italy, and constitute its power, 
represented by a national camp. Thanks to that camp and the Northern volunteers, 
Italy, at the end of the war, whatever be the intentions of its initiators, may still 
become the supreme arbiter of its own destinies.... Such a popular manifestation 
would exclude every new division of Italy, every importation of new dynasties, 
every peace of the Adige or the Mincio, every abandonment of every part of the 
Italian soil. And the name of Rome is inseparable from the name of Italy. There, 
in the sacred city, stands the palladium of our national unity. It is the duty of 
Rome not to swell the Sardinian army by a mob of volunteers, but to prove to 
Imperial France that the prop of the Papal despotism at Rome will never be 
acknowledged the sword-bearer of Italian independence.... If Rome forgets its 
duties, we must act for the Romans. Rome represents the unity of the fatherland. 
Sicily, Naples, and the volunteers of the North must constitute its army." 
Such were the words of Mazzini in May, 1859, reechoed by 
Garibaldi3 when, at the head of the popular army created in Sicily 
and Naples, he promised to proclaim the Unity of Italy from the 
top of the Quirinal.348 
You will remember how Cavour, from the beginning, did 
everything in his power to beset Garibaldi's expedition with 
difficulties; how, after the first success won by the popular hero, 
he sent La Farina, in company with two Bonapartist agents, over 
to Palermo, in order to deprive the conqueror of his dictatorship; 
how, later on, every military move of Garibaldi was met, on the 
part of Cavour, first by diplomatic and at last by military 
countermoves.b  After the fall of Palermo and the progress to 
Messina, Garibaldi's popularity towered so high among the people 
and the army of Paris, that Louis Napoleon considered it prudent 
to try the wheedling method. When Gen. Türr, at that time 
disabled from active service, had repaired to Paris, he became 
quite overwhelmed with Imperial flatteries. He was not only an 
honored guest at the Palais Royal, but was even admitted to the 
Tuileries, 349 initiated into the Emperor's unbounded enthusiasm 
for his "annexed" subject, the Nizzard hero, and laden with 
tokens of good will, such as rifled cannon, and so forth. At the 
same time Türr's mind was impressed with the Emperor's 
a Giuseppe Mazzini, "La Guerra", Pensiero ed Azione, No. 17, May 2-16, 1859; 
Giuseppe Garibaldi's address to the people of Palermo on September 10, 1860, 
L'Indépendance belge, No. 261, September 17, I860; see also The Times, No. 23728, 
September 18, I860.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 421-24.— Ed. 

=====第515页=====
Affairs in Prussia 491 
conviction that Garibaldi, after he had made sure of Naples and 
the Neapolitan Navy, could do nothing better than to try, in 
unison with the Hungarian refugees, a landing at Fiume, there to 
plant the banner of a Hungarian revolution. But Louis Napoleon 
proceeded from altogether false premises when he supposed that 
Türr was the man, or even fancied himself to be the man, to 
exercise the least control over Garibaldi's course of action. Türr, 
whom I know personally, is a brave soldier and an intelligent 
officer, but beyond the sphere of military activity he is a mere 
zero,  below the average of common mortals, lacking not only 
training of mind and a cultivated intellect, but that natural 
shrewdness and instinct which may stand in place of education, 
learning, and experience. He is, in one word, an easy-going jolly 
good fellow, gifted with an extraordinary degree of credulity, but 
certainly not the man to politically control anybody, not to speak 
of Garibaldi, who, with a fire of soul, still owns his grain of that 
subtle Italian genius you may trace in Dante no less than in 
Machiavelli. Türr, then, having proved a miscalculation, such at 
least he is spoken of in the entourage of the Tuileries. Kossuth 
was tried and dispatched to Garibaldi to bring him round to the 
views of the Emperor, and to bring him off his true scent, which 
points to Rome. Garibaldi used Kossuth as a means of stirring the 
revolutionary enthusiasm, and had him consequently feasted with 
popular ovations, but knew wisely how to distinguish between his 
name, representing a popular cause, and his mission, hiding a 
Bonapartist snare. Kossuth returned to Paris quite chopfalien; but, 
to give an earnest of his fidelity to the Imperialist interests, has 
now, as reported by the Opinion nationale, the Plon-Plon Moniteur, 
addressed a letter to Garibaldi, wherein he calls upon the latter to 
conciliate himself with Cavour, to abstain from every attempt at 
Rome, in order to not estrange France, the true hope of the 
oppressed nationalities, and even to let Hungary alone, the latter 
country being not yet ripe for an insurrection. 
I need not tell you that here, at Berlin, the shares of ministerial 
liberalism" have experienced a heavy fall, consequent upon the 
impending Warsaw Congress; where, not only the rulers by the 
grace of God are to shake hands, but their respective Ministers of 
Foreign Affairs: Prince Gorchakoff, Count Rechberg, and our own 
Herr von Schleinitz, are to meet in the snug corner of a gilded 
antechamber, there to give an orthodox turn to the coming history 
of mankind. 
The transactions of Prussia with Austria, as to a new commercial 
treaty between the Zollverein and Austria, such as foreshadowed 

=====第516页=====
492 Karl Marx 
by the treaty of February 19,  1853, 350 may now be considered to 
be broken off, since the Prussian Cabinet has positively declared 
that any assimilation, or even approximation of tariffs was out of 
the question. 
Written on September 27, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6076, October 15, 1860 

=====第517页=====
493 
Frederick Engels 
PREPARATIONS FOR WAR IN PRUSSIA 
Berlin, Oct. 23, 1860 
The anger and the dread felt by our Liberals at the Prince 
Regent's3 participation in the Warsaw Congress, find, as is usual 
with the grievances of genuine Prussian Liberals, their vent in 
bitter aspersions of Austria and its new-fangled Constitution.351 In 
the first place, Francis Joseph will never be forgiven, for having 
bereft these gentlemen of their greatest consolation, and the 
standing topic of their verbose self-righteousness, viz., the contrast 
between "constitutional" Prussia and "absolutist" Austria. The 
Austrian patent, of course, is open, not only to cavils, but to 
serious misgivings of every kind. The circumstances under which 
and the hands by which the gift is bestowed, stamp it with the 
character of a shift, rather than a sincere concession. Once before, 
on the 4th of March, 1849, Francis Joseph promulgated the 
outlines of a constitution, only to cancel them the following year, 
after the fortune of war had declared on his side.352 But, then, 
there exists no instance on the records of history of princes having 
ever curtailed their own privileges, and yielded to popular claims, 
except under a heavy pressure from without, and there exists no 
instance of their having kept faith whenever they could dare to 
break their oaths and their pledges with impunity. The old 
Hungarian Constitution353 has not been restored in its integrity, 
since the two most important rights of voting the ways and means, 
and the levies of troops, are transferred from the Diet at Pesth to 
the Central Imperial Council at Vienna, which latter being 
intended to form the States General of the whole empire, finds 
itself invested with attributes likely to become permanent sources 
a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. 

=====第518页=====
494 Frederick Engels 
of strife between itself and the different national or provincial 
Diets.  The Constitutions of the German and Slavonic provinces 
being limited to the most general and vague outlines, may be 
made nothing or everything of. The greatest fault found with the 
patent on the part of the Magyars is the separation of Croatia and 
Servia and Transylvania from Hungary, and the grant to those 
provinces of different independent Diets; but if the events of 
1848-49 be recalled to mind, it may be justly doubted whether 
the Croats, Slavonians, Serbs, and Wallachians will be inclined to 
share in this Magyar grievance, and back it by their support. The 
Vienna statesmen, in this instance, seem rather to have played a 
clever trick upon the principle of nationality, and turned it to their 
own account. 
But, as for the general Diet of the whole empire, under the 
name of the Imperial Council, seated at Vienna and composed of 
the respective delegates appointed by the different Diets of 
Galicia, Hungary, Transylvania, Croatia, Servia, Venetia, and the 
German provinces, being placed beyond the pale of allegiance to 
the Diet of the German Confederation, will it not cut asunder the 
relations that have hitherto obtained between German Austria and 
the German Confederation? This is the great theme now harped 
upon by official Prussian Liberalism, which will never stand in 
want of arguments for its pet idea, the exclusion of Austrian 
Germany from the German Confederation. But all this reasoning 
proceeds from a false premise in clinging to the letter of Francis 
Joseph's patent. While the latter must be considered, on the part 
of the Austrian dynasty, as a clever device, it affords to the various 
peoples crushed under Hapsburg sway a precious handle for 
working out their own destinies and reopening the era of 
revolutions. For the present, the Austrian Constitution will have 
done much good in humbling the Pharisean pride of the Prussian 
mock Liberals, and stripping the Hohenzollern dynasty of the only 
advantage it could boast over its rival, that of carrying on the old 
concern of the bureaucrat and the soldier under the more 
respectable form of constitutionalism. 
To give you an insight into the real state of this much-vaunted, 
"regenerated" Prussia, it will be necessary to recur to the changes 
that have lately taken place in the organization of the Prussian 
army. You will remember that the Prussian Chamber of Deputies, 
while lacking on the one side the courage to affront public opinion 
by an open sanction of the Government proposals for the 
reorganization of the army, and lacking on the other side the 
courage to make a decided stand against the martinet leanings of 

=====第519页=====
Preparations for War in Prussia 495 
the Prince Regent, hit upon the usual expedient of weakness—a 
middle course, neither fish nor flesh. It refused to pass the 
Government plan for the reorganization of the army, but voted 
$9,500,000 for putting the army into a state fit to encounter the 
dangers apprehended from without.3 In other words, the Prussian 
Deputies voted the ways and means wanted by the Government 
for carrying out its plan, but voted them on false pretexts. Hardly 
had the Prussian Parliament been adjourned when the Ministry, 
openly breaking through the conditions on which the grant was 
obtained, began, without further ado, to introduce the changes in 
the organization of the army willed by the Prince Regent and 
rejected by the so-called representatives. During the recess of the 
Parliament, the standing army has been doubled, being raised from 
40 regiments to 72 regiments of the line and 9 regiments of the 
guard. The permanent annual expenses for the military budget 
have thus, by the supreme will of the Prince Regent, and in open 
violation, not only of the will of the people, but of the vote of its 
mock representatives, been raised by 100 per cent. But do not 
fancy the Prince of Hohenzollern or any of his colleagues risks the 
fate of Strafford.354 There will be some low grumbling, pickled 
with fervent assertions of dynastic loyalty, and unbounded 
confidence in the Cabinet, and this will be all. Now, considering 
that even the old army organization, founded as it was upon a 
merely agricultural population, had become an intolerable draw­
back upon the resources and the productive activity of a people 
which in the course of time had engaged in manufactures, it will 
be easily understood how the army, now doubled in numbers, 
must grind down the best energies of the masses, and drain the 
springs of national wealth. The Prussian army may now boast of 
being the largest in Europe in proportion to population and 
national resources. 
You know that a Hohenzollern ruler, when speaking of  himself, 
or when spoken of by his cabinet and his officials, goes by the 
name of Kriegsherr, that is to say, "Lord of War." Now this, of 
course, does not mean that Prussian kings and regents lord it over 
the chances of war. Their great anxiety to keep peace, and their 
known propensity for being thrashed in the open field show 
better. By that title of "Lord of War," so dearly cherished by 
Hohenzollern rulers, it is rather understood that the true prop of 
their kingly power must be sought for, not in the people, but in a 
a On this sitting of the Prussian Diet (February 10, 1860) see the Stenographische 
Berichte über die Verhandlungen, Bd. I, Berlin, 1860, S. 95-106.— Ed. 

=====第520页=====
496 Frederick Engels 
portion of the people, separated from the mass, opposed to it, 
distinguished by certain badges, trained to passive obedience, 
drilled into a mere instrument of the dynasty which owns it as its 
property and uses it according to its caprice. A Prussian king 
would, therefore, rather abdicate than allow his army to swear 
obedience to the Constitution. Hence a Hohenzollern ruler, being 
the king of his people only as far as he is the "Lord of War," in 
other words, the proprietor of the army, must, before all things, 
dote on it, fondle it, flatter it, and feed it with always increasing 
morsels of the national wealth. This great aim has been obtained 
by the new military organization. The number of officers has been 
doubled, and the rapid promotion to higher grades in the French, 
Austrian, and Russian armies, which the Prussian officers had cast 
longingly anxious eyes upon, has been secured to them without 
exposing their lives and limbs to the least hazard. Hence there is 
just now prevailing, not among the common soldiers, but among 
the officers of the Prussian army, a vast amount of enthusiasm for 
the Prince Regent and his "liberal" Ministers. At the same time 
the aristocratic fox-hunters, grumbling at the liberal phrases of the 
new régime, have been quite conciliated by the new occasion 
afforded them for fastening their younger sons on the purse of 
the country. There is one drawback to all this, even from the 
dynastic standpoint. Prussia has now concentrated all its available 
forces into one standing army. That army once beaten, there will 
be no reserve to fall back upon. 
Written on October 23, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6097, November 8, 1860 

=====第521页=====
497 
Karl Marx 
GREAT BRITAIN—A MONEY STRINGENCY 3 
London, Nov. 10, 1860 
An event long ago predicted has set in, a drain of bullion, and, 
consequent upon it, a rise in the rate of discount. Yesterday the 
Bank of England raised the rate of discount from 4 to 4V2 Per 
cent. In the corresponding month of 1859 the bank rate did not 
exceed 3 per cent, despite the then enormous shipments of silver 
to the East, amounting to £13,234,305. The obvious object of the 
Bank was to put a check on the drain of bullion from its vaults, 
which, amounting to £16,255,951 on the 26th of September last, is 
now reduced to £13,897,085, not including £43,000 taken from 
the Bank yesterday. The drain, beginning on Sept. 26, has been 
constantly on the increase until it has reached this week almost 
£300,000. The large imports of corn were, of course, sure to lead, 
sooner or later, to an emigration of the precious metals, but the 
payments of the corn bills being not yet due, the present forain 
cannot be accounted for in this manner, and, moreover, it takes 
place concurrendy with a rate of discount higher in London than 
in Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels and Hamburg, while simultaneously 
the gold export leaves no profit as an exchange operation. 
Whither, then, does the gold go? To the vaults of the Bank of 
France. The present discount rate of the Bank of France is only 3 
per cent, although that concern has lost about £4,000,000 since 
the end of August, while its discounts for August and September 
have increased by about £3,000,000. Any vulgar bank would, 
under such circumstances, have raised its rate of discount, but 
Louis Bonaparte, afraid to cause a visible disturbance of the 
a Marx based his analysis on the article "The Rise in the Bank Rate of 
Discount", The Economist of November 10, 1860, pp. 1232 and 1242.— Ed. 

=====第522页=====
498 Karl Marx 
money market, orders the Bank to purchase gold at a loss, and 
will force it to continue proceeding with this certainly not 
mercantile operation. On the other hand, the Bank of England 
proves that it is unable to check the present drain by the rise in 
the rate of interest. Yesterday, for instance, no bullion was taken 
from the Issue Department of the Bank, but a considerable 
quantity in sovereigns was drawn from the Banking Department. 
It is one of the necessary consequences of Sir Robert Peel's blessed 
bank acts of 1844 and 1845 355 that the mercantile public are 
constantly misled as to the real amount of the precious metals 
exported, since the Banking Department furnishes no public 
returns of the sovereigns withdrawn from its chest. 
The rise in the official discount rate of the Bank of England, 
especially if continuing, will, of course, impose upon the Bank of 
France the necessity of following in the same direction, and thus 
prevent Louis Bonaparte from any longer commanding the Bank 
Directors to buy gold at a loss, in order to hide a visible 
derangement of the money market. Still, the English drain of 
bullion will not be stopped by that eventuality, since, in proper 
time,  the corn bills must fall due and be paid for in cash. 
Written on November 10, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6111, November 24, 1860 

=====第523页=====
499 
Frederick Engels 
AUSTRIA —PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 
London, Dec. 24, 1860 
The revolution in Austria gets along at a racing pace. Only two 
months ago, Francis Joseph acknowledged by his diploma of the 
20th October,356 that his empire was in a state of revolution, and 
tried to remedy it by bribing Hungary by a promise that her 
ancient Constitution, in some curtailed shape or other, was to be 
restored. The diploma, although a concession to the revolutionary 
movement, was in its conception one of those master-strokes of 
treacherous policy which form such a prominent part in Austrian 
diplomacy. Hungary was to be bought by concessions apparently 
very great, and made to appear still greater by being placed side 
by side with the scanty allowance allotted to the German and 
Slavonic provinces, as well as with the mockery of an Imperial 
Parliament which the diploma proposed to establish. But in the 
details of the work the cloven foot of treachery was apparent 
enough to turn the contemplated master-stroke into a piece of 
egregious folly and a pledge given to the revolutionary movement 
of the helpless weakness of the Government. Not only was the 
voting of supplies and soldiers to be taken from the Hungarian 
Diet and to be transferred to the Central Parliament and partly 
even to the Emperor alone—as if a Government just compelled to 
eat all the political leek it had grown during the last ten years, was 
still strong enough to withhold such rights from its very 
conquerors—but the scanty and vague nature of the rights 
conferred on the other portions of the empire and on the central 
representation at once proved, by contrast, the insincerity of the 
whole affair. And when the provincial constitutions for Styria, 
Carinthia, Salzburg, and Tyrol357 were published—constitutions 

=====第524页=====
500 Frederick Engels 
giving the lion's share of representation to the nobility and clergy, 
and maintaining the old distinction of estates—when the old 
Ministry remained in office, there could be no longer any doubt as 
to what was intended. Hungary was to be soothed, and then to be 
made the cat's-paw to help absolutist Austria out of her troubles; 
and absolutist Austria once strong again, Hungary knew well 
enough from experience what her fate would be. The very fact of 
the unlimited and indiscriminate establishment of the Hungarian 
language as the only official language in Hungary, was intended 
for nothing else but to excite the Slavonians, Roumans, and 
Germans of Hungary against the Magyar race. The Hungarian old 
Conservatives (vulgo, Aristocrats), who had concluded this bargain 
with the Emperor, lost all standing at home by it; they had 
attempted to barter away the two most essential rights of the Diet. 
In fact, the Imperial diploma deceived nobody. While in the 
German provinces public opinion at once compelled the old 
municipal councils (appointed by the Emperor after the Revolu­
tion) to give way before new men, who are now being chosen by 
popular election, the Hungarians began to reestablish their old 
county officers and county assemblies which, before 1849, formed 
all the local authorities in the country.358 In either case, it is a good 
sign that the opposition party at once secured local and communal 
power, instead of merely clamoring for an ephemeral change of 
Ministry and neglecting to secure the important positions left open 
to it in more modest spheres of action. In Hungary, the forms of 
the ancient local administration, as reorganized in 1848, at once 
placed all the civil power in the hands of the people, and left to 
the Vienna Government no other alternative but to cede or to 
have recourse at once to military force. Here, then, the movement 
naturally went on most rapidly. The demand for the full 
restoration of the Constitution, as amended in 1848, and including 
all the laws agreed upon in that year between the Diet and the 
King, arose from one end of the land to the other. Not satisfied 
with that, the immediate repeal of the tobacco monopoly 
(introduced illegally since 1848), and of all other laws imposed 
without the consent of the Diet, was asked for. The levying of 
taxes was openly declared illegal, until the Diet should have voted 
them; not one-third of the taxes due were paid; the young men 
called out to serve in the army were called upon to resist 
enrolment, or to abscond; and Imperial eagles were pulled down, 
and, worst of all, in this transition state the Government had no 
means to resist this agitation. Wherever the county assemblies were 
convoked they pronounced themselves unanimously in this sense; 

=====第525页=====
Austria—Progress of the Revolution . 501 
and the Conference of Hungarian notables assembled at Gran,a 
under the Presidency of the Primate of Hungary,0 in order to 
propose to the Government a basis for the election of a Diet, 
without deliberation almost, and unanimously, declared the 
democratic electoral law of 1848 to be still in force. 
That was more than the old Conservatives had expected when 
they made the compromise with the Emperor. They were 
completely  " débordés." c The revolutionary waves threatened to 
drown them. The Government itself saw that something must be 
done. But what could the Cabinet of Vienna do? 
The attempt at bribing Hungary was on the eve of signally 
failing. What, if the Cabinet now tried to bribe the Germans? 
They never enjoyed such rights as the Hungarians, perhaps less 
would satisfy them. The Austrian monarchy, to exist, must use the 
various nationalities among its subjects in turns against each other. 
The Slavonians could be used in the utmost extremity only; they 
were too much connected with Russia by Panslavist agitation; be it 
then for the Germans. Count Goluchowski, the hated Polish 
aristocrat (a renegade from the Polish caus,e to that of Austrian 
service), was sacrificed, and Chevalier von Schmerling was made 
Minister of the Interior. He had been Minister of the German 
ephemeral empire in 1848, and afterward of Austria; this post he 
quitted when the Constitution of 1849 was definitively abolished. 
He passed for a Constitutionalist. But there was, again, so much 
hesitation and indecision before he was definitively called in, that 
the effect was again lost. People asked what good was Schmerling 
if all the other Ministers remained? There was a cooling down of 
all hopes, even before he was definitively appointed; and instead 
of a frank concession, his nomination only appeared as another 
proof of weakness. But while in the German Provinces the 
opposition was satisfied with securing local power, and receiving 
every move of the Government with undisguised distrust, and 
dissatisfaction, in Hungary the movement went on. Before even 
Schmerling had been nominated, the old Conservative Hungarians 
called into office, Szécsen and Vay at their head, acknowledged 
the impossibility of retaining their positions; and the Ministry of 
the Emperor had to undergo the humiliation of inviting two 
Hungarian Ministers of 1848, colleagues up to Autumn of that 
year of Batthyâny, who was shot, of Kossuth and Szemere—of 
a Estergom.— Ed. 
b Jânos Scitovszky.— Ed. 
c Overwhelmed.— Ed. 

=====第526页=====
502 Frederick Engels 
inviting Messrs. Déak and Eötvös, to enter the Ministry of the man 
who had trodden down Hungary with Russian assistance. They are 
not appointed yet; the system of hesitation and vacillation, of 
higgling and haggling about trifles, is in its full glory yet, but if 
they accept, they are sure to be ultimately appointed. 
Thus Francis Joseph is being driven from one concession to 
another, and if it should come to pass that in January the two 
Diets should meet, one at Pesth for Hungary, and her annexes, 
and the other at Vienna for the remaining provinces of the 
empire, fresh concessions will be wrung from him. But instead of 
reconciling his subjects, every fresh concession will exasperate 
them more by the undisguised insincerity with which it is given. 
And what with the reminiscences of the past—with the maneuvers 
of the Hungarian emigration in the pay of Louis Napoleon; with 
the fact that a liberal Austria is impossible, because Austria's 
foreign policy must always be reactionary, and, therefore, at once 
create collisions between the Crown and the Parliament, and with 
Louis Napoleon speculating upon this fact—it is probable enough 
that 1861 may see the Austrian empire dissolve into its component 
parts. 
Written on December 24, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6152, January 12, 1861 

=====第527页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 

=====第528页=====

=====第529页=====
505 
Karl Marx 
[EXTRACTS FROM IMRE SZABÖ'S WORK THE STATE 
POLICY OF MODERN EUROPE, FROM THE BEGINNING 
OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY TO THE PRESENT TIME. 
IN TWO VOLUMES, LONDON, 1857]359 
[Volume I] 
1) 1520-1559. Francis I and Charles V 
(1523.  Dissolution of the Union of Calmar 360; Gustavus Vasa elected king of 
Sweden.) 
1520. Charles (V) crowned emperor at Aix-la-Chapelle 3 (master of Burgundy, 
Spain, Sicily, Naples and Navarre and Austria (since Maximilian I's death in 1519)). 
Milan, claimed by Louis XII by the right of his grandmother, of the family of 
Visconti, conquered by Francis I in 1515 from the Sforzas; now claimed by Charles 
as a fief of the Empire. Francis also revived the claims of France to Naples and 
Burgundy. Thus commenced a 14 years' war, apparently for the sake of Milan. 
Henry VIII in the Austrian alliance. French (after defeat of Bicoco b) forced by a 
Spanish army to abandon the Duchy of Milan. Rome, Venice, Florence and Genoa 
enter the Austrian alliance. Francis I without an ally; Charles Bourbon (the 
Constable) goes over to Charles. 
Second French campaign (in Italy) under General Bonnivet. The French 
routed. Charles Bourbon enters the Provence, English prepare to invade Picardy. 
Francis drives the invaders out of the French territory, reconquers the Duchy of 
Milan (after the battle of Marignano). 
1525. Francis beaten before Pavia, carried away prisoner to Madrid. Coalition 
against Charles—the small states of Italy, new pope (Clement VII), Henry VIII, 
Louise of Savoy (the regent of France, Francis' mother). 1526. Francis accepts 
Madrid peace to get free. 
League between Francis, Pope, Venice, Milan, Florence, Henry VIII.361 
Bourbon with the Imperialists drives Sforza 0 from Milan, sacks Rome. Francis 
and Henry VIII declare war to Charles. 
French army makes itself master of Rome, besieges Naples. Malady in the 
French camp, return to France. 
Charles checked by the Lutheran princes of Germany and the arms of Soliman. 
Ottomans occupy almost the whole of Hungary, of which Ferdinand, the brother of 
Charles, endeavoured to possess  himself.  Soliman advances to the walls of Vienna. 
a Aachen.— Ed. 
b Bicocca.— Ed. 
c Francesco II.— Ed. 

=====第530页=====
506 Karl Marx 
1529. Treaty of Cambray (traité des dames). 362 Francis again renounces his claims 
to Milan, Naples, and Flanders. As to Burgundy, one chief point of the quarrel, 
only temporary arrangement: the marriage of Francis with Eleonora of Portugal, 
Charles' sister, being again stipulated. 
Charles turns upon the Lutherans. The princes now [have] two lines of  policy,  with 
regard to home and foreign affairs; Pope even seeks the alliance of the infidels. 
1530. Diet of Augsburg.363 Condemnatory decree against innovation. Protes­
tants form the league of Schmalkalden,364 seek the aid of France and England. Francis 
enters upon the proposal; concludes also alliance with John  Zapolya,*  of Hungary, the 
rival of Ferdinand of Austria, and sends Rincon to Constantinople, to secure the 
Sultan's  assistance.  Francis marries his son'1 to Catherine of Medici, the pontiff's niece, 
while Henry VIII severs England from the see of Rome.365 
1532.  Temporary peace of Nuremberg (between Charles and the Protestants). 
Charles' expedition against Barbarossa. c 
1535. Francis, after 6 years of peace, recommences war (third war), reappears in 
Italy; successful; dictates at Milan and Savoy. Charles returns victor from Algiers, 
drives the French from Italy, penetrates into the Provence where [he is] finally 
repulsed. 
1538. Peace at Nice for 10 years. But 2 French envoys (Rincon to the Porte, 
Fregosa for Venice) by orders of Charles seized in Italy, assassinated. Francis 
recommences war. Five armies put in motion, but in vain. 
1544. Peace of Crespy: Francis renounces his claims to Naples and Artois; bind[s] 
himself not to meddle with Navarre. (Henry VIII had again turned on the part of 
Charles.) 
1547. t Francis I; his son Henry II. Charles turns upon the league of 
Schmalkalden. 
7547.  Victory of the Imperialists through Maurice of Saxony of Mühlberg, dissolving 
the league. Charles proclaims the Interim. 366 Maurice, having secured the 
co-operation of Henry II, surprises the Emperor in Tyrol (Charles forced 1552 to 
conclude the peace of Passau with the Protestants) same year in which the French 
poured into the Duchy of Lorraine, there to seize Metz, Toul and Verdun. Charles 
driven back from Metz and 1556 withdraws from the public scene, divides his 
dominions between his brother, Ferdinand of Austria, and his son Philip II. War in 
Italy and the Netherlands continues between Henry II and Philip II. 
1559. Treaty of Château Cambresis. d Each party was bound to restore all the 
conquests made since 1551 367; France abandoning more than 180 strong places 
besides Savoy. Marriage of Elizabeth, daughter of Henry II, to Philip II. Henry II f. 
This (the reign of Charles V) the period of Habsburg 
supremacy proper. France is the first to attack it, but supported by 
Lutherans in Germany, Soliman, Hungary (Zapolya) and the Pope 
(Clément), also by the jealousy of the small Italian states. 
II) 1559-1618. The Netherlands and Philip II 
1559. Francis II in France. (Religious wars in France.) 1566. Commencement of 
the troubles in the Netherlands. 
a Janos Zâpolya. — Ed. 
b Henry IL— Ed. 
c Hadher Barbarossa. — Ed. 
d Cateau-Cambrésis. — Ed. 

=====第531页=====
\£ÜL- CV «A(^ Cnw^s^  »4 Ok**.«**.  ÜL> vJlju ^v^w ^ tvy^\ v 
-V^W^c^^w  ,^V^L  h*-^*- WC>wy  i~_-.,  Vs-^W -~^^, _\^\\ 
S-^iV  /u^A-r^^-.w NrMl /V^  -i.,-1  ^'^"•^  ^^W,.^  (JX*^*-^-
1ji£ Uw.k,  H""^* ^c^^^^L  ^„^  O^vA^i.  C^tW  ~y^t/L&s  _^_ 
AU v„ji. JU^ «V*-^  CfV^->M.  ^WJV  JiS»- I \ '^^S* 11" „ "L~->-*4  4-^  K\>*  •+*fK' A*t~*** 
S**-*.-*  —rYW\  ^£i£  ^H^£.^  , i i  •. o-jC^yA  *"^Xr>  v-*  ^*<y^  L»^. 
Vu -rvA. ^"x-^p^ ^-^usv î-»^s  VVUUAU-  ^cruA-, ^-»w*w>^ .^^ v~^. 
>-UT^<->  . ^rf^*-»^».  *_*>,  ^»^«^«^AA*;-^:)»^ 
^v^ U-v^ .^^^  ~\ ,  *»=U C— VT  °^Y^ V^^ \V *-^V  VS^W^  vv—^^ 
First page  of Marx's manuscript with extracts from Imre Szabö's worlc  The  State  Policy 
of Modern Europe, from  the  Beginning  of the  Sixteenth Century  to the  Present Time 

=====第532页=====

=====第533页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 509 
1572.  William of Orange proclaimed governor of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht. 
1579. Union of Utrecht. 
Elizabeth in England. 1562 (after treaty of Elizabeth with Protestants in France) 
treaty with Charles IX (of France). In this treaty comprehended Ferdinand 
(Emperor) and Philip II. 
1572.  Massacre of St. Bartholomew. 
Till 7585 the Netherlands left to themselves. 1585. Alliance treaty of Elizabeth 
with the Netherlands. 
1589. Henry III, the last of the Valois, murdered. Henry of Navarre (Henry IV). 
1593.  Alliance at the Hague between Elizabeth and Henry IV; Netherlands 
included in it. 
1598. Peace of Vervins between Henry IV and Philip II (mutual restitution of 
the conquests since 1559). This peace proclaimed the Wane of Spanish preponder­
ance (in the same year Edict of Nantes). Philip II t. Philip III. (1588. Destruction of 
the Armada.) Death of Elizabeth. James I. 
1609. Treaty between Henry and Spain for the cessation of hostilities with the 
United Provinces (form of a truce of 12 years; in fact, an acknowledgment of the 
independence of the Low Countries). (The Spanish branch of the Habsburgs still 
maintained its sway over Italy and had acquired Portugal in 1581). 
Henry IV's plan for the remodelling of Europe (abasement of Austria).368 
Provisions: Italy: Pope secular Prince (Rome, Naples, Apulia, Calabria under him); 
Venice (Republic; united with Florence, Modena, a few other small states); Duke of 
Savoy (to become king of Lombardy). 
Bohemia (elective kingdom; to be annexed to it Moravia, Silesia, Lusatia3). 
Hungary (annexed to it the arch-duchy of Austria, Styria, Carinthia). Poland also to 
be aggrandized. Switzerland (to be added to it Tyrol, Alsace, and other territories). 
Netherlands (to be republic). 
The House of Austria to be reduced to Spain and a few islands off the coast of 
the Mediterranean. 
t Henry IV 1610. 
(This period [witnesses the] downfall of the older branch of the 
Habsburgs.) 
Ill) 1618-1648. (Thirty Years War) 
1617. Treaty between Gustav Adolphus and Michael Feodorowich (first 
Romanoff). Sweden confirmed in the possession of Carelia, Kexholm b and Ingria.c 
Muscovite excluded from the Gulf of Finland and the Baltic. Adolphus rendered 
himself master (against Poland) of Livonia and Polish Prussia. End of the 16th 
century extinction of the Jagellon dynasty. 
Hungary and Bohemia now under the Habsburgs: the former aided, and, at the 
same time, clogged by Turkey in its attempts to throw off the Habsburgs. 
Under Ferdinand I, Maximilian, Rudolph II (filling the XVIth century) Austria 
takes no part in the wars between Spain and France; appeases the Sultans with 
tributes and vies for Hungary. 
1606. Hungary pacified by the treaty of Vienna (Rudolph II). Transylvania's 
a Region in the middle reaches of the Elbe, Spree and Neisse rivers, inhabited 
by the West Slavonic tribe of Lusatians.— Ed. 
b Priozersk.— Ed. 
c The Izhora land subject to Novgorod.— Ed. 

=====第534页=====
510 Karl Marx 
independence acknowledged.369 Turkey checked by Abbas, Shah of Persia; 
arrested her progress to Europe. 
Accession of Ferdinand II (archduke of Styria). 
1618 commencement of the troubles in Bohemia. Bohemians offer the crown to 
Frederick V (elector of the Palatinate); his ally Bethlen3 (prince of Transylvania). 
28 Aug. 1619. Ferdinand II elected emperor of Germany, concludes alliance 
with Maximilian of Bavaria, Spain, Pope,b  and Marv de Medicis (in the minority of 
Louis XIII, married to Anne, daughter of Philip III). (Duke of Angouleme 1620 
concludes for France treaty with Ferdinand II at Ulm.) Philip III t. Philip IV. 
Protestants in Germany [find an] ally in Christian IV of Denmark; Wallenstein's 
army. Beginning of the war. 370 Prince of Wales married with Henrietta of France.c 
1624. Richelieu's entrance into office. 
7625.  Richelieu makes war on Spain by occupying the Valtelina. Charles I (in 
England). 
1626. Bethlen forced to make peace with Ferdinand  II.371  Denmark (participat­
ing in the war from 1625) forced to make a separate peace with Ferdinand II 
(1629). 
1629. Ferdinand II's decree of Restitution.372  La Rochelle surrenders to 
Richelieu. 
1629. Richelieu mediates peace between Sweden and Poland.373 Gustavus 
Adolphus (with the promise of subsidies of France) lands an army in Pomerania. 
1631.  Treaty between France and Sweden. 
(1629,  after the death of Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua,d Charles, Duke of Nevers, 
and Ferdinand of Guastalla pretenders to it. Former supported by France, latter by 
Austria. French army forces the pass of Susa, confirms Nevers.)374 
1632.  Battle of Lützen. Gustav Adolphus f. 
1634. Defeat of the Swedes at Nördlingen. Direct participation of France in the 
war of Germany. France takes possession of Alsace, after its fortified places were 
given up to the French by their Swedish allies. New league with the Netherlands set 
on foot by Richelieu. Elector of Saxe e goes over to the Emperor; peace of Prague.375 
War simultaneously recommenced in Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, on the 
Rhine and the Danube. Richelieu invades Spain. (1635) Marshals Châtillon and 
Brézé entered the Netherlands; Créqui, in unison with the Duke of Savoy, f in Italy; 
Guébriant and Turenne cooperate with the Swedes on the Rhine, another body 
penetrates into Spain. 
Austria and Spain on the one side; France, Sweden, and the 
Netherlands on the other the principals. 
1637. Ferdinand II t Ferdinand III Emperor. 
1640.  Fresh war in Hungary about to commence by George Rakoczyß Prince of 
Transylvania, in alliance with France and Sweden; the latter (France) ditto with the 
Catalonians, where a rise [takes place]. Revolution in Portugal; expulsion of the 
Spaniards. Emperor assured by a truce with the Turks, then masters of the half of 
Hungary. Victories of the French army in Italy, Spain, Flanders, on the Rhine. 
a Gabor Bethlen.— Ed. 
b Paul  V.—Ed. 
c Henrietta Maria.— Ed, 
d Vincenzo II Gonzaga.— Ed. 
c Johann Georg I.— Ed. 
f Victor Amadeus  I.—Ed. 
s György I Râkôczy.— Ed. 

=====第535页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 5  1 1 
4 December 1642. Richelieu t. 1643. Louis XIII t. Mazarin (Anne's of Spain 
Regency).376 
1645. Assembling of the Plenipotentiaries at Munster (chiefly there treated the 
affairs of Sweden and the Protestants), and Osnabrück 3 (the affairs of France 
principally). 377 (155 negotiators.) (Savoy ally of France.) 
Circular of the French ambassador: "the interests of France identical with German 
liberty". Victories by French and Swedes. 
"The Hollanders no more feared their hereditary enemies, the Spaniards, but 
the French, their ancient allies, now the object of their distrust" (Bougeant b). 
"They (the Hollanders) insensibly came to the conviction that security consisted in 
having the Spaniards as a barrier against France" (I.e.). Preliminary agreement between 
the Spanish and Dutch ambassadors. 
1648. Victories of the Swedes. Ratification of peace between Spain and 
Holland.378 
October 1648. Peace. (Spain excluded from it.) 
France obtained: Upper and Lower Alsace, Brisac,c  right of keeping a garrison in 
Philipsburg, the three bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun. Sweden received 
Higher Pomerania, Stettin, Gortz, etc., port of Wismar; bishoprics of Verden and 
Bremen, with vote in the German diet. Brandenburg, Mecklenburg, Hanover, 
Hesse, etc., compensated chiefly by ecclesiastical property. (Pignerol, d formerly 
belonging to Savoy, [turned over] to France.) In Italy Austria confirmed in Milan 
and Tuscany. Acknowledged independence of Holland and Switzerland 
(de facto since 1315). 
With reference to religion all settled on the basis of the peace of Passau and 
Augsburg (1552 and 1556). Emperor grants general amnesty to the empire, except 
his own provinces. 
(Bohemia forgotten.)379 
Weakening of the younger house of Austria. 
IV) 1648-1660. Gallo-Spanish War. 
Peace of the Pyrenees 
Cromwell. 
1654. War in Flanders between Mazarin and Spain. 
1654. Peace between England and Holland.380 
1655. Coalition between England and France. Commercial English treaty with 
France. 1657 Cromwell sends the French an aid of 6,000 men, acquires Dunkirk. 
7657.  t Ferdinand III. 1658 Leopold Emperor. Cromwell t-
1657. Coalition against Sweden of Denmark, Poland, Muscovy, Austria. (Charles 
Gustavus king of Sweden.) His only ally: Prince Rakoczy of Transylvania. 
1659. Conferences between Mazarin and Don Louis de Haro, on the island of 
Pheasants (in the river of Bidasoa). Marriage between Louis XIV and Maria 
a Osnaburg.— Ed. 
h Guillaume Hyacinthe Bougeant, Histoire du traité de Westphalie, ou des 
négociations qui se firent à Münster et à Osr.abriig, pour établir la paix entre toutes les 
puissances de l'Europe, Paris,  1751.—  Ed. 
<" Brcisach. — Ed. 
(l Pincrolo. — Ed. 

=====第536页=====
512 Karl Marx 
Theresa, daughter of Philip IV (entire renunciation on the part of the Infanta). 
Treaty of the Pyreneesß sl France gets in the Low Countries the county of Arras, 
several places in Flanders, Hainault and the Duchy of Luxemburg. On the 
Pyrenees Roussillon and Conflans. 3 Duke of Lorraine bound to allow a military 
passage to France. 
March 1661 MazaVin t. 
1654. Queen Christina resigns in favour of Charles X (son of the sister of 
Gustav Adolphus b). He is allied with the elector of Brandenburg,0 invades Poland. 
Then league of Denmark with Muscovy, Holland against him. 1660 he compels the 
Danes to peace, gets Scania,d Oeland,e  several places on the island of Rügen, 
exemption from the Sound Duties. 382 7660 Charles X t; his son, Charles XI, 
succeeds. Renews treaty with Denmark, makes peace of Oliva^^ with Poland, which 
cedes to him Livonia, Esthonia, and Oesel. 1661 peace with Muscovy on the status 
quo ante bellum. 
"Thus did Sweden confirm its preponderance in the north, at the very moment 
when France became all-powerful in the south and west of Europe." 
V) 1660-1697. Wars of Louis XIV. Peace of Ryswick 
Restoration in England. 
Dunkirk sold to Louis XIV by Charles II. War between England and Holland. 
England by De Ruyter and Tromp forced to peace of Breda (1667). (Louis XIV 
acted in this war with Holland.) Louis XIV assists Portugal against Spain. 
7665.  Philip IV of Spain (Louis XIV's father-in-law) t. Carlos II (scarcely 4 
years old, his son). (Philip IV's 2nd daughterf consort of the Emperor Leopold.) 
Louis XIV lays claim by the "right of devolution"^4 to the Spanish Netherlands. 
1667. Louis XIV (Turenne) conquers greatest part of the Spanish Netherlands. 
7668 (winter) subdues Franche-Comté. 
January 23, 1668. Triple Alliance between England, Holland and Sweden. 
France was to relinquish its conquests in the Spanish Netherlands or Franche-
Comté. 
May 1668. Louis XIV at Aix-la-Chapelle peace with Spain (retains his conquests 
in the Netherlands, relinquishes Franche-Comté). 
7670.  Conspiracy of the nobles in Hungary against the Habsburg rule. Leopold 
treaty with Louis XIV. Hungary subdued, Leopold turned to the Dutch. 
7677.  Secret treaty of Louis XIV with Charles II of England. 
7672.  French invasion of Holland. 
7673.  Charles forced to abandon the French alliance. Coalition of Spain, the 
Emperor, s Brandenburg, Holland, Denmark against France. Sweden her only ally. 
Theatre of war from Holland transferred to the Spanish Netherlands and the 
German frontiers. 
1675. Negotiations commence at Nimeguen,h where: 
70 August 1678. Separate treaty between Louis XIV and Holland. September 
1678 Spain made peace. Abandons Franche-Comté for the restitution of some 
a Albertville. — Ed. 
b Catherine.— Ed. 
c Frederick William.— Ed. 
d Malmöhus. — Ed. 
e Halland.— Ed. 
f Margarita Theresa.— Ed. 
s Leopold I.— Ed. 
h Nijmegen.— Ed. 

=====第537页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 513 
places in the Spanish Netherlands. Finally Leopold makes peace385; Louis stipulates 
with Denmark, Brunswick, Brandenburg for the restitution to Sweden of the 
conquests made upon her during the war. Louis XIV triumphs at the coast of Sicily 
over the united fleets of Holland and Spain. But the peace of Nimeguen did not 
settle Louis' right over a few towns in Alsace. 
1681.  Chamber of Reunion in Metz. 386 
Emperor tries to make war; but war with Hungary and Turkey; 1684 makes 
peace with Louis XIV at Ratisbonne.3 
1686. League between Holland, Austria, Savoy, Brandenburg. 
1688. Louis XIV sends an army to the Rhine. Accession of William III in 
England. Great offensive alliance against France (England, Holland, Emperor 
Leopold, Spain, Brandenburg, Victor Amadeus of Savoy). 
7689.  Declaration of war against France by Holland, England, Spain, and 
Austria.b (Separate treaty between Holland, England and the Emperor in May 
1689.) (Emperor or his heirs shall be assisted in taking the eventual succession of 
the Spanish Monarchy. His son, Joseph, king of Hungary, shall be elected Emp. of 
Germany.) (France to be reduced to the terms of the treaties of Westphalia and the 
Pyrenees.) 
August 1696. Separate peace at Turin between Louis XIV and Victor Amadeus 
of Savoy. Pignerol given up to Savoy. 
1697. Peace of Ryswick.ss7  First peace between France, Holland and England. 
Then Spain. Mutual restitution. July 1697 peace with the Emperor. Kiel, Fribourg, 
Brisac, Philipsburg exchanged by Louis XIV for Strasburg. Apart from this, 
restitution of all places acquired during the war, beyond Alsace. 
VI) 1697-1715. War of the Spanish Succession. 
Peace of Utrecht 
October 11, 1698. Partition treaty (of Spain) at the Hague between Louis XIV and 
William III. (Two Sicilies, Tuscany, Guipuscoa allotted to the Dauphin.c Milan to 
archduke Charles, 2nd son of the emperor. Spain and its other possessions to the 
Elector of Bavariad and his heirs.) 
February 1698. t the Elector of Bavaria. 
March 11, 1700. Second Partition Scheme between William and Louis. 
(Dauphin to receive, besides the dominions in the 1st treaty, Lorraine, for which 
Milan to the Duke of Lorraine. All the other dominions of the Spanish crown to 
the Archduke Charles.) 
1699. Peace of Carlowitz between the Porte, Austria, Venice, and Poland. 
1700. League between Czar Peter, Poland and Denmark against Sweden, defeat 
of the Russians at Narva by Charles XII. 
October 1700. Will of Carlos II, appointing the Duke of Anjou,e 2nd son of the 
Dauphin, his heir. November 1700 Carlos II t. Philip V acknowledged by Duke of 
Savoy, Duke of Mantua/ Portugal, and lastly, King William. 
a Regensburg. — Ed. 
b Marx took this from the chronological table at the end of Szabo's book, 
p. 384.— Ed. 
c Louis.— Ed. 
d Joseph Ferdinand.— Ed. 
e Philip of Anjou (Philip V).— Ed. 
f Ferdinando Carlo, Gonzaga di.— Ed. 

=====第538页=====
514 Karl Marx 
February 1701. Louis XIV marches troops into the Spanish Netherlands which 
he forces the Dutch garrisons to evacuate; letter patent by which he acknowledges 
the right of Philip to succeed to the throne of France. 3 
September 1701. Second Great Alliance.388 James II t. Louis XIV acknowledges 
the Pretender.b William t. Partial war between Austria and France in Italy.389 
1702.  Queen Anne renews the alliance. May. War against France declared by 
England, Holland, Emperor.c (Portugal, Hanover, Prussia accede) ([also] several of 
the smaller German states). (Bavaria, Brunswick, Cologne, Duke of Savoy for Louis 
XIV.) 
1704. Gibraltar captured by the English. 1706 victory of Ramillies (Marl­
borough). Civil war in Hungary.390 Austria conquers Naples. 
1707. Charles XII in Saxony. 
(Hungary in war against Austria since 1703.) 
1709. Battle of Pultava.d Charles XII to Turkey. 
1710. Declarations of war by the Porte to Russia. 
1711.  Peace of the Pruth between Turkey and Russia. Preliminaries of Peace 
between England and France. 
April 1711. t Emperor Joseph. The Archduke Charles, his son,e heir to all his 
dominions. 
In the preliminaries (between England and France): 
Dunkirk demolished; Gibraltar and Port Mahon, Newfoundland and Hudson 
Bay for England. 
January 12, 1712. General Congress opened at Utrecht. (Philip renounces his 
claims to France.) (Duke of Berry and Duke of Orleans renounce their claims to 
Spain.) 
April 1713. Peace of Utrecht concluded between England, France, Spain and 
Holland. France ceded to England, besides the above, her possessions in the island 
of St. Christopher, Nova Scotia, Port Royal. In the name of Spain Louis ceded 
Upper Guelder to Prussia, acknowledged the king-title of Frederick I, and his 
sovereignty over Neufchatel. Savoy received Sicily and the right of succession [to 
the] throne, in default of the issue of Philip V. Frontier between France and Savoy 
the summits of the Alps. Holland obtains a commercial treaty and the exchange of 
a few places. April 11, 1713. Commercial treaty between France and England. 
1711.  Hungary pacified by the treaty of Szatmar. Czar Peter promised to assist 
him f with 30,000 men, if allowed to keep Livonia as a fief of the German empire. 
Short campaign, France on the Rhine superior to Austria. 
Sept. 7, 1714. Peace of Baden between France and Austria. France acknowledges 
the right of the Emperor to Naples, Milan, Tuscany, Spanish Netherlands; restores 
Brisac and Fribourg. Electors of Bavaria and Cologne to be restored to their states. 
1715. New league against Sweden joined by George I and Prussia. 
Philip V not yet acknowledged by Austria. Not until 1715 treaty between 
Holland and Austria, which concedes Holland a few places in the Spanish 
Netherlands, in addition to the right of garrisoning several other places. 
/ September 1715. Louis XIV t. 
a Szabo has "formal renunciation on the part of Philip V of the throne of 
France" (Vol. I, p. 167).— Ed. 
b James Stuart.— Ed. 
c Leopold I.— Ed. 
d Poltava.— Ed. 
e A slip of the pen. It should read "his brother".— Ed. 
f Charles VI.— Ed. 

=====第539页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 515 
VII) 1715-1721 
George I [and] Duke of Orleans united in league against Spain. 
(Alberoni.) 
1699. Peace of Carlowitz. Peter gets Azov; abandonment of all Hungary to 
Austria save the Banat; Morea rendered back to Venice; Podolia and Ukraine to 
Poland. 
Under the treaty between England (Hanover), Prussia, Poland (Saxony) and 
Denmark, the Czar received the Baltic provinces; Prussia Stettin and dependencies, 
August of Saxony rex Poloniae Courland, Hanover Bremen- Verden, Denmark the 
island of Rügen with a part of Swedish Pomerania. 3 1719. Aaland conferences 
opened on April 24.391  Agreed in Aaland isles that: Czar assists Charles XII to re­
cover from Prussia Stettin and the part of Pomerania occupied by Prussian troops. 
Czar assists Sweden with 20,000 men for carrying on the war in Germany, and 
assists Charles to acquire Norway as indemnity for the Baltic provinces ceded to 
Russia. Czar assists Charles to gain back Bremen and Verden from George I, etc. 
(also Restoration of Stuarts). 
Death of Charles XII. Peace of the new Swedish Government with England, 
Denmark and Prussia. 
{Treaty of Stockholm, November 1, 1719.) 
Treaty of Nystadt (in Finland), August 30, 1721. (Sweden cedes Livonia, Esthonia, 
Ingria, part of Carelia, district of Wiborg, islands Oesel, Dago, Moen, and the other 
islands off the coasts of the said provinces. Czar restores Finland except a part, to 
be determined at the regulation of the frontiers.)392 
(Under the peace of Stockholm Schleswig fell to Denmark. Peter 
marries his daughter Anne to Duke of Holstein, b takes up his 
"rights".  Originally, he in alliance with Denmark against this Duke.) 
"Transformation of the north of Europe, based on the dismemberment of Sweden. " 
VIII) 1715-1740. General Embroilment of Europe 
War between Spain and Austria in Italy. Austria supported by 
England. War of England and France against Spain. 
Alberoni sent into exile. 
January 1720. Spain accedes to the Quadruple Alliance.393 Sicily made over to 
the Emperor,c Savoy receives Sardinia in exchange for it. Parma, Placentia,'1 
Tuscany promised, on the death of the last Medici,e to Don Carlos, son of Philip V 
by his second wife, Elizabeth of Parma. 
a Marx put this paragraph after the words "1719. Aaland conferences opened 
on April 24". The editors have transferred it to maintain the chronological 
order.— Ed. 
l> Charles I.— Ed. 
c Charles VI.— Ed. 
d Piacenza.— Ed. 
e Cosimo III.— Ed. 

=====第540页=====
516 Karl Marx 
1724. Congress of Cambray (England, France, Spain, and Austria). 
1725. Secret treaties between Spain and Austria. Counter-treaty of Hanover.394 
1728. (Opened 14 June) Congress of Soissons. 
1729. Peace of Seville between Spain, England and France. 
1731.  Treaty of Vienna between Austria, England and Holland. Death of king 
Augustus. 
September 1733. Stanislaus Leszinsky proclaimed king of Poland. Russia (ruled by 
Anne since 1730) with Austria (Karl VI) are for the son3 of the deceased king, who 
promised the emperor the guarantee of the Pragmatic Sanction,395 and to the 
Czarina not to reclaim Courland, formerly a fief of Poland. War about the crown of 
Poland.  France attacks Austria. 
Marshal Berwick operates on the Rhine. Another French army, under Villars, 
crosses the Alps, and, joined by Charles Emanuel of Sardinia, drove the Austrians 
from Milan. Shortly afterwards Don Carlos (of Spain) (son of Elizabeth) penetrated 
into Naples and Sicily-, where he was proclaimed king, dispersing (with the aid of 
the population, exasperated at the tyranny of the Austrian rule) the whole imperial 
army; and there was soon nothing left in Italy in Austrian hands, save the fortress 
of Mantua. Only 1,500 French troops sent to Danzic. 
1735. Peace of Vienna (October) between France and Austria. (August III of 
Saxony shall be king of Poland. Stanislaus, with the kingly title, receives the Duchies 
of Lorraine and Bar, to revert after his death to France. Don Carlos retains Naples, 
Sicily, and the Austrian coast of Tuscany.) The Duke of Lorraine receives in 
exchange for his hereditary dominions the possession of Tuscany. Sardinia shall 
receive Novara, Tortona, and a few other places in the Milanese. Parma and Piacenza to 
be given to the Emperor. All the other conquests made by the allied armies to be 
restored. Guarantee of the Pragmatic Sanction by France, Spain, the maritime powers 
and Russia. (Marie Thérèse, the Emperor's daughter, marries Francis of Lorraine. b) 
1736. Russo-Austrian war against the Porte. Russians invade the Crimea. 
Munich takes Perekop, lays waste the southern part of the peninsula. 
1737. Munich takes Oczakow. Gen. Lascy (Russ) again penetrates into the 
Crimea. Congress of Niemirov. Russia demanded: 1) the abolition of all former 
treaties; 2) cession of the Crimea, the Kuban, and the other Tartar provinces; 3) 
independence of the Danubian provinces, under the protectorate of Russia; 4) Czar 
to be acknowledged (his title as Emperor); 5) free navigation in the Euxine,c the 
Bosphorus, the Hellespont, and the Mediterranean. 
Austria asked large territories beyond the Danube, including Belgrade, Widdin, 
several portions of Moldavia and Wallachia. 
1739. Peace of Belgrade: Everything restituted to the Porte except Azov. Further: 
The Porte remained in the possession of Belgrade, Orsova, and the disputed parts 
of Wallachia and Bosnia. (Never had Hungary had a better opportunity for 
recovering her independence. Rakoczy, ex-prince of Transylvania, in Turkey 
together with anti-Austrian Hungarian chiefs.) 
War in Indiad between Spain and England. English declaration of war against 
Spain.e 
a Augustus III.— Ed. 
b Francis Stephen (Francis I).— Ed. 
c The Black Sea.— Ed. 
d Szabo has "in the Indies". This refers to the West Indies.— Ed. 
e Marx took this sentence from the chronological table at the end of Szabö'sbook, 
p. 386.— Ed. 

=====第541页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 517 
1740. t Frederick William I, of Prussia; t Emperor Charles VI; t Anna of 
Russia. 
1713-1740. Barren unison of France with England. Pitiable state of Sweden, 
divided into Hat (French) and Bonnet (Russian) parties, the latter of which soon 
gained the ascendancy. 
IX) 1740-1763. Austrian Succession War. 
Seven Years War 
1740. Invasion of Silesia by Frederick II. 
1741.  Treaty of Nymphenburg, based on the partition of Austria (between France, 
Elector of Bavaria, 3 Spain, August III (of Saxony and Poland), and Prussia). 
Habsburg saved by Hungarian enthusiasm, and the treacherous policy and half 
measure of Cardinal Fleury. 1741 (spring). Fred. II marches into Moravia. 
Sardinia, subsequently gained over to the other side, prepares for the invasion of 
Milan. 
1742.  England declares for Austria. June 11 peace at Breslau between Frederick 
and Austria (he gets Lower Silesia). War between France and Austria goes on in 
Germany and Italy. Frankfort (1742) Charles VII (Bavaria) crowned Emperor. 
To prevent Russia from rendering aid to Maria Theresia, French bring about a 
Russo-Swedish war; soon ended to Russia's profit. 1743 peace of Abo; Sweden to 
cede different places in Finland; to designate, at the behest of the Czarina, b the 
Duke of Holstein Gottorp, c successor to the Swedish crown. 
/ 745. Treaty of Warsaw between England, Saxony and Austria against 
Frederick. 
(1743.  Treaty of Worms between Austria, England and Sardinia.) Frederick again 
enters the French alliance. 
(1744. Spring. France and England declare war against each other.)d 
1745 (December). Peace of Dresden between Frederick and Austria: renewal of 
the treaty of Breslau, by which Frederick retained Silesia, promising his vote to 
Francis of Lorraine, consort of Maria Theresia. Emperor Charles Albert of Bavaria 
had died, his son e had made peace with Maria Theresia. (This the second separate 
Austro-Prussian peace.) 
This peace enabled Maria Theresia to send large reinforcements to Italy where 
Milan, Parma and Piacenza had fallen into the hands of the Gallo-Spanish armies; 
scale turned. 
England victorious in the Indies and the Mediterranean. Philip V of Spain t. 
Withdrawal of the Spanish troops from Italy. While Belleisle beaten in Italy, 
victories of Marshal de Saxe' and Lowendal in the Netherlands. Saxe in 1747 
progresses through the territories of the Dutch Republic, reduction of the fortress 
Bergen-op Zoom. Maritime victories by the Engl, admirals Anson, Warren and 
Hawke. Russian army of 40,000 set in motion by Elizabeth, allured by the promise 
of English subsidies. 
a Charles VII (Charles Albert).— Ed. 
h Elizabeth (Petrovna).— Ed. 
c Adolphus Frederick.— Ed. 
A Marx put this after the words " 1745 (December). Peace of Dresden between 
Frederick and Austria". The editors have transferred it in accordance with Marx's 
marginal notes.— Ed. 
e Maximilian III  Josef.—  Ed. 
' Maurice von Saxe. — Ed. 

=====第542页=====
518 Karl Marx 
1748. October. Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle which Maria Theresia could not but 
accept. Restitution of conquests by France and England. France gave up for Cape 
Breton the places in the Netherlands, and restored to England Madras; dispute 
about the frontiers in Canada left for subsequent decision. Parma, Piacenza, 
Gustalla a given to Don Philip and his male heirs. Sardinia remains in status quo, 
Assiento treaty for England prolonged for 4 years, guarantee of the English 
succession, expulsion of the Stuarts from France. Guarantee of the Pragmatic 
Sanction, confirmation of Lower Silesia to Frederick II. Germs of the new war the 
pending differences between France and England. 
1751-3.  Kaunitz' secret negotiations at Paris. Makes first abbé de Bernis^ then 
Duc de Choiseul Minister. 
1754. War recommences between France and England in America; dispute 
about the boundaries of Nova Scotia, or Acadia, ceded to England in the Utrecht 
treaty396; building of French forts along the Ohio, occupation by the French of the 
neutral islands of the Antilles, Tobago, St. Vincent, St. Lucia. 
January 1756. Anglo-Prussian treaty of Westminster. Against it Gallo- Austrian 
defensive alliance of Versailles (May 1756). At the same time negotiations between 
Austria, Saxony, and (Elizabeth) Russia. June 1756. Capture of Fort Mahon by the 
French. Frederick defeats the Saxons at Pirna (surrender of 18,000 men) (autumn 
1756). 
1757 (winter). Austria, France, Russia, Sweden, and several "circles" of Germany 
collect force of 400,000 men against Frederick. Spring 1757 Fred, beats the 
Austrians at Prague; beaten by Daun at Collin,b forced to retreat to Saxony. Defeat 
of the Hanovero-Hessian troops by Richelieu.39,7  (Convention at Closter Seven, by 
which Duke of Cumberland bound to disband the Han. Hess, troops.) Frederick 
persuades Richelieu to inaction, while he falls upon Soubise and the Germans 
under Prince Hildburghausen. November 5 his victory at Rosbach, while Richelieu 
remained inactive in his quarters at Halberstadt. Then to Silesia. Victory at Lissa. 398 
1758. Accession of Pitt (Lord Chatham) to the head of affairs. 
December 1758. Second Gallo-Austrian treaty at Versailles. Louis XV engages to 
subsidise the Swedes, to maintain 100,000 army (French) in Germany, and to 
maintain also the Saxon army — Silesia and Glatz to be restituted to the empress,c 
the Rhenish provinces to be conquered from Prussia, to be ceded to Austria, the 
revenues, however, during the time of war, to be given to France. France forgot 
her maritime war,399 to fight the battles of Austria. 
1759. Defeat of Prussians at Hochkirchen. 
1759-60. English victorious in the East Indies, in America (capture of Quebec by 
Wolfe, hence, the conquest of Canada) and in the West Indies. 
Choiseul in Austria's interest. 
1761.  Family compact between the French and Spanish Bourbons. Chatham will 
anticipate Spain. Supplanted by Lord Bute. Invasion of Portugal by Spain. 
January 1762. t Elizabeth of Russia. Peter III emperor. The propositions made 
to the Czar by Lord Bute, through the Russian minister, Prince Golitsin, to reduce 
Prussia to peace on any conditions, declined. 
(Fred. II informed of these despatches by Peter III.) 
Bute's secret negotiations with Austria for the dismemberment of Prussia met 
with no better success. 
•'' Guastalla.- -F.d. 
h Kolin.----F.d. 
'•' x?,\ria Theresa.— Ed. 

=====第543页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabô's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 519 
February 1763. Peace between England, France, Spain at Paris. England received 
Nova Scotia, Canada, Cape Breton, while France a share in the fisheries of 
Newfoundland. Mississippi declared the boundary between Louisiana and the 
British settlements. France yielded to England, in the West Indies, Grenada and 
the neutral islands of St. Vincent, Domingo,3  Tobago. In Africa the English 
restored Gorea, retained Senegal; Menorca restored to England. France recovered 
her small possessions in the East Indies, but engaged to maintain no troops in 
Bengal. Spain gave up to England Florida, confirms her right to cut logwood in the 
bay of Honduras, but Spain replaced in Cuba and Havanah. Portugal in the status 
quo ante bellum. 
Peace at Hubertusburg 400 between Fred, and Austria (nothing else than a 
confirmation of the peace at Breslau and Dresden b). (Fred.engages to give his vote 
for Archduke Joseph, son of Maria Theresa, at the pending election of the king of 
the Roumans.) No territorial change in Europe after the 7 years' war. 
If Frederick raised Prussia to the rank formerly occupied by Sweden (since the 
peace of Westphalia401), he is prudent enough to profit by, but too weak to arrest, 
the progress of Muscovite ambition.... Fred. II had no great political plan. Silesia his 
whole and single idea. 
The distinctive character of this period the decline of France. In the first war the 
alliances of France with Frederick, twice thrown overboard by him, failed to wrest 
the German sceptre from dilapidated Austria. In the second war, France, allied 
with that same Austria, Saxony, Sweden and Russia, failed even to dispossess 
Frederick of Silesia. 
X) 1763-1774. Partition of  Poland. 
Peace of Kainardji 
Augustus III, Saxon king of Poland, t. June 1762. Catherine usurps throne of 
Russia. Catherine and Frederick declare for Poniatowski. Defensive alliance between 
them,  contains secret clause not to permit any changes in the anomalous constitution 
of Poland.402 
1764. Russian troops march into Poland. September enthrone Poniatowski. 
Russian ministerc at Warsaw real president of the assemblies of Poland. Catherine 
declares for the dissidents (Greeks and Protestants), also supported by England and 
Sweden, as the guarantees of the peace of Oliva. 
Diet of 1767. Prince Repnin, the Russian ambassador, assumes the part of a 
dictator. Polish Confederacy of Bar (in Podolia). War with the Russians; the remnant 
of the Bar confederates driven into the dominions of the Porte, excited by France 
to mingle in the Russo-Polish war. At the end of 1768 or the beginning of 1769 the 
Sultand throws the Russian Ambassadore in the 7 towers. 
1770. Russo-Turkish war.f 
(Corsica sold to France by Genoa.) g 
a Dominica.— Ed. 
h See this volume, p. 517.— Ed. 
c Nikolai VasilyCvich Repnin.— Ed. 
d Mustafa III.— Ed. 
e Alexei Mikhailövich Obreskov. — Ed. 
f Marx took this from the chronological table at the end of Szabo's book, 
p. 386.— Ed. 
s Marx put this after the words "1772. Partition of  Poland".  The editors have 
transferred it in accordance with the way the material is presented in Szabô's 
book.— Ed. 
18-1305 

=====第544页=====
520 Karl Marx 
1772.  Partition of Poland.  By the partition Prussia obtained West Prussia (600,000 
souls;  master of the Vistula, the inlets and outlets of Polish commerce); Catherine: 
Lithuania and the country between the rivers Dvina and Dnieper (1,800,000 souls); 
Austria: Lodomeria, Gallicia, and other parts surrounding Hungary (3,000,000 
souls). 
July 1774. (Peace of Kainardji.) (Independence of the Crimea.) Azov, Kinburn, 
Kertch, Yenikale for Russia, etc. The right of Russia to make verbal applications at 
Constantinople, in behalf of Moldavia and Wallachia. 
Austria obtains the Bukovina part of Moldavia (Austria, the ally of Turkey). 
XI) 1774-1783. American War of Independence.3 
Peace of Paris 
1763.  Rigorous regulations (British) to prevent smuggling; stamp duty.403 
1773.  Boston demonstration (ship-cargoes with tea thrown into the sea). 
December 1776. (Franklin arrives in France.) 
6 February 1778. Treaty between France and the revolted Colonies.b 
April 1778. French fleet under Count d'Estaing with a considerable land force 
sets sail for America. 
Joseph (of Austria) attempts to annex Lower Bavaria (after the death of the 
Elector Maximilian Joseph) to Austria. 
Potato war.404 
He tries also to open by force of arms the free navigation of the Scheldt. 
7 779.  Spain joins with France in the war against England. 
1780. Russia proclaims the Armed Neutrality.0405 
3 September 1783. Peace of Versailles between France, Spain, America, England. 
May 1784. Peace between England and Holland. 
XII) 1783-1790. Final annexation of the Crimea 
to the Russian Empire 
Austria in alliance with Russia, ready to share in the spoil. 
1790. Prusso-Turkish Alliance.... Congress of Reichenbach (entire conciliation of 
Prussia and Austria406).... Peace of Werila (on the basis of the status quo) between 
Sweden and Russia407.... Discontent of the Hungarians and Belgians.... Peace of 
Szistova between Austria and Turkey408.... Peace of Jassy (between Russia and 
Turkey).409 
Austria, since the days of Charles V, was never able either to conquer, or to 
recover, a single province. 
[Volume  II]410 
la) 1790-1796 
1791,  August 25. Austro-Prussian declaration of Pilnitz. 
1792 (April 20). French declaration of war against Austria. 
a Szabo has "The war of the British-American colonies..." (The State Policy..., 
Vol. I, p. 296).— Ed. 
b Marx took this item from the chronological table at the end of Szabo's book, 
p. 386.—  Ed. 
c Item taken by Marx from Szabö's chronological table (ibid., p. 387).— Ed. 

=====第545页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 521 
1792 (July 25, Coblenz). Brunswick's proclamation. 
1793,  21 January. Louis Capet executed. 
1793,  25 March. Convention of Pitt with Russia, followed by treaties of alliance 
and subsidies with Sardinia, Spain, the Bourbon Princes of Italy, Prussia, Austria, 
Portugal, and several petty states of Germany 
(against France). 
1st Coalition. (While sending his troops into the heart of France, the Prussian 
king3 plotted with Catherine a second partition of Poland.) 
July 1793. Second partition of  Poland.  Prussia: Danzic and Thorn. 
(The new constitution of Poland had been proclaimed May 3, 
1791.) (Throne hereditary.) (Russian campaign in Poland 1792.) 
(Convention between Prussia and Russia of St. Petersburg,January 
23, 1793. Prussians enter Poland. Russia got nearly the half of 
Lithuania (the Palatinates of Podolia, Polotsk and Minsk, the half 
of Novogrodek,b Brest, Volhynia) (3 millions of inhabitants).0 
Catherine vehemently inveighed against France, keeping her forces at home. 
April 1794. (Subsidiary agreement between Prussia and England.) 
March 24, 1794. Kosciuszko (dictator). Insurrection at Warsaw 
and Vilna. Austria despatches also an army. November 9, 1794. 
Suworow enters Warsaw. 
3 January 1795. Separate Declaration of Petersburg between 
Austria and Russia (relating to the division). October 24, 1795. 
Prussia signs with Austria the convention of Petersburg. Cracow 
for Austria. Russia obtained the remainder of Poland and 
Lithuania as far as the Niémen, and the confines of Brest and 
Novogrodek, greater part of Samogitia, all of Courland and 
Semigalia. In little Poland that part of the territory of Chelm 
situated on the right bank of the Bug, and the remainder of 
Volhynia. (1,200,000.) 
Austria [obtains], besides principal part of Cracow, Palatinates of 
Sandomir and Lublin, part of the district of Chelm, Palatinates of 
Brest, Podolactiad and Masovia (on the left bank of the Bug) 
(about 1 million of souls). 
Prussia part of Masovia and Podolactia on the right bank of the 
Bug, in Lithuania part of the Palatinate of Troki and Samogitia 
and small district in little Poland, part of the Palatinate of Cracow 
(about 1 million). 
a Frederick William II.— Ed. 
b Novogrudok.— Ed. 
c This paragraph is not based on Szabo's book, but on some other source.— Ed. 
d Podlachia.— Ed. 
18* 

=====第546页=====
522 Karl Marx 
III partition of Poland 
Russia hitherto the greatest gainer by the French war. The first in impressing 
upon England, Austria, Prussia the dangers of the revolutionary principles, 
Catherine pursued her separate interests, without furnishing a single Cossack or a 
single rouble for the "common cause". Her few vessels sent to the assistance of 
England had the appearance of mockery. 
5 April 1795. Basel Peace of France with Prussia. Definite and secret treaty in 
August. Prussia ceded her possessions on the left bank of the Rhine, to be 
indemnified by the secularisation of several German bishoprics. Spain follows. 
(France holds only Spanish part of St. Domingo.411) Tuscany [made] peace with 
France earlier on. Two powers of the Baltic neutral. England now only with 
Sardinia and Austria. Belgium incorporated into France. Parts of Holland ceded to 
France.412 
IIa) 1796-1801 (peace of Luneville) 
April 1796. (3 consecutive battles—Bonaparte—decide the fate of Sardinia.) 
(France obtained Savoy, Nice and the right to occupy several fortresses.) Bonaparte 
in Lombardy. The colonies of the Batavian republic had fallen into the hands of 
Great Britain. 
Catherine t 17 November 1796. 
18 April 1797. Peace preliminaries at Leoben signed by Austria. 
Cisalpine Republic (Modena, Ferrara, Romagna, Mantua). Ligurian republic 
(Genoa, etc.) 
17 October 1797. Peace of Campoformio. (Austria renounces the Netherlands, 
consents to the acquisition of the left bank of the Rhine by France. Receives Venice 
and the Dalmatian part of the Venetian territory. Albania and the Venetian or Ionian 
islands become French.)413 
(May 19, 1798. Bonaparte leaves Toulon for Egypt.) (Malta Bonaparte conquers 
in June 1798.)a  March 15, 1798. Rastatt Congress.* 1* 
December 1798. Treaty between England and Russia. (Both [form] separate alliance 
with Turkey and Sicily.) Swiss Republic under French Protectorate. Occupation by 
the French of the Papal states. 
Second Coalition. 
April 1799. Dissolution of the Rastatt Congress. 
Austria enters the 2nd coalition. By and by Portugal, Bavaria, Elector of 
Mayence,b  Duke of Württemberg 0 enter it. War in Italy and Germany. Naples 
overthrown. Parthenopean Republic. 415 Piedmont [becomes] French under false 
pretences (de facto. Charles Emanuel IV withdraws to Sardinia.) 
(9 October 1799. Bonaparte lands in France.) 
June 14, 1799. Marengo. British take Malta. Emperor Paul: armed neutrality with 
Denmark, Sweden and Prussia. 
March 23, 1801. Paul t. Alexander I. 
9 February 1801. Peace of Luneville. (Rhine recognised by Austria as the 
boundary of France. Division of Venetian territory. Cession of Belgium to France.) 
(Cisalpine, Ligurian, Helvetian, Batavian republics recognised.) 
a Marx took this from the chronological table at the end of Szabö's book.— Ed. 
b Friedrich Karl Joseph, Baron of Erthal.— Ed. 
c Frederick I.— Ed. 

=====第547页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 523 
Ilia) 1801-1805 
January 1802. Bonaparte president of the Italian republic. 
27 March 1802. Peace of Amiens (France, England, Spain, Holland). (England 
retains Trinidad and Ceylon.) (Malta to be evacuated by the English, independent.) 
(France promises to evacuate Naples, Papal states; England all the ports and islands 
in the Mediterranean and Adriatic. Republic of the Ionian islands, integrity of 
Turkey guaranteed.) 
May 18, 1803. England declares war to France. 
May 18, 1804. Bonaparte Emperor. 2 December 1804 crowned by Pope.3 
IVa) 1805-1807. 3d Coalition. Peace of Tilsit 
Petersburg the pivot of new combinations against France. 
11 April 1805. Coalition Treaty between England and Russia. (Sweden already 
bound to England15  by a treaty of December 1804, by which Stralsund was made 
the dépôt of the English.) 
Declar. Petersburg of August 9, exchanged between Austria with 
England and Russia. 
17 October 1805. Capitulation of Ulm. 2 December Austerlitz. 
26 December 1805. Separate peace of  Pressburg  (Austria and Bonaparte). (Napoleon 
recognised as king of Italy. Austria loses her Venetian part. Cedes Tyrol to 
Bavaria; other parts to Baden and Württemberg. Bavaria and Württemberg 
kingdoms, Baden Grand Duchy.) 
January 23, 1806. Pitt t. Fox negotiates with France. Russia thwarts the peace 
negotiations. September 13, 1806. Fox t. 
July 12, 1806 (Paris. Confederation of the Rhine, 16 German 
princes.) 
6 August 1806. Austria resigns the title of German Emperor. 
(Empire at an end.) 
October 14, 1806. Battle of Jena and Auerstädt. 
June 14, 1807. Battle of Friedland. 
July 7, 1807. Peace of Tilsit. (Warsaw and part of West Prussia given to August 
III (Saxony) and raised into a kingdom; East Prussia to the Czar. Secret articles: 
Moldavia and Wallachia to Russia, Morea and Candiac to France, Continental 
System. Deposition of Bourbons in Spain.) 
Va) 1807-1814. (Peace of Paris) 
October 1808. Congress of Erfurt. Conquests of Russia in Sweden (Finland) and 
Turkey (Danubian Principalities). 
(At the same time the Russians engaged in backstage dealings6 
with Prussia and Austria against France.) 
» Pius VII.— Ed. 
b Marx has "Russia", probably a slip of the pen.— Ed. 
c Crete.— Ed. 
d The original is illegible here.— Ed. 

=====第548页=====
524 Karl Marx 
March 1809. Austrian Manifesto calls the Tyroleans to arms. Archduke John 
into Italy, Ferdinand marched upon Warsaw, Charles into Bavaria. 
12 May 1809. Napoleon enters Vienna. 5, 6 July Wagram. 10 Oct. Peace at 
Schönbrunn. (Austria cedes Carinthia, part of Tyrol, the territory of Trieste, part 
of Croatia, Hungarian Adriatic Coast with Fiume. King of Saxony 3 received West 
Gallicia; Russia another part of Austrian  Poland,  for her tardy and reluctant manoeuvres 
during the campaign, as the ally of France.) (Austria had  received secret assurances  of the 
neutrality of the Czar.) 
September 1809. Peace of Russia with Sweden. (It obtained Finland and the Aaland 
isles.) 
December 1810. Ukase issued by Russia against the principles of the Continental 
System. 
By the end of 1811, the whole of the plots between the northern courts and the 
court of St. James ripe for execution. Pozzo di Borgo and Prince Luberminski 
channels between Petersburg and London. Bernadotte already looked upon as a 
sure card. Prussia and Russia already favoured with arms and ammunition by 
England. General rising in Italy prepared by Pozzo. 
1812,  Peace of Bucharest under English mediationb; acquisition by Russia of 
Bessarabia and part of Moldavia. 
1813,  February. Prusso-Russian treaty of Kalisch. 
1814, April 12. Abdication of Napoleon. 
1814, May 30. Peace of Paris. (France limits of 1792. Certain augmentations on 
the North side.c) 
Via) May 1814 to November 1815 
1 November 1814. Opening of the Congress of Vienna. 
9 January 1815. Secret treaty between Austria, France, and England. 
1 March 1815. Bonaparte lands in France. 
June 18, 1815. Waterloo. (September 26, 1815. Holy Alliance.) 
End of June 1815. Congress of Vienna ends. ("Kingdom of Poland" to Russia; 
part of the Duchy of Warsaw (Posen) to Prussia. Gallicia to Austria. Prussia 
received half of Saxony, part of Swedish Pomerania, several provinces of 
Westphalia, and on the left bank of the Rhine. Belgium and Luxemburg to 
Holland. Austria obtains (in exchange for Belgium) besides its former possessions 
the whole of Venice, Mantua, etc. (Modena, Tuscany and Parma for other 
members of the Habsburg family.) Naples restored to Ferdinande Genoa to 
Piedmont. Denmark must give up Norway to Sweden. Austria gets president of the 
Frankfort diet. 416 Switzerland: Valois,e Neufchatel, Geneva added to it. Several 
settlements in the Indies, the Cape of Good Hope, Malta, the Ionian islands, 
Heligoland—spoils from France, Holland, Venice, the Knights of St. John and 
Denmark to England.) 
26 September 1815. Holy Alliance. 
20 November 1815. Second Paris Treaty. France obliged to give up several frontier 
fortresses on the side of the Rhine, Netherlands, Alps. 
a Frederick Augustus I.— Ed. 
b Marx took this sentence from the chronological table at the end of Szabô's 
book, p.  388.—  Ed. 
c Presumably this refers to Holland (see Szabo, The State Policy..., Vol. I, 
p. 92).—  Ed. 
d Ferdinand I.— Ed. 
e Valais.— Ed. 

=====第549页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabô's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 525 
Vila) 1815-1825 
October 1817. Festival of the German students at Wartburg. Burschenschaft. 417 
Abolition of the constitution (of 1812) of Sicily. Ditto of Cortes in Spain.418 
September 1818. Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle. Evacuation of France. The war in 
Portugal. War between Spain and her American colonies. Periodical meetings 
proposed by Metternich, to keep down the revolutionary spirit. November 15 
protocol signed with relation to those meetings. Castlereagh had signed it. France 
also taken into the Holy Alliance; [Castlereagh] departs on command of his 
ministry. (Metternich, Hardenberg, Nesselrode the triumvirate.) 
1819. Congress at Carlsbad under Austro-Prussian auspices; afterwards transfer­
red to Vienna. Remodelled the German constitution. Police-Commission at 
Maynz.419 Carbonari (formed in 1809 around the throne of Emperor Francisa).420 
Popeb thunders against Carbonarism and Freemasons. 
January 1820. Ferdinand of Spainc forced to restore the constitution of the 
Cortes, ditto Ferdinand king of Naples (6 July). (General William Pepe, leader of the 
Carbonari.) 
August 1820. Proclamation issued in Lombard-Venetia by Emp. Francis I 
against Carbonarism. 
October 1820. Congress at Troppau. Armed interference against Naples proposed 
by Metternich. (Dissent of Castlereagh) (who, however, "will leave Austria 
unembarrassed in her cause"); the congress transferred to 
Laybach (1821). 
February 1821. Austrian army enters Naples under Baron Fremont.d Outbreak 
in Sardinia, Wallachia, Greece. Austrian armed intervention in Sardinia. 
1822.  September. Congress of Verona. Protest of Canning. French intervention in 
Spain. 
28 January 1823. Crown speech of Louis XVIII. Announces the intervention in 
Spain. Alexander I distinctly announced his resolve to aid France if attacked by 
England. (Metternich began to equivocate.) 
Counter-revolution in Portugal. (1822 House of Braganza had granted constitution 
similar to that of Spain.421 (King John VI.) (Made counter-revolution with the aid 
of his son, Don Miquel and the Count Amarazda.e) Canning forbids Spanish 
Intervention; acknowledges the independence of the American Colonies.) 
December 2, 1823. Message to the American Congress of James Monroe, the President. 
1825. Mexico acknowledged by Canning. 
September 1824. Louis XVIII t. Charles X. 
1 October 1825. Alexander I ("The White Angel" of Madame de Krüdener 1) t. 
Nicolaus. 
Villa) 1825-1834 
Mohamed II (Reformer). (Mutiny of the Janissaries, discontent of the Ulemas, 422 
defection of several Pashas.) ("Hetäria".) (First established in Moscow. 423) 
(Alexander's Ionian minister,424 Capo d'Istria, chief instrument in the Greek 
a Francis I.— Ed. 
b Pius VIL— Ed. 
c Ferdinand VII.— Ed. 
d Johann Maria Philipp Frimont.— Ed. 
e Dom Miguel and Count of Amarante. — Ed. 
f See this volume, p. 138.— Ed. 

=====第550页=====
526 Karl Marx 
movement.) (Ali Pasha, of Janina, gives in 1821 signal to the general rising of the 
Greeks.) (Alexander Ypsilanti in Wallachia first rising. Simultaneous risings in the 
Peloponnesus, the Archipelago, etc. Destruction of the Janissaries.) 
February 1825. Ibrahim Pasha (son of Mehemet Ali) lands in Morea. 
Quarrel of Turkey with Russia, before Alexander's death. 
4 April 1826. Anglo-Russian Protocol (of Petersburg) on Greece. 
Treaty of Ackerman October 1826 (between Russia and Turkey). (Stipulations with 
regard to the Principalities3 and Servia.) 
March 1826. King John VI of Portugal t. (His eldest son Don Pedro gives 
Portugal to his daughter Maria.) Metternich intrigues with and for the Sultan.b 
6th July 1827. Treaty (on Greece) signed in London by France, England, and Russia 
(mediation upon the belligerents). 
October 20, 1827. Navarino Disaster. (Canning meanwhile t.) 
Spring 1828. Russian army crosses the Pruth. Occupies the Principalities. Pozzo, 
bosom friend of La Ferronnays, French Minister, privy to every secret communication 
proceeding from Vienna. 
14 September 1829. Treaty of Adrianople; the mouth of the Danube acquired by 
Russia. Count Capo d'Istria President of Greece. 
1830. July. Accession of Louis Philippe. September. Revolution in Belgium. 
1831.  Rise of the Poles. Risings in Italy. Settlement of the Belgian affairs. 
Settlement of the Greek affairs.0 
October 1831. Finis Poloniae.d 
20 January 1831. Declaration of Belgian independence. 
1833,  February. Treaty of Unkiar Skelessi (10 July).425 
7 May 1832. Otto of Bavaria King of Greece. 
(Russia which extorted, under the cover of the G*reek war, the treaty of 
Ackerman, and then that of Adrianople, was the sole gainer among the European 
powers.) 
1832.  On Metternich's initiative reactionary measures in 
Germany. 
IXa) 1834-1846 
1828.  (Revolt of Don Miquel.) 1832. Don Pedro lands in TeTceira. 
Ferdinand of Spain t 1833. July 1, 1833. (Sir Charles Napier destroys the 
Miquelite squadrons at Cape St. Vincent.) 
April 1834. Quadruple Alliance (England, France, Spain, Portugal).426 
Treaty of July 15, 1840.427 
6 November 1846. Cracow incorporated into Austria. 
XIa) 1846-1850* 
Pope Pius IX. Swiss Confederation wages war [against the Sonderbund 428]. 
Revolution of February 1848. 
3 Moldavia and Wallachia.— Ed. 
b Mahmood IL— Ed. 
c Marx took this item from the chronological table at the end of Szabo's book, 
p. 389.— Ed. 
d See this volume, p.  148.—  Ed. 
e Marx omitted Chapter X ("Theories of International Law") of Szabö's 
book.— Ed. 

=====第551页=====
Extracts from Imre Szabo's Work The State Policy of Modern Europe 527 
November 1846. Pope issues order for the convocation of a "Consulta di 
Stato". 429 
Pressburg diet of 1847. 
9 August 1848. Charles Albert (Sardinia) forced to buy the armistice at Solasco 
(lasts until mid-March 1849). 
25 November 1848. Flight of Pius. 
May 1848. Frankfort Assembly. 
March 23, 1849. Battle of Novara. 
14 April 1849. Independence of Hungary proclaimed. 
9 February 1849. Republic proclaimed at Rome. 
30 June 1849. Rome falls. 13 August 1849. Hungary surrenders. 
August 22, 1849. Venice surrenders. 
1848, July. Entry of the Russians into the Principalities. 
Duke of Genoa3 becomes king of Sicily. 
1849. 430 February. The Russians in Transylvania. 
March 15. The Russians expelled from Transylvania. 
March 23. Defeat of the Sardinians at Novara. 
April 14. Dethronisation (Hungary) of the Habsburgs. 
February 9. Rome Republic. 
April 1849. Treaty of Balta Liman. 
April 22. French embark for Civita Vecchia. 
June. Russians enter Hungary. 
June 30. Rome surrenders to the French. 
August 13. Surrender of the chief Hungarian corps to the Russians. 
August 22. Surrender of Venice. 
Xlla) 1850-1853 
1850, January. Greece blockaded by the English. 
May 24. Three Kings' Treaty (Prussia, Saxony, Hanover).b 
October. Warsaw conferences. 
December. Austro-Russian conferences at Dresden. 
1851,  December 2. Coup d'Etat. 
1851,  Russians withdraw from the principalities. 
1852,  December 2. French Empire proclaimed. 
December 6. Its recognition announced in the British Parliament. 
1852,  May. Danish succession treaty. 
Xllla) 1853-56c 
Compiled in June 1860 
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 44, 
Moscow, 1977 Printed according to the manu­
script in English and German 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Ferdinando Maria Alberto.— Ed. 
h Frederick William IV, Frederick Augustus II and Ernest Augustus.— Ed. 
c Here the manuscript breaks  off.—  Ed. 

=====第552页=====

=====第553页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第554页=====

=====第555页=====
531 
NOTES 
1 This letter is the first document bearing on the Vogt case (see Note 12). In the 
spring of 1859 Karl Vogt had published his pamphlet Studien zur gegenwärtige 
Lage Europas (Genf und Bern, 1859) in which he put forward a Bonapartist 
conception of foreign policy. In June 1859, an anonymous pamphlet, Zur 
Warnung (A Warning), appeared in London. It was published in the London 
newspaper Das Volk, No. 7, June 18, 1859 under the heading Warnung zur 
gefälligen Verbreitung (A Warning. With a  Request  for Circulation—in Herr Vogt and 
his letters Marx refers to it as Zur Warnung) in the column "Reichsverraetherei", 
and it exposed Vogt's Bonapartist intrigues and his attempts to bribe some 
journalists to present a Bonapartist picture of developments. As Marx shows, the 
pamphlet was written by Karl Blind. Wilhelm Liebknecht sent a proof sheet of Zur 
Warnung to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung (see this volume, p. 114) which 
published it in its No. 173 on June 22, 1859 in the article "Karl Vogt und die 
deutsche Emigration in London" ("Karl Vogt and the German Emigrés in 
London"). This induced Vogt to bring an action against the Allgemeine Zeitung. 
Blind denied authorship of Zur Warnung thus making it impossible for the 
Allgemeine Zeitung to refute Vogt's complaint. This caused Marx to send its 
editors a statement by the compositor Vögele confirming Blind's authorship 
(see this volume, pp. 117-19). 
The present letter by Marx was published by the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 
300, October 27, 1859 under the editorial heading "Prozess Vogt gegen die 
Redaction der Allgemeinen Zeitung" ("Vogt's Action against the Editors of the 
Allgemeine Zeitung") in the column "Neuste Posten" alongside the relevant 
statements by E. Biscamp, A. Vögele and W. Liebknecht. p. 3 
2 The Volks-Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung did not publish this statement. 
The Reform carried it in the Supplement to its No. 139 on November 19, 1859 
under the editorial heading "Zum Prozesse von Carl Vogt contra die 
Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung" ("Concerning Carl Vogt's Lawsuit against the 
Allgemeine Zeitung"). The statement was prefaced with the following editorial 
note:  "In view of the great interest Carl Vogts lawsuit against the Augsburg 
Allgemeine Zeitung has evoked everywhere, we would not deny Herr K. Marx 
acceptance of the following letter which casts a new light on the grave and 

=====第556页=====
532 Notes 
utterly unproved accusations made by Karl Blind against the former member of 
the Frankfurt Parliament." p. 4 
3 Excerpts from The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte first appeared in 
English in the Chartist People's Paper in "A Review of the Literature on the 
Coup d'état" written by Johann Georg Eccarius, a Communist League member, 
and published in instalments from October to December 1852 (see this edition, 
Vol. 11). The last part of the "Review" (The People's Paper, Nos. 32 and 33, 
December 11 and 18) contained passages from the first chapter of The 
Eighteenth Brumaire. p. 5 
4 Here and below Marx refers to the book Des idées napoléoniennes written by 
Louis Bonaparte in England and published in Paris and Brussels in 1839. 
p. 5 
5 Apart from the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 325, November 21, 1859 (Supplement), 
this "Declaration" was published in Karl Vogt's Mein  Prozess  gegen die Allgemeine 
Zeitung,  Genf,  1859 (Dokumente, Nr. 12). p. 8 
6 This declaration, published as a leaflet in London in February 1860, was 
repeatedly referred to by Marx as a circular because he had sent it, together 
with the "Declaration" of February 6, 1860 (see this volume, pp. 12-13), to a 
number of German newspapers. Marx translated the closing part of the circular 
into German and included it in the main body of his Herr Vogt (see this 
volume, pp. 127-28). He also included this section, in English, in the Appendix 
(11) to this work. p. 10 
7 Besides the newspapers listed under Marx's text this "Declaration" was 
published in the Berlin Publicist (see Marx's letter to Engels of February 13, 1860, 
present edition, Vol. 41). Marx also sent copies of the "Declaration" to the 
National-Zeitung and the Frankfurter Journal (see his letter to Engels of February 7, 
1860) but these papers did not publish it. 
Die Reform printed the "Declaration" with the editorial note: "The 
pamphlet is headed 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette' and is available for 
inspection at the editorial office." 
The opening part of the "Declaration" was included by Marx in the Preface to 
Herr Vogt (see this volume, p. 25). 19 
8 This letter was not published. A copy of it, written in Marx's hand, is extant. 
(See Marx's letters to Engels of February 9 and 14, 1860 and to Legal 
Counsellor Weber of February 24, 1860, present edition, Vol. 41.) p. 14 
9 This refers to the strict twofold censorship imposed by the Prussian 
Government on the Rheinische Zeitung, which was edited by Marx. p. 17 
0 As can be seen from an entry in Marx's notebook for 1860 this declaration was 
also sent to the Hamburg Freischütz which, however, did not publish it. p. 18 
1 Marx sent this "Declaration" to the Volks-Zeitung and Die Reform. p. 19 
2 Marx's exposé Herr Vogt was written in reply to Vogt's pamphlet Mein Prozess 
gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung,  Genf,  1859, which heaped slander on Marx and his 
associates in the Communist League. Vogt wrote his pamphlet after the 

=====第557页=====
Notes 533 
Allgemeine Zeitung had reprinted the pamphlet Zur Warnung, which exposed 
Vogt's Bonapartist intrigues (see Note 1). Vogt had brought an action against 
the newspaper. His complaint was dismissed, and in December 1859 he 
published his pamphlet. The bourgeois press gave his slanderous accusations 
the broadest publicity. On January 31, 1860 Marx wrote to Engels: "The 
jubilation of the bourgeois press is, of course, unbounded" (see present edition, 
Vol. 41). The Berlin National-Zeitung gave a résumé of Vogt's pamphlet in two 
leading articles (Nos. 37 and 41, January 22 and 25, 1860). A number of 
European periodicals, notably the Hamburg Freischütz (Nos.  17-21,  April 1860), 
the Breslauer Zeitung, the London Daily Telegraph (February 5, 1860) and the 
Paris Revue contemporaine (XIII, February 15, 1860), also gave it extensive 
coverage. 
In the interests of the proletarian party, then in process of formation, Marx 
decided to answer Vogt through the press. He did so in his exposé Herr Vogt. 
He also intended to bring an action for libel against the National-Zeitung. In late 
January 1860 he began gathering the material for his book against Vogt and 
his action against the National-Zeitung. With this aim in view he wrote dozens of 
letters to people with whom he was connected in his political and revolutionary 
activity and received from them material exposing Vogt. Letters arrived from 
J. Ph. Becker, G. Lommel (as Marx wrote to Engels on November 13, 1860, 
Lommel's letter provided the basis for Chapter IX, "Agency", of Herr Vogt), 
S. Borkheim and others. C. A. Dana, C. D. Collet, L. L. Jottrand, J. Lelewel, 
B. Szemere, M. Perczel, N. I. Sazonov and others sent letters bearing witness to 
Marx's faultless political record. Marx was also supported by Ernest Jones, 
which led to the resumption of their old friendship. In mid-February 1860 
Marx began sending evidence against Friedrich Zabel, editor of the National-
Zeitung, to Legal Counsellor Weber, who instituted legal proceedings against 
Zabel. However, between April and October 1860 Marx's complaint was 
dismissed at every level of the Prussian judiciary. 
While supplying evidence for his action, Marx continued to work on his 
exposé of Vogt. His preparatory materials for it, contained above all in his 
notebooks for 1858-60, and the numerous direct and indirect references to 
various sources in the book  itself,  testify to the vastness of the factual material 
Marx had gone through. He studied the political and diplomatic history of 
the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and made copious 
notes on foreign policy from books and periodicals of different orien­
tations, from Bonapartist pamphlets brought out by the Dentu publishers, 
from Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, from Blue Books and from other 
sources. 
In September Marx by and large concluded his work on Herr Vogt. 
However, following the dismissal of his charge against Zabel, he wrote one 
more chapter, "A Lawsuit", in which he criticised the Prussian judiciary. In a 
letter to Engels dated October 2, 1860 Marx gave a summary of Herr Vogt 
which, with some alterations, he later incorporated in the book as its table of 
contents. In the letter, Section 5 of Chapter III was entitled "Central Festival of 
Workers in Lausanne"; in the book its title is "Central Festival of the German 
Workers' Educational Associations in Lausanne (June 26 and 27, 1859)"; 
Chapter VIII bears the title "Vogt's Studies" in the letter, and "Dâ-Dâ Vogt 
and His Studies" in the book. The latter change accentuates the similarity of 
views of the Bonapartist Vogt and the contemporary Arab journalist Dâ-Dâ, 
who translated Bonapartist pamphlets into Arabic on the instructions of the 
Algerian authorities. 

=====第558页=====
534 Notes 
Marx considered several titles for his book. Originally he intended to call it 
Ex-Imperial Vogt or Dâ-Dâ Vogt (see his letter to Engels of September 25, 
1860).  Both versions met with the objections of Engels, and it was at his 
suggestion that the book was entitled Herr Vogt (see Marx's letters to Engels of 
October 2 and November 13, 1860 and Engels' letters to Marx of October 1 
and 5, 1860 in Vol. 41 of the present edition). Originally every chapter had 
a résumé at the end, but Marx omitted them because the book, as he wrote 
in his letter to Engels of December 6, 1860, had "grown without my noti­
cing it". 
Publication of Herr Vogt involved serious difficulties, both financial ones 
and those connected with the revelations contained in this scathing polemic 
(see,  for instance, Marx's letters to Engels of September 15 and 25 and to 
Lassalle of September 15, 1860). The book was sent to the printers in 
September 1860 (Marx to Lassalle, September 15, 1860) and appeared on 
December 1, 1860. The publisher was A. Petsch (London) and the printer 
R. Hirschfeld. In his letter to Marx of December 5, 1860 Engels deplored the 
numerous misprints and spelling mistakes, and also the absence of résumés at 
the end of chapters. Such résumés, he wrote, would have been "extremely 
effective" and, at the same time, "brought out the artistry of the whole 
arrangement which is truly admirable". 
Marx took steps to ensure the wide circulation of the book as a means of 
exposing Vogt and other Bonapartist agents among journalists. Advertisements 
of its publication were sent to more than 40 newspapers, mostly German ones, 
in Germany, Switzerland and America, and also to a number of British papers 
(Marx to Engels, December 12, 1860 and January 22, 1861). But only a few 
newspapers published them: the Genfer  Grenzpost,  No. 12, December 22, 1860, the 
Hamburg Reform (supplements to Nos. 150 and 152, December 15 and 19, 1860) 
and Freischütz, the Berlin Publicist and Neue  Preussische  Zeitung, and the Kölnische 
Zeitung (Marx to Engels, December 26, 1860 and January 8 and 22, 1861, Engels 
to Marx, January 7, 1861). Most papers ignored the book. In his letter to Engels of 
January 22, 1861 Marx wrote with bitterness: "The scoundrels ... want to consign 
it to oblivion." The censorship and the police authorities, in particular those of the 
Bonapartist Second Empire, reacted guardedly. A report from Paris in the 
Allgemeine Zeitung of April 19, 1861 said: "By way of warning to booksellers Herr 
Vogt by Karl Marx was placed on the list of proscribed books, thus frustrating the 
appearance of a muchabridged French version which is now printing" (Marx to 
Engels, May 16, 1861). 
The book was duly appreciated by Marx's friends and acquaintances. On 
receiving it Engels wrote to Marx: "That thing is grand. Especially the chapters 
'Studies' and 'Agency'; cela est écrasant." Two days later he wrote: "The more 
I read of the book, the better it pleases me." And still later: "It's certainly the 
best piece of polemical writing you have ever done" (Engels to Marx, December 
3, 5 and 19, 1860). W. Wolff's comment was: "It is a masterpiece from 
beginning to end." Contemporaries greatly appreciated Marx's closely reasoned 
arguments. For instance, P. Imandt wrote in January 1861 that it had banished 
whatever doubts he still had about Vogt's treachery in 1849. Lassalle, who 
originally objected to the very idea of writing a polemic against Vogt, was 
forced to admit that there were solid grounds for accusing Vogt of association 
with Bonapartist circles. This was also granted by people whose views widely 
differed from Marx's. For instance, L. Bûcher, as Marx wrote to Engels on 
December 19, I860, admitted the validity of Marx's arguments and that the 

=====第559页=====
Notes 535 
book had destroyed "any prejudice he might have had against Marx's 
agitational activities". 
A number of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois journalists attempted to refute 
Marx's exposé of Vogt as a Bonapartist agent. This was the purpose of Eduard 
Meyen's libellous article "Die neue Dunciation Karl Vogt's durch K. Marx" 
("The New Dunciation of Karl Vogt by Karl Marx") in Der Freischütz, Nos. 155 
and 156, December 27 and 29, 1860 and No. 1, January 1, 1861 (Marx to 
Engels, January 3, 1861). Marx was also attacked by Bettziech (pen name of the 
German petty-bourgeois democrat H. Beta) in the Magazin für die Literatur des 
Auslandes, No. 2, January 9, 1861. Complimentary notices on the book were 
published in the Kölnischer Anzeiger (Marx to Engels, January 18, 1861). 
No second edition of Herr Vogt appeared during the lifetime of Marx and 
Engels. Only a few short excerpts were reprinted. Thus a passage from 
Chapter X ("Patrons and Accomplices") appeared in the Breslauer Zeitung, No. 
115, March 9, 1861 under the heading "Zur Charakteristik Kossuth's" 
("Concerning Kossuth") and in the Leipzig Demokratisches Wochenblatt, Nos. 
16-18,  April 18 and 25 and May 2, 1868 under the heading "Der enthüllte 
Kossuth" ("Kossuth Exposed"). Appendix 4 ("The Communist Trial in 
Cologne") from Chapter XII was reprinted in the Leipzig Volksstaat, organ of 
the Social-Democratic Party, Nos. 7 and 8, January 20 and 22, 1875 under the 
heading "Enthüllungen über den Kölner Kommunistenprozess" ("Revelations 
Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne"). The same section was 
reproduced in the Nachtrag (Appendix) to the authorised (second) edition of 
Marx's Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (Leipzig, 1875). 
Under the heading "Nachtrag aus der Leipziger Auflage von 1875" ("Appen­
dix from the Leipzig Edition of 1875") Engels also included it, with a 
small addendum, in the third edition of the Revelations, which he published 
in 1885. 
Herr Vogt appears in English for the first time in these Collected Works. 
Only Appendix 4 ("The Communist Trial in Cologne") appeared in English 
earlier, in the collection: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Cologne Com­
munist Trial, translated with an Introduction and Notes by Rodney Living­
stone, Lawrence and Wishart and International Publishers, London and 
New York, 1971. p. 21 
13 This refers to the war between the Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) and 
France, on the one hand, and Austria, on the other (April 29 to July 8, 1859). 
It was launched by Napoleon III, who, under the banner of the "liberation of 
Italy", strove for aggrandizement and sought to strengthen the Bonapartist 
regime in France with the help of a successful military campaign. The 
Piedmont ruling circles hoped that French support would enable them to unite 
Italy, without the participation of the masses, under the aegis of the Savoy 
dynasty ruling in Piedmont. The war caused an upsurge of the national 
liberation movement in Italy. The Austrian army suffered a series of defeats. 
However, Napoleon III, frightened by the. scale of the national liberation 
movement in Italy, abruptly ceased hostilities. On July 11, the French and 
Austrian emperors concluded a separate preliminary peace in Villafranca (see 
Note 126). 
In this passage Marx alludes to his differences with Ferdinand Lassalle on 
the ways of unifying Italy and Germany. In his pamphlet Der italienische Krieg 
und die Aufgabe  Preussens.  Eine Stimme aus der Demokratie (The Italian War and the 
Task of Prussia. The Voice of a Democrat) published in Berlin in 1859, Lassalle 

=====第560页=====
536 Notes 
advocated the dynastic unification of Germany under the aegis of Prussia (see 
the preface to this volume, pp. XVII-XVIII). p. 27 
14 The Brimstone Gang (Schwefelbande) —the name of a students' association at 
Jena University in the 1770s whose members were notorious for their brawls; 
subsequently the expression "Brimstone Gang" became widespread. p. 28 
15 Marx often puns on the name of Karl Vogt. Vogt or Landvogt was the name of 
provincial governors and other administrators in the German Empire in the 
Middle Ages. The "hereditary Vogt of Noughtborough (Nichilburg)" is an 
allusion to a character in Johann Fischart's satirical novel Affentheur liehe, 
Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung: von Thaten und Rahten der vor kurtzen 
langen und je weilen vollenwolbeschreyten Helden und Herrn: Grandgoschier, 
Gorgellantua und Pantagruel. Königen inn Utopien, Iedewelt und Nienenreich, Soldan 
der Neuen Kannarrien und Oudyssen Inseln: auch Grossfürsten im Nubel Nibel 
Nebelland, Erbvögt auff Nichilburg, und Niderherren zu Nullibingen, Nullenstein und 
Niergendheym Etwan von M. Franz Rabelais Französisch entworffen. Achte Ausgabe, 
1617.  Fischart's work, a German adaptation of François Rabelais' novels 
Gargantua and Pantagruel, was published in 1757. Below Marx frequently uses 
phrases from it. p. 28 
16 By "Magnum Opus" Marx means, here and below, Vogt's book Mein Prozess 
gegen die Allgemeine Zettung, as distinct from Vogt's other, shorter writings on 
the same subject. p. 28 
17 This refers to the closing stage of the campaign in support of the Imperial 
Constitution which was adopted by the Frankfurt National Assembly on March 
28, 1849. Most German states refused to recognise the Constitution. The 
people were its sole defender. Led by petty-bourgeois democrats, they launched 
an armed struggle in its support in the spring of 1849. The most violent 
uprisings occurred in the Bavarian Palatinate and Baden. However, in July the 
joint Prussian, Bavarian and Württemberg troops crushed the resistance of the 
Palatinate and Baden insurgent army and forced the remaining units to 
withdraw into Switzerland. The Baden and Palatinate events marked the end of 
the German revolution of 1848-49. Engels described them in The Campaign for 
the German Imperial Constitution and Revolution and Counter-Revolution in 
Germany (see present edition, Vols. 10 and 11). p. 29 
18 In dulci jubilo (in sweet merriment)—the opening words of a fourteenth-
century Christmas carol. Later the phrase occurred in various student songs. 
p. 30 
19 Engels took part in the Baden-Palatinate uprising and on July 12, 1849, after 
its defeat, crossed over into Switzerland together with the detachment of 
August Willich, whose adjutant he was. He first settled in Vevey, but later 
moved to Lausanne. In September he met with members of the Communist 
League in Berne and Geneva. In early October, after obtaining a permit to 
leave Switzerland (see present edition Vol. 10, p. 595) he left for London 
where Marx wanted him to take part in the publication of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue and in reorganising the Communist League 
(Marx to Engels, end of July, August 17 and 23, 1849, present edition, Vol. 38). 
p. 31 

=====第561页=====
Notes 537 
20 The blue republicans—bourgeois republicans; red republicans—democrats and 
socialists of various trends. p. 31 
21 The Frankfurt Parliament or the German National Assembly, opened in 
Frankfurt am Main on May 18, 1848. It was convened to unify the country and 
draw up a Constitution. The liberal deputies, who were in the majority, turned 
the Assembly into a mere debating club. At the decisive moments of the 
revolution, the liberal majority condoned the counter-revolutionary forces. In 
spring 1849, the liberals left the Assembly after the Prussian and other 
governments had rejected the Imperial Constitution that it had drawn up. 
What remained of the Assembly (the Rump) moved to Stuttgart and was dispersed 
by the Württemberg forces on June 18. 
The Regency of the Empire was formed in Stuttgart on June 6, 1849 by what 
remained of the Frankfurt National Assembly. The Regency consisted of five 
deputies representing the Left faction (moderate democrats), including Karl 
Vogt. Their attempts to ensure by parliamentary means the implementation of 
the Constitution drawn up by the Frankfurt Assembly and rejected by the 
German princes ended in total failure. p. 31 
22 The battle of Idstedt (June 24-25, 1850) was the closing episode of the war waged 
by the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein against Denmark. Under the impact 
of the March 1848 revolution in Germany a national liberation uprising had 
flared up in the two duchies, which were subject to the King of Denmark but 
populated mainly by Germans. The uprising became part of the struggle for 
the unification of Germany. The ruling circles of Prussia, which was at war with 
Denmark over Schleswig and Holstein, feared a popular outbreak and an 
intensification of the revolution. They therefore sought an agreement with the 
Danish monarchy to the detriment of overall German interests, which also had 
a negative effect on the operations of the Prussian army. The war lasted 
intermittently until July 1850. The Schleswig-Holstein army was defeated at 
Idstedt. As a result, the two duchies remained part of the Kingdom of 
Denmark. p. 32 
23 On September 21, 1848 German refugees led by Struve invaded Baden from 
Swiss territory. Supported by the local republicans, Struve proclaimed a 
German Republic in the frontier town of Lörrach and formed a provisional 
government. The insurgent detachments were soon dispersed by troops, and 
Struve, Blind and other leaders of the uprising were imprisoned in Bruchsal by 
decision of a court-martial. They were released during another uprising in 
Baden in May 1849. p. 32 
24 This refers to attempts by Struve and other German democrats to form a 
refugee Democratic Association and a Central Bureau of the United German 
Emigration. The activities of the petty-bourgeois democrats were to a 
considerable extent directed against the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee, 
then led by Marx and Engels (see Note 25), and aimed at bringing the 
proletarian sections under their influence. A critical assessment of these 
activities is given in the "Address of the Central Authority to the League,June 
1850",  written by Marx and Engels (see present edition, Vol. 10, p. 371) and in 
Engels' letter to Joseph Weydemeyer of April 22, 1850 (see present edition, 
Vol. 38). p. 33 
25 The London German Refugee Committee was set up on September 18, 1849 on 
Marx's initiative under the auspices of the German Workers' Educational 

=====第562页=====
538 Notes 
Society. Besides Marx and other members of the Communist League, it 
included a number of petty-bourgeois democrats. At a meeting of the Society 
on November 18, the Committee was transformed into the Social-Democratic 
Refugee Committee, the aim being to dissociate the proletarian section of the 
London refugees from the petty-bourgeois elements (the report on the meeting 
was dated December 3, 1849). The new Committee included only members of 
the Communist League: Karl Marx (who was elected chairman), Heinrich 
Bauer, August Willich, Karl Pfänder and Frederick Engels. Besides providing 
material assistance for the refugees, predominantly those belonging to the 
proletarian wing, the Committee played an important part in restoring ties 
between members of the Communist League, in uniting the supporters of Marx 
and Engels in London and in reorganising the Communist League. In 
mid-September 1850, following the split in the Communist League, when most 
members of the Educational Society, to which the Committee was accountable, 
came under the influence of the Willich-Schapper sectarian group, Marx and 
Engels, together with their followers, withdrew from the Educational Society 
and the Committee (for details see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 483 and 632). 
p. 33 
26 Carbonari—members of secret political societies in Italy and France in the first 
half of the nineteenth century. In Italy they fought for national independence, 
unification of the country and liberal constitutional reforms. In France their 
movement was primarily directed against the rule of the restored Bourbon 
dynasty (1815-30). p. 33 
27 By calling J. G. Rademacher a doctor of magic, Marx alludes to the former's 
book Rechtfertigung der von den Gelehrten misskannten, verstandesrechten Er­
fahrungsheillehre der alten scheidekünstigen Geheimärzte und treue Mittheilung des 
Ergebnisses einer 25-jährigen Erprobung dieser Lehre am Krankenbette, Berlin, 
1846-1847 (Vindication of  the Neglected Rational Empirical Science of Medicine of  the 
Old Doctors of Magic, Experts in Analytical Chemistry. With a Truthful Account of  the 
Results of a 25-Year-Long Application of this Science at the Sick-Bed). p. 33 
28 By the December Gang Marx means the secret Society of December 10 founded 
in 1849 and so called to commemorate the election of Louis Bonaparte, the 
Society's patron, to the Presidency of the French Republic on December 10, 
1848.  Marx describes the December 10 Society further in the text. The Society 
played an active part in the Bonapartist coup d'état of December 2, 1851 which 
established the counter-revolutionary regime of the Second Empire (1852-70) 
headed by Napoleon III. p. 33 
29 In the passage from The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte quoted here 
Marx consistently substitutes the word "gang" (Bande) for "society" 
(Gesellschaft). p. 34 
30 Lazzaroni—a contemptuous name for declassed proletarians, primarily in the 
Kingdom of Naples. These people were repeatedly used by reactionary 
governments against liberal and democratic movements. p. 34 
31 This refers to Louis Bonaparte's attempts during the July monarchy to stage a 
coup d'état by means of a military mutiny. On October 30, 1836 he succeeded, 
with the help of several Bonapartist officers, in inciting two artillery regiments 
of the Strasbourg garrison to mutiny, but they were disarmed within a few 

=====第563页=====
Notes 539 
hours.  Louis Bonaparte was arrested and deported to America. On August 6, 
1840,  taking advantage of a partial revival of Bonapartist sentiments in France, 
he landed in Boulogne with a handful of conspirators and attempted to raise a 
mutiny among the troops of the local garrison. This attempt likewise proved a 
failure. Louis Bonaparte was sentenced to life imprisonment, but escaped to 
England in 1846. p. 35 
The National ateliers (workshops) were instituted by the Provisional Govern­
ment immediately after the February revolution of 1848. By this means the 
government sought to discredit Louis Blanc's ideas on the "Organisation of 
Labour" in the eyes of the workers and, at the same time, to utilise those 
employed in the national workshops, organised on military lines, against the 
revolutionary proletariat. Revolutionary ideas, however, continued to gain 
ground in the national workshops. The government took steps to reduce die 
number of workers employed in them, to send a large number off to public 
works in the province and finally to liquidate the workshops. This precipitated 
a proletarian uprising in Paris in June 1848. After its suppression, the 
Cavaignac Government issued a decree on July 3 disbanding the national 
workshops. 
For an assessment of the national workshops see Karl Marx, The Class 
Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10, p. 63). 
The Gardes mobiles (Mobile Guards), set up by a decree of the Provisional 
Government on February 25, 1848 with the secret aim of fighting the 
revolutionary masses, were used to crush the June uprising of the Paris 
workers. Later they were disbanded on the insistence of Bonapartist circles, 
who feared that in the event of a conflict between Louis Bonaparte and the 
republicans, the Gardes mobiles would side with the latter. p. 35 
This witticism by Countess Lehon and the caustic remark by Madame de 
Girardin on the Bonapartist regime, both of which Marx quotes at the end of 
the paragraph, were forwarded to him, together with many other items used in 
The Eighteenth Brumaire, by Richard Reinhardt, a German refugee in Paris and 
Heinrich Heine's secretary. In his letter to Ferdinand Lassalle of February 23, 
1852 Marx quotes a letter to him from Reinhardt, in particular the following 
passage: "As for de Morny, the minister who resigned with Dupin, he was 
known as the escroc [swindler] of his mistress' (Countess Lehon's) husband, a 
circumstance which caused Emile de Girardin's wife to say that while it was not 
unprecedented for governments to be in the hands of men who were governed 
by their wives, none had ever been known to be in the hands of hommes 
entretenus [kept men]. Well, this same Countess Lehon holds a salon where she 
is one of Bonaparte's most vociferous opponents and it was she who, on the 
occasion of the confiscation of the Orleans' estates, let fall  ' C'est le premier vol de 
l'aigle'. [A pun: "It is the first flight of the eagle" and "It is the first theft of 
the eagle".] Thanks to this remark of his wife's, Emile de Girardin was 
expelled" (see present edition, Vol. 39). p. 36 
This refers to the Regency of Philippe of Orleans in France from 1715 to 1723 
during the minority of Louis XV. p. 36 
The Holy Coat of Trier—a relic exhibited in the Catholic Cathedral at Trier, 
allegedly a garment of Christ of which he was stripped at his crucifixion. 
Generations of pilgrims came to venerate it. p. 37 

=====第564页=====
540 Notes 
36 The Vendôme Column was erected in Paris between 1806 and 1810 as a tribute 
to the military victories of Napoleon I. It was made of bronze from captured 
enemy guns and crowned by a statue of Napoleon; the statue was removed 
during the Restoration but re-erected in 1833. In the spring of 1871, by order 
of the Paris Commune, the Vendôme Column was destroyed as a symbol of 
militarism. p. 37 
37 Das Volk —a German-language weekly published in London from May 7 to 
August 20, 1859—was founded as the official organ of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London. The first issue appeared under the editorship 
of the German journalist Elard Biscamp, a petty-bourgeois democrat. Begin­
ning with issue No. 2 Marx took an active part in its publication: he gave advice 
to the editors, edited articles himself and organised material support. In issue 
No. 6 of June 11, the Editorial Board officially named Karl Marx, Frederick 
Engels, Ferdinand Freiligrath, Wilhelm Wolff and Heinrich Heise as its 
contributors (see present edition, Vol. 16, p. 624). Marx's first article in the 
paper—"Spree and Mincio"—was printed on June 25 (see present edition, 
Vol. 16). Under Marx's influence Das Volk began to turn into a militant 
revolutionary working-class newspaper. In the beginning of July, Marx became 
its virtual editor and manager. 
Das Volk carried Marx's preface to his work A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy, six of his articles, including the unfinished series Quid pro 
Quo,  seven articles by Engels and his review of Marx's Contribution to the Critique 
of Political Economy, and reviews of the Hermann, the newspaper of the German 
petty-bourgeois democrats, by Marx and Biscamp (they appeared in the column 
"Gatherings from the Press"). Furthermore, many articles and political reviews 
written by different authors were edited by Marx. In all, sixteen issues 
appeared. Das Volk ceased publication for lack of money. 
Articles published in Das Volk reflected the elaboration by Marx and Engels 
of questions of revolutionary theory and the tactics of proletarian struggle, 
covered the class battles of the proletariat and implacably combated petty-
bourgeois ideology. From a position of proletarian internationalism the 
newspaper analysed the course of the Austro-Italo-French war of 1859 and the 
issues involved in the unification of Germany and Italy, exposed the foreign 
policy of Britain, Prussia, France, Russia and other reactionary states and 
waged a consistent struggle against Bonapartism and its overt and covert 
supporters. p. 38 
38 Two Richmonds in  the field is an expression used to denote a second, unexpected 
adversary. It originates from Shakespeare's Richard III (Act V, Scene 4). 
p. 39 
39 This presumably refers to Abt's pamphlet Carl Vogt und Carl Marx oder die 
Bürstenheimer, Leipzig, Heidelberg. A notice in No. 27 (July 5, 1861) of the 
Stimmen der Zeit. Wochenschrift für Politik und Literatur, a weekly published by 
Adolph Kolatschek, said that the pamphlet would be published in the 
supplement to No. 39, and contained the following editorial note: "The 
work in question reached the editor as early as January of this year. The 
delay in publication is by no means due to any fault on the part of the 
author." 
It is possible that friends had forwarded the manuscript of the pamphlet to 
Marx. p. 39 

=====第565页=====
Notes 541 
40 In April 1848 a republican uprising took place in Baden. Led by the 
petty-bourgeois democrats Friedrich Hecker and Gustav Struve, it started with 
republican detachments invading Baden from Switzerland. The uprising was 
poorly organised and was crushed by the end of April. 
Later some participants in the Baden uprising joined the unit formed by 
August Willich from German émigré workers and artisans in Besançon, France, 
in November 1848. Its members received allowances from the French 
Government, payment of which was, however, discontinued at the beginning of 
1849.  Later the unit was incorporated in Willich's volunteer detachment which 
took part in the Baden-Palatinate uprising in May-June 1849. p. 40 
41 The great adventure with "the lost drum" is Marx's ironic way of referring to 
the manoeuvres of Napoleon III and the Bonapartist circles in France aimed at 
capturing the left bank of the Rhine. Vogt supported these manoeuvres in the 
press.  Marx compares them to a comic episode in Shakespeare's All's Well That 
Ends Well (Act III, Scenes 5 and 6, Act IV, Scenes 1 and 3). By Parolles Vogt is 
meant. p. 40 
42 The Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Démocratie appeared in Cologne daily 
from June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849. The editorial board included Karl Marx 
(Editor-in-Chief), Heinrich Bürgers, Ernst Dronke, Ferdinand Freiligrath, 
Georg Weerth, Wilhelm  Wolff,  Ferdinand Wolff and Frederick Engels. 
The Neue Rheinische Zeitung was founded by Marx as a militant periodical 
intended to exert a direct influence on the masses, educate and unite them 
politically and ideologically and pave the way for the creation of a mass party of 
the German proletariat. As a rule, Marx and Engels wrote the editorials, 
formulating the paper's stand on the key questions of the revolution. 
The consistent revolutionary tendency of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, its 
active internationalism and its attacks on the government, aroused the 
displeasure of the bourgeois shareholders and led to the persecution of its 
editors by the authorities and a smear campaign in the feudal monarchist and 
liberal bourgeois press. It was particularly the paper's articles in defence of the 
June 1848 uprising of the Paris proletariat that frightened away the 
shareholders. Persecution of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung editors by the judicial 
authorities and the police became particularly severe after the counter­
revolutionary coup in Prussia in November-December 1848. 
In May 1849, under the conditions of the general counter-revolutionary 
offensive, the Prussian Government expelled Marx from Prussia on the pretext 
that he was not a Prussian citizen. Marx's expulsion and new repressive 
measures against other editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung resulted in the 
paper ceasing publication. The last issue, No. 301, printed in red ink, appeared 
on May 19, 1849. In their farewell address "To the Workers of Cologne", the 
editors wrote that "their last word everywhere and always will be emancipation of 
the working class". p. 41 
43 The arsenal in Prüm was stormed by democrats and workers from Trier and 
neighbouring townships on May 17 and 18, 1849. Their aim was to seize the 
arms and extend the uprising in defence of the Imperial Constitution to the 
left bank of the Rhine. The insurgents succeeded in capturing the arsenal, but 
government troops soon arrived on the scene and the movement was 
suppressed. p. 41 
44 Sazonov obviously had in mind Professor I. K. Babst, who had given a series of 
lectures in political economy in Moscow. An account of the first lecture was 

=====第566页=====
542 Notes 
published in the Moskovskiye vedomosti, No. 19, January 24, 1860. In Sazonov's 
opinion, this lecture reflected some of the ideas contained in the Preface of 
Marx's A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. p. 42 
45 The Bundschuh was a secret revolutionary peasant union active in Germany on 
the eve of the Peasant War of 1525. Schily uses the name to designate the 
Communist League, led by Marx and Engels. p. 44 
46 An allusion to the Club of Resolute Progress. Founded in Karlsruhe on June 5, 
1848,  it represented the more radical wing of the petty-bourgeois democratic 
republicans (Struve, Tzschirner, Heinzen and others) discontented with the 
conciliatory policy of the Brentano government and the increasing strength of 
the Rightist elements within it. The Club suggested that Brentano should 
extend the revolution beyond Baden and the Palatinate and introduce radicals 
into the government. Brentano refused, so the Club tried, on June 6, to force 
the government's hand by threatening an armed demonstration. The govern­
ment, however, supported by the civic militia and other armed units, proved 
the stronger party in the conflict. The Club of Resolute Progress was 
disbanded. p. 44 
47 Cercle social—an organisation established by democratic intellectuals in Paris in 
the first years of the French Revolution. Its chief spokesmen, Claude Fauchet 
and Nicolas Bonneville, demanded the egalitarian division of the land, 
restrictions on large fortunes and employment for all able-bodied citizens. 
p. 46 
48 Here Marx has "auch eine schöne Gegend", i.e. "a beautiful landscape too". 
The phrase originated from a story about a woman who, trying to console the 
mother of a soldier killed at the Batde of Leipzig (1813), said: "But it was a 
beautiful landscape." p. 46 
49 The Grütli Association (Grütliverein) was a Swiss petty-bourgeois reformist 
organisation founded in 1838 as an educational society for artisans and 
workers. The name Grütliverein was to emphasise the Swiss national character 
of the association. Legend has it that in 1307 representatives of three Swiss 
cantons met in Grüdi meadow and formed an alliance to fight against the 
arbitrary rule of the Austrian governors (Vogts). Hence Marx's ironic reference 
to Karl Vogt. p. 47 
50 Badinguet was the nickname of Napoleon III. He was called so because in 1846 
he escaped from prison disguised in the clothes of the stonemason Badinguet. 
Marianne was the name of a secret republican society in France founded in 
1850.  Its aim was to fight against the Bonapartist regime of the Second Empire. 
p. 49 
51 The Communist League was the first German and international communist 
organisation of the proletariat formed under the leadership of Marx and 
Engels in London early in June 1847, as a result of the reorganisation of the 
League of the Just (a secret association of refugee workers and artisans that was 
set up in Paris in the 1830s and had communities in Germany, France, 
Switzerland and England). The programme and organisational principles of the 
Communist League were drawn up with the direct participation of Marx and 
Engels. The League's members took an active part in the bourgeois-democratic 

=====第567页=====
Notes 543 
revolution in Germany in 1848-49. Although the defeat of the revolution dealt 
a blow to the League, in 1849-50 it was reorganised and continued its activities. 
In the summer of 1850 disagreements arose in the League between the 
supporters of Marx and Engels and the sectarian Willich-Schapper group, 
which tried to impose on the League its tactics of immediately unleashing a 
revolution without taking into account the actual situation and the practical 
possibilities. The discord led to a split within the League in September 1850. 
Because of police persecutions and arrests of League members in May 1851, 
the activities of the League as an organisation practically ceased in Germany. 
On November 17, 1852, on a motion by Marx, the League's London District 
announced the dissolution of the League (see Marx's letter to Engels of 
November 19, 1852). On February 24, 1860 Marx sent this letter to Legal 
Counsellor Weber (see present edition, Vol. 41). 
The Communist League played an outstanding role as the first proletarian 
party guided by the principles of scientific communism, as a school of 
proletarian revolutionaries and as the historical forerunner of the International 
Working Men's Association. (On the Communist League see this volume, 
pp. 78-82.) p. 49 
52 See Marx's Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (present 
edition, Vol. 11, pp. 445-49). This work was published as a pamphlet in Basle, 
Switzerland, in January 1853 (the edition used by Vogt). In the USA it was first 
published in instalments in the democratic Boston Neu-England-Zeitung and at 
the end of April 1853 it was printed in pamphlet form by the same newspaper. 
In Herr Vogt Marx quotes the Revelations from the Boston pamphlet, p. 49 
53 The Palais Royal in Paris was the residence of Jerome Bonaparte (the youngest 
brother of Napoleon I) and his son, Prince Joseph (nicknamed Plon-Plon). 
p. 49 
54 The German-American Revolutionary Loan was a loan that Gottfried Kinkel and 
other petty-bourgeois émigré leaders tried to raise in 1851 and 1852 among 
German refugees and Americans of German origin with a view to immediately 
inciting a revolution in Germany. To win support for the loan, Kinkel toured 
the USA in September 1851. The project proved a total failure. In a number of 
their works Marx and Engels ridiculed the loan as an adventurist and harmful 
attempt artificially to engineer a revolution during a lull in the revolutionary 
movement. p. 50 
55 At the battle of Murten (June 22, 1476), fought in the course of the Burgundian 
Wars,  the troops of Duke Charles the Bold of Burgundy were defeated by the 
Swiss. p. 50 
56 In St. Paul's Church, Frankfurt am Main, the Frankfurt National Assembly met 
in 1848 and 1849. p. 51 
57 The Grand Cophta was the name of the omnipotent and omniscient Egyptian 
priest who headed the nonexistent Masonic "Egyptian Lodge" which the 
famous eighteenth-century impostor "Count" Cagliostro (Giuseppe Balsamo) 
claimed to have founded. p. 53 
58 The Federal Council—the Government of the Swiss Confederation. p. 54 
59 In September 1851 arrests were made in France among members of local 
communities belonging to the Willich-Schapper group, which was responsible 

=====第568页=====
544 Notes 
for the split in the Communist League in September 1850. The petty-
bourgeois conspiratorial tactics of the group, ignoring realities and aiming at an 
immediate uprising, enabled the French and Prussian police, with the help of 
the agent-provocateur Cherval, who headed one of the group's local 
communities in Paris, to fabricate the case of the so-called Franco-German plot. 
Cherval was both an agent of the Prussian envoy in Paris and a French spy. In 
February 1852 the accused were sentenced on a charge of plotting a coup 
d'état. With the connivance of the French and Prussian police Cherval was 
allowed to escape from prison. The attempts of the Prussian police to 
incriminate the Communist League led by Marx and Engels failed. Konrad 
Schramm, a League member, arrested in Paris in September 1851, was soon 
released owing to lack of evidence. Nevertheless, the Prussian Police Superin­
tendent Stieber, one of the organisers of the Cologne Communist trial in 1852, 
repeated the false police accusations. Marx exposed Stieber's perjury in his 
Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see the chapter "The 
Cherval Plot", present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 407-19). 
On his arrival in London in May 1852 Cherval was admitted to the German 
Workers' Educational Society led by Schapper but was soon expelled because of 
his role of provocateur in the so-called Franco-German plot. p. 55 
60 The Cologne trial (October 4-November 12, 1852) was organised and 
stage-managed by the Prussian Government. The defendants were members of 
the Communist League arrested in the spring of 1851 on charges of 
"treasonable plotting". The forged documents and false evidence presented by 
the police authorities were not only designed to secure the conviction of the 
defendants but also to compromise their London comrades and the proletarian 
organisation as a whole. Seven of the defendants were sentenced to 
imprisonment in a fortress for terms ranging from three to six years. The 
dishonest tactics resorted to by the Prussian police state in fighting the 
international working-class movement were exposed by Engels in his article 
"The Late Trial in Cologne" and, in greater detail, by Marx in his pamphlet 
Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see present edition, 
Vol. 11). p. 56 
61 The German Workers' Educational Society in London was founded in February 
1840 by Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll and other members of the League of the 
Just (an organisation of German craftsmen and workers, and also of emigrant 
workers of other nationalities). After the reorganisation of the League of the 
Just in the summer of 1847 and the founding of the Communist League, the 
latter's local communities played the leading role in the Society. During various 
periods of its activity, the Society had branches in working-class districts in 
London. In 1847 and 1849-50, Marx and Engels took an active part in the 
Society's work, but on September 17, 1850, Marx, Engels and a number of their 
followers withdrew because the Willich-Schapper sectarian and adventurist 
faction had temporarily increased its influence in the Society, causing a split in 
the Communist League (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 483, 632). In the late 
1850s, Marx and Engels resumed their work in the Educational Society, which 
was active up to 1918, when it was closed down by the British Government. 
p. 56 
62 Karl Vogt was one of the five members of the Imperial Regency (see Note 21). 
p. 58 

=====第569页=====
Notes 545 
63 An allusion to the denunciatory prophecies of Zacharias, one of the twelve 
minor prophets of the Old Testament. p. 60 
64 The Hambach Festival was a political demonstration held by members of the 
liberal and radical bourgeoisie at the castle of Hambach (in the Bavarian 
Palatinate) on May 27, 1832 to urge the unification of Germany, constitutional 
reforms and the transformation of Germany into a federal republic. p. 60 
65 The German socialist Eichhoff was Berlin correspondent of the weekly 
Hermann. In September and October 1859 he anonymously published in it a 
series of articles headed "Stieber" in which he exposed the part played by 
Wilhelm Stieber, chief of the Prussian political police, in organising the 
government-inspired trial of members of the Communist League in Cologne in 
1852.  Stieber sued Eichhoff for libel. In May 1860 a Berlin court sentenced 
Eichhoff to 14 months imprisonment (see Marx's letters to Engels of January 
31, 1860 and to Freiligrath of February 29, 1860, present edition, Vol. 41). 
p. 65 
66 The Ladendorf trial—the trial of Ladendorf, Gercke, Falkenthal, Levy and 
several other persons arrested in 1853 on the basis of a denunciation by police 
agent Hentze, a former member of the Communist League. The trial was held 
in Berlin in 1854. On trumped-up charges of plotting, the defendants were 
sentenced to various terms of imprisonment (from three to five years). 
The League of the Dead was a secret conspiratorial organisation in Bremen in 
the 1840s and early 1850s. It was uncovered by the police in 1852. p. 66 
67 Here Marx paraphrases two expressions: "Tranquillity is the first duty of the 
citizen", a dictum coined by the Prussian minister Schulenburg-Kehnert in his 
address to the population of Berlin of October 17, 1806, following the defeat at 
Jena (Le Moniteur universel, No. 304, October 31, 1806, "Prusse", Berlin, du 18 
octobre), and "In hoc signo vinces" ("By this sign thou shalt conquer"). Legend 
has it that on the eve of a battle against his rival Maxentius in 312, the Roman 
Emperor Constantine (274-337) saw in the sky the sign of the Cross and over it 
the words "In hoc signo vinces". The Church associates this legend with 
Constantine's "conversion" from the persecution of Christianity to its protec­
tion, p. 67 
68 At the battle of  Zorndorf,  fought in the course of the Seven Years' War on 
August 14 (25), 1758, the Prussian army, commanded by Frederick II,clashed 
with the Russian forces. Both sides suffered heavy losses. The outcome of the 
battle was inconclusive. p. 69 
69 Kobes I was the nickname of Jacob Venedey, who was born in Cologne. In the 
Cologne dialect, Kobes stands for Jacob. Venedey owed the nickname to Heinrich 
Heine, who in a satirical poem headed "Kobes I" ridiculed him as a model 
philistine. p. 69 
70 An ironic allusion to the book Kraft und Stoff (Energy and Matter) (1855) by the 
German physiologist Ludwig Büchner, a vulgar materialist like Vogt. p. 71 
71 This refers to the Second Democratic Congress of representatives of democratic 
and workers' organisations from various German towns which was held in 
Berlin from October 26 to 30, 1848. p. 73 

=====第570页=====
546 Notes 
72 A reference to the Revolutionary Centralisation, a secret organisation founded at 
the beginning of 1850 by German refugees in Switzerland, mostly petty-
bourgeois democrats. Its Central Committee, based in Zurich, was headed by 
S. E. Tzschirner, a leader of the Dresden uprising in May 1849. Prominent 
members were P. Fries, T. L. Greiner, F. Sigel, G. A. TechowandJ. Ph. Becker, 
all participants in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate uprising. Members of the 
Communist League, K. L. J. d'Ester, K. Bruhn and W.  Wolff,  also belonged to 
this organisation. In July and August 1850 the leaders of the Revolutionary 
Centralisation approached the Central Authority of the Communist League with a 
proposal to amalgamate. On behalf of the League's Central Authority Marx and 
Engels rejected the proposal as detrimental to the class independence of the 
proletarian party. By the end of 1850, the Revolutionary Centralisation had 
disintegrated as a result of the mass expulsion of German refugees from 
Switzerland. p. 75 
73 Beust's letter to Schily of May 1, 1860 was a postscript to Emmermann's letter 
to Schily part of which Marx quotes immediately above. Marx commented on 
Emmermann's and Beust's letters (particularly on the latter, which contained 
derogatory statements about Marx) in his letter to Engels of May 7, 1860 (see 
present edition, Vol. 41). p. 76 
74 The German Workers' Educational Society in Brussels (Deutscher Arbeiter­
verein) was founded by Marx and Engels at the end of August 1847 to provide 
a political education for German workers living in Belgium and spread the 
ideas of communism among them. With Marx, Engels and their associates at its 
head, the Society became the legal centre rallying German revolutionary 
proletarians in Belgium and maintaining direct contact with Flemish and 
Walloon workers' clubs. Its most active members belonged to the Brussels 
community of the Communist League. The Society played an important part in 
founding the Brussels Democratic Association. Its activities ceased after the 
February 1848 revolution in France when the Belgian police arrested and 
deported its members. p. 79 
75 The reference here is to the Willich-Schapper group, which Marx and Engels 
called the Sonderbund —perhaps an aMusion to the separatist union of seven 
economically backward Catholic cantons of Switzerland formed in the 1840s to 
resist progressive bourgeois reforms. This sectarian adventurist group split 
away from the Communist League after September 15, 1850 (see Note 51) and 
formed an independent organisation with its own Central Authority. In view of 
the factionalists' refusal to abide by the decision to transfer the Central 
Authority to Cologne and because of their disorganising activities, the Cologne 
Central Authority expelled them from the League at the proposal of the 
League's London District and gave notification of this in its Address of 
December 1, 1850 (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 625-30 and 633). By their 
activities the Willich-Schapper group helped the Prussian police uncover the 
League's illegal communities in Germany and fabricate a case in Cologne in 
1852 against prominent members of the League (see present edition, Vol. 11, 
pp. 445-52). p. 80 
76 The German Confederation (der Deutsche Bund) was an ephemeral union of 
German states formed by decision of the Congress of Vienna in June 1815 and 
originally comprising 35 absolutist feudal states and 4 free cities. The 

=====第571页=====
Notes 547 
Confederation aggravated the political and economic fragmentation of Ger­
many and impeded its development. 
After the defeat of the 1848-49 revolution, a struggle for hegemony in 
Germany developed between Prussia and Austria. The latter sought to restore 
the German Confederation, which had virtually fallen apart during the 
revolution. Prussia hoped to achieve supremacy by forming a union of German 
states under its own aegis. In the autumn of 1850 the Austro-Prussian rivalry 
was intensified by the clash of interests over the Electorate of Hesse-Cassel, 
where a constitutional conflict had developed between the local Chamber and 
the Elector as a result of which the Chamber was disbanded and martial law 
introduced. In this situation Austria and Prussia vied for the right to carry out 
punitive operations against the Hesse constitutional movement. In early 
November 1850 Prussian and Austrian troops clashed on the territory of 
Hesse-Cassel. However, under pressure from Nicholas I, Prussia was forced to 
yield to Austria and temporarily desist from its plans for establishing hegemony 
in Germany (see Note 143). p. 81 
77 The Federal Diet (Bundestag)—the central body of the German Confederation. 
It consisted of representatives of the member states and held its sessions in 
Frankfurt am Main. Having no actual power, it nevertheless served as an 
instrument of monarchist feudal reaction. p. 81 
78 The German military association "Self-Help" (Deutscher republikanischer 
Wehrbund "Hilf Dir") was set up at the initiative of J. Ph. Becker in 
Gross-Hüningen in October 1848. It was to unite Germans living abroad, 
particularly political refugees and artisans in Switzerland and France. The 
Association's Central Committee was in Biel, Berne Canton. Becker was the 
political leader, A. Willich the military. A German column was formed in 
Besançon with branches in Nancy, Vesul, Lyons and other towns. The idea of 
rallying all German unions in Switzerland failed to materialise. p. 82 
79 H. L. Miskowsky was burnt to death during a fire in a wooden barracks in 
Whitechapel in 1854 (see Marx's letter to Engels of May 6, 1854, present 
edition, Vol. 39). p. 84 
80 The meeting in question was held in late August 1850. p. 84 
81 In Marx's exposé The Knight of the Noble Consciousness, in which this letter is 
quoted in full, it is dated November 22 (see present edition, Vol. 12, 
pp. 504-05). The original of the letter is not extant. p. 86 
82 An allusion to Batrachomyomachia (The Battle of the Frogs and the Mice), an 
anonymous Greek poem which parodies Homer's  Iliad. 
Marx and Engels give a detailed description of A. Ruge's Agitation Union 
and G. Kinkel's Émigré Club (Marx calls it Emigré Society here) and also of the 
relations between the two émigré petty-bourgeois organisations in their exposé 
The Great Men of the Exile (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 310-25). p. 87 
83 This idea was formulated in the "Review, May to October 1850" in a section 
which Engels later included in Chapter IV of The Class Struggles in France, 1848 
to 1850, 1895 edition (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 509-10 and 134-35). 
Marx expressed the same idea even earlier in his article "The Revolutionary 
Movement" (present edition, Vol. 8, p. 214). 

=====第572页=====
548 Notes 
"A storm in a teacup" is an expression used by Montesquieu about a series 
of riots in the republic of San Marino. p. 90 
84 Marx quotes from his speech at the trial of the Rhenish District Committee of 
Democrats (see present edition, Vol. 8, p. 336). The minutes of the trial were 
published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 226 and 231-33, February 19, 25, 
27 and 28, 1849 and as a separate pamphlet under the heading Zwei politische 
Prozesse. Verhandelt vor den Februar-Assisen in Köln, Köln, 1849. Verlag der 
Expedition der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung. The pamphlet also included a report 
on the trial of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of February 7, 1849. p. 91 
85 The Comité de salut public (Committee of Public Safety) was established by the 
Convention on April 6, 1793; during the Jacobin dictatorship (June 2, 
1793-July 27, 1794) it was the leading body of the revolutionary government in 
France. p. 93 
86 Ernst Dronke was sent to Switzerland as an emissary of the Communist League 
in July 1850 after Marx and Engels had learnt about the activity of the 
Revolutionary Centralisation from a letter by Wilhelm Wolff of May 9, 1850. 
Dronke wrote about his work in Switzerland and Germany in his letters to the 
League's Central Authority of July 3, 1850 and to Engels of July 3 and 18, 
1850.  p. 94 
87 This quotation is from the article "Gottfried Kinkel" by Marx and Engels (see 
present edition, Vol. 10, p. 345). 
The article castigated the unworthy conduct of the petty-bourgeois democrat 
Kinkel before the court-martial in Rastatt which tried him for his part in the 
campaign for the Imperial Constitution. Speaking in court in his own defence 
on August 4, 1849 Kinkel denied his involvement in the revolutionary 
movement and eulogised the Hohenzollern dynasty. Marx and Engels gave a 
satirical portrayal of Kinkel in their exposé The Great Men of the Exile (see 
present edition, Vol. 11). p. 96 
88 Marx probably means the American Revolutionary Union for Europe 
(Amerikanischer Revolutionsbund für Europa), a German-American émigré organ­
isation set up in Philadelphia in the summer of 1852 and consisting mostly of 
former members of the Agitation Union. p. 98 
89 Marx means the polemic between Gustav Adolf Roesler and Franz Heinrich 
Zitz, former deputies to the Frankfurt National Assembly, who attacked each 
other between July and September 1850 in the German-American newspapers 
Deutsche Schnellpost für Europäische Zustände, öffentliches und sociales Leben 
Deutschlands (New York) and New-Yorker Democrat. p. 98 
90 This probably refers to the manuscript "Drei Jahre in Paris" ("Three Years in 
Paris"),  a description of the German emigration in 1849 to 1851 by the 
petty-bourgeois refugee Leopold Hafner. Marx was familiar with it (see his 
letter to Adolph Cluss of September 3, 1852, present edition, Vol. 39). Q Q 
91 Marx is referring to Vogt's pamphlet Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung 
as the Lausiade (from the German word Laus, i.e. louse) by analogy with the 
Lousiad, a satirical epic by the English poet Peter Pindar (pen name of John 
Wolcot). 

=====第573页=====
Notes 549 
Lusiads (Os Lusiadas) is an epic by Luis de Camoens (c. 1524-1580), the 
great poet of the Portuguese Renaissance. p. 99 
92 Marx ridicules Vogt's ephemeral power as Imperial Regent (see Note 21) by 
comparing his status to Sancho Panza's imaginary governorship of the island of 
Barataria (barato means "cheap" in Spanish) in Cervantes' Don Quixote. 
p. 100 
93 Here and elsewhere, speaking of the Frankfurt National Assembly, Marx used 
the Assembly's verbatim reports, which were later published in book form 
under the heading Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen 
constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, 
1848-1849. p. 103 
94 On August 26, 1848 Denmark and Prussia concluded an armistice in Malmö 
which nullified the revolutionary and democratic gains of the peoples of 
Schleswig and Holstein and virtually sanctioned the continuance of Danish rule 
there. On September 16, 1848 the Frankfurt National Assembly ratified the 
armistice. This decision caused an outburst of indignation in Germany's 
democratic circles. On September 17, 1848 a mass meeting held in the 
Pfingstweide meadow in the northeast suburb of Frankfurt am Main adopted a 
resolution demanding that the deputies who had voted for ratification should 
be declared traitors and urging the Left deputies to walk out of the Assembly 
(Stenographischer Bericht..., Bd. 3, S. 2184). While some extreme Left deputies 
complied with these demands, Karl Vogt came out against them. On September 
18 the popular movement in Frankfurt against the ratification of the Malmö 
armistice developed into an uprising which was brutally suppressed by 
government troops. p. 103 
95 On October 9, 1848 the Frankfurt National Assembly adopted a "Law for the 
Protection of the Constituent National Assembly and of the Officials of the 
Central Authority" ("Gesetz betreffend den Schutz der Konstituierenden 
Reichsversammlung und der Beamten der Zentralgewalt", Stenographischer 
Bericht..., Bd. 4, S. 2528-29). Under this law, insulting a deputy of the 
Assembly or a representative of the central authority (an Imperial Regent, a 
minister or any other official) was punishable by imprisonment. This was one of 
the repressive measures against the people introduced after the September 
uprising in Frankfurt. p. 103 
96 The Central March Association, thus named after the March 1848 revolution in 
Germany, was founded in Frankfurt am Main at the end of November 1848 by 
Left-wing deputies to the Frankfurt National Assembly and had branches in 
various towns in Germany. Fröbel, Simon, Rüge, Vogt and other petty-
bourgeois democratic leaders of the March associations confined themselves to 
revolutionary phrase-mongering and showed indecision and inconsistency in 
the struggle against counter-revolutionaries, for which Marx and Engels sharply 
criticised them (e.g., in the article "Ein Aktenstück des Märzvereins", Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, December 29, 1848). p. 103 
97 See Engels' works "Elberfeld" and The Campaign for the German Imperial 
Constitution (present edition, Vols. 9 and 10). p. 105 
98 In November and early December 1848 a coup d'état took place in Prussia 

=====第574页=====
550 Notes 
which led to the establishment of the arch-reactionary Brandenburg-Manteuffel 
Ministry and the dissolution of the National Assembly. p. 105 
99 See Note 70. p. 106 
100 At the elections to the Frankfurt National Assembly in May 1848, the Silesian 
district of Striegau (Strzegom) elected Wilhelm Wolff to deputise when 
necessary for the liberal deputy Stenzel, who obtained a majority vote. When 
Stenzel and a group of other liberal deputies walked out of the Assembly in 
May 1849, his seat went to  Wolff. 
"...the Frankfurt Assembly, which was 'in the process of dissolution'" — 
Marx ironically quotes the statement in which the liberals in question 
announced their withdrawal from the Assembly (Stenographischer Bericht..., 
Bd. 9, S. 6746). p. 106 
101 The proclamation "The German National Assembly to the German Nation" 
("Die deutsche Nationalversammlung an das deutsche Volk") drawn up by the 
poet J. L. Uhland on behalf of the moderate democrats was dictated by the 
latter's desire for a political rapprochement with the liberal bourgeoisie. It 
offered no concrete programme of action and boiled down to an impotent 
appeal to the German nation to press for the introduction of the Imperial 
Constitution. 
The other proclamation, stemming from the Committee of Thirty, 
contained an equally ineffectual call to the armies of those German states which 
refused to recognise the National Assembly, to swear allegiance to the Imperial 
Constitution. 
The Committee of Thirty was set up by the Frankfurt National Assembly on 
April 11, 1849 to devise steps conducive to the implementation of the Imperial 
Constitution in view of the ambiguous stand of Frederick William IV, King of 
Prussia, on the Assembly's offer of the Imperial Crown. Originally Frederick 
William IV made his acceptance contingent on the attitude of the other 
German princes, but on April 28, 1849 he rejected the Imperial Constitution 
and the Imperial Crown. p. 106 
102 In early May 1849 Middle Franconia (part of Bavaria) was swept by a wave of 
protests against the rejection of the Imperial Constitution by the Bavarian 
Government. The movement culminated in a mass rally in Nuremberg on May 
13 attended by 50,000 people. In his address Karl Vogt, under cover of 
pseudo-revolutionary phrases, urged the people to abstain from resolute action. 
"Wailers" (Heuler) —the name the republican democrats in Germany applied 
to the moderate constitutionalists in 1848 and 1849. The latter, in turn, called 
their opponents "agitators" (Wühler). p. 109 
103 An ironic reference to Louis Bonaparte, who was brought up in the Swiss 
canton of Thurgau. In 1832 he became a citizen of that canton and in 1833 an 
honorary citizen of the Swiss Republic. p. Ill 
104 The Great Exhibition in London, from May to October 1851, was the first world 
trade and industrial exhibition. p. 113 
105 This refers to Heinrich Heine's political articles for the Augsburg Allgemeine 
Zeitung from Paris in the 1830s and 1840s and to the essays published in the 
same newspaper by the German Orientalist Jakob Philipp Fallmerayer in the 
early 1840s. Heine published most of the articles in question in book form 

=====第575页=====
Notes 551 
under the titles Französische Zustände (1832) and Lutetia (1854). Fallmerayer's 
essays appeared in a two-volume edition under the title Fragmente aus dem 
Orient in 1845. p. 114 
106 "Bas Empire" (Lower Empire) is the name sometimes given to the Byzantine 
Empire and also to the late Roman Empire in historical literature. It came to be 
applied to any state in decline or disintegration. p. 115 
07 At the beginning of April 1859 Vogt sent Freiligrath and others his political 
"Programme" calling on the states of the German Confederation to maintain 
neutrality in the war France and Piedmont were preparing against Austria. 
Vogt urged political leaders to support his "Programme" in the press. (See 
Vogt, Mein Prozess..., Dokumente, S. 33.) p. 115 
08 In this footnote Marx outlines the history of the publication of his exposé Lord 
Palmerston (see present edition, Vol. 12). It was conceived as a series of articles 
for the New-York Daily Tribune, but not all of the articles were published there. 
Between October 1853 and January 1854 four instalments appeared as 
anonymous leading articles, externally unconnected and under different titles. 
Simultaneously, betweeen October 22 and December 24, 1853, the Chartist 
People's Paper published eight articles under the common title Lord Palmerston 
with the editorial note: "Written for the New-York Tribune by Dr. Marx, and 
communicated by him to us." 
The pamhlet against Palmerston was widely circulated. On November 26, 
1853 the Glasgow Sentinel reprinted from the Tribune the third article of the 
series under the title "Lord Palmerston and Russia". In December of the same 
year the London publisher Tucker put out this article in pamphlet form. In 
early February 1854 a second edition of the pamphlet appeared with Marx's 
participation, now under the heading Palmerston and  Poland.  Somewhat 
later Tucker published another pamphlet, Palmerston and the Treaty of Unkiar 
Skelessi (the heading on the title page was: Palmerston, What Has He Done?), 
which reproduced, with a number of alterations, the text of the fourth and 
fifth articles in the series. 
Between December 1855 and February 1856 all eight articles were reprinted 
in The Free Press, organ of the London Urquhartists, and, as a separate edition, 
in No. 5 of The Free  Press  Serials. At about the same time individual articles of 
the series appeared in the Urquhartist Sheffield Free  Press  and later in a number 
of other newspapers. p. 116 
109 The Foreign Affairs Committees were public organisations set up by the 
Urquhartists in a number of English cities between the 1840s and 1860s, mainly 
with the aim of opposing Palmerston's policy. p. 117 
i!0 This refers to Marx's unfinished introduction to a work he proposed to write 
on the history of British and Russian diplomacy in the eighteenth centurv. The 
introduction was first published under the title Revelations of the Diplomatic 
History of the 18th Century in the Sheffield Free Press and the London Free Press 
between June 1856 and April 1857. In 1899 Eleanor Aveling, Marx's daughter, 
published it in London in book form under the heading Secret Diplomatic 
History of the Eighteenth Century. p. 117 
111 The Manchester School—a trend in economic thought reflecting the interests of 
the industrial bourgeoisie. It advocated Free Trade and non-interference by the 
state in economic affairs. In the 1840s and 1850s the Free Traders were an 

=====第576页=====
552 Notes 
independent political group; later they constituted the Left wing of the Liberal 
Party. p. 117 
112 Mormons—members of a religious sect founded in the United States in 1830 by 
Joseph Smith (1805-1844) who wrote the Book of Mormon (1830) on the basis of 
alleged divine revelations. In the name of the prophet Mormon the book tells 
of the migration of the Israelite tribes to America which, it claims, took place in 
antiquity. p. 118 
113 This refers to La question romaine, a pamphlet by E. About published in 
Brussels in 1859. A supplement to the Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150, June 
2, 1859 published an article "Die römische Frage (von E. About. Fortsetzung). 
Pius IX". p. 118 
u4 These words are not from Müllner but from Franz Grillparzer's play DieAhnfrau 
(Act III). p. 120 
115 On June 7, 1859 the Allgemeine Zeitung (No. 158) carried an article under the 
editorial heading "Venedey über die Stellung Deutschlands und Preussens zur 
italienischen Frage" ("Venedey on the Position of Germany and Prussia on the 
Italian Question") including a letter by Venedey to a friend of his in Prussia 
which was originally published in the Zeitung für Norddeutschland. Among other 
things, the letter exposed Vogt's ties with Prince Joseph Napoleon. p. 120 
n6 Marx ironically calls Vogt a "diminisher of the Empire" (Mindrer des Reichs) by 
contrast to "Augmenter of the Empire" (Mehrer des Reichs), a title given to 
German emperors in the Middle Ages. See also p. 166 of this volume. 
The "Little Germany" press—the press favouring a "Little Germany", i.e. the 
unification of Germany under Prussia's supremacy without Austria. p. 122 
117 A copy of the letters by Liebknecht and Blind (of September 8, 1860) is 
contained in Marx's notebook for 1860. The originals have not been found. 
The italics are presumably Marx's. p. 122 
U8 Eisele and Beisele were a pair of ridiculously stupid characters in the humorous 
weekly Fliegende Blätter started in 1844. They were also the heroes of Johann 
Wilhelm Christern's anonymously published story Doktor Eisele's und Baron von 
Beisele's Landtagsreise im April 1847. p. 131 
119 Sine studio means here "without favour". It is part of the phrase "sine ira et 
studio" ("without anger and prejudice") with which Tacitus declared his 
intention to write an unbiased history (Annales, Liber primus, I). 
Marx's use of the phrase with reference to Vogt's Studien is clearly ironic. 
p. 133 
120 This refers to the series of pro-Bonapartist pamphlets put out by the Dentu 
publishing house in Paris in 1859 and 1860. p. 135 
121 Theatre de la Porte Saint-Martin—a theatre company in Paris that catered to low 
tastes during the Second Empire. p. 135 
122 The Seven Years' War (1756-63)—a European war in which England and 
Prussia fought against the coalition of Austria, France, Russia, Saxony and 
Sweden. In 1756-57, the Prussian troops of Frederick II won a number of 
victories over the Austrian and French armies; however, the success of the 
Russian forces in Prussia (1757-60) put Frederick II in a critical position, 

=====第577页=====
Notes 553 
nullifying the results of his victories. The war ended with France having to 
cede some of her colonies (including Canada and almost all of her possessions 
in the East Indies) to Britain, while Prussia, Austria and Saxony had to 
recognise the pre-war frontiers. p. 135 
123 The  Treaty  of Basle  was  concluded separately  by the  French Republic  and 
Prussia,  a member  of the  European Coalition,  on April  5, 1795.  Prussia  was 
forced  to sign  it in  view  of the  successes  of the  French army  and the  growing 
differences between  the  coalition members, above  all  between Prussia  and 
Austria.  Its  conclusion marked  the  beginning  of the  coalition's disintegration. 
On July  22, 1795  Spain also signed  a separate peace treaty with France  in 
Basle.  p. 135 
124 The treaty was designed to prevent the seizure by Prussia of the King of 
Saxony's possessions and the annexation by Russia of all the lands of the 
former Duchy of Warsaw. p. 135 
125 The agreement, concluded in October 1821 during King George IV's visit 
to Hanover, was directed against Russia's policy on the Greek question. 
p. 135 
126 On July 8, 1859 the emperors of France and Austria held a separate 
meeting—without the King of Piedmont, France's ally in the war against 
Austria (see Note 13)—in Villafranca, at which they reached an agreement on 
an armistice. The meeting was held on the initiative of Napoleon III, who 
feared that the protracted war might give a fresh impulse to the revolutionary 
and national liberation movement in Italy and other European states. On 
July 11 France and Austria signed a preliminary peace treaty under which Austria 
was to cede to France its rights to Lombardy and France was to transfer this 
territory to Piedmont. Venetia was to remain under Austrian supremacy (despite 
the terms of the Plombières agreement, see Note 159) and the princes of the 
Central Italian states were to be restored to their thrones. A confederation of 
Italian states was to be formed under the honorary chairmanship of the Pope. 
The Villafranca agreements formed the basis of the peace treaty France, 
Austria and Piedmont concluded in Zurich on November 10, 1859 (see Marx's 
articles "What Has Italy Gained?", "The Peace" and "The Treaty of 
Villafranca" in Vol. 16 of the present edition and Engels' letter to Marx of July 
14, 1859, present edition, Vol. 40). p. 136 
127 This refers to the peace treaty concluded by the Habsburgs and representatives 
of the Hungarian nobility at Szatmar, Hungary, in April 1711, following the 
defeat of the national liberation movement in Hungary. Under the peace 
treaty, Hungary became part of the Habsburg Empire. During the liberation 
war in Hungary British diplomacy sought to secure an early termination of the 
hostilities and preserve the integrity of the Habsburg Empire, Britain's ally in 
the War of the Spanish Succession. p. 136 
128 The reference is to the London Convention of July 15, 1840 between Britain, 
Russia, Austria and Prussia on supporting the Turkish Sultan against the 
Egyptian ruler Mehemet AH. France, which supported Mehemet Ali, did not 
participate. The threat of an anti-French coalition made France withdraw her 
support for the Egyptian ruler. p. 137 

=====第578页=====
554 Notes 
129 Under a treaty concluded in 1816 by Britain and the Kingdom of the Two 
Sicilies (the Kingdom of Naples) the latter undertook not to grant commercial 
privileges to third countries prejudicial to Britain's interests. In 1838 the King 
of Naples granted a French company the monopoly right to mine sulphur in 
Sicily, which evoked a sharp protest from Britain. To make the King of Naples 
rescind his decision the British Government in 1840 ordered its navy in the 
Mediterranean to open hostilities. Naples was forced to comply with Britain's 
demands. p. 137 
130 In 1797 the British Government issued a special Bank Restriction Act making 
banknotes legal tender and suspending the payment of gold for them. To all 
intents and purposes convertibility was not reintroduced until 1821. The return 
to convertibility was made possible by a law passed in 1819. p. 138 
131 In August 1858 Russia and Piedmont concluded an agreement granting the 
Russian Steamship and Trading Company the temporary right to use the 
eastern part of the Villafranca harbour, near Nice, for mooring, refuelling and 
repairing its ships. 
In 1853 Prussia bought from the Duchy of Oldenburg a strip of the shore 
in the Jade Bay to set up a naval base there. It was built between 1855 and 
1869 and named Wilhelmshaven. p. 138 
132 This refers to the repercussions of the uprising in the free city of Cracow (the 
Cracow Republic), which, by decision of the Congress of Vienna, had been 
placed under the joint control of Austria, Prussia and Russia. On February 22, 
1846 the insurgents seized power in Cracow, established a National Govern­
ment and issued a manifesto abolishing feudal services. The uprising was 
suppressed at the beginning of March. In November 1846 Austria, Prussia and 
Russia signed a treaty incorporating Cracow into the Austrian Empire. 
p. 139 
133 This refers to the decree of November 20 (8), 1847, signed by Nicholas I, 
allowing serfs to buy themselves off, together with their land, when their 
landlords' estates were put under distraint. (For details see Marx's article "The 
Emancipation Question", present edition, Vol. 16.) p. 140 
134 To strengthen its influence in the Balkans, Russia supported the national 
liberation movement of the Balkan peoples against Turkish domination. 
Together with France, which likewise sought to consolidate its influence in the 
area, Russia backed the striving of Moldavia and Wallachia to unite and form 
a Romanian state. With French and Russian support Colonel Alexandru 
Cuza was elected hospodar (ruler) of Moldavia in January 1859 and of 
Wallachia in early February 1859. A united Romanian state was set up 
in 1862. p. 141 
135 The memorandum was printed in the Preussisches Wochenblatt zur Besprechung 
politischer Tagesfragen, Nos. 23, 24 and 25 of June 9, 16 and 23, 1855. The 
source of its origin was not indicated. On July 13, 1859 it was reprinted in The 
Free Press under the heading "Memoir on Russia, for the Instruction of the 
Present Emperor. Drawn up by the Cabinet in 1837". Marx used the document 
in one of his reports for the New-York Daily Tribune (see present edition, Vol. 
16). The memorandum attracted his attention in connection with the 
aggravation of the struggle over the question of German and Italian unification 
and the light against Bonapartism. In a letter to Engels of July 19, 1859 Marx 
wrote that he intended to sum up Russia's role in this tragicomedy and at the 

=====第579页=====
Notes 555 
same time expose Bonaparte's intrigues. After familiarising themselves with this 
document Marx and Engels expressed doubts about the authenticity of certain 
passages (see Engels' letter to Marx of June 18, 1859 and Marx's letter to 
Engels of July 19, 1859, present edition, Vol. 40). 
Bismarck in his reminiscences (Gedanken und Erinnerungen von Otto Fürst von 
Bismarck, Stuttgart, 1898, Bd. 1, S. 111-12) says that the memorandum was a 
falsification. p. 141 
136 The Congress of Nemirov—the peace talks held by Russia, Austria and Turkey 
in the Ukrainian town of Nemirov between August and November 1737. The 
congress was convened on Turkey's initiative during the Russo-Turkish war of 
1735-39, which Austria entered, on the side of Russia, in 1737. The peace 
terms put forward by Russia called, among other things, for granting Moldavia 
and Wallachia the status of independent principalities under Russian pro­
tection. Turkey declared most of the terms unacceptable and resumed hosti­
lities. 
The Congress of Foc§ani was held at the Romanian town of Foc§ani in July 
and August 1772 with a view to ending the Russo-Turkish war started by 
Turkey in 1768. The Russian delegation proposed, in particular, that Wallachia 
and Moldavia should be granted independence under the joint protection of 
the European powers. Turkey rejected Russia's proposals. No agreement was 
reached and the hostilities were resumed. p. 142 
137 The  peace  0f Bucharest, concluded on May 28 (16), 1812, put an end to the 
Russo-Turkish war of 1806-12. Under its terms, Russia got Bessarabia and 
certain areas in Transcaucasia. Turkey was to grant internal autonomy to 
Serbia and confirm its earlier agreements with Russia extending a measure of 
autonomy to Moldavia and Wallachia. p. 142 
138 Reglement organique (1831-32)—constitutional acts laying down the socio­
political system of the Danubian Principalities (Wallachia and Moldavia) after 
the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29. The Règlement, based on a draft framed by 
P. D. Kiselev, head of the Russian administration, was adopted by an assembly 
of boyars and clergymen. Legislative power in each of the Principalities was 
vested in an assembly elected by the big landowners. Executive power was 
wielded by the hospodars, rulers elected for life by representatives of the 
landowners, the clergy and the towns. The Règlement envisaged a number of 
bourgeois reforms: abolition of internal customs duties, introduction of free 
trade, and the right of peasants to move from one owner to another. However, 
in view of the preservation of serfdom and concentration of political power in 
the hands of the big landowners and boyars, the progressive forces in the 
Principalities regarded the Règlement as a symbol of feudal stagnation. It was 
repealed during the 1848 revolution. p. 142 
139 The Hetairia (full name: Philike Hetairia) was a Greek secret organisation 
founded in Odessa in 1814. It moved its headquarters to Constantinople in 
1818 and soon won a nation-wide following. In 1821 the Hetairia prepared a 
national liberation uprising in Greece, after the beginning of which it was 
disbanded. p. 143 
140 At its congress in Verona (October to December 1822) the Holy Alliance 
decided to launch an armed intervention against revolutionary Spain. In 1823 
French troops invaded Spain and restored the absolute power of Ferdinand 
VII. They stayed in the country until 1828. p. 143 

=====第580页=====
556 Notes 
141 At Navarino (a port in Greece) on October 20, 1827 the Turko-Egyptian navy 
clashed with the British, French and Russian squadrons sent into Greek waters 
for armed mediation in the war between Turkey and the Greek insurgents. 
The battle was fought after the Turkish command had refused to end the 
massacre of the Greek population. The forces of the three European powers, 
commanded by the British Vice-Admiral Edward Codrington, routed the 
Turko-Egyptian fleet. This facilitated the national liberation struggle of the 
Greeks and Russia's success in its war against Turkey in 1828 and 1829. 
p. 143 
142 Young Italy (Giovine Italia) was a secret organisation of Italian revolutionaries 
(1831-48) founded by Mazzini. It fought for national independence and a 
united Italian republic. p. 144 
143 In October 1850 Emperor Nicholas I of Russia, Emperor Francis Joseph of 
Austria and Count Frederick William von Brandenburg, the head of the 
Prussian Government, met in Warsaw. The conference was held on the 
initiative of Nicholas I in connection with the sharpening struggle between 
Austria and Prussia for supremacy in Germany. The Russian Tsar, acting as 
arbiter, used his influence to make Prussia abandon its attempts to form a 
political confederation of German states under Prussia's aegis. The dispute was 
settled when the heads of the Austrian and Prussian governments signed an 
agreement in Olmütz (Olomouc) on November 29, 1850 under which Prussia 
renounced its claims to supremacy in Germany and yielded on the issues of 
Schleswig-Holstein and Hesse-Cassel. As a result of the agreement an Austrian 
army corps was sent to Holstein. p. 145 
144 Pozzo di Borgo, Russia's Ambassador to Paris, sent the dispatch in question to 
Count Nesselrode, the Russian Chancellor, on October 16 (4), 1825 in reply to 
the latter's circular letter of August 18 (6), 1825. The circular, drawn up at the 
instructions of Alexander I, asked the Russian Ambassadors abroad for their 
opinion about the Western Powers' policy vis-à-vis Russia in connection with the 
Eastern question. Pozzo di Borgo suggested in his dispatch that Russia should 
resort to armed force in dealing with Turkey. The dispatch was published in 
Recueil des documents pour la plupart  secrets  et inédits  et d'autres  pièces historiques  utiles à 
consulter dans la crise actuelle (juillet 1853), Paris. Marx used the second (1854) 
edition of the book. p. 145 
145 Finis Poloniae!—a phrase attributed—without sufficient grounds—to Tadeusz 
Kosciuszko, the leader of the national liberation movement in Poland in 1794. 
He is supposed to have uttered it after the defeat of the insurgent army at the 
battle of Maciejowice (October 10, 1794) when he was taken prisoner. 
p. 148 
146 Marx is referring to the map of Slav lands compiled by the Czech Slavonic 
scholar Pavel Josef Safafik for his book Slovansky nârodopis (Slavonic Ethnog­
raphy) published in 1842. p. 151 
147 The Lay of Ludwig (Das Ludwigslied) was written in the Frankish dialect by an 
anonymous poet in the late ninth century. It is a panegyric of the West 
Frankish King Louis III, celebrating his victory over the Normans at Sancourt 
in 881 (Hausschatz der Volkspoesie, Leipzig, 1846). p. 154 

=====第581页=====
Notes 557 
148 On June 11, 1849 Ledru-Rollin, the leader of the petty-bourgeois democrats, 
tabled a motion in the Legislative Assembly calling for the impeachment of 
President Louis Bonaparte and the government for violating the Constitution 
by sending French troops to crush the Roman Republic and restore the 
temporal power of the Pope. After it had been voted down by the conservative 
majority of the Assembly the petty-bourgeois democrats tried to organise a 
mass protest demonstration on June 13, which was dispersed by government 
troops. The leaders of the Montagne, the petty-bourgeois faction in the 
Assembly, were stripped of their powers as deputies and persecuted. Some of 
them were forced to emigrate. The June 13 events revealed the Montagne 
leaders' indecision and inability to head the revolutionary movement of the 
masses (see Marx's The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850, present edition, 
Vol. 10, pp. 101-07). p. 155 
149 Napoléon le Petit (Napoleon the Little)—the nickname given to Louis Bonaparte 
by Victor Hugo in a speech he made to the French Legislative Assembly in 
1851.  It gained wide currency after the publication in 1852 of Hugo's Napoléon 
le Petit. p. 156 
150 Here Marx uses the words "ein Ende mit Schrecken", apparently an allusion to 
the dictum "Lieber ein Ende mit Schrecken als ein Schrecken ohne Ende" ("A 
dreadful end is better than dread without end"). It is attributed to Ferdinand 
Schill, commander of volunteer units that fought against Napoleon's troops in 
1806-07. Schill is believed to have uttered these words in a speech he made in 
the market-place of Arneburg on the Elbe on May 12, 1809 when he urged 
Prussia to fight France. p. 156 
151 In the early 1850s the French Government drew up a plan for the import of 
African Negroes, including inhabitants of Portugal's African colonies, for work 
on plantations in France's West Indian colonies. The implementation of the 
plan was tantamount to a revival of the slave trade and led to a conflict 
between France and Portugal. p. 157 
152 This refers to the abortive attempt by the Italian revolutionaries Orsini and 
Pieri to assassinate Napoleon III on January 14, 1858. Marx refers to it in 
several of his articles, e.g. "The War Prospect in France" and "Quid pro Quo" 
(see present edition, Vol. 16). p. 157 
153 By tne  L0is  de sûreté publique (laws on social security) Marx means the Loi des 
suspects (law on suspects) adopted by the Corps Législatif on February 19, 1858. 
It granted the government and the Emperor the unlimited right to deport 
persons suspected of hostility towards the regime of the Second Empire to 
various places in France and Algeria and even to banish them from French 
territory. p. 157 
154 By the decree of January 27, 1858 the territory of the Second Empire was 
divided into five General Captaincies headed by marshals. This was done on 
the pattern of Spain, where the captain generals (commanders of military 
districts) wielded full power. 
The decree on the regency and the establishment of the Privy Council was 
issued on February 1, 1858, soon after Orsini's attempt on the life of Napoleon 
III. Pélissier was a member of the Council, which was to become the Regency 
Council if the Emperor's son, a minor, acceded to the throne. p. 157 

=====第582页=====
558 Notes 
155 Napoleon III was the son of Napoleon I's brother Louis Bonaparte, King 
of Holland from 1806 to 1810. By calling Napoleon III the "nephew of the 
battle of Austerlitz" Marx alludes to the fact that the coup d'état of December 2, 
1851 was timed to coincide with the anniversary of the batde of Austerlitz 
(December 2, 1805) at which Napoleon I defeated the allied Russian and Aust­
rian forces. p. 157 
156 At the end of 1858 the French journalist Montalembert was put on trial for 
writing an article condemning the regime of the Second Empire ("Un débat sur 
l'Inde au parlement anglais", Le Correspondant, nouvelle série, V. IX, octobre 
1858).  He was pardoned by Napoleon III but rejected the pardon and 
demanded his acquittal. Marx ironically draws a parallel between this trial and 
that of John Hampden, a prominent figure in the English seventeenth-century 
revolution, who in 1636 refused to pay "ship money", a royal tax not 
authorised by the House of Commons. The Hampden trial increased the 
opposition to absolutism in England. 
In his pamphlet De la Justice poursuivie par l'Eglise (Brussels, 1858) Proudhon 
compares the Bonaparte and Orléans dynasties and gives preference to the 
principles of government proclaimed by the latter, but makes reservations 
concerning the need for certain democratic reforms. Marx ironically compares 
these reservations with the Acte additionel, the constitutional regulations 
introduced by Napoleon I in France in 1815 upon his return from Elba. 
p. 157 
157 This refers to the abortive republican uprising of troops in Chalon-sur-Saône 
on March 6, 1858 (see Marx's article "Portents of the Day", present edition, 
Vol. 15). p. 157 
158 On January 20, 1858 Count Walewski, the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
sent a Note to the British Government expressing dissatisfaction with Britain's 
granting asylum to political refugees. In this connection Palmerston tabled the 
Conspiracy to Murder Bill in the House of Commons on February 8. During its 
second reading Milner Gibson proposed an amendment censuring the 
Palmerston Government for not giving an appropriate reply to the Note. The 
amendment, adopted by the majority of the House, amounted to a vote of 
no-confidence in the Government and forced it to resign. p. 158 
159 On July 21, 1858, at Plombières, Napoleon III and Prime Minister Cavour of 
the Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) reached a secret agreement envisaging 
Franco-Sardinian military co-operation against Austria, the abolition of 
Austrian rule in Lombardy and Venetia and their union with Piedmont, the 
establishment of a North Italian state to be ruled by the Savoy dynasty, and the 
cession by Piedmont of Savoy and Nice to France. The agreement was 
formalised by a Franco-Sardinian treaty concluded in Turin in January 1859. 
During the Plombières meeting the question of a Franco-Sardinian war against 
Austria was decided. It started in April 1859. 
In the autumn of 1858, Palmerston, then head of the Whig opposition to 
the Derby-Disraeli Tory Cabinet, was invited by Napoleon III to Compiègne to 
clarify his position on the impending Franco-Austrian war. At the meeting 
Palmerston did not object to the Austrians being driven out of Italy, but in his 
speech at the opening of Parliament on February 3, 1859 he condemned 
France's action. p. 159 

=====第583页=====
Notes 559 
160 On October 10, 1850 Louis Bonaparte, then President of the French Republic, 
held a general review of troops on the plain of Satory (near Versailles). During 
the review Bonaparte, who was preparing a coup d'état, treated the soldiers 
and officers to sausages in order to win their support. p. 163 
161 At the Congress of Paris on March 30, 1856 France, Britain, Austria, Sardinia, 
Prussia and Turkey, on the one hand, and Russia, on the other, signed a peace 
treaty that concluded the Crimean War (1853-56). Russia, defeated in the war, 
was forced to cede the estuary of the Danube and part of South Bessarabia, 
renounce its protection of the Danubian Principalities, and agree to the 
neutralisation of the Black Sea, which involved the closure of the Straits to 
foreign warships and a ban on the maintenance by Russia and Turkey of naval 
arsenals and navies in the Black Sea. In exchange for Sevastopol and the other 
Crimean towns seized by the Allies, Russia was to return Kars to Turkey. 
France refused to support Britain's demand for the severance of the Caucasus 
from Russia and Austria's demand for the incorporation of Bessarabia into 
Turkey. The Congress marked the beginning of a Franco-Russian rapproche­
ment, p. 163 
162 The Thirty Years' War (1618-48) — a European war in which the Pope, the 
Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs and the Catholic German princes, rallied 
under the banner of Catholicism, fought the Protestant countries: Bohemia, 
Denmark, Sweden, the Republic of the Netherlands and a number of 
Protestant German states. The rulers of Catholic France — rivals of the 
Habsburgs—supported the Protestant camp. Germany was the principal battle 
area and the main object of plunder and territorial claims. The Treaty of 
Westphalia (1648) sealed the political dismemberment of Germany. p. 168 
163 During the Irish uprising of 1798 the town of Kilkenny was occupied by 
Hessian mercenaries serving in the British army, who used to amuse themselves 
by watching fights between cats with their tails tied together. One day, a 
soldier, seeing an officer approaching, cut off the cats' tails with his sword and 
the cats ran away. The officer was told that the cats had eaten each other and 
only their tails remained. p. 170 
164 The Treaty of Campoformio, signed on October 17, 1797, concluded the 
victorious war of the French Republic against Austria, a member of the first 
anti-French coalition. Under the treaty, France got Belgium, the Ionian Islands 
and part of Albania. Austria was to help France annex the left bank of the 
Rhine, and relinquished its former possessions in Northern Italy. Together 
with part of the abolished Venetian Republic, these constituted the Cisalpine 
Republic, a new state under French protection. A big portion of the Venetian 
Republic, including Venice, and also Istria and Dalmatia, were given to Austria 
in exchange for concessions made to France on the Rhine frontier. p. 171 
165 The Council of States—one of the two houses of Switzerland's Federal Assembly 
(Parliament). The other house is called the National Council. p. 175 
166 Vallée des Dappes —a mountain valley on the border of the Swiss Canton of 
Vàud and France. The Congress of Vienna (1814-15) ruled it to be Swiss 
territory; however France later refused to recognise this decision. Because of its 
strategic importance the Vallée des Dappes remained a bone of contention 

=====第584页=====
560 Notes 
between the two states until Switzerland ceded part of it to France in exchange 
for territorial compensation in 1862. p. 175 
In the autumn of 1856 a conflict developed between Prussia and Switzerland 
over the events in Neuchâtel (in German: Neuenburg). From 1707 to 1806 the 
principality of Neuchâtel was a dwarf state under Prussian rule. In 1815, by 
decision of the Vienna Congress, it was incorporated into the Swiss 
Confederation as its 21st canton, at the same time remaining a vassal of Prussia. 
In February 1848 a bourgeois revolution in Neuchâtel put an end to Prussian 
rule and a republic was proclaimed. In 1852 Britain, France and Russia signed 
a protocol in London which re-affirmed the Prussian King's rights to 
Neuchâtel. The Prusso-Swiss conflict flared up with fresh violence in 
September 1856 when the Swiss authorities arrested the participants in an 
abortive monarchist putsch in Neuchâtel who had the support of the Prussian 
King. The Swiss Government demanded that Prussia should renounce all its 
claims to the canton. The conflict was settled in the spring of 1857 thanks to 
the diplomatic intervention of other powers, notably France. The Prussian King 
had to waive his claim to Neuchâtel, while the Swiss Government released the 
arrested royalists. p. 175 
The Sonderbund — a separatist union of the seven economically backward 
Catholic cantons of Switzerland formed in 1843 to resist progressive bourgeois 
reforms and to defend the privileges of the Church and the Jesuits. The decree 
of the Swiss Diet of July 1847 dissolving the Sonderbund was used by the latter 
as a pretext for starting hostilities against the other cantons early in November. 
On November 23, 1847 the Sonderbund army was defeated by the federal 
forces. Attempts by Austria and Prussia to interfere in Swiss affairs in support 
of the Sonderbund failed. Louis Philippe's Government virtually sided with 
these powers in protecting the Sonderbund. p. 176 
In this Note, directed to a- number of states, the Federal Council declared that 
in the event of war in Italy, Switzerland would defend its neutrality and 
territorial integrity and would, in keeping with the resolutions of the Congress 
of Vienna, occupy the neutralised area of Savoy (Northern Savoy). 
The Congress had proclaimed the "perpetual neutrality" of Switzerland 
and, in its Final Act, adopted on June 9, 1815, declared Chablais and Faucigny, 
the provinces of Northern Savoy, a neutralised territory and authorised 
Switzerland, in the event of war or the threat of war between the neighbouring 
states,  to occupy these provinces, at the same time enjoining the Kingdom of 
Sardinia to withdraw its troops from there. p. 176 
Marx quotes from Klage (Lament), an anonymous twelfth-century German 
poem. It is a kind of supplement to the Nibelungenlied (or Der Nibelunge Not). 
Marx probably used the 1826 edition by Karl Lachmann Der Nibelungen Not mit 
der Klage. He quotes from an entry in his notebook of 1860. 
Iwein,  oder der Ritter mit dem Löwen (Ywain, or the Knight of the Lion) is a 
narrative poem by the medieval German poet Hartmann von Aue. Its central 
idea is the sacrifice of happiness for the sake of honour. The poem is an 
adaptation of the novel Yvain ou le Chevalier au Lion by the French 
twelfth-century writer Chrétien de Troyes. Marx presumably used the edition, 
Hartmann von Aue, Iwein, Eine Erzählung (Mit Anmerkungen von G. F. 
Benecke und K. Lachmann), Berlin, 1843. p. 184 

=====第585页=====
Notes 561 
171 Die Kaiserchronik —a German epic of the twelfth century telling in semi-
legendary form the history of the Roman and German emperors from Caesar 
to 1147. The extant version is attributed to the twelfth-century German poet 
Konrad. Marx probably used the edition prepared by Heinrich Kurz, Geschichte 
der deutschen Literatur, Leipzig, 1857. p. 185 
172 Prince Napoleon commanded a division in the Crimea in 1854. Lacking 
military talent and unpopular with the army, he feigned ill health to stay away 
from directing military operations and later returned to Paris without official 
permission. p. 189 
173 An allusion to Napoleon Ill's rumoured illegitimacy. Officially he was the son 
of King Louis Bonaparte of Holland, a brother of Napoleon I. p. 190 
174 See Note 70. p. 190 
175 See Note 165. p. 192 
176 See Note 159. p. 192 
177 Corybants—attendants of the goddess Cybele who were supposed to accompany 
her with wild dances and music; also priests of Cybele who acted as Corybants 
with orgiastic processions and rites. p. 194 
178 The Crédit Mobilier (Société général du Crédit Mobilier) was a French joint-stock 
bank founded in 1852 by the Péreire brothers. Closely connected with and 
protected by the Government of Napoleon III, it engaged in large-scale 
speculation. The bank was involved, in particular, in the railway-building 
business. It went bankrupt in 1867 and was liquidated in 1871. p. 198 
179 Helvetia—a Swiss student association which in 1859-60 opposed Napoleon 
Ill's plans for the annexation of Savoy to France. p. 201 
is« See Note 45. p. 204 
181 The Fusionists advocated fusion of the Legitimists (the supporters of the elder 
branch of the French Bourbon dynasty) and the Orleanists (the adherents of 
the younger branch). 
Collège de France—one of France's oldest higher educational establishments 
(founded 1530 in Paris). 
L'Institut de France—France's highest scientific and art centre. It comprises a 
number of leading academies, including the Académie Française. p. 207 
182 This refers to the committee of the party of Order, which sat in the rue de 
Poitiers. The party of Order formed in 1848 was a coalition of monarchist 
groups: the Legitimists (supporters of the Bourbon dynasty), the Orleanists 
(supporters of the Orleans dynasty) and the Bonapartists. It was the party of 
the conservative big bourgeoisie. From 1849 until the coup d'état of December 
2, 1851 it held sway in the Legislative Assembly of the Second Republic. 
p. 208 
183 An allusion to the shrine of the three Magi in Cologne Cathedral (cf. Heinrich 
Heine, Deutschland, ein Wintermärchen, Chapter VII). p. 210 
184 Marx is referring to Vogt's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on April 
24, 1849 (Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constitniren-

=====第586页=====
562 Notes 
den Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main). An excerpt from Vogt's speech 
was published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 283, April 27, 1849 and is 
contained in Marx's notebook. p. 211 
8n Mouse Tower—a tower built on a rock in the middle of the Rhine below the 
town of Bingen. Hemmed in by rocks, this section of the river is called the 
Binger Loch (Bingen Hole). According to one version, the name of the tower is 
associated with Archbishop Hatto II of Mayence. Legend has it that he ordered 
a number of starving people to be burnt in a barn. When their screams were 
heard, he jokingly told the bystanders that these were the cries of the mice who 
had caused the food shortage. This earned him the disfavour of mice, to avoid 
which he had a tower built for him on a rock in the Binger Loch. However the 
mice found him out there and devoured him. p. 212 
86 An allusion to Vogt's participation in the Genevan joint-stock company La 
Cimentaire (see this volume, p. 327). p. 212 
87 An allusion to the prolonged resistance that the garrison of Komârom fortress, 
commanded by General Klapka, offered to the besieging Austrian army and 
the Russian troops sent by Tsar Nicholas I. The fortress held out until the end 
of September 1849. The defence of Komârom was the closing act of the 
Hungarian revolution of 1848-49. p. 214 
88 This refers to the rising in Milan on February 6, 1853 organised by the 
followers of the Italian revolutionary Mazzini and supported by Hungarian 
revolutionary refugees. The aim of the insurgents, mostly Italian patriotic 
workers, was to overthrow Austrian rule in Italy. However, the leaders' 
conspiratorial tactics and failure to take into account the actual situation led to 
the rapid defeat of the insurgents. Marx analysed the rising in a number of 
articles (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 508-09, 513-16 and 535-37). p. 217 
189 Speaking of manifestos issued by Kossuth and Mazzini, Marx based himself on 
the article "Data by Which to Judge of Kossuth" (The Free  Press,  No. 5, May 27, 
1859),  which mentioned a manifesto issued by Kossuth in 1855 and ad­
ded: "The names associated in this with Kossuth were Ledru-Rollin and 
Mazzini." 
The Central Committee of European  Democracy,  set up in London in June 1850 
on Mazzini's initiative, was an organisation of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
refugees from different countries. Kossuth played an important part in it, as 
well as Mazzini, Ledru-Rollin and Ruge. The Committee's Inaugural Manifesto, 
"Aux peuples!", of July 22, 1850 (Le Proscrit, No. 2, August 6, 1850) was 
criticised by Marx and Engels in their international review for May to October 
1850 published in the autumn of that year in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 529-32). Extremely 
heterogeneous in composition and ideological principles, the Committee 
virtually disintegrated in March 1852 because of the strained relations between 
the Italian and French democratic refugees. p. 218 
90 Kossuth's lectures of 1858 and a number of his articles were published in 
Brussels in 1859 under the title: Kossuth L., L'Europe, l'Autriche et la Hongrie. 
The Concordats are agreements between the Pope and the governments of 
individual countries on the status and privileges of the Catholic Church in these 
countries. Under the Concordat of 1855 concluded by the Holy See and 
Vienna, the Catholic Church in Austria was to enjoy autonomy, the right of 

=====第587页=====
Notes 563 
direct communication with Rome and the right to own property. It was to act 
as supreme spiritual censor and wield a vast influence on the schools. 
p. 221 
191 The facts Marx presents here and further on (p. 222) concerning Kossuth's 
meeting with Napoleon III and financial dealings with the Bonapartists were 
related to him by Szemere (see Marx's letter to Engels of September 28, 1859). 
He also used them in his article "Kossuth and Louis Napoleon", published in 
the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5748, September 24,  1*859  (see present edition, 
Vol. 16). The article caused considerable repercussions among Hungarian 
refugees in the United States. "Hungarians in New York, Chicago, New 
Orleans, etc., have held meetings at which they resolved to send Kossuth a 
letter challenging him to justify himself with respect to my article in the 
New-York Tribune," Marx wrote to Engels on November 19, 1859 (present 
edition, Vol. 40). 
A version of this article, headlined "Particulars of Kossuth's Transactions 
with Louis Napoleon" was published in The Free Press, No. 10, September 28, 
1859.  On October 8, 1859 Marx wrote to Szemere that "the Free Press report 
was reprinted in English, Scottish and Irish provincial newspapers". A German 
version of the article appeared in the supplement to the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 
276, October 3, 1859. On October 10 Marx informed Engels that it had also 
been reprinted by the Weser-Zeitung. p. 221 
92 This refers to Emperor Francis Joseph's diploma of October 20, 1860 (das 
Kaiserliche Diplom vom 20. Oktober 1860) which granted a measure of 
autonomy to the non-German parts of the Austrian Empire. It was a 
half-measure designed to placate the advocates of federalism, particularly the 
Hungarians. (Engels analysed it in his article "Austria—Progress of the 
Revolution", see this volume, pp. 499-500.) However the October diploma was 
rescinded a few months later by the Patent of February 26, 1861, which 
reintroduced the centralist system in the Austrian Empire. p. 225 
93 In usum Delphini—literally: "for the use of the Dauphinv, in a figurative sense: 
"with omissions", "bowdlerised". The phrase gained currency after 1668 when 
the works of ancient classics were published for the son of Louis XIV, the heir 
to the French throne (the Dauphin), expurgated of all "objectionable" 
passages. p. 225 
94 On August 13, 1849, at Vilâgos, the Hungarian army commanded by Görgey 
surrendered to the Tsarist troops sent to help the Habsburgs suppress the 
revolution in Hungary. Although the Hungarian army possessed considerable 
resources and was able to continue the struggle, Görgey treasonably capitulated 
to meet the wishes of the conservative nobility who were opposed to a spread of 
the revolution. p. 226 
195 The ultramontane party in Switzerland was formed in the 1840s on the initiative 
of the reactionary Catholic circles in connection with the intensified opposition 
of the economically backward cantons to the liberal-democratic reforms carried 
out by the bourgeoisie. This opposition led to the establishment of the 
Sonderbund (see Note 168) and a civil war in Switzerland. p. 228 
96 This refers to one of the charitable educational institutions run by the Herrnhut 
communities. The first of these communities was set up in Herrnhut., Saxony, in 
1722 by followers of a religious fraternity originally known as the Moravian 

=====第588页=====
564 Notes 
Brethren. There were a number of Herrnhut communities in Germany, 
America and South Africa. p. 231 
197 "Laissez aller et  laissez  faire" was the formula of the advocates of free trade and 
non-intervention of the state in economic relations. p. 231 
198 This refers to the street riots in Geneva in October 1846 caused by differences 
between bourgeois radicals and Rightists over the attitude to  ]> § adopted 
towards the Sonderbund and democratic reforms in the administration of the 
canton of Geneva. p. 231 
199 See Note 168. p. 231 
200 In January 1849 Mazzini and J. Ph. Becker advanced a plan for establishing a 
volunteer German-Helvetian republican legion to support the revolutionary 
movement in Sicily. The Swiss Federal Council banned propaganda of the plan 
in the Swiss press as prejudicial to Switzerland's neutrality. Becker's attempts to 
organise the shipment to Italy of the 2,500 volunteers assembled in Marseilles 
failed because of a ban imposed by the French authorities, who were preparing 
an intervention against the Roman Republic. p. 232 
2d See Note 178. p. 234 
202 See Marx's article "The Berlin National-Zeitung to the Primary Electors" 
(present edition, Vol. 8, p. 271). 
Schilda—the name of a town whose inhabitants, portrayed in Die 
Schildbürger, a German popular satirical book of the late 16th century, have 
come to be regarded as epitomes of philistine narrow-mindedness and 
obtuseness. p. 236 
203 The original has "denkende Leser" ("thinking readers") here. This ironic 
reference to the readers of the National-Zeitung seems to be an allusion to the 
title of K. Rotteck's well-known book Allgemeine Geschichte vom Anfang der 
historischen Kenntniß  bis auf  unsere Zeiten;  für denkende Geschichtsfreunde (Universal 
History from  the  Beginnings  of  Historical Knowledge  to Modern Times;  for  Thinking 
Friends of History), Freiburg und Konstanz, 1813-1818. p. 236 
204 These lines (Marx quotes  in English  and  gives  the  German translation  in a 
footnote)  are  from Alexander Pope's  The  Dunciad.  An  Heroic Poem, Book  I, 
written between  1728 and 1743.  Pope gives  a satirical portrayal  of his  literary 
adversaries, relegating them  to the  realm  of Dulness.  p. 237 
205 The Neue Oder-Zeitung was a German bourgeois-democratic daily published 
under this title in Breslau (Wroclaw) from 1849 to 1855. 
It started publication in March 1849 following a split in the editorial board 
of the oppositional Catholic Allgemeine Oder-Zeitung, which appeared from 
1846.  The Neue Oder-Zeitung was the most radical newspaper in Germany in 
the 1850s, and the object of government persecution. Its editorial board was 
headed by the bourgeois democrats Temme, Stein and Eisner. The last named 
became Editor-in-Chief in September 1855. In 1855 Marx contributed to the 
Neue Oder-Zeitung as its London correspondent. In view of the almost complete 
absence of a working-class press in the years of reaction Marx and Engels 

=====第589页=====
Notes 565 
considered it essential to use the bourgeois-democratic press in the struggle 
against the reactionary forces. p. 238 
206 See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 390-91 ("Stein"). The italics in this passage 
were partly changed by Marx. 
Agreers Assembly (V ereinbarer-Ver Sammlung) was Marx's and Engels' ironic 
way of referring to the Prussian National Assembly, which was guided by the 
"theory of agreement". Convened in Berlin in May 1848, it was to draw up a 
Constitution not on the basis of sovereign and constituent rights but "by 
agreement with the Crown" (the principle formulated by the Camphausen-
Hansemann Government and adopted by the majority of the Assembly). The 
Crown used the theory of agreement to camouflage its preparations for a 
counter-revolutionary coup d'état. On December 5, 1848 the Prussian National 
Assembly was disbanded. 
The imposed Constitution was made public on the same day. It introduced a 
two-chamber parliament in Prussia. By the imposition of age and property 
qualifications the First Chamber was made a privileged chamber of the gentry. 
Under the electoral law of December 6, 1848, the right to vote in the two-stage 
elections to the Second Chamber was granted only to "independent Prussians". 
The two Chambers first met on February 26, 1849. However, the Branden-
burg-Manteuffel government, displeased with the position of the Left-wing 
deputies of the Second Chamber, though their opposition was rather moderate, 
dissolved it on April 27. The pretext for the dissolution was the approval by 
the Second Chamber of the Imperial Constitution drawn up by the Frankfurt 
National Assembly. Subsequently, the imposed Constitution was repeatedly 
revised, on the initiative of the ruling circles of Prussia, in a still more 
anti-democratic spirit. p. 238 
ao7 The Corn Laws were repealed in June 1846. They imposed high import duties 
on agricultural produce in the interests of the landowners, in order to maintain 
high prices on the home market. The repeal of the Corn Laws marked a 
victory for the industrial bourgeoisie, who opposed them under the slogan of 
free trade. p. 239 
208 The First Democratic Congress, held in Frankfurt am Main from June 14 to 
June 17, 1848 and attended by delegates of 89 democratic and workers' 
organisations from different German cities, decided to unite all democratic 
associations and set up district committees and a Central Committee of German 
Democrats. The latter had its headquarters in Berlin. p. 239 
209 See Note 203. p. 242 
210 Septembrists was the name given to the Jacobins by their enemies who 
slanderously accused them of wanton brutality in September 1792, during the 
French Revolution. p. 243 
211 Lévites —Hebrew priests in the service of the Temple of Jerusalem for whose 
benefit tithes were collected (see Numbers 3:39). p. 245 
212 f]ie frien(i in  question was Ferdinand Lassalle (see Marx's letters to him of 
February 23 and March 3, 1860). In reply to Marx's request Lassalle answered 
that no one in Berlin knew of any Daily Telegraph correspondent (Lassalle's 

=====第590页=====
566 Notes 
letter to Marx of March 11, 1860, in: Fr. Mehring, Briefe von Ferdinand 
Lassalle. —Aus dem literarischen Nachlass von Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels und 
Ferdinand Lassalle, 4. Bd., Stuttgart, 1902). 
The acquaintance mentioned further in the text was presumably Eduard 
Fischel. An entry in Marx's notebook for 1860 mentions the dispatch of a letter 
to him (it has not been found). Marx learned the name of the Daily Telegraph 
correspondent from Fischel's letter of May 30, 1860. p. 246 
213 Magistrat in German means municipal or city council. p. 247 
214 The Echternach procession (or leaping procession) has been held annually in the 
Luxemburg town of Echternach at Whitsun since the Middle Ages in gratitude 
for the termination of an epidemic of St. Vitus's dance (chorea) which raged in 
the town in 1374. The participants in the procession perform complicated 
forward and backward movements. p. 247 
215 An allusion to the speculative activities of the Credit Mobilier bank founded by 
the Péreire Brothers (see Note 178). p. 249 
216 Marx calls Vincke a knight of the joyful countenance by analogy with the Knight of 
the Doleful Countenance (Don Quixote). 
Chevalier sans peur et sans reproche (knight without fear or reproach)— 
appellation of the medieval knight Pierre du Terrai! seigneur de Bayard. It is 
used with reference to other people too, both in its literal sense and ironically. 
p. 250 
217 The conservative deputies of the Frankfurt National Assembly arranged a 
banquet in honour of the Regent of the Empire, Archduke John, who arrived 
in Frankfurt am Main on July 11, 1848. Vincke was present too. The reference 
is to his speech at the sitting of July 15, 1848 (Deutsche Reichstags-Zeitung, 
No. 49, July 16, 1848). 
The couplet quoted lower in the text is from an eighteenth-century student 
song. p. 251 
218 The Corpus juris civilis, compiled in the sixth century under the Emperor 
Justinian, was a code of law regulating property relations in Rome's 
slave-owning society. It was applied in part in Germany from the fifteenth to 
the nineteenth century. p. 251 
219 An allusion to Benda's challenging Vincke to a duel for his provocative 
anti-Jewish remarks which Benda took as a personal insult. Vincke refused to 
fight. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung wrote about the incident in its issue No. 184, 
January 1, 1849. 
The United Diet, convened by Frederick Wiiiiam IV in Berlin in April 1847, 
was an assembly of Prussia's eight provincial diet»; and, like these, was based on 
the principle of social estates. Its terms of reference were limited to the 
endorsement of new taxes and loans, a delibeiative vote in the discussions of 
draft laws and the right to petition the kintr The first United Diet was 
dissolved because of its refusal to approve a new loan. p. 251 
220 Here and below Marx used the reports on the session of the Frankfurt 
National Assembly published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 

=====第591页=====
Notes 567 
An account of Vincke's speech appeared in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 
No. 126, October 26, 1848. p. 252 
221 This refers to the counter-revolutionary stand of the German and Austrian 
bourgeoisie during the Vienna uprising in October 1848. It was manifest, in 
particular, in the actions of the majority of the Frankfurt National Assembly 
and the central authority which, posing as mediator, virtually sabotaged aid to 
revolutionary Vienna. Vincke actively supported this attitude (Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, No. 126, October 26, 1848). p. 254 
222 The Fata Morgana of Little Germany—a plan for the unification of Germany 
from above under Prussia's aegis and excluding Austria. Supported by the 
majority of the bourgeoisie, it reflected the struggle between Austria an<l 
Prussia for supremacy in Germany after unification. p. 254 
223 Here Marx summarises Vincke's speeches in the Prussian United Diet on 
December 29, 1848 and January 3, 1849 (Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 184 and 
185, January 1 and 3, 1849). p. 255 
224 Daimios—powerful feudal barons in medieval Japan. p. 255 
225 The  Ministry of Action (Ministerium der That) was the name given during the 
1848-49 revolution to Prussia's Auerswald-Hansemann government (June-
September 1848) (see Engels' article "The Fall of the Government of Action 
present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 417-19). p. 256 
226 These words were spoken by Count von Brandenburg, the Prussian Prime 
Minister, at a sitting of the Lower Chamber of the Prussian Diet on April 20, 
1849 in connection with the proposal to adopt the Imperial Constitution (Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, No. 280, April 24, 1849). p. 257 
227 See Note 193. p. 259 
228 This refers to the Democratic Association founded in Brussels in the autumn of 
1847.  It consisted of proletarian revolutionaries, mainly German revolutionary 
refugees, and radical bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats. Marx and 
Engels took an active part in setting up the Association. On November 15, 1847 
Marx was elected its Vice-President (the President was Lucien Jot'rand, a 
Belgian democrat), and under his influente the Association became :i leading 
centre of the international democratic movement. During the February 1848 
revolution in France, the proletarian wing of the Association preyed for '!;;• 
armament of Belgian workers and an intensification of the struggle f<;< • 
democratic republic. However after Marx's expulsion from Brussels in eajh 
March 1848 and the suppression of the revolutionary elements bv die Belgian 
authorities, the Association's activities assumed a narrower, purely local 
character and virtualK ceased in ' 8  19. p. 2t"H 
22y The Labour Parliament met in Manchester from March 6 to 18, 1854. It had 
been called in connection with the rise of the strike movement in Britain in 
1853 on the initiative of a group of Chartists headed bv Ernest joues. As earn 
as the end of 1853 (Marx mistakenly gives this as tiie date of the Labour 
Parliament's meeting) thii- group proposed setting up a broad working-class 

=====第592页=====
568 Notes 
organisation called The Mass Movement which was to bring together the trade 
unions and the unorganised workers with a view to co-ordinating strikes in 
different parts of the country. The organisation was to be headed by a 
periodically convened Labour Parliament consisting of delegates elected by 
meetings of unorganised workers and the trade unions affiliated with The Mass 
Movement. The Labour Parliament adopted the programme of The Mass 
Movement and formed a five-member executive committee. Marx, elected an 
honorary delegate to the Parliament, sent a letter which was read out on March 
IG (see present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 57-58). In it he put forward the task of 
establishing an independent mass working-class party in Britain. 
However, the attempt to set up The Mass Movement failed because most 
trade union leaders rejected political struggle and refused to support the idea 
of forming a united mass working-class organisation. The decline of the strike 
movement in the summer of 1854 was a contributing factor. The Labour 
Parliament did not meet after March 1854. p. 265 
2"'° Marx intended to write a pamphlet entitled On Prussian Justice (see his letters 
to Engels of October 25, I860 and to Lassalle of October 2, 1860, present 
edition, Vol. 41). The plan did not materialise. p. 271 
-31 Code civil (Code Napoleon)—French Civil Code published in 1804. It was 
introduced by Napoleon in the conquered regions of West and Southwest 
Germany and remained in force in the Rhine Province after its incorporation 
into Prussia in 1815. p. 271 
232 The Patriots was a republican society of German refugees in London in the 
1850s and 60s. Its members included Blind, Freiligrath ana Hollinger. 
'The National Association (Deutscher National- Ver ein) was a party of the 
German liberal bourgeoisie which advocated the unification of Germany 
(without Austria) in a strong centralised state under the aegis of the Prussian 
monarchy. Its inaugural congress was held in Frankfurt in September 1859. 
The open letter of the Patriots to the National Association was published in 
a number of German newspapers in November 1859. It contained a vaguely 
formulated plan for the dvnastic unification of Germany under Prussia's aegis. 
p. 274 
'3"' Quirites—the citizens of Ancient Rome in their civil capacity. p. 293 
234 Schily 's letter to Marx is not dated. Presumably it was written at the end of 
June 1860. It deals with the fate of German refugees, participants in the 
revolution of 1848-49, who were not members of the Frankfurt National 
Assembly. p. 296 
2'-5 The Grand Councils in Switzerland were the legislatures of the city cantons set 
up under the Constitution of 1803. 
The National Council—one of the two chambers of the Swiss Federal Assembly 
formed under the Constitution of 1848 (the other chamber was the Council of 
States). 
The Federal Council was the supreme federal executive body, iormed under 
the 1348 Constitution. Its chairman was the president of the republic. 
The Council of States—see Note 165. p. 297 

=====第593页=====
Notes 569 
236 See Note 17. p. 299 
237 Vae victis! (woe to the vanquished!). Defeated by the Gauls at Allia in 390 the 
Romans had to pay a ransom of a thousand pounds of gold. When the Romans 
complained that the weights used by the victors were too heavy, the Gauls' king 
Brennus exclaimed "Vae victis!" and threw his big sword on the scales too. 
(Titus Livius, V, 48). p. 301 
238 Marx's assumption that Vogt, as the Berne correspondent of the Frankfurter 
Journal, was the author of the articles in question has not been proved. 
p. 302 
239 A reference to the Biblical "fleshpots" of Egypt. During the Jews' exodus from 
Egypt, the fainthearts among them, depressed by the hardships of the march 
and by hunger, recalled with longing the days of captivity when they at least 
had enough to eat. p. 302 
240 The protest in question was quoted in Schily's letter to Marx (written after 
March 6, 1860). p. 303 
241 See Note 75. p. 307 
242 See Note 59. p. 308 
243 See Note 66. p. 311 
244 This refers to the book Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des neunzehnten 
Jahrhunderts, Berlin, Erster Theil 1853, Zweiter Theil 1854, compiled by the 
police officers Wermuth and Stieber. The appendices to the first volume, a 
"history" of the working-class movement written for the information of the 
police, contained some documents of the Communist League. The second 
volume was a blacklist of persons associated with the working-class and 
democratic movement, complete with biographical data. p. 311 
245 See Note 87. p. 314 
246 On May 15, 1848 workers led by Blanqui and Barbes staged a revolutionary 
uprising against the anti-labour and anti-democratic policy of the bourgeois 
Constituent Assembly, which met on May 4. Participants in the popular 
demonstration forced their way into its premises and demanded the formation 
of a Ministry of Labour and a number of other measures. An attempt was 
made to set up a revolutionary government. However, National Guards from 
the bourgeois districts and units of the regular army helped restore the 
Assembly to power. The leaders of the movement were arrested and put on 
trial. p. 321 
247 Tne  New York journal Putnam's Monthly published Engels' survey The Armies of 
Europe (see present edition, Vol. 14). It had been written at the request of 
Marx, who received an order for it through Charles Dana, editor of the 
New-York Daily Tribune. Marx helped Engels in writing the survey by supplying 
him material from the British Museum. p. 323 

=====第594页=====
570 Notes 
248 The Order of St. Gregory the Great was founded by Pope Gregory XVI in 
1831.  p. 324 
249 The meeting of the Russian and Austrian emperors and the Prince Regent of 
Prussia took place in Warsaw. The attempted rapprochement between Austria, 
Prussia and Russia was motivated by a desire to prevent the unification of Italy 
and counteract the foreign policy of Napoleon III, who supported Victor 
Emmanuel II of Sardinia. p. 324 
250 Maronites —members of the Maronite Christian Church, chiefly in Lebanon. 
The reference here is to the clashes between Maronite peasants and 
townspeople, on the one hand, and their feudal lords belonging to the Druse 
Moslem sect, on the other. Externally a religious conflict between Christians 
and Moslems, it was essentially a class conflict. See also Note 316. p. 325 
251 An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's financial claims on the National Assembly at 
the time of his Presidency (1848-52). 
Clichy, in Paris, was a debtors' prison from 1826 to 1867. p. 327 
252 The memorandum was sent to Marx by Bertalan Szemere. The covering letter 
has not been found. It was presumably written in February 1860. The 
memorandum is an account of a conversation Kossuth had with the British MP 
Sandford on May 30, 1854. Szemere learned of this conversation from a letter 
he had received from Richard Cobden, leader of the British Free Traders. 
p. 328 
253 In July 1848 the Austrian Government asked Hungary to provide troops for 
the suppression of the liberation struggle in Italy. Kossuth readily supported 
this request and urged the State Assembly to grant it. After winning a victory 
at Custozza on July 25 Austria consolidated its positions in Italy and threw all 
its forces against the liberation struggle in Hungary. p. 328 
254 According to verified data, the right to raise tithes was first relinquished by 
Doroczy Zsigmond, the representative of the bishopric of Pecs, who made a 
statement to this effect in the Lower Chamber. The representatives of other 
bishoprics followed his example. p. 328 
255 On June 16 and 17, 1860, at Baden-Baden, Napoleon III met the Prince 
Regent William of Prussia, and the princes of other German states. Hoping to 
realise his ambition of annexing the German lands on the left bank of the 
Rhine, he sought a deal with Prussia at the expense of the small German states. 
The meeting ended in failure for Napoleon and helped Prussia secure a key 
role in Germany's foreign policy. p. 329 
256 This article was written by Marx for the New-York Daily Tribune to which he 
contributed from August 1851 to March 1862. On Marx's request many of the 
articles were written by Engels (see notes 273, 302, 314). By agreement with the 
New-York Daily Tribune editors Marx wrote on some of his articles dealing with 
different European countries "Paris", "Berlin" or "Vienna" respectively. (See 
Marx's letters to Engels of November 10, 1858, December 16, 1858 and January 
13 and 15, 1859 and also Marx's letter to F. Lassalle of March 28, 1859; present 
edition, Vol. 40). 

=====第595页=====
Notes 571 
The articles which Marx and Engels contributed to the New-York Daily 
Tribune mainly dealt with the most important questions of foreign and home 
policy, the working-class movement, the economic development of the major 
European countries, colonial expansion and the national liberation movement 
in the oppressed and dependent countries. They immediately attracted 
attention by rfieir profundity, political insight and literary merit. Many of 
Marx's and Engels' contributions were reprinted in special issues of the 
New-York Daily Tribune—the New-York Weekly Tribune and Semi-Weekly 
Tribune—and some of them also in the Chartist  People's  Paper. Other papers, in 
particular the New-York Times, quoted passages from Marx's and Engels' 
articles. 
On many occasions the New-York Daily Tribune editors treated these articles 
quite arbitrarily; they printed them unsigned, as editorials, made insertions and 
introduced new passages which sometimes ran contrary to what Marx and 
Engels wanted to say. Marx repeatedly protested against those practices. From 
the autumn of 1857, when the financial position of the New-York Daily Tribune 
deteriorated due to the economic crisis that gripped the USA, Marx had to 
reduce the number of his contributions to the paper, and during the American 
Civil War he stopped sending them altogether, mainly because the Tribune had 
come under the sway of people advocating a compromise with the slave-owning 
states.  p. 330 
257 Quakers (or Society of Friends)—a religious sect founded in England during the 
seventeenth-century revolution and later widespread in North America. They 
rejected the Established Church with its rites and preached pacifist ideas. 
p. 330 
258 The reference is to Société générale du Crédit Mobilier —see Note 178. 
Crédit Foncier, a French joint-stock bank, set up in 1852, granted short- and 
long-term loans on the security of immovable property. Between 1854 and 
1859 it granted loans totalling 2,000 million francs to the government of 
Napoleon III. 
By referring to the banks of Napoleonic France as Crédits ambulants 
(travelling credits) Marx emphasised their instability. p. 330 
259 Rich gold deposits were discovered in California in 1848 and Australia in 1851. 
Apart from their great importance for the commercial and industrial 
development of Europe and America, these discoveries whipped up stock-
exchange speculation in the capitalist countries. 
The Tuileries —the royal palace in Paris, residehce of Napoleon III. 
p. 331 
260 A reference to an imperial decree of Napoleon III on grain reserves of November 
16, 1858 (Le Moniteur universel, No. 322, November 18, 1858). See Marx's article 
"Project for the Regulation of the Price of Bread in France", present edition, Vol. 
16, and Marx's letter to Lassalle of February 4, 1859, Vol. 40. p. 332 
261 Droit d'octroi —a right, originating from feudal times, of cities to levy tolls on 
imported consumer goods. It was repealed in 1791 during the French 
Revolution, but later reintroduced on some foodstuffs (salt, wine, fish, etc.). 
These tolls varied from town to town. p. 334 
262 A reference to the preparations for an Opium War against China conducted by 
the British and French governments in early 1860. The war was unleashed in the 

=====第596页=====
572 Notes 
summer of the same year with the aim of imposing onerous new terms upon 
China. 
The Anglo-French commercial treaty, signed on January 23, 1860, signified 
a triumph for the advocates of free trade in both countries and served the 
interests of the British industrial bourgeoisie (for details see this volume, 
pp. 341-44). 
Marx is referring to the movement for the national unification of Italy, 
which gained momentum during and after the Austro-Italo-French War of 1859 
(see Note 13) and was opposed by a number of European countries. In the 
spring and summer of 1859 popular insurrections flared up in Tuscany, 
Modena, Parma and Romagna. The members of the ruling dynasties there fled 
from their duchies to seek the protection of the Austrian army. The national 
assemblies set up as the result of the insurrections declared that the population 
of the duchies wished to be incorporated in Piedmont. This question was finally 
settled in March 1860 by a plebiscite. p. 335 
263 This refers to the second Opium War, waged by Britain and France against 
China in 1856-60. p. 335 
264 The object of the Anglo-Persian War of 1856-57 was to establish British 
influence in Persia, pave the way for further colonial expansion in the Middle 
East and Central Asia and prevent the Shah of Persia from establishing his 
power over the independent principality of Herat. When Persian troops 
occupied Herat in October 1856 Britain used this as a pretext to open 
hostilities. The war took an unfavourable turn for Persia. However, the 
national liberation uprising that flared up in India in 1857 and continued up to 
1859 compelled Britain to conclude a peace treaty with Persia in all haste. 
Under the terms of the treaty signed in Paris in March 1857, Persia repudiated 
its claims to Herat, which, in 1863, was incorporated into the possessions of the 
Afghan Emir. p. 336 
265 Britain interfered in the civil war in Portugal (1828-34) waged by the liberal 
nobility, bourgeoisie and intelligentsia, which were supported by the anti-feudal 
section of the peasantry and fought for the preservation of the constitutional 
monarchy and against the feudal aristocracy, which sought to restore absolute 
monarchy and was backed up by the clergy and reaction-influenced peasants in 
some districts of Spain. The absolutists were led by Dom Miguel, a pretender to 
the Portuguese throne. In an attempt to consolidate their influence in the 
Iberian Peninsula and weaken the positions of Austria, which supported the 
absolutists, the British and French governments sent a fleet to the Portuguese 
coast (in 1831) to blockade the Tagus and Douro rivers, thus facilitating the 
victory of the constitutionalists. 
The Anglo-Greek conflict referred to occurred in June 1850. When the 
British Government presented Greece with an ultimatum and sent ships to 
blockade Piraeus, using as a pretext the burning (in Athens in 1847) of the 
house of a Portuguese merchant, Pacifico, who was a British subject. The real 
object of this move, however, was to make Greece surrender several 
strategically important islands in the Aegean Sea. 
The war against Afghanistan was instigated by the British Government in 
1838.  British troops invaded Afghanistan, but British rule was short-lived. In 
November 1841 a popular insurrection broke out and the occupying troops 

=====第597页=====
Notes 573 
were defeated. In 1842 Britain made another attempt to conquer Afghanistan, 
but this also ended in total failure. p. 338 
266 The Anglo-Chinese Treaty, signed on October 8, 1843, supplemented the 
Treaty of Nanking (1842), which was concluded after the Anglo-Chinese War of 
1840-42 (known as the first Opium War) and was the first of a series of 
unequal treaties imposed by the Western powers on China and reducing it to 
the status of a semi-colony. 
Under the supplementary treaty of 1843 the British secured further 
concessions from China, including the right to have special setdenients for 
foreign citizens in the open ports, the right of exterritoriality and most­
favoured-nation treatment. p. 338 
267 A reference to the Tientsin Russo-Chinese Treaty signed on June 13 (1), 1858. 
It stipulated among other things that Russian envoys going to Peking could sail 
up the Peiho River via Daga. p. 338 
268 The seizure of a British ship carrying contraband opium by the Chinese 
authorities in October 1856, followed by the savage bombardment of Canton by 
the British Navy, served as a pretext for the second Opium War. p. 338 
269 A reference to the struggle for power in Ancient Rome waged by the Roman 
general Lucius Cornelius Sulla supported by the nobility and army veterans. It 
resulted in the establishment of Sulla's dictatorship in 82 B. C. Here, Marx has 
in mind Napoleon III. p. 339 
270 See Note 262. p. 341 
271 Marx is referring to the Anglo-French Commercial Treaty of 1860, a source of 
intricate political intrigues in the relations between the two countries. He 
compares this treaty with the "sweet changeling" (Puck) of Oberon, king of the 
farries, and his wife Titania (Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Act II, 
Scene 1), Puck being the cause of Oberon's wicked tricks. p. 341 
272 See Note 207. p. 342 
273 The subject of this and several other articles was suggested to Engels by Marx 
who wrote in his letter of November 3, 1859: "Coudn't you do me an article on 
the recent changes in the Prussian army?" (see present edition, Vol. 40). The 
Prussian military reform is also described in the article "Preparations for War in 
Prussia" (see this volume, pp. 493-96) and in Engels' "The War Question in 
Prussia and the German Workers' Party" (present edition, Vol. 20). p. 345 
274 See Note 13. 
The Crimean War (1853-56), or the Eastern war, was waged by Russia 
against the allied forces of Britain, France and Turkey for supremacy in the 
Middle East and ended with the signing of the Paris Peace Treaty (1856). The 
war is described by Marx and Engels in the articles included in volumes 13-15 
of the present edition. p. 345 
275 A reference to the colonial war in Algeria, launched by the French Government 
in 1830. The Algerian people put up a stubborn resistance to the French 
colonialists; it took them 40 years to turn Algeria into a French colony. 
p. 345 

=====第598页=====
574 Notes 
276 These batdes took place during the Austro-Italo-French War between the 
Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) and France on the one hand, and Austria on 
the other (see Note 13). In the battle at Magenta (June 4, 1859) the Austrian 
army was defeated by the French (see Engels' articles "A Chapter of 
History" and "The Austrian Defeat", present edition, Vol. 16). At Solferino 
(June 24, 1859) the Austrians were again defeated by the French and 
Piedmontese forces (see Engels' articles "The Battle at Solferino" and 
"Historical Justice", present edition, Vol. 16). p. 346 
277 See Note 76. p. 348 
278 The battle of Austerlitz between the Russo-Austrian and the French armies on 
December 2, 1805, ended in victory for the French commanded by Napoleon I. 
At the battle of Jena on October 14, 1806, the Prussian troops were defeated 
by Napoleon's army. This resulted in Prussia's capitulation. 
At the battle of Wagram on July 5-6, 1809, Napoleon defeated the Austrian 
army commanded by Archduke Charles. p. 349 
279 This refers to Marx's articles dealing with the budget proposed by Gladstone: 
among them are "Feargus O'Connor.— Ministerial Defeats.— The Budget", 
"L.S.D.,  or Class Budgets, and Who's Relieved by Them", "Riot at Constan­
tinople.— German Table Moving.— The Budget", "Soap for the People, a Sop 
for The Times.—The Coalition Budget" (see present edition, Vol. 12). 
p. 351 
280 A reference to the "liberal course" proclaimed by Prince William of Prussia 
(King of Prussia from 1861) in October 1858, when he took up the regency. In 
the bourgeois press this course was described as a "new era". Actually he did 
not carry out any of the reforms expected by the bourgeoisie; but in 1860 a 
previously prepared military reform was effected which abolished the remnants 
of democratism still surviving in the Prussian army after the national liberation 
war against Napoleon I in 1813-15. This reform stipulated that henceforth the 
Landwehr would be used only for garrison duties, and it considerably increased 
the strength of the army in peacetime. p. 367 
281 See notes 13 and 126. 
A reference to the diplomatic documents of the Austro-Italo-French War of 
1859,  published by the Prussian Government in the Neue Preussische Zeitung, 
Nos.  170, 171, 173 and 174 (July 24, 26, 28 and 29, 1859) and in the Allgemeine 
Zeitung, No. 211 (July 30, 1859). For details see Marx's article "Quid pro Quo" 
in Volume 16 of the present edition. p. 368 
282 See notes 123 and 278. p. 368 
283 xhe meeting between Alexander II and William, Prince Regent of Prussia,took 
place in October 1859 in Breslau (Wroclaw). Although no political objects of 
the meeting were officially mentioned either in Prussia or in Russia, the press 
of both countries stressed its great political importance for consolidating the 
alliance of the two sovereigns. p. 368 
284 See Note 278. p. 369 

=====第599页=====
Notes 575 
285 See notes 65 and 59. p. 369 
286 Siculi —one of the ancient tribes in Sicily. p. 370 
287 A reference to a popular rising in Sicily against the French Anjou dynasty, 
which conquered Southern Italy and Sicily in 1267. On the evening of March 
31, 1282, the population of Palermo took the chimes for vespers as a signal to 
massacre several thousand French knights and soldiers. As a result, the whole 
of Sicily was freed from French domination and came under the King of 
Aragon. p. 371 
288 p0pUiar unrest in Sicily against Francis II of Naples and his hirelings began in 
the autumn of 1859. The uprising that broke out in October was suppressed, 
but in the spring of 1860 disturbances broke out again. The Palermo uprising 
in May 1860 was again crushed by the royal forces. Peasant guerrilla units were 
operating all over the island, however, and they joined Garibaldi after he 
landed in Sicily with his "Thousand" volunteers. p. 372 
289 Bullier's Correspondance, a Paris news agency founded in the 1850s and later 
amalgamated with Havas. p. 373 
290 The Zollverein, a union of German states which established a common customs 
frontier, was set up in 1834 under the aegis of Prussia. Brought into being by 
the need to create an all-German market, the Customs Union subsequendy 
embraced all the German states except Austria and a few of the smaller states. 
p. 373 
291 A reference to the Paris peace treaties of 1814 and 1815 signed by France and 
the main participants of the sixth and seventh anti-French coalitions (Russia, 
Britain, Austria and Prussia) that defeated Napoleon. Under the terms of the 
first treaty, signed on May 30, 1814, France lost all the territories won by her in 
the 1792-1814 wars, with the exception of several border fortresses and 
Western Savoy. Under the provisions of the second Paris treaty the territory of 
France was limited by the 1790 borders and she was deprived of strategically 
important points on her Eastern frontier, including the fortress of Landau. 
p. 374 
292 See Note 280. p. 375 
293 A reference to the treaty of alliance and mutual guarantees between Russia and 
Prussia (Traité d'alliance et de garantie mutuelle conclu à St. Petersbourg entre 
la Russie et la Prusse) concluded in June 1714 during the Northern War 
between Russia and Sweden (1700-21) when Russia sought to win Prussia over 
to her side by promising to divide Swedish possessions in Germany. Under the 
treaty Prussia was guaranteed the possession of Eastern Pomerania with the 
town of Stettin (Szczecin). p. 377 
294 On the Seven Years' War (1756-63) see Note 122. 
The death of Empress Elisabeth on January 5, 1762 (December 25, 1761) 
led to a sudden change in Russia's foreign policy. Her successor, Peter III, 
concluded a peace treaty with Prussia thereby giving the latter an opportunity 
to sign, in 1763, the Hubertusburg peace treaty with Austria and Saxony and 
retain the possession of Silesia. p. 377 

=====第600页=====
576 Notes 
295 The three partitions of Poland (by Austria, Prussia and Russia) took place at 
the end of the eighteenth century (1772, 1793, 1795). 
Russia gained Lithuanian, Byelorussian and Ukrainian territories; Polish 
land, including Pomorze, Great Poland, and part of Mazovia with Warsaw, 
went over to Prussia; and Austria received the Western Ukraine and part of 
Smaller Poland. As a result of the third partition Poland ceased to exist as a 
state.  p. 377 
296 The Congress of Vienna was held by European monarchs and their ministers in 
1814-15.  They established the borders and status of the European states after 
the victory over Napoleonic France and sanctioned, contrary to the national 
interests and will of the peoples, the reshaping of Europe's political map and 
the restoration of the "legitimate" dynasties. By decision of the Congress of 
Vienna, territories along the right and left banks of the Rhine, as well as 
Northern Saxony, were incorporated into Prussia, notwithstanding the opposi­
tion of Britain, Austria and France. p. 377 
297 See Note 283. p. 377 
298 A reference to the claims of Napoleon III to the left bank of the Rhine, which 
the French ruling circles had considered France's "natural frontier" in the east 
ever since the seventeenth century. For details see Engels' articles "Po and 
Rhine" and "Savoy, Nice and the Rhine" (present edition Vol. 16). p. 378 
299 Tne  Olmütz agreement—see Note 143. 
The Federal Diet—see Note 77. p. 379 
300 In the letter which William, Prince Regent of Prussia, sent to Albert, Prince 
Consort of England in February 1860, he expressed his readiness to accept 
Britain's proposal concerning the alliance between Britain, Austria and Prussia, 
into which he hoped to draw Russia as well. This proposal was called forth by 
the increasingly aggressive tendencies of the government of Napoleon III with 
regard to the German lands on the left bank of the Rhine and by France's 
annexation of Savoy and Nice. p. 382 
301 In the spring of 1833 Russian troops were landed at Unkiar-Skelessi, near the 
Bosporus, to render assistance to the Turkish Sultan against the army of the 
insurgent Egyptian ruler Mehemet Ali. In May 1833 the Porte, with the 
mediation of Britain and France, signed a peace treaty with Mehemet Ali, 
ceding him Syria and Palestine. However, Russian diplomats took advantage of 
the strained situation and the presence of Russian troops in Turkey and 
prevailed upon the Porte to sign, on July 8, 1833, the Unkiar-Skelessi Treaty 
for a defensive alliance with Russia. On the insistence of Russia a secret clause 
was included in the treaty prohibiting all foreign warships, except those of 
Russia, to pass through the Dardanelles. This circumstance greatly aggravated 
the relations between Russia and the West-European countries and, during a 
new Turko-Egyptian crisis (1839-41), the tsarist government had to comply 
with their demand that in peacetime the straits should be closed to the warships 
of all foreign states without exception. p. 382 
The subject of this article was suggested by Marx who wrote to Engels on June 

=====第601页=====
Notes 577 
2, 1860 asking him to write a small article about "the Garibaldi's affair" (see 
present edition, Vol. 41). p. 386 
303 A reference to the defence of the Roman Republic which was virtually directed 
by Garibaldi from April to July 1849. In April 1849, President Louis Bonaparte 
and the French Government sent an expeditionary corps to Italy under 
General Oudinot to intervene against the Roman Republic proclaimed on 
February 9, 1849, and to restore the secular power of the Pope. On April 30, 
1849,  the French troops were driven back from Rome. The main blow was 
dealt by Garibaldi's volunteer corps. Oudinot violated the terms of the armistice 
signed by the French, however, and on June 3 started a new offensive against 
the Roman Republic, which had just completed a military campaign against 
Neapolitan troops in the south and was engaged in rebuffing the Austrians in 
the north. After a month of heroic defence, Rome was captured by the 
interventionists and the Roman Republic ceased to exist. p. 387 
304 This item and the next one ("Interesting from Prussia") were directed against 
the Bonapartist agents among the European democrats and exposed the 
chauvinist nature of About's pamphlet (see this volume, pp.  400-01,  as well as 
Marx's letters to Engels of June 16, 1860 and December 26, 1860, and Marx's 
letter to J. Ph. Becker of June 23, 1860, present edition, Vol. 41), the 
publication of which was connected with the forthcoming meeting between 
Napoleon III and William, Prince Regent of Prussia (see Note 255). Marx 
used quotations from About's pamphlet to unmask the activity of the Prussian 
police agents among European democrats. In Herr Vogt Marx revealed the 
connection between About's ideas and Vogt's activity as a secret agent in the 
pay of Napoleon III (see this volume, pp. 183, 328-29). At Marx's suggestion, 
Sigismund Borkheim, one of the German democrats, wrote a pamphlet entitled 
Napoleon HI und Preussen. Antwort eines deutschen Flüchtlings auf "Preussen in 
1860" von Edmond About, London, 1860. 
Marx must have used the proofs of About's pamphlet supplied to him by 
Borkheim, since in both his articles and in the Notebook for 1860 containing 
passages from About's pamphlet he gives its original title Napoleon HI et la 
Prusse (see also this volume, pp. 328-29). 
The extracts given by Marx in this article were checked against About's 
pamphlet. Marx's text is set in large type. While quoting from the pamphlet, 
Marx often changed punctuation and paragraphs; sometimes, instead of direct 
quotations, he gave a précis of the text in which case the editors of this volume 
have omitted quotation marks; omissions in quotations are indicated by 
omission marks in square brackets. p. 391 
3°5 See Note 190. p. 392 
306 See Note 255. p. 397 
307 The governments of Britain and the Kingdom of Sardinia flirted with 
Napoleon III in an effort to secure an exclusive alliance with France. 
p. 399 
308 Alexander II and Napoleon III met in Stuttgart on September 25, 1857. Their 
meeting testified to the emerging rapprochement between France and Russia 
after the Crimean War. p. 399 
309 The Rhenish Confederation (Rheinbund) of the states of Western and Southern 
Germany was founded in 1806 under the protectorate of Napoleon. These 

=====第602页=====
578 Notes , 
states officially broke with the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation, 
which ceased to exist shortly afterwards. When Napoleon lost the military 
campaign of 1813 the confederation fell apart. p. 399 
10 Speaking of the Dutch savior of  society  Marx has in mind Napoleon III, who was 
a son of Louis Bonaparte (brother of Napoleon I), King of Holland in 1806-10. 
On the Congress of Vienna, see Note 296. 
The Congresses of the Holy Alliance (an association of European monarchs 
founded in September 1815, on die initiative of the Russian Tsar Alexander I 
and the Austrian Chancellor Metternich to suppress revolutionary movements 
and preserve feudal monarchies in European countries) took place in 
Aix-la-Chapelle (1818), in Troppau (Opava) and Laibach (Ljubljana) (1820-21), 
and in Verona (1822). The Laibach Congress proclaimed the principle of 
interference by die Holy Alliance members in the internal affairs of other 
countries with the aim of maintaining monarchies there; and adopted a 
decision on sending the Austrian army to Italy to suppress the revolutionary 
and national liberation movement in diat country. The Verona Congress 
sanctioned French armed intervention against Spain. p. 400 
11 In 1857-59 India was the scene of a big popular uprising against the British. It 
flared up in the spring of 1857 among the Sepoy units of the Bengal army and 
spread to large areas in Northern and Central India. Its main strength was in 
the peasants and the poor urban artisans. Directed by local feudal lords it was 
put down owing to the country's disunity, religious and caste differences and 
also because of the military and technical superiority of the British, p. 407 
2 The letter which Garibaldi sent in the summer of 1860 to Mr. Green, an 
English acquaintance of Marx, shows that Garibaldi wanted the struggle waged 
by the Italian people for the national unification of the country and its 
liberation from foreign rule to be independent of Napoleon Ill's policy. Marx 
is referring to this in his letters to Engels of July 9 and to Lassalle of September 
15, 1860 (see present edition, Vol. 41). p. 421 
13 A reference to the Società Nationale Italiana, a political organisation of a liberal 
monarchist trend founded in 1856 in Turin and other towns by G. Pallavicino, 
an Italian political figure, and La Farina, an agent in the pay of Cavour. Its 
aim was to popularise the ideas of Italy's unification under the aegis of the 
Savoy dynasty and to enlist the country's national forces for this cause. 
Garibaldi was an active member of this association and represented its 
revolutionary wing, but the decisive role in the organisation was played by 
Cavour's accomplices. p. 423 
4 The subject of this and several other articles was suggested by Marx who wrote 
to Engels on June 25: "I would be grateful if by Friday or Saturday you could 
write an article for the Tribune either on the defences of England, or on 
Garibaldi, or on the Indian trade" (see present edition, Vol. 41). On July 25 
Marx informed Engels that he had received his article "British Defenses" and 
promised to send him the Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Consider the 
Defences of the United Kingdom; together with the Minutes of Evidence and Appendix, 
London, 1860. Concerning British defences Engels wrote one more article (end 
of July 1860) entided "Could the French Sack London?" (this volume, 
pp. 434-38). 

=====第603页=====
Notes 579 
The article "Garibaldi's Movements" was written by Engels on August 8 
(this volume, pp. 449-52). 
As is evident from Engels' letter of July 26, 1860 (see present edition, Vol. 
41) an article on Indian commerce was not written. Marx devoted a few lines to 
this question in his article "British Commerce" (this volume, pp. 406-09). 
p. 425 
315 During the Crimean War of 1853-56 Sevastopol was besieged by the British, 
French, Turkish and Sardinian troops. In the course of the fighting, Sevastopol 
was badly damaged. p. 426 
316 In 1859 Northern Lebanon was the scene of an anti-feudal rebellion started by 
the Maronite peasants (see Note 250); disturbances spread to the centre of 
Lebanon and in the spring of 1860 fierce clashes took place between Druses 
and Maronites. This was largely due to British and French policy. Britain gave 
support to the Druse feudalists, whereas the Maronite feudal lords and the 
clergy were backed by France. British and French emissaries incited enmity 
between rival Druse and Maronite feudal groups and fanned religious strife 
between Moslems and Christians. The Turkish authorities also played a 
provocative part. Napoleon III used the massacre of May-June 1860 as a 
pretext for sending an expeditionary corps to Lebanon. The agreement 
between Britain, Austria, Russia, France, Prussia and Turkey provided for 
setting up an international commission and specified the term during which the 
French troops were to stay in Lebanon. Under pressure from Britain and 
Austria, the French forces were withdrawn from that country in 1861. 
p. 429 
317 The conflict was caused by La Guéronnière's pamphlet Le Pape et le Congrès, 
which appeared in France at the close of December 1859 and was inspired by 
Napoleon III. The clericals saw in it an attempt on the part of the emperor to 
restrict the secular power of Pius IX. The higher Catholic clergy of France 
started a campaign against Napoleon III after Pius IX strongly denounced the 
pamphlet in an Encyclical early in 1860. p. 430 
318 A reference to the monarchist parties of Legitimists and Orleanists that formed 
in the early half of the nineteenth century. The Legitimist Party stood for the 
big landowners and the restoration of the Bourbons. The Orleanist Party, that 
ruled during the July monarchy, represented the interests of big financial and 
industrial capital and supported the restoration of the Orleans, that is, the 
younger branch of the Bourbons. p. 431 
319 See Note 232. p. 431 
320 Francis Joseph of Austria, and William, Prince Regent of Prussia, met on July 
26, 1860 in Teplitz (Teplice). The Austrian emperor sought Prussia's support 
in case of a war with France and Sardinia. p. 431 
321 In the early 1840s, under pressure from France and Britain, Turkey had to 
reorganise the administration of Lebanon, which was divided into two sectors. 
The northern sector, with a Maronite population, was administered by a 
governor from among the Maronite feudal lords connected with France, while 
the southern sector, populated by Maronites and Druse Moslems, was ruled by 

=====第604页=====
580 Notes 
a governor from among the Druse feudal lords connected with Britain. While 
remaining within the framework of the Turkish Empire, Lebanon received a 
certain degree of autonomy in the sphere of judiciary, finance, etc. Seeking to 
- increase their political influence in Lebanon and win the Lebanese market, the 
European powers fanned religious strife between Maronites and Druses. 
p. 431 
322 A reference to the revolution of 1688-89, after which constitutional monarchy 
was consolidated in England on the basis of a compromise between the landed 
aristocracy and the bourgeoisie. The 1689 Bill of Rights and other acts limited 
the rights of the king still further and extended the rights of Parliament. 
p. 432 
323 Under the Act for the Better Government of India, adopted by the British 
Parliament on August 2, 1858, India passed under the control of the British 
crown and the East India Company was liquidated. The Act also provided for 
the formation of the Indian Council as an advisory body of the Board of 
Control for India. The Governor-General of India became known as the 
Viceroy, though he remained virtually functionary of the Secretary of State for 
India in London. p. 432 
324 In a letter to Persigny, the French Ambassador in London, written on July 25, 
1860,  and published in French papers (Le Constitutionnel, "Paris le Ie août", 
No. 215, August 2, 1860), Napoleon III denied a hostile attitude to Britain and 
sought to dispel suspicion and distrust, prevalent in Britain at the time, of his 
foreign policy (see this volume, p. 446). p. 439 
325 The will of Peter the Great—a spurious document circulated by enemies of 
Russia. The idea of the existence of the "will" was advanced in the West as 
early as 1797. In 1812 Ch. L. Lesur described the contents of this pseudo-will 
in his book Des progrès de la puissance russe, depuis son origine jusqu'au 
commencement du  XIX e siècle, and in 1836 it was reproduced as a document in 
T. F. Gaillardet's book Mémoires du Chevalier d'Eon. In Marx's and Engels' 
lifetime many people in Western Europe regarded this document as authentic. 
p. 440 
326 A reference to the Rhine-song ("Der deutsche Rhein") —a poem by Nicolaus 
Becker which was widely used by nationalists in their own interests. It was 
written in 1840 and set to music by several composers. p. 440 
327 The Liberal Party was formed in Britain in the late 1850s and early 1860s. It 
united in its ranks the Whigs, the Manchester men (representatives of the 
industrial bourgeoisie) and the Peelites (moderate Tories). In the British 
two-party system the Liberal Party's counterpart was the emerging party of 
Conservatives (former Tories). p. 444 
328 At St. Stephen's Chapel (in Westminster Palace) the British House of Commons 
held its sessions from the sixteenth century to the nineteenth. p. 445 
329 A reference to a Bill passed in August 1860. Under the Act for the 
Reorganisation of the Indian Army, the European contingent of the Indian 
Army, formerly at the disposal of the East India Company, became part of the 
British royal armed forces, and the number of British soldiers in the Indian 
army increased sharply. Adopted after the suppression of the Indian uprising 

=====第605页=====
Notes 581 
of 1857-59 (see Note 311) the Act was one of the measures the British 
Government resorted to m an effort to consolidate British rule in India. 
p. 445 
m) See Note 323. p. 446 
831 See Note 316. p. 446 
sy>. Robert Macaire—a social comedy staged by the famous French actor Frederick 
Lemaître in collaboration with the playwrights Antier and Saint-Amand. Marx 
is referring to Macaire's words "Foi d'honnête homme ... pas de bêtises!" (Acte 
IL ÏII tableau, scène VIII). The character of Robert Macaire, portraying a 
clever swindler, was a biting satire on the domination of the financial 
aristocracy under the July monarchy. Marx alluded to this character on several 
occasions. See, for example, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (present 
edition, Vol. .10, p. 50). p. 447 
333 \ reference to Lombardy, which France ceded so Piedmont under the 
Villafranca Peace Treaty (see Note 126), as well as to Romagna and the duchies 
of Parma, Modena and Tuscany, which were incorporated into Piedmont 
following the plebiscite of March 1860. p. 453 
•34 Pariant pour la Syrie (Departing for Syria)—the opening words of a song sung 
at the festivities arranged by Napoleon III at the time of the Second Empire. 
Marx is alluding to the Syrian expedition. p 455 
S3:' See notes 255 and 320. ..>. 457 
^ The assemblée des notables—a consultative body irregularly convened by French 
kings from the fourteenth century to the eighteenth, it consisted of 
representatives of the higher clergy and court nobiiity, and also of mayors of 
die cities. In 1787, on the eve of the French Revolution, it voted down the 
government's tax bill and met for the last time in  3 788 to discuss the 
composition of, and elections to, the States General. 
The States General—a body representing the social estates in medieval 
France. It consisted of clergymen, nobles and burghers. Convened in May 
1789,  after a 175-year interval, at a time when the bourgeois revolution was 
maturing in France, the States General were on June 17 transformed by the 
decision of the deputies of the third estate into the National Assembly, which 
on July 9 proclaimed itself the Constituent Assembly and became the supreme 
organ of revolutionary France. p. 459 
337 Mark Lane—the grain stock exchange in London. p. 461 
358 \n i860 France put forth a project which acknowledged Spain as a great 
power. Owing to Britain's opposition, the project did not materialise. 
p. 464 
;!?'9 See Note 324. p. 464 
:MO Marx -s  quoting from "The Oriental Question", an article published in the 
Russky  Invalid,  Nos. 164 and 165 on July 31 and August 2, I860, making some 
changes in the text of the journal. Apparently, he was using a version of this 

=====第606页=====
582 Notes 
article printed in the European press. The most important divergences are 
indicated in the footnotes. p. 467 
341 After the defeat of the Roman Republic in 1849 the French interventionist 
troops did not leave Rome until 1870. p. 471 
342 "Brown Bess" — the name used by British soldiers in the eighteenth and early 
nineteenth centuries for a flint-lock musket with a brown walnut stock. 
p. 477 
343 See notes 232 and 249. p. 484 
344 On March 3 (February 19), 1859. Russia and France concluded in Paris a secret 
agreement under which Russia undertook to adopt a "political and military 
stand which most easily proves its favourable neutrality towards France" 
(Article 1) and to make no objection to the Kingdom of Sardinia being enlarged 
in the event of a war between France and Sardinia on the one hand and 
Austria on the other. France undertook to raise the question of revising those 
articles of the Paris Peace Treaty of 1856 which restricted Russia's rights in the 
Black Sea area and robbed her of a part of Bessarabia. p. 486 
345 On June 26, 1849. the liberal deputies of the Frankfurt National Assembly, 
who had walked out after the Prussian King's refusal to accept the Imperial 
Crown, met in Gotha for a three-day conference which resulted in the 
formation of the Gotha party. If expressed the interests of the pro-Prussian 
German bourgeoisie and supported the policy of Prussian ruling circles aimed 
at uniting Germanv under the hegemony of Hohenzollern Prussia. p. 486 
346 sec Vote 28 i. p. 489 
; i ro.ujj in Ancient Rome victorious troops Aarched in 
li!s higWây. The expression "via sacra" is also used Wdescribe 
;; aigu. 
s IÎ! to an appeal sent by Napoleon III to his army from Genoa 
«util lu: bec.une the coinmatider-in-chjel. The appeal said, in 
u s:if fée de l'ancienne Rome les inscriptions se pressaient sur 
rappeler au peuple ses hauts faits: de même aujourd'hui, en 
inndovi, Marengo, I.odi, Castiglione, Arcoie, Rivoli, vous 
, une autre voie sacrée, au milieu de ces glorieux souvenirs" 
red road of Ancient Rome inscriptions were carved on marble 
e she people's feais. Today likewise, passing through Moudovi, 
Castiglione, Aréole and Rivoli, you will march a!on;: another 
iH 1st these glorious memories"). p. 489 
(Jin. inal~-  <>n<  oi' she seven hill* <>.«•> which Rome is situated. p. 490 
'• v s» »te.-, V} and 259. p. 490 
lins rciers co the commercial treaty between Prussia and Austria, concluded in 
Berlin on February 19, 1853. It eliminated many of the customs barriers that Via (urn i>a<; 
triun iph along tl 
a vir iorious can 
f 1 eiv an alite 
o<> M lay IJ, lK.v 
pa s 1 : "Dm.s  ':< •. 
le m, arbre poui 
passa nu par M 
mai < heuv dan-, 
•;'- A i< >ug the *an 
i:o i'o 
.Vfa; i ütMrit n>o'-,,ii 
••.ici e • '• toad, .nn 
=====第607页=====
Notes 583 
obstructed the development of trade between the two countries. (See Marx, 
"Kossuth and Mazzini.—Intrigues of the Prussian Government.—Austro-
Prussian Commercial Treaty.— The Times and the Refugees", present edition, 
Vol. 11.) 
Concerning the Zollverein see Note 290. p. 492 
351 See Note 192. p. 493 
352 An allusion to the Constitution of the Austrian monarchy (Gesamtmonarchie) 
introduced by Francis Joseph on March 4, 1849 (Reichsverfassung für das 
Kaiserthum Oesterreich. Olmütz, 4 März 1849. In: Wiener Zeitung, No. 57, 
March 8, 1849). Despite the promises of autonomy to the lands inhabited by 
non-Austrians, the imposed Constitution was conceived in an anti-democratic 
spirit of centralised bureaucracy and anti-democratic government (the Emperor 
and his Ministers were to enjoy full powers). The Constitution of March 4 was 
a step towards restoring absolutism in Austria. Nevertheless the Constitution 
limited the Emperor's power and it was abrogated by the imperial patent of 
December 31, 1851. (Concerning thé Constitution of March 4, 1849, see 
F. Engels' articles "The War in Italy and Hungary", "From the Theatre of 
War.— Windischgrätz's Comments on the Imposed Constitution", present 
edition, Vol. 9, pp. 148, 261-64, and "Letters from Germany", Vol. 10, 
p. 11.) ' p. 493 
353 The reference is to Hungary's unwritten constitution which was the oldest in 
Europe and based on ancient traditions and legislative acts of the Kingdom. 
The independence of the Diet was guaranteed in the interests of the 
Hungarian nobility, as also was the Diet's right to decide the most important 
state questions, including financial credits and army recruitment. p. 493 
354 Lord Strafford, Charles I's favourite and an ardent champion of absolutism, 
was accused of high treason and executed in 1641 by demand of Parliament 
supported by the people of London and the suburbs. p. 495 
355 An Act to Regulate the Issue of Banknotes, and for Giving to the Governor and 
Company of the Bank of England Certain Privileges for a Limited Period was 
introduced by Robert Peel on July 19, 1844. It envisaged the division of the Bank 
of England into two completely independent departments, each with its own cash 
account—the Banking Department, dealing exclusively with credit operations 
and the Issue Department, issuing banknotes. 
The Act limited the number of banknotes in circulation and guaranteed 
them with definite gold and silver reserves which could not be used for the 
credit operations of the Banking Department. Further issues of banknotes were 
allowed only in the event of a corresponding increase in the precious metal 
reserves. 
Marx analysed the Act of 1844 and its significance in a number of articles 
for the New-York Daily Tribune: "The Vienna Note.—The United States and 
Europe.— Letters from Shumla.— Peel's Bank Act" (see present edition, Vol. 
12), "The English Bank Act of 1844 and the Monetary Crisis in Britain", "The 
British Revulsion" (Vol. 15) and "The English Bank Act of 1844" (Vol. 16). A 
detailed description of the Act was given by Marx later, in Capital, Vol. Ill, 
Chapter XXXIV. p. 498 
356 See Note 192. p. 499 

=====第608页=====
584 Notes 
357 The reference is to Austria's provincial constitutions published as a continua 
tion of the "October Diploma" (Der Kaiserliche Diplom von 20. Oktober 
1860)— "Landes-Ordnung und Landtags-Wahlordnung für das Herzogthum 
Steiermark", "Landes-Ordnung und Landtags-Wahlordnung für das Herzog­
thum Kärnthen", "Landes-Ordnung und Landtags-Wahlordnung für das 
Herzogthum Salzburg", "Landes-Ordnung und Landtags-Wahlordnung für die 
gefürstete Grafschaft Tirol", Verfassung der Oesterreichische Monarchie, Wien, 
1861.  p. 499 
358 The county assemblies, based on the estate principle, were a form of 
self-government in Hungary. In 1848, as a result of the revolutionary changes 
in the. country, representatives of the entire population without any estate 
distinctions were allowed to sit in these assemblies. After the defeat of the 
1848-49 revolution the county assemblies were disbanded, and the comitatus as 
an administrative unit was abolished. p. 500 
359 xhis is Marx's synopsis of Imre Szabö's two-volume study, The State Policy of 
Modern Europe, from the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century to the Present Time, 
which was published anonymously in London in May-June 1857. Szabö's work, 
written in English, is a summary of inter-state relations in Europe from the 
Italian wars of the early 16th century to the Paris Congress of 1856. It reflects 
the influence of David Urquhart's views. Marx compiled his synopsis in the first 
half of June 1860 in connection with his work on Herr Vogt. He needed this 
historical investigation to expose the counter-revolutionary nature of Napoleon 
Ill's policy. In taking notes he concentrated on the events and fully ignored 
Szabö's interpretation of them. Some notes refer to events not mentioned in 
Szabö's work and are probably based on other sources. In the present edition 
these insertions and Marx's conclusions are set in large type. The names of 
persons and geographical names are reproduced in Marx's transcription, with 
their present spelling given in footnotes. Obvious mistakes have been silently 
corrected. 
Marx drew on these notes above all in the chapter "Dâ-Dâ Vogt and His 
Studies" (see this volume, pp. 133-83). p. 505 
360 The Union of Calmar (1397-1523) included Denmark, Norway (with Iceland) 
and Sweden (with Finland) under the sovereignty of the Danish kings. Sweden 
virtually broke away in 1449. The attempt of the Danish King Christian II to 
bring it back into the union by staging a bloodbath in Stockholm led to a final 
rupture and the restoration of Swedish statehood (1523). p. 505 
361 This refers to the League of Cognac formed on May 22, 1526. p. 505 
362 Traité des dames—an ironic designation of the Peace of Cambray (August 1529), 
which was concluded with the active co-operation of Louise of Savoy (Francis 
I's mother) and Margaret (Charles V's aunt). p. 506 
363 xhis refers to the rejection by Charles V and the Augsburg Imperial Diet in 
1530 of the Confession of Augsburg, which laid down the principles of 
Lutheranism and established the ritual aspect. p. 506 
364 xhe League of Schmalkalden (February 27, 1531), named after the town in 
Thuringia where it was formed, was a union of Protestant princes and a 
number of Imperial towns for the protection of the Reformation against the 

=====第609页=====
Notes 585 
Catholic princes headed by Emperor Charles V, From 1546 to 1548 the League 
and the Emperor were engaged in a war which ended in the latter's victory and 
the disintegration of the League. p. 506 
365 In 1534 Henry VIII broke off relations with the Pope and was proclaimed 
Head of the Anglican Church by Parliament (Act of Supremacy). p. 506 
366 The Augsburg Interim was a treaty between the German Catholics and 
Protestants adopted by the Imperial Diet in Augsburg after the Protestants' 
defeat in the Schmalkalden War. A compromise that satisfied neither party, it 
was superseded by the Religious Peace of Augsburg (1555). p. 506 
367 The Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis (1559) put an end to the Italian Wars 
(1494-1559). It consisted of two treaties: one between France and England and 
another between France and Spain. France renounced all claims to possessions 
in Italy. The Savoy Duchy, captured by Francis I in 1536, was restored and 
given part of Piedmont. p. 506 
368 Marx is obviously referring to an international treaty proposed in Mémoires des 
sages et royales économies d'Estat, domestiques, politiques et militaires de Henry le 
Grand,  a book by Sully, Counsellor to Henry IV, published in 1638. Drawn up 
by Sully (even though he attributes it to Henry IV) at the height of the Thirty 
Years'  War, it was anti-Habsburg in character and advocated the expulsion of 
the Turks and Tatars from Europe and the establishment of a conglomerate of 
Christian states under the nominal supremacy of the Pope, but actually led by 
France. The plan was patently unrealistic. p. 509 
369 F rom 1604 to 1606 Hungary, Hungarian-ruled Slovakia and Transylvania were 
the scene of an anti-Habsburg liberation movement led by the Hungarian 
feudal lord Istvan Bocskai. The anti-feudal demands of the peasants taking 
part in the movement made its leaders accept a compromise with the 
Habsburgs. The treaty signed by Bocskai and Rudolph II in Vienna in 1606 
restored Transylvania's independence, granted religious freedom to the 
Protestants and replaced a number of the Emperor's counsellors by members of 
the Hungarian nobility. p. 510 
370 The Thirty Years' War (see Note 162) was sparked off by an anti-Habsburg 
uprising in Bohemia which lasted from 1618 to 1620. The Bohemians were 
supported by Gabor Bethlen, leader of a similar uprising in Hungary. The 
insurgents suffered a decisive defeat at Bîlâ Hora on November 8, 1620. 
p. 510 
371 The anti-Habsburg movement in Hungary led by Gâbor Bethlen (1619-26) was 
one aspect of the Thirty Years' War and ended in the signing of the Pozsony 
(Bratislava) Peace on December 20, 1626. p. 510 
372 The Edict of Restitution (1629) provided for the restoration of secularised 
church land to the German Catholic princes. It was the result of the successes 
achieved by the Habsburg-Catholic camp in the early stage of the Thirty Years' 
War. The Edict was officially revoked by the Peace Treaty of Westphalia 
(October 24, 1648). p. 510 
373 The Truce of Altmark was concluded by Poland and Sweden with French 
20* 

=====第610页=====
586 Notes 
mediation for six years on September 26, 1629. It enabled Sweden to open 
hostilities against the Habsburgs. p. 510 
374 This refers to the war of the Mantuan Succession (1628-31), which formed the 
third stage of the Thirty Years' War. p. 510 
375 The Peace of Prague was concluded by the German Protestant princes with the 
Emperor on May 30, 1635. p. 510 
376 Anne of Austria, consort of Louis XIII of France, was the daughter of Philip III 
of Spain and tried to pursue a pro-Spanish policy at the time of her regency 
(1643-61), during the minority of her son Louis XIV. France's virtual ruler at 
that time was Mazarin. p. 511 
377 The Peace of Westphalia, signed in Münster on October 24, 1648, consisted of 
two interlinked peace treaties: the Osnabrück Treaty (between the Holy Roman 
Emperor and his allies, on the one hand, and Sweden and its allies, on the 
other) and the Münster Treaty (between the Emperor and France with its 
allies).  Peace negotiations had been under way from 1645. The Peace of 
Westphalia virtually sealed Germany's political fragmentation (see also Note 
162).  p. 511 
378 This refers to Spain's separate treaty with Holland (one of the series of 
Westphalian treaties). p. 511 
379 Bohemia formed part of the Habsburg Empire (1526-1918). 
Speaking of the amnesty Marx means the promises Britain, France, Sweden, 
Denmark and other states made to Bohemia during the Thirty Years' War when 
it fought on the side of the anti-Habsburg coalition. Under the Peace of 
Westphalia, the Bohemian lands, the scene of military operations throughout 
the Thirty Years' War, remained under Habsburg rule. p. 511 
380 This refers to the Westminster Peace Treaty of April 14, 1654, which 
concluded the first Anglo-Dutch war (1652-54). It was waged for mastery of the 
seas and ended in defeat for Holland. The latter was forced to reconcile itself 
to the English Navigation Act of 1651, which was directed against the Dutch 
carrying trade. p. 511 
381 After the Peace of Westphalia (1648) France continued its war against Spain. It 
was concluded by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, signed on Fezan Island on 
Bidasoa River on November 7, 1659. As a result, hegemony in Western Europe 
passed from Spain to France. p. 512 
382 This refers to the terms of the Peace of Roeskilde concluded on February 26, 
1658,  which ended the Danish-Swedish War of 1657-58. 
Sound duties—the money toll exacted from 1425 onwards by Denmark from 
foreign ships passing through the Sound. p. 512 
383 The Peace of Oliva, signed on May 3, 1660, by Sweden, on the one hand, and 
Poland, Emperor Leopold I and Elector Frederick-William of Brandenburg, on 
the other, was one of the series of treaties that ended the Northern War 
(1655-60). p. 512 

=====第611页=====
Notes 587 
384 The jus devolutionis was a legal principle in some of the Netherland provinces 
under which, in the event of a second marriage of the father, his land passed to 
his children by the first marriage. It served as a basis for Louis XIV, married to 
Maria Theresa, daughter of Philip IV of Spain by his first marriage, to launch 
a war for the Spanish Netherlands (the War of Devolution, 1667-68) against 
Charles II, King of Spain, son of Philip IV of second marriage. Philip IV died 
in 1668. p. 512 
385 This refers to the Peace of Nijmegen, concluded by France and Sweden with 
Emperor Leopold I on February 5, 1679. It confirmed the terms of the Peace 
of Westphalia and was one of the Nijmegen treaties of 1678-79 which ended 
the war of 1672-78 waged by a coalition of states headed by France against a 
coalition under the Netherlands. p. 513 
386 The Chambres de réunion were set up by Louis XIV at the municipal council of 
Breisach and the Parliaments of Metz and Besançon in 1679-80 to provide legal 
justification for France's claims to territories in Alsace, Western Lorraine and 
some other areas. p. 513 
387 -phe Peace of Ryswik (or Rijswijk) concluded the 1688-97 war between France 
and the Augsburg League (the Netherlands, England, Spain, the German 
Empire, Savoy, Sweden, and a number of German and Italian principalities). It 
confirmed, with certain alterations, the pre-war frontiers of the states involved. 
France was forced to recognise William of Orange as King of Great Britain and 
Ireland and thus reconcile itself to the coup d'état of 1688-89. p. 513 
388 The Grand Alliance—the anti-French coalition formed on September 7, 1701 in 
The Hague by Emperor Leopold I, Britain and the Netherlands on the eve of 
the War of the Spanish Succession. Prussia, Denmark, Portugal and several 
other states joined the alliance later. By calling it the second Grand Alliance, 
Szabö treats the anti-French coalition of 1688 as the first. p. 514 
389 What is meant here is the beginning of the War of the Spanish Succession, in 
which the first action was the dispatch in 1701 of Imperial troops under 
Eugene of Savoy to Italy to prevent the capture of the Duchy of Milan by the 
French. War was officially declared on Louis XIV in 1702. p. 514 
390 This refers to the, anti-Habsburg liberation movement in Hungary (1703-11) 
led by Ferenc II Rikoczy. An active part in it, particularly in the early period, 
was played by the peasants, who put forward anti-feudal demands. The 
movement ended in the signing of the Treaty of Szatmar (1711) (see Note 127) 
and the surrender of the insurgent army. Hungary was incorporated into the 
Habsburg Empire. Râkôczy regarded the Szatmar treaty as a betrayal and 
refused to recognise it. p. 514 
391 The Aaland Congress (1718-19) — preliminary peace talks between representatives 
of Russia and Sweden during the Great Northern War (1700-21). The parties 
failed to reach agreement. p. 515 
392 The Great Northern War (1700-21) was concluded by a series of peace treaties: 
the Treaty of Stockholm (November 9, 1719) between Sweden and Britain 
(Hanover); the Treaty of Stockholm {January 21, 1720) between Sweden and 

=====第612页=====
588 Notes 
Prussia; the treaty between Sweden and Denmark (July 3, 1720) and the Treaty 
of Nystadt (September 10/August 30, 1721) between Russia and Sweden. 
Marx gives the wrong date, November 1, when referring to the Treaty of 
Stockholm between Sweden and Britain. p. 515 
393 Quadruple Alliance (1718)—the alliance formed by France and Britain and later 
joined by Austria (the Netherlands was expected to join too) to uphold the 
terms of the Peace of Utrecht in the face of Spain's attempts to recover its 
possessions in Italy turned over to Austria under the Utrecht peace 
agreements. The conflict took the form of a war by France and Britain against 
Spain which ended in Spain's defeat and accession (1720) to the Quadruple 
Alliance. p. 515 
394 xhis refers to the Hanoverian Alliance formed by France, Britain and Prussia 
on September 3, 1725 and joined by the Netherlands in 1726 and Denmark 
and Sweden in 1727. It was directed against Spain and Austria. p. 516 
395 The Pragmatic Sanction was a law on succession to the throne issued by Charles 
VI of Habsburg in 1713. It decreed the indivisibility of the Habsburgs' 
hereditary lands and envisaged the possibility of the Crown of the Austrian 
Empire passing to Maria Theresa, Charles VI's daughter. p. 516 
396 This refers to the treaties (including the Peace of Utrecht and the Peace of 
Rastatt) concluded between 1713 and 1715 by France and Spain with the 
members of the anti-French coalition (Britain, the Netherlands, Portugal, 
Prussia, Savoy and the Austrian Habsburgs) to end the long War of the Spanish 
Succession. Their major provision was the retention of the Spanish throne by 
Philip Bourbon, grandson of Louis XIV, but the King of France was forced to 
renounce his plans for merging the French and Spanish monarchies. A number 
of French and Spanish colonies in the West Indies and North America, and 
also Gibraltar and the port of Mahon on Minorca Island were turned over to 
Britain. It also secured the asiento, a monopoly right to import African slaves 
into the Spanish dominions in America. p. 518 
397 A mistake in Szabö's book: the Hanovero-Hessian troops were beaten by a 
French army under Marshal L. Ch. d'Estrées. Marshal L. F. Richelieu assumed 
command of this army in 1758. p. 518 
398 This refers to the Battle of Leiten (Lutynia) in Silesia on December 5, 1757 at 
which Frederick II defeated the Austrians and secured the capture of Silesia by 
Prussia. p. 518 
399 An allusion to the fact that one of the main causes of the Seven Years' War (see 
Note 122) was Anglo-French rivalry over colonies. p. 518 
400 The Hubertusburg Peace, signed by Austria and Saxony with Prussia on 
February 15, 1763, was made possible by Peter III, who not only stopped all 
hostilities against Prussia but pledged himself to Frederick II to use whatever 
influence Russia could exert on Austria to end the Seven Years' War (1756-63). 
Under the Hubertusburg Peace, Prussia recovered oil the territories it had lost 
during the war. p. 519 

=====第613页=====
Notes 589 
401 This refers to the benefits Sweden gained under the Peace of Westphalia, 
which gave it control of the main harbours on the Baltic and the North Sea (see 
also Note 162). p. 519 
402 An allusion to the liberum veto, the right of every member of the Diet to veto its 
decisions; introduced in 1652, it aggravated feudal anarchy in Poland, p. 519 
403 Stamp duty—the duty imposed in North America on commercial and judicial 
documents and periodicals. It was introduced by the Stamp Act, endorsed by 
the British Parliament on March 22, 1765. p. 520 
404 Potato War—ironic name given to the War of the Bavarian Succession 
(1778-79), waged by Prussia and Saxony against Austria. p. 520 
405 The Armed Neutrality, a policy directed against Britain, was based on five 
principles of international law put forward in 1778 in connection with problems 
of navigation in the Sound. The Armed Neutrality was also acceded to by 
Denmark, Sweden and Prussia. p. 520 
406 In June and July 1790 representatives of Austria, Prussia, Poland, Britain and 
the Netherlands conferred in the Silesian town of Reichenbach. Worried by 
Russia's successes in the Russo-Turkish War (1787-91), they obliged Austria to 
make peace with Turkey (see Note 408). p. 520 
407 The Peace of Värälä, signed on August 14, 1790, ended the Russo-Swedish War 
of 1788-90. Russia recognised the new Swedish Constitution, which curtailed 
the rights of the Riksdag, strengthened the King's authority and confirmed the 
privileges of the nobility. The peace treaty recognised Russia's right to the 
territories it has obtained under the Nystadt and Abo treaties (see this volume, 
pp. 515, 517). p. 520 
408 On August 4, 1791 Austria and Turkey signed a peace treaty at Sistova, Bulgaria, 
terminating the Austro-Turkish War of 1788-90 on the basis of the status quo 
ante bellum. Austria obtained Stara Orsova, but without the right to erect 
fortifications there. p. 520 
409 The Treaty of  JaSsy,  signed on December 29, 1791 (January 9, 1792), ended the 
Russo-Turkish War of  1787-91.  It confirmed the annexation of the Crimea to 
Russia and laid down the Russo-Turkish frontier along the Dniester, p. 520 
410 In his synopsis of Volume II of Szabö's book, Marx adds the letter "a" to the 
numbers of chapters: la, Ha, etc. p. 520 
411 Under the separate Treaty of Basle (July 22, 1795) concluded by France and 
Spain, the former obtained the Spanish (eastern) part of Haiti. The western 
part of the island, called Santo Domingo from 1697 to 1803, was owned by 
France under the Ryswick peace treaty of 1697 (see Note 387). In the 
nineteenth century the whole of Haiti was sometimes referred to as Santo 
Domingo. p. 522 
412 This refers to the treaty between France and the Batavian Republic, which was 
formed on the territory of the Dutch Kingdom following the entry of French 
republican troops into the country and a rising of the local population 

=====第614页=====
590 Notes 
(January-March 1795) against the reactionary regime of Stadtholder Wil­
liam V. Signed in May 1795, the treaty provided for the transfer of part of the 
republic's territory to France. In 1806 Napoleon I transformed the Batavian 
Republic into the Kingdom of Holland. p. 522 
413 See Note 164. p. 522 
414 This refers to the negotiations to settle the territorial disputes involving the 
Holy Roman Empire held by representatives of France, Austria, Prussia and a 
number of other German states in Rastatt from December 9, 1797. In March 
1798 the Imperial delegation approved the transfer of the left bank of the 
Rhine to France (this seems to be the event Marx had in mind in recording the 
date in question), and on April 23, 1799 the congress closed because of the 
outbreak of hostilities between the second coalition and France. p. 522 
115 The Parthenopaean Republic was proclaimed on the territory of the Kingdom of 
the Two Sicilies on January 22, 1799 by Neapolitan republicans backed by the 
troops of the French Directory. It only survived until June 23, 1799 when the 
power of the Bourbons (Ferdinand IV) was restored with British help. 
p. 522 
416 This refers to the Federal Diet, an assembly of representatives of the German 
states which formed the German Confederation (see Note 76) at the Congress 
of Vienna on June 8, 1815. p. 524 
4,7 The Wartburg Festival was held on the initiative of Jena University students on 
October 18, 1817 to commemorate the tercentenary of the Reformation and 
the fourth anniversary of the Battle of Leipzig. The Festival was a 
demonstration of the students' opposition to the Metternich regime. 
The Burschenschaften were German student organisations formed during the 
liberation struggle against Napoleon. They advocated the unification of 
Germany and combined progressive ideas with extreme nationalism. Szabö 
mistakenly associates the rise of these organisations with the Wartburg Festival. 
p. 525 
418 Marx refers to the Constitution adopted by the Cortes in Cadiz on March 18, 
1812,  in the course of the Spanish revolution of 1808-14. It envisaged a series 
of bourgeois-democratic reforms and was repealed by Ferdinand VII on May 4, 
1814.  Reintroduced by Riego during the Spanish revolution of 1820-23, it was 
again repealed on October 1, 1823 by Ferdinand VII, who had earlier sworn 
allegiance to it. It was again introduced on August 12, 1836 and remained in 
force until June 18, 1837. p. 525 
419 This refers to the Central Commission of Investigation set up at Mainz on 
August 31, 1819 at a conference of ministers of Austria, Prussia, Bavaria, 
Saxony and other member states of the German Confederation to combat the 
liberal and revolutionary opposition in Germany. p. 525 
420 At an early stage of their activity in the nineteenth century the Carbonari 
headed the anti-French movement in the Kingdom of Naples (against Murat) 
and helped Ferdinand I and his son Francis I recover the crown of the 
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The source used by Marx mistakenly calls Francis 
an emperor. p. 525 

=====第615页=====
Notes 591 
I.e., the Constitution of Cadiz (see Note 418). p. 525 
The Ulema were Moslem doctors of divine law and theology who controlled the 
judiciary and the religious institutions and schools in Moslem countries. They 
enjoyed high prestige in the political life of the Ottoman Empire. p. 525 
Hetairia—see Note 139. p. 525 
An allusion to the fact that before entering the Russian diplomatic service in 
1809 G. Capo d'lstria held a number of posts in the Republic of the Seven 
United Islands set up on the Ionian Islands under the Russo-Turkish 
convention of 1800. p. 525 
See Note 301. p. 526 
This refers to the Convention on the Iberian Peninsula signed by the four 
powers in London on April 22, 1834 (see Note 265). p. 526 
See Note 128. p. 526 
See Note 168. p. 526 
At the beginning of his pontificate (1846), Pope Pius IX announced a 
programme of moderate liberal-bourgeois reforms (establishment of a commis­
sion on the administrative reorganisation of the Papal States, limited political 
amnesty and other measures). p. 527 
From here on Marx"s notes follow not the text of Volume II of Szabo's book 
but the chronological table appended to it (State Policy..., Vol. II, pp. 389-91). 
p. 527 

=====第616页=====

=====第617页=====
593 
NAME INDEX 
A 
Abbas I (1571-1629)—Shah of Persia 
(1587-1629).—510 
Abd-el-Kader (c. 1808-1883)—Emir of 
Algeria; a leader of the Arabs in the 
1832-47 national liberation war in 
Algeria and Morocco against the 
French; prisoner of war in France 
(1847-52); set free and granted a 
pension by the French Government; 
later lived in Damascus.—443 
Abdul Mejid (1823-1861)—Sultan of 
Turkey (1839-61).—468 
Abel, Karl (b. 1837)—German philolog­
ist and journalist, Berlin correspon­
dent of The Daily Telegraph.—246-50 
Aberdeen, George Hamilton Gordon, Earl 
of (1784-1860)—British Tory states­
man; leader of the Peelites from 
1850;  Foreign Secretary (1828-30, 
1841-46); Prime Minister of the Coal­
ition Government (1852-55):—383 
About, Edmond François Valentin (1828-
1885)—French journalist, Bonapar-
tist.—118,  162, 182, 183, 186, 206, 
212, 271, 324, 325, 328, 329, 391, 
392, 393-96, 400, 431, 439 
Abt—German journalist, petty-bour­
geois democrat; emigrated to Ge­
neva in the early 1850s; expelled 
from the local German Workers' 
Association for slander.—  38, 39, 41, 
44, 47 
Adolf (1817-1905)—Duke of Nassau (1839-66), Grand Duke of Luxem­
bourg (1890-1905).—398 
Adolphus Frederick (1710-1771)—King 
of Sweden (1751-71) from the Hol-
stein-Gottorp House.—517 
Aeschylus (525-456 B.C.)—Greek dra­
matist.—299 
Agassiz, Louis Jean Rodolphe (1807-
1873)—Swiss-born American natural­
ist, opponent of Darwinism.—45 
Alberoni, Giulio (1664-1752)—Spanish 
statesman, cardinal; First Minister of 
King Philip V (from 1717 to 1719).— 
224, 515 
Albert, Prince Consort of Queen Victoria 
of Great Britain (1819-1861).—382, 
383, 397 
Alberts—secretary of Prussian Embassy 
in London in the 1850s.—305 
Alexander I (1777-1825)—Emperor of 
Russia (1801-25).—138, 140, 142, 
143, 147, 153, 377, 485, 522, 524, 
"25, 526 
Alexander II (1818-1881)—Emperor of 
Russia (1855-81).—138-42, 144-47, 
150, 153, 154, 165, 166, 171, 336, 
368, 377, 399, 430, 431, 485 
Alexander of Macedon (Alexander the 
Great) (356-323 B.C.)—general and 
statesman.—190 
Ali (Ali Pasha) (1741-1822)—actual 
ruler of the Albanian and Greek 
lands belonging to Turkey (1788-
1822).—526 
Altenhöfer, August Joseph (1^04-1876)— 
German journalist, an editor of the 

=====第618页=====
594 Name Index 
Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung.— 112 
Alvensleben, Gustav von (1803-1881) — 
Prussian general, confidant of the 
Prince Regent of Prussia who became 
King William I in 1861.—216, 397 
Amarante —see Chaves, Manoel de Sil-
veira 
Angoulême, Charles de Valois, Duke of 
(1573-1650)—Charles IX's natural 
son; served in the army of Louis 
XIII.—510 
Anne (1601-1666)—Consort of Louis 
XIII of France from 1615; Regent 
(1643-61) for her son Louis XIV; 
daughter of Philip III of Spain.— 
510, 511 
Anne (1665-1714)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1702-14).—514 
Anne (Anna) (1693-1740)—Empress of 
Russia (1730-40).—142, 516, 517 
Anne (Anna Petrovna) (1708-1728)— 
daughter of Peter I of Russia; mar­
ried Charles I, the Duke of Holstein-
Gottorp, in 1725, mother of Peter 
III—515 
Anson, George, Baron (1697-1762)— 
British admiral, First Lord of the 
Admiralty (1751-56, 1757-62); took 
part in the war of the Austrian 
Succession (1740-48); carried out re­
forms in the British navy.—517 
Apollonius of Rhodes (Rhodius) (3rd cent. 
B.C.)—Greek poet and grammarian, 
author of the epic Argonautica.— 199 
Aragon, House of (llth-15th cent.).— 
371 
Argyll, Archibald Campbell, Earl of 
(1629-1685)—Scottish aristocrat; 
headed the rebellion against James II 
in May and June 1685; executed 
after the defeat of the rebellion.— 73 
Armstrong, William George, Baron Arm­
strong of Cragside from 1887 (1810-
1900) — English inventor and indus­
trialist; noted for his invention of a 
special type of rifled cannon.—  361-
65 
Arndt, Ernst Moritz (1769-1860) — 
German writer, historian and 
philologist; took part in the struggle 
against Napoleonic rule; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly (Right Centre) in 1848-49.—134 
Arnim,  Harry, Count von (1824-1881)— 
German conservative diplomat, Bis­
marck's opponent, envoy (1871) and 
Ambassador (1872-74) to Paris; ar­
rested for appropriating diplomatic 
documents (1874) and expelled from 
the country.—307 
Arnim-Boitzenburg, Adolf Heinrich, 
Count von (1803-1868) —Prussian 
statesman; Minister of the Interior 
(1842-45) and Prime Minister (March 
19-29,  1848); deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Right wing) 
in 1849.—252 
Assermann, Ferenc (1821-1893)—Hun­
garian army officer, took part in the 
revolution of 1848-49 in Hungary.— 
225-26 
August (us) II(the Strong) (1670-1733)— 
King of Poland (1697-1706, 1709-33) 
and Elector of Saxony as Frederick 
Augustus I (1694-1733).—515, 516 
August (us) III (1696-1763)—King of 
Poland (1734-63) and Elector of Sax­
ony (from 1733) as Frederick Augus­
tus II; son of Augustus II.—516, 
517, 519 
B 
Babst, Ivan Kondratyevich (1824-1881)— 
Russian economist, historian and wri­
ter; professor of political economy at 
the universities of Kazan (from 1851) 
and Moscow (from 1857); gave public 
lectures on political economy in the 
early 1860s.—42 
Badel, Marguerite (Rigolboche) (born c. 
1842)—French dancer.—326 
Badinguet—see Napoleon HI 
Baerensprung, von—chief of the Prus­
sian police in Posen in the late 
1850s.—394, 395 
Baker, Robert—British official, factory 
inspector in the 1850s and 1860s.— 
410,  416-18, 419, 420 
Balzac, Honoré de (1799-1850)—French 
novelist.—36, 266 
Bamberger, Ludwig (1823-1899) — 
German democratic journalist; took 

=====第619页=====
Name Index 595 
part in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate 
uprising; emigrated to France in the 
1850s; later a National-Liberal and 
deputy to the Imperial Diet.— 249 
Bangya, Janos (Johann) (1817-1868)  — 
Hungarian journalist and army of­
ficer; took part in the 1848-49 rev­
olution in Hungary; after the defeat 
of the revolution, Kossuth's emissary 
abroad and at the same time a secret 
police agent; later served in the 
Turkish army under the name of 
Mehemed Bey and was a Turkish 
agent during the war in the Caucasus 
(i 855-58).—219-21 
Baraguay d'Hilliers, Louis (1764-1812)  — 
French general; fought in the wars of 
the French Republic against the coali­
tion of European states and took part 
in Napoleon I's campaigns.— 162-63 
Baroche, Pierre Jules (1802-1870) — 
French lawyer and politician; deputy 
to the Constituent and Legislative 
Assemblies during the Second Re­
public; procurator-general of the 
Court of Appeal (1849); Bonapartist; 
member of several cabinets before 
and after the coup d'état of De­
cember 2, 1851.—194, 341 
Barreaux (Jacques Vallée, Sieur des) 
(1602-1673) —French poet.—91 
Barrot, Camille Hyacinthe Odilon  (1791-
1873)—  French lawyer and politi­
cian, leader of the liberal dynastic 
opposition until February 1848; from 
December 1848 to October 1849 
headed the monarchist coalition 
Ministry.—  55, 105 
Barthélémy, Emmanuel (c. 1820-1855)— 
French worker, Blanquist, member of 
secret revolutionary societies during 
the July monarchy and participant in 
the June 1848 uprising in Paris; a 
leader of the French society of Blan­
quist emigrants in London; executed 
in 1855 on a criminal charge.—  83, 
84 
Bassermann, Friedrich Daniel  (1811-
1855) — German politician; rep­
resented the Baden Government in 
the Federal Diet during the 1848-49 
revolution; deputy to the Frankfurt National Assembly (Right Centre).— 
105, 302 
Batthyâny, Kâzmér, Count of (1807-
1854) — Hungarian statesman, liberal 
aristocrat; Minister of Foreign Affairs 
in the Hungarian revolutionary Gov­
ernment of Szemere (1849); emig­
rated first to Turkey and then to 
France after the suppression of the 
revolution.— 216 
Batthyâny, Lajos (Ludwig, Louis), Count 
of (1806-1849)— Hungarian states­
man, liberal aristocrat; Prime Minis­
ter (March-September 1848); pur­
sued a policy of compromise with the 
Austrian monarchy; shot after the 
suppression of the revolution.—  216, 
501 
Bauer, Edgar (1820-1886) —German 
writer, Young Hegelian; lived abroad 
in the 1850s and early 1860s; editor 
of the London newspaper Die Neue 
Zeit (1858-59).—117 
Bayard,  Pierre Terrail, seigneur de (c. 
1475-1524)  — French military hero, 
glorified by his contemporaries as the 
knight sans peur et sans reproche (with­
out fear and without reproach).— 
250, 251, 253-58 
Bazancourt, César Lécat, baron de (1810-
1865)—French military writer, Bo­
napartist.—163 
Beauharnais, Eugène de (1781-1824) — 
French general, stepson of Napoleon 
I; fought in the wars of Napoleonic 
France; Viceroy of Italy (1805-14).— 
144 
Becher, August—member of the Baden 
Provisional Government, one of the 
five Imperial Regents; emigrated in 
1849 after the defeat of the Baden-
Palatinate uprising.— 210 
Becker, Gottfried (1827-1865)—German 
journalist; took part in the 1849 
Baden-Palatinate uprising; emigrated 
to America (1853); fought in the 
American Civil War; son of Johann 
Philipp Becker.— 61 
Becker, Johann Philipp (1809-1886) — 
German revolutionary; took part in 
the German and Swiss democratic 
movement in the 1830s and 1840s 

=====第620页=====
596 Name Index 
and in the 1848-49 revolution; com­
manded the Baden people's militia 
during the 1849 Baden-Palatinate 
uprising; prominent figure in the 
First International in the 1860s, dele­
gate to all its congresses; friend and 
associate of Marx and Engels. —51, 
60, 61, 62, 63, 77, 82, 228, 230-33, 
235, 250, 262, 267, 299, 304, 310, 
327 
Becker, Max Joseph (d. 1896)—German 
engineer, democrat; took part in the 
1849 Baden-Palatinate uprising; after 
its defeat emigrated first to Switzer­
land and then to the USA.—30, 32 
Becker, Nicolaus (1809-1845)—German 
poet, author of the song "Der 
deutsche Rhein". —440 
Beckmann —Prussian police spy in Paris 
in the early 1850s, Paris correspon­
dent of the Kölnische Zeitung.— 56, 
307 
Belle-Isle, Charles Louis Auguste Fouquet, 
duc de (1684-1761)—French military 
leader and diplomat, Marshal of 
France (from 1741), War Minister 
from 1750 (with intervals); fought in 
the war of the Austrian Succession 
(1740-48).—517 
Benda, Robert von (1816-1899) — 
German liberal politician, member of 
the Prussian Chamber of Deputies 
from 1859; member of the Imperial 
Diet from 1867; a National-Liberal.— 
251 
Bernadotte, Jean Baptiste Jules (c. 1763-
1844)—Marshal of France; was 
adopted by Charles XIII of Sweden 
(1810) and became heir to the Swedish 
throne; fought in the war against 
Napoleon I ,(1813); King of Sweden 
and Norway as Charles XIV John 
(1818-44).—524 
Bernis, François Joachim Pierre de (1715-
1794)—French statesman, diplomat 
and writer; cardinal from 1758; 
Foreign Minister (1757-58).—518 
Berry, Charles Ferdinand (1686-1714) — 
grandson of Louis XIV; married 
(1710) Marié Louise, daughter of 
Philippe of Orleans.— 514 
Berryer, Pierre Antoine (1790-1868) — French lawyer and politician, deputy 
to the Constituent and Legislative 
Assemblies during the Second Re­
public, Legitimist.—157 
Berwick, James Fitzjames, Duke of (1670-
1734)—Marshal of France, natural 
son of James II of Great Britain; 
fought in the wars of the Spanish 
(1701-14) and the Polish (1733-35) 
Succession.—516 
Bethell, Richard, 1st Lord Westbury 
(1800-1873)—British lawyer and lib­
eral statesman; Attorney General 
(1856-59, 1860-61) and Lord Chan­
cellor (1861-65).—445 
Bethlen, Gabor (1580-1629)—leader of 
the anti-Habsburg movement in the 
Kingdom of Hungary (1619-26), 
Prince of Transylvania (1613-29) and 
King of Hungary (1620-21).—510 
Beust, Friedrich von (1817-1899)— 
former Prussian army officer; com­
mittee member of the Cologne Work­
ers' Association (1848); an editor of 
the Neue Kölnische Zeitung (Sep­
tember 1848-February 1849); took 
part in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate 
uprising; emigrated to Switzerland; 
professor of pedagogy.— 76 
Biedermann, Friedrich Karl (1812-
1901)—German historian and writer, 
liberal; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly (Centre) in 1848; 
later a National-Liberal.—302 
Biscamp, Elard—German democratic 
journalist; took part in the 1848-49 
revolution in Germany; emigrated 
after the defeat of the revolution; 
member of the editorial board of Das 
Volk, organ of the German refugees 
in London published with Marx's 
collaboration.—17, 117-18, 127, 240, 
261, 263, 265, 273, 275, 277, 286, 
289, 296-301 
Bixio,  Girolamo (Nino) (1821-1873)— 
Italian democrat; took part in the 
1848-49 national liberation war, the 
defence of the Roman Republic 
(April-July 1849) and Garibaldi's re­
volutionary campaign in Southern 
Italy (1860); became general of the 
Italian army in 1862; commanded 

=====第621页=====
Name Index 597 
the detachment of Garibaldians that 
captured Rome (1870).—473, 477 
Blanc, Jean Joseph Louis (1811-1882)— 
French petty-bourgeois socialist, his­
torian; member of the Provisional 
Government and President of the 
Luxembourg Commission (1848); 
pursued a policy of conciliation with 
the bourgeoisie; emigrated to Eng­
land (August 1848) and became a 
leader of the petty-bourgeois re­
fugees in London.—  69, 265 
Blanchenay, Louis (1800-1881) — Swiss 
politician, deputy to the National 
Council (1848-60); customs director 
(1861-73).—198 
Blanqui, Louis Auguste (1805-1881) — 
French revolutionary, Utopian com­
munist; organised several secret 
societies and plots; adhered to the 
extreme Left of the democratic and 
proletarian movement during the 
1848 revolution.—69 
Blind,  Karl (1826-1907)—German 
democratic journalist; took part in 
the Baden revolutionary movement 
in 1848-49; a leader of the German 
petty-bourgeois refugees in London 
in the 1850s; National-Liberal in the 
1860s.—3,  4, 7-11, 13, 16, 17, 116-
18, 119, 122-32, 186, 240, 263, 267, 
273, 275-78, 283-86, 289, 315-19 
Blondin (pseudonym of Jean Fran­
çois Gravelet) (1824-1897)—famous 
French tightrope walker.—225 
Bloomfield,  John Arthur Douglas, Baron 
Bloomfield of Oakhampton and Redwood 
(1802-1879)—British diplomat, en­
voy to Berlin (1851-60) and Am­
bassador to Vienna (1860-71).—383 
Blum,  Robert (1807-1848)—German 
democratic journalist; leader of the 
Left in the Frankfurt National As­
sembly; took part in the defence of 
Vienna in October 1848; court-
martialled and executed after the fall 
of the city.—39, 71, 73, 74, 192, 243 
Bluntschli, Johann Caspar (1808-1881) — 
Swiss lawyer and politician.— 79 
Bobzin, Friedrich Heinrich Karl (b. 
1826)—German artisan, member of 
the German Workers' Association in Brussels (1847); took part in the 
1849 Baden-Palatinate uprising; to­
gether with Gustav Struve headed 
the democratic Association of Ger­
man Emigrants in London.— 33 
Boiardo (Bojardo), Matteo Maria (c. 
1441-1494)—Italian poet of the Re­
naissance, author of L'Orlando in-
namorato.— 313 
Boichot, Jean Baptiste (1820-1889)— 
French republican; deputy to the 
Legislative Assembly (1849); took 
part in the demonstration of June 13, 
1849;  later an emigre and one of the 
leaders of the French emigrant socie­
ty in London; returned to Paris 
(1854) where he was again perse­
cuted by the police and imprisoned; 
amnestied in 1859.—53 
Bolivar y Ponte, Simon (1783-1830)— 
South American politician, one of the 
chief leaders of the South American 
Spanish colonies in their war of 
independence; President of the Re­
public of Colombia (1819-30).—219, 
328 
Bonaparte—imperial dynasty in France 
(1804-14, 1815 and 1852-70).—175, 
188, 194 
Bonaparte, Jérôme Napoléon Joseph 
Charles Paul (1784-1860)—youngest 
brother of Napoleon I; King of 
Westphalia (1807-13), Marshal of 
France from 1850.—170 
Bonaparte, Louis (1778-1846)—brother 
of Napoleon I; King of Holland 
(1806-10); father of Napoleon III.— 
189-90 
Bonaparte, Louis—see Napoleon III 
Bonaparte, Prince Napoléon Joseph Charles 
Paul (Plon-Plon) (1822-1891)—son of 
Jerome Bonaparte, cousin of 
Napoleon III; adopted the name of 
Jérôme after the death of his elder 
brother (1847); deputy to the Con­
stituent and Legislative Assemblies 
during the Second Republic; com­
manded a division in the Crimea 
(1854) and a corps in the Austro-
Italo-French war (1859); went by the 
name of Plon-Plon and the Red 
Prince.—40, 49, 58, 60, 116, 123, 

=====第622页=====
598 Name Index 
148, 170, 187-90, 193, 197-99, 205, 
206, 211-12, 221, 222, 225, 258, 316 
Bonerius {Boner), Ulrich (1324-1349)— 
German poet and preaching monk; 
author of a collection of fables, Der 
Edel Stein, based on Latin sources.— 
193 
Boniface, Louis (b. 1796)—French jour­
nalist, Bonapartist.—186, 211 
Bonis, Samu {Samuel) (1810-1879)— 
Hungarian lawyer and politician; 
took part in the 1848-49 revolution; 
supported Kossuth.—328 
Bonnivet, Guillaume Gouffier, seigneur de 
(1488-1525)—French admiral; com­
manded the French troops (1523-25) 
during the Italian war; killed in the 
battle of Pavia.— 505 
Borchardt, Louis—German physician, 
one of Engels' acquaintances in Man­
chester.— 119 
Borkheim, Sigismund Ludwig (1825-
1885)—German democratic journal­
ist; took part in the 1849 Baden-
Palatinate uprising; emigrated after 
its defeat; London merchant from 
1851;  was on friendly terms with 
Marx and Engels.— 29, 30, 31, 32, 
41, 42, 61, 329 
Borkmann —private secretary of Wil­
liam, Prince Regent of Prussia.—397 
Bosco —Neapolitan general; fought 
against Garibaldi's revolutionary de­
tachments in South Italy (1860).— 
475 
Bougeant, Guillaume Hyacinthe (1690-
1743) — French historian and man of 
letters, Jesuit; his best known works 
are on the history of the Thirty 
Years'  War (1618-48) and the Peace 
of Westphalia.— 511 
Bourbon, Charles, duc de (1490-1527) — 
commander-in-chief of the French 
army under Francis I; later went 
over to the side of Charles V; de­
feated the French troops in the battle 
of Pavia (1525).—505 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in France 
(1589-1792, 1814-15, 1815-30), Spain 
(1700-1808, 1814-68, 1874-1931 and 
since 1975), and some of the Italian states.—371,  459, 460, 472, 518, 521, 
523 
Brandenburg, Friedrich Wilhelm, Count of 
(1792-1850)—Prussian general and 
statesman; headed the counter­
revolutionary Ministry (November 
1848-November 1850).—255 
Brass, August (1818-1876)—German 
journalist; took part in the 1848-49 
revolution in Germany; emigrated to 
Switzerland after its defeat; editor-in-
chief of the Neue Schweizer Zeitung 
(1859-60).—187, 188 
Braun, Karl Johann von Braunthal {Jean 
Charles) (1802-1866)—German nov­
elist.—242 
Brentano, Lorenz Peter (1813-1891)— 
Baden democrat, lawyer, deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Left wing) in 1848; headed the 
Baden Provisional Government 
(1849);  after the defeat of the Baden-
Palatinate uprising emigrated to Swit­
zerland and later to the  USA.—51, 
254 
Brézé, Urbain de Maillé, marquis de 
(1597-1650)—French military leader 
and diplomat; fought in the Thirty 
Years'  War (1618-48); Marshal of 
France from 1632.—510 
Briganti (d. 1860) — Neapolitan gener­
al; fought against Garibaldi's re­
volutionary detachments in South 
Italy and was killed by the insurgent 
Neapolitan soldiers (I860).—474, 478 
Brillat-Savarin, Anthelme (1755-1826)— 
French lawyer and writer.—197 
Brunnow, Filipp Ivanovich (1797-
1875) —Russian diplomat; took part 
in the Troppau, Laibach and Verona 
Congresses of the Holy Alliance; 
envoy (1840-54, 1858-60) and Am­
bassador (1860-74) to London.—146 
Brunswick, Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand, 
Duke of (1735-1806)—commander-
in-chief of the Austro-Prussian army 
fighting against revolutionary France 
(1792).—521 
Bucher, Lothar (1817-1892)—Prussian 
official and journalist; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848; refugee in London 

=====第623页=====
Name Index 599 
and correspondent of the Berlin Na-
tional-Zeitung; subsequently a Nation­
al-Liberal.—88, 115 
Büchner, Ludwig (1824-1899)—Ger­
man physiologist and vulgar mate­
rialist philosopher.—72, 106, 190 
Bullier—French journalist, Bonapart-
ist.—186 
Bunsen, Christian Karl Josias, Baron von 
(1791-1860)—Prussian diplomat, writ­
er and theologian; Ambassador to 
London (1842-54).—310 
Bürgers, Heinrich (1820-1878) —Ger­
man journalist, contributor to the 
Rheinische Zeitung (1842-43); member 
of the Cologne community of the 
Communist League (1848); one of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung editors; 
subsequently a liberal.— 262 
Burgoyne, Sir John Fox, Baronet (1782-
1871)—British military engineer, gen­
eral, field marshal from 1868; mili­
tary adviser and chief of the engi­
neers in the Crimea (1854-55).—438 
Buss, Franz Joseph von (1803-1878) — 
German lawyer and politician; op­
posed Prussia's hegemony.—107 
Bute, John Stuart, Earl of (1713-1792)— 
British Torv statesman, Prime Minis 
ter (1762-63).—135, 518 
Butenev, Appollinary Petrovich (1787 
1866) — Russian diplomat, Ambas 
sador to Turkey (1830-40); envoy to 
Rome (1843-56) and to Turkey 
(1856-58).—144, 219-20 
Butler, Samuel (1612-1680)—English 
satirical poet, author of the poem 
Hudibras.—190 
Byron, George Gordon Noel, Lord (1788-
1824)—English poet.—78. 243 
C 
Cabet, Etienne (1788-1856)—French 
writer, Utopian communist, author of 
Voyage en Icarie.—  88, 89 
Cagliostro, Alessandro, Count (Giuseppe 
Balsamo) (1743-1795)—Italian im­
postor.—334 
Cairns, Hugh McCalmont (1819-1885) — 
British lawyer and statesman, Tory and later (from the 1860s) a Conser­
vative; Lord Justice of Appeal (from 
1858),  Lord Chancellor (1868, 1874-
80), M.P.—445 
Calderon de la Barca, Pedro (1600-
1681) — Spanish dramatist and poet. 
—28,  251 
Cambacérès, Jean Jacques Régis, duc de 
(1753-1824) —French lawyer and 
statesman; President of the Conven­
tion (1794-95), then consul; counsel­
lor of Napoleon I, one of the compil­
ers of the Code civil—197 
Cambridge, George William Frederick 
Charles, Duke of (1819-1904)—British 
general, commander-in-chief of the 
British army (1856-95).—432 
Cammarano, Salvatore (1801-1852) — 
Italian dramatist, author of several 
opera libretti.— 77 
Camoens (Camôes), Luis Vaz de (c. 1524-
1580)—Portuguese poet, author of 
the epic poem Os Lusiadas.—99, 190 
Canning, Charles John (1812-1862)— 
British statesman, lory and subse­
quently Peelite; Postmaster General 
(1853-55), Governor-General of India 
(1856-62).—480 
Canning. George (1770-1827) — British 
Tory statesman and diplomat, For­
eign Secretary (1807-09, 1822-27), 
Prime Minister (1827).—337, 525-26 
Capo d'lstria, Giovanni Antonio (Joannes), 
Count (1776-1831)—Greek statesman 
and diplomat; was in the Russian 
service (1809-22), Second Secretary 
of State for Foreign Affairs in Russia 
(1815-22); President of Greece (1827-
31).—143,  525-26 
Carlier, Pierre Charles Joseph (1799-
1858) — Prefect of the Paris polke 
( 1849-51  ), Bonaj»artist.—55 
Castella—Swiss radical politician, mem­
ber of the government of the Frei­
burg (Fribourg) Canton (1847-56). 
— 53 
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, Marauis of 
Londonderry, Viscount (1769-1822) — 
British Tory statesman, brutally sup­
pressed the uprising in Ireland 
(1798);  Chief Secretary for Ireland 

=====第624页=====
600 Name Index 
(1799-1801), Secretary for War and 
for the Colonies (1805-06, 1807-09), 
Foreign Secretary (1812-22).—135, 
525 
Catherine (1584-1638)—mother of 
Charles X (Gustavus) of Sweden, 
sister of Gustavus II (Adolphus) of 
Sweden.—512 
Catherine II (1729-1796)—Empress 
of Russia (1762-96).—138, 142, 
519-22 
Catherine de Médicis (1519-1589) — 
Queen of Henry II of France.— 506 
Catiline (Lucius Sergius Catilina) 
(c. 108-62 B.C.)—Roman politician 
and conspirator against the aristocra­
tic republic—59, 68, 180 
Cato,  Marcus Porcius ("the Elder") 
(234-149 B.C.)—Roman statesman 
and writer, upheld aristocratic privi­
leges.—244 
Cavaignac, Louis Eugène (1802-1857) — 
French general and politician, mod­
erate republican, took part in the 
conquest of Algeria; War Minister of 
France from May 1848, directed the 
suppression of the June uprising; 
head of the executive (June-De­
cember 1848).—55, 154 
Cavalli, Giovanni (1808-1879) — Italian 
army officer, general from 1860, 
military inventor.— 356-57 
Cavour,  Camillo Benso, conte di (1810-
1861)—Italian statesman, Prime 
Minister of Piedmont (1852-59, 1860-
61); pursued a policy of uniting Italy 
under the supremacy of the Savoy 
dynasty relying on the support of 
Napoleon III; headed the first Gov­
ernment of united Italy in  1861.— 
53, 180, 181, 195, 421, 423, 424, 
489-91 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de (1547-
1616) — Spanish writer.—190 
Charles I (1600-1649) —King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1625-49); exe­
cuted during the Revolution.— 510 
Charles I (Charles Frederick) (1700-
1739)—Duke of Holstein-Gottorp. 
—515 
Charles I Gonzaga (1580-1637) — Duke of Nevers and Mantua (1627-37).— 
510 
Charles II (1630-1685) —King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1660-85).—512 
Charles II (1661-1700)—King of Spain 
(1665-1700).—512 
Charles III (1716-1788) —King of Spain 
(1759-88), King of Naples as Charles 
VII and of Sicily as Charles IV 
(1735-59).—516 
Charles V (1500-1558)—Holy Roman 
Emperor (1519-56) and King of 
Spain as Charles I (1516-56), Prince 
of the Netherlands (1516-55) and 
King of Sicily (1516-56).—505-06,520 
Charles VI (1685-1740) —Holy Roman 
Emperor (1711-40); son of Leopold I. 
—514-17 
Charles VII (Charles Albert) (1697-
1745)—Holy Roman Emperor (1742-
45); Elector of Bavaria (1726-45).— 
517 
Charles IX (1550-1574)—King of 
France (1560-74).—509 
Charles X (1757-1836)—King of France 
(1824-30).—146, 525 
Charles X (Gustavus) (1622-1660) — 
King of Sweden (1654-60).—512 
Charles XI (1655-1697) —King of Swe­
den (1660-97).—512 
Charles XII (1682-1718) —King of Swe­
den (1697-1718).—377, 513-15 
Charles XV (1826-1872) —King of Swe­
den and Norway (1859-72).—401 
Charles Albert (1798-1849)—King of 
Piedmont (1831-49).—527 
Charles ("the Bold") (1433-1477) —Duke 
of Burgundy (1467-77).—50-52, 53-
55, 109 
Charles, Duke of Nevers—see Charles I 
Gonzaga 
Charles Emmanuele III (1701-1773) — 
King of Piedmont, Duke of Savoy 
(1730-73).—516 
Charles Emmanuele IV (1751-1819) — 
King of Piedmont, Duke of Savoy 
(1796-1802).—522 
Charles the Great (Charlemagne) (742-
814) — Frankish King from 768 and 
Emperor of Rome "(800-814).—151, 
442 

=====第625页=====
Name Index 601 
Charles (Karl Ludwig)— (1771-1847)— 
Archduke of Austria; general and 
writer on military science; fought in 
the wars against Napoleonic France 
(1792-1809).—524 
Chateaubriand, François René, vicomte de 
(1768-1848)—French writer, states­
man and diplomat; supported the 
policy of the Holy Alliance; Foreign 
Minister (1822-24).—143 
Châtillon —see Coligny, Gaspard de 
Chaves, Manoel de Silveira, Pinto de 
Fonseca, marquis de, Count of Amarante 
(1784-1830) —Portuguese general 
and politician, supporter of the abso­
lute monarchy, a leader of the revolt 
that sparked off the Miguelist wars 
(1823-34).—525 
Chelsea, Viscount—British diplomat, sec­
retary at the British Embassy in Paris 
(1859).—160 
Chenu, Adolphe (born c. 1817) — 
member of secret revolutionary 
societies in France during the July 
monarchy, agent-provocateur of the 
secret police.—73 
Cherval, Julien (real name Joseph 
Cramer)—Prussian police spy who 
had gained entry into the Communist 
League and led one of the Paris 
communities belonging to the sec­
tarian Willich-Schapper group; ac­
cused of complicity in the so-called 
Franco-German plot in Paris in Feb­
ruary 1852; escaped from prison 
with the connivance of the police; 
agent-provocateur in Switzerland 
under the name of Nugent  (1853-
54).—44,  55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 118, 
180, 261, 262, 266-67, 276, 278-80, 
283, 285, 304-05, 308-09, 311 
Chevalier, Michel (1806-1879) —French 
engineer, economist and writer, fol­
lower of Saint-Simon; championed 
Napoleon Ill's economic policy; con­
tributed to the Journal des Débats.— 
341-42 
Choiseul, Etienne François, duc de, comte 
de Stainville (1719-1785) —French 
statesman and military leader; 
Foreign Minister (1758-70), and at 
the same time War and Naval Minis­
ter (1761-66).—518 Christern, Johann Wilhelm —author of 
the anonymously published satirical 
pamphlet Doctor Eisele's und Baron 
von Beisele's Landtagsreise im April 
7847.-131,  274 
Christian IV (1577-1648)—King of Den­
mark and Norway (1588-1648).— 
510 
Christina (1626-1689)—Queen of Swe­
den (1632-44).—512 
Cialdini, Enrico, Duke of Gaeta  (1811-
1892)—Italian general; commanded 
a brigade of the Sardinian corps in 
the Crimea (1855).—489 
Cicero (Marcus Tullius Cicero) (106-43 
B.C.) — Roman statesman, orator and 
philosopher.—68,  70-71,  297, 371 
Cincinnatus (Lucius Quinctius Cincin­
nati) (c. 519-c. 438 B.C.)—Roman 
politician, patrician; a model of simp­
licity and valour.—257 
Clairville, Louis François (Nicolaie, dit) 
(1811-1879)—French dramatist and 
journalist.— 324 
Claudius, Matthias (pseudonyms Asmus 
or der Wandsbecker Bote) (1740-
1815)—German poet and writer, 
published Der Wandsbecker Bote in 
1771-75.—242 
Clement VII (Giulio de Medici) (1478-
1534)—Pope (1523-34).—491, 506 
Clossmann, A. von (d. 1871)—German 
army officer, petty-bourgeois demo­
crat; took part in the 1849 Baden-
Palatinate uprising; later emigrated 
to Switzerland.—188 
Clothilde of Savoy (1843-1911)— 
Princess of Savoy, daughter of Victor 
Emmanuel II of Sardinia, wife of 
Prince Napoleon (Plon-Plon) from 
1859.—212 
Cluss, Adolph (1825-1905)—German 
engineer, member of the Communist 
League; secretary of the Workers' 
Educational Association in Mainz 
(1848);  emigrated to the USA (1848) 
where, in the 1850s, he was active in 
the German-American workers' or­
ganisations; one of the first propa­
gators of scientific communism in 
America.— 309 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865)—English 

=====第626页=====
602 Name Tndex 
manufacturer and politician, a leader 
of the Free Traders and founder of 
the Anti-Corn Law League, M.P.— 
M1-42 
Cohnheim, Max—German democrat; 
took part in the Baden revolutionary 
movement in 1848-49; emigrated 
after the revolution.—  30, 32, 33 
Coligny, Caspard de (called Maréchal de 
Châtillon) (1584-1646) —Marshal of 
France; fought in the Thirty Years' 
War.— 510 
Colins, Jean Cuillaume César Alexandre 
Hippolyte, baron de (1783-1859) — 
French petty-bourgeois economist of 
Belgian descent.— 331 
Collet, Collet Dobson—English radical 
journalist and public figure; editor of 
The Free Press, organ of Urquhart's 
followers (1859-65).—8, 9, 124 
Constantine (Konstantin Nikolayevich) 
(1827-1892) —Russian Grand Duke, 
second son of Nicholas I, admiral 
general; head of the Naval Depart­
ment (1853-81) and commander-in-
chief of the Navy (1855-81); took 
part in preparing and carrying out 
the Peasant Reform of 1861; Viceroy 
of Poland (1862-63).—6, 8, 10, 116, 
123, 151, 317 
Cosenz, Enrico (1820-1898) —Italian 
general; took part in the national 
liberation movement in Italy; com­
manded a division during Garibaldi's 
revolutionary campaign in South 
Italy (1860); Chief of the General 
Staff (1882-93).—471, 474 
Cosimo III Medici (1642-1723) —ruler 
of Florence (1670-1723).—515 
Cowley, Henry Wellesley, Earl of (1804-
1884) — British diplomat; Ambas­
sador to Paris (1852-67).—134, 158, 
160, 172, 189, 192, 193, 194, 196,341 
Cramer—see Cherval, Julien 
Crawshay,  G.—  English journalist, sup­
porter of David Urquhart; editor of 
The Free Press (1856-60).—218 
Créquy, Charles de ßlanchefort, marquis 
de, prince de Poix, duc de Lesdiguières 
(1578-1638) —Marshal of France; 
fought in the Thirty Years' War 
(1618-48); Ambassador to Rome (1633) and to Venice (1636).—510 
Crispi, Francesco (1818-1901) — Italian 
statesman, republican; took part in 
the 1848-49 Italian revolution and in 
Garibaldi's revolutionary campaign in 
South Italy (1860); began to cham­
pion the constitutional monarchy 
after the final unification of Italy (the 
late 1860s).—421, 423 
Crispi, Rosalie (née Montmasson) — wife 
of Francesco Crispi; together with 
her husband, took part in Garibaldi's 
revolutionary campaign in South 
Italy (I860).—421 
Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658) — leader 
of the English revolution; Lord Pro­
tector of England, Scotland and Ire­
land.—490 
Cumberland—see William Augustus 
Cuvier, Georges Leopold Chrétien Frédéric 
Dagobert, baron de (1769-1832) — 
French naturalist, author of works on 
comparative anatomy, paleontology 
and the classification of animals.— 73 
Cuza (Cusa), Alexander (1820-1873)— 
Romanian politician; as Alexander 
Johann I, Hospodar (1859-66) of the 
Danubian principalities, Moldavia 
and Wallachia, which formed a 
united Romanian state in 1862; was 
removed from power as a result of a 
reactionary plot (1866) and emi­
grated.—141-42, 161-62, 164 
Cyples, William (1831-1882)—English 
journalist, politician and public fig­
ure, Urquhartist; contributor to the 
Sheffield Free Press and secretary of 
the Sheffield Foreign Committee 
(1856).—315 
Czartoryski, Adam Jerzy, Prince (1770-
1861) — Polish magnate; Foreign 
Minister of Russia (1804-06); head of 
the Polish Provisional Government 
during the 1830-31 insurrection; 
later leader of the Polish monarchist 
émigrés in Paris.— 395 
D 
Dâ-Dâ Rochaid (Dahdah)—Arabian writ­
er; translated Bonapartist pamphlets 
into his native tongue on the instruc-

=====第627页=====
Name Index 603 
tions of the Algerian authorities 
(1850s).—182, 183, 184, 187, 206, 
324, 328 
Dana, Charles Anderson (1819-1897)— 
American journalist, one of the New-
York Daily Tribune editors (1840s-
1860s);  later editor of the Sun.— 
265, 323-24 
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321)—Italian 
poet.—50, 74, 75, 100, 209, 279 
Daun,  Leopold Joseph Maria, Count von 
(1705-1766)—Austrian general; 
fought in the Seven Years' War 
(1756-63).—518 
Déak,  Ferenc (1803-1876)—Hungarian 
statesman, representative of the liber­
al Hungarian aristocracy; advocated 
compromise with the Austrian 
monarchy; Minister of Justice in the 
Batthyâny Government (March-
September 1848); member of the 
Chamber of Deputies from I860.-— 
502 
Delahodde—see Hodde, Lucien de la 
Delarageaz, Louis Henri (1807-1891)— 
Swiss radical politician, supporter of 
Fourier, editor of the Nouvelliste Vau-
dois.—198 
Demosthenes (c. 384-322 B.C.)—Athe­
nian orator and statesman.—68 
Dentu, Edouard Henry Justin (1830-
1884)—one of the owners of Dentu 
Publishers in France; Bonapartist.— 
134, 135, 137, 139, 140, 153, 161-62, 
165, 172, 174, 180, 183, 324, 325, 
327, 328, 431 
Dentzel, Bernhard Gottlieb (1773-1838)— 
German politician, member of the 
Baden Chamber; emigrated to Swit­
zerland.—41,  299 
Derby, Edward Geoffrey Smith Stanley, 
Earl of (1799-1869) —British states­
man, Tory leader; Prime Minister 
(1852,  1858-59, 1866-68).—158, 177, 
223,  339 
Dickens, Charles John Huff am (1812-
1870)—English novelist.—70, 174 
Dieffenbach, Ernst (1811-1855)—Ger­
man naturalist, professor of geology 
in Giessen (1850).—212 
Dietz, Oswald (c. 1824-1864)—German 
architect; took part in the 1848-49 revolution; refugee in London; 
member of the Central Authority of 
the Communist League; belonged to 
the sectarian Willich-Schapper group 
after the split in the League in 1850; 
subsequently fought in the American 
Civil War on the side of the Union.— 
307 
Dietzel, Gustav (1827-1864)—German 
scientist, lawyer.— 210 
Diogenes of Sinope (c. 412-c. 323 B.C.)— 
Greek Cynic philosopher.—46 
Dionysius (the Elder) (c. 432-c. 367 
B.C.)—tyrant of Syracuse (406-367). 
—371 
Disraeli, Benjamin, Earl of Beaconsfield 
(1804-1881)—British statesman and 
writer, a Tory leader; Chancellor of 
the Exchequer (1852, 1858-59, 1866-
68), Prime Minister (1868, 1874-
80).—245,  342, 344 
Dolgorukov (Dolgoruki, Dolgoroukow), 
Pyotr Vladimir  ovich,  Prince (1816-
1868)—Russian historian and writer, 
liberal; emigrated in 1859; published 
a number of opposition newspapers 
and journals (1860s); contributed to 
Herzen's Kolokoi—141, 429 
Don Carlos—see Charles HI 
Donizetti, Gaetano (1797-1848)—Italian 
composer.—77 
Douglas, Sir Howard (1776-1861)— 
British general and military writer.— 
360, 363 
Dréolle, Ernest (1829-1887)—French 
journalist and politician, Bonapart­
ist.—430 
Dronke, Ernst (1822-1891)—German 
writer; at first a "true socialist", later 
a member of the Communist League 
and an editor of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung; emigrated to England after 
the 1848-49 revolution; supported 
Marx and Engels. —41, 45 
Druey, Henri (1799-1855)—Swiss radi­
cal statesman; member of the Federal 
Council (1848-54); head of the De­
partment of Justice and Police 
(1848);  President of the Swiss Con­
federation (1850).—44, 45, 52, 53, 
54,.296,  297, 299-301 

=====第628页=====
604 Name Index 
Ducommun, Elie (1833-1906)—Swiss 
radical statesman and journalist, 
editor of the Revue de Genève from 
1855.—200 
Dufaure, Jules Armand Stanislas (1798-
1881) — French lawyer and politician, 
Orleanist; deputy to the Constituent 
Assembly (1848); Minister of the 
Interior in the Cavaignac Govern­
ment (October-December 1848); in­
spired the suppression of the Paris 
Commune.—157 
Dulon, Rudolph (1807-1870)—German 
pastor; emigrated to the USA in 
1853.—87 
Dumont (Du Mont), Joseph (1811-1861) 
—German journalist, moderate liber­
al; publisher of the Kölnische Zeitung 
from 1831; changed his name to Del 
Monte (Delmonte).—5, 6, 242 
Dunne—British army officer; took part 
in Garibaldi's revolutionary campaign 
in South Italy (I860).—451 
Duns Scotus, John (c. 1265-1308)— 
Scottish scholastic theologian.—251, 
255 
Dupin, André Marie Jean Jacques  (1783-
1865)—French lawyer and politician, 
Orleanist, deputy to the Constituent 
Assembly (1848-49) and President of 
the Legislative Assembly (1849-51); 
subsequently a Bonapartist.—228 
Dupont, Emile (b. 1821) — French public 
figure, member of the co-operative 
society in Valenciennes; editor of a 
number of journals, including La 
voix du proscrit; author of articles on 
the position of the miners.— 36 
Dusek, Frantisek (1797-1873)—Hun­
garian statesman of Bohemian descent; 
Minister of Finance in the Szemere 
Government during the 1848-49 re­
volution.—223 
E 
Éher, Nândor (1825-1885)—Hungarian 
journalist; took part in the 1848-49 
revolutionary movement and in 
Garibaldi's revolutionary campaign in 
South Italy (I860).—473 Eichhoff,  Karl Wilhelm (1833-1895)— 
German socialist journalist; in the 
late 1850s exposed Stieber as a police 
spy in the press and was brought to 
trial for this; refugee in London 
(1861-66); member of the First Inter­
national from 1868, and one of its 
first historians; member of the Ger­
man Social-Democratic Workers' 
Party from 1869.—65 
Eisenmann, Johann Gottfried (1795-
1867)—German physician and writ­
er; deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Centre, later Left wing) in 
1848-49.—103 
Eleanor of Austria (1498-1558)—sister 
of Charles V, the Holy Roman Em­
peror; wife of Manuel I of Portugal 
and from 1530, of Francis I of 
France.—506 
Eleonora of Portugal—see Eleanor of 
Austria 
Elizabeth I (1533-1603)—Queen of Eng­
land (1558-1603).—506, 509 
Elizabeth of Parma—see Farnese, Eliza­
beth 
Elizabeth of Valois (1545-1568)—daugh­
ter of Henry II of France; wife of Phil­
ip II of Spain from 1559.—506 
Elizabeth (Elizaveta Petrovna) (1709-
1761)—Empress of Russia  (1741-
61).—517,  518 
Eisner, Karl Friedrich Moritz (1809-
1894)—Silesian radical journalist; dep­
uty to the Prussian National Assem­
bly (Left wing) in 1848; an editor of 
the Neue Oder Zeitung in the 1850s.— 
263 
Emmermann, Karl—chief forester from 
the Rhine Province; commanded an 
infantry unit of the Baden-Palatinate 
insurgent army in 1849; emigrated to 
Switzerland.—76, 77 
Enfantin, Barthélémy Prosper (1796-
1864)—French Utopian socialist, a 
disciple of Saint-Simon; held leading 
posts in a number of capitalist enter­
prises from the mid-1840s.—341 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895).—6, 33, 
40, 79, 81, 84-86, 88-90, 96-97, 101, 

=====第629页=====
Name Index 605 
105, 114, 119, 131, 241, 262, 285, 
286, 306, 348, 385 
Engländer, Sigmund (1828-1902)— 
Austrian journalist; emigrated to Eng­
land in 1848; secret police agent.— 
277 
Eötvös, Jôzsej, Baron (1813-1871) — 
Hungarian writer and statesman, 
representative of the liberal aristocra­
cy; Minister of Religious Worship 
and Public Education in the Bat-
thyâny Government (March-
September 1848).—502 
Ephialtes—Greek, native of Melos; 
showed the Persian troops a passage 
through the mountains (480 B.C.), 
thus enabling them to attack the 
troops of the Spartan King Leonidas 
from the rear.—204 
Ermani—German publisher and book­
seller in London.—129, 319 
Ernest Augustus (1771-1851)—King of 
Hanover (1837-51).—398, 527 
Ernst II (1818-1893)—Duke of Saxony, 
Coburg and Gotha (1844-93).—398 
Erthal, Friedrich Karl Joseph, Baron of 
(1719-1802)—Elector and Bishop of 
Mayence (1774).—522 
Estaing, Jean Baptiste Charles Henri Hec­
tor, comte d' (1729-1794) — French 
admiral; commanded the French 
squadron (1778) in the American 
War of Independence (1775-83).— 
520 
D'Ester, Karl Ludwig Johann  (1811-
1859)—German physician; socialist 
and democrat; member of the Co­
logne community of the Communist 
League; deputy to the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing) in 1848; 
member of the Central Committee of 
German Democrats from October 
1848;  prominent figure in the 1849 
Baden-Palatinate uprising; emigrated 
to Switzerland.—101, 237 
F 
Fallmerayer, Jakob Philipp (1790-1861) — 
German historian and traveller.—114 
Farini, Luigi Carlo (1812-1866)— Italian historian and statesman; 
championed the unification of Italy 
under the Savoy dynasty; Minister of 
Public Education (1851-52); ruler of 
Modena (1859); Sardinian Minister 
of the Interior (1860); head of the 
Italian Government (1862-63).—489 
Farnese, Elizabeth (1692-1766)—Queen 
of Spain and Princess of Parma; wife 
of Philip V of Spain.—515 
Faucher, Julius (Jules) (1820-1878)— 
German writer, Young Hegelian; ad­
vocate of free trade; refugee in 
England from 1850 till 1861, when 
he returned to Germany; contributor 
to the Morning Star.—117-19 
Favre, Jules Gabriel Claude (1809-
1880) — French lawyer and politician; 
a leader of the republican bourgeois 
opposition from the late 1850s; 
Foreign Minister (1870-71), together 
with Thiers headed the struggle 
against the Paris Commune; among 
others, inspired the struggle against 
the First International.—430, 455 
Fazy, Jean Jacques (James) (1794-1878)— 
Swiss journalist and statesman, radi­
cal; head of government of the Gene­
va Canton (1846-53, 1855-61); pur­
sued a pro-Bonapartist policy.—31, 
53, 74, 113, 116, 187, 189, 192-97, 
198-203,  206, 214, 228-35, 260, 296, 
298, 327 
Ferdinand,  Prince of Guastalla—see Fer­
rante II 
Ferdinand I (1503-1564)—Holy Roman 
Emperor (1556-64); brother of 
Charles V.—506-09 
Ferdinand I (1751-1825)—King of the 
Two Sicilies (1816-25); King of 
Naples as Ferdinand IV (1759-1825, 
with intervals); King of Sicily as 
Ferdinand III (1759-1825).—524, 
525 
Ferdinand II (1578-1637) —Holy Ro­
man Emperor (1619-37).—458, 510 
Ferdinand III (1608-1657)—Holy Ro­
man Emperor (1637-57); Arch­
duke of Austria.—  510,  511 
Ferdinand VII (1784-1833)—King of 
Spain (1808, 1814-33).—143, 337, 
525, 526 

=====第630页=====
606 Name Index 
Ferdinand (Charles Joseph) of Fste  (1781-
1850) — Archduke of Austria; com­
manded troops in Bavaria and Po­
land during the wars against 
Napoleonic France.— 524 
Ferdinand Philippe Louis Charles Henri, 
duc d'Orléans (1810-1842)—eldest 
son of Louis Philippe of France; took 
part in the conquest of Algeria 
(1835-40).—355 
Ferdinando Carlo, Gonzaga di (1652-
1708) —Duke of Mantua (1665-
1707),  the last of the Gonzaga 
family.— 513 
Ferdinando Maria Alberto (1822-1855) — 
Duke of Genoa, brother of Victor 
Emmanuel II of Sardinia; fought in 
the war against Austria (1848-49); 
elected King of Sicily (1848) but 
refused to accept the crown.— 527 
Ferrante II (1563-1630) — Prince of 
Guastalla (1621-30) from the Gon­
zaga family; claimed the Duchy of 
Mantua (1629) after the death of 
Vincenzo II Gonzaga.— 510 
Fialin—see Persigny, Jean Gilbert 
Fink—German refugee in Geneva.— 54 
Fischart, Johann (c. 1545-1590)— 
German satirist.—28, 33, 70,  1 18, 
252, 254 
Fischel, Eduard (1826-1863)—German 
writer, progressist; assessor of the 
Berlin Municipal Court from 1858; 
editor of the Berlin Urquhartist jour­
nal Das Neue Portfolio (1859-60); 
sharply criticised the foreign policy 
pursued by Palmerston and Napo­
leon III.—246 
Fleury, André Hercule de (1653-1743) — 
French cardinal and statesman; be­
came First Minister of Louis XV in 
1726.—517 
Fleury, Charles (real name Carl Friedrich 
August Krause) (b. 1824)—London 
merchant, Prussian spy and police 
agent.—55,  66, 305, 306-12 
Flocon, Ferdinand (1800-1866) — French 
democratic politician and journalist, 
an editor of La Réforme; member of 
the Provisional Government (1848).— 
263, 322 
Flores —Neapolitan general; com­manded troops in Apulia (1860).— 
472 
Flotte (Deflotte), Paul Louis François René 
de (1817-1860) —French naval of­
ficer, democrat and socialist, Blan-
quist; took part in the 1848 revolu­
tion in France; deputy to the Legisla­
tive Assembly (1850-51); took part in 
Garibaldi's revolutionary campaign in 
South Italy (I860).—474, 478 
Foscolo, Ugo (1778-1827)—Italian poet. 
— 203 
Fould,  Achille (1800-1867)—French 
banker and politician, Orleanist, sub­
sequently Bonapartist; Minister of 
Finance (1849-52, 1861-67), Minister 
of the Imperial Court (1852-60).— 
330, 331, 344 
Fourier, François Marie Charles (1772-
1837) — French Utopian socialist.— 
38, 88 
Fox, Charles James  ( 1749-1806) — British 
statesman, Whig leader; Foreign Sec­
retary (1782, 1783, 1806).—523 
Francesco II Sforza (1495-1535)  — Duke 
of Milan.— 505 
Francis I (1494-1547) — King of France 
(1515-47).—173,  174 
Francis I (1708-1765) —Holy Roman 
Emperor (1745-65); Duke of Lor­
raine as Francis III (1729-36); Grand 
Duke of Tuscany (1737-65).—516, 
517 
Francis I (1768-1835)—Emperor of 
Austria (1804-35); Holy Roman Em­
peror as Francis II (1792-1806).— 
525 
Francis I (1777-1830) —King of the 
Two Sicilies (1816-25).—525 
Francis II (1544-1560)—King of 
France (1559-60).—471, 474, 488, 506 
Francis II (1836-1894)—King of 
Naples and Sicily (1859-60).—372, 
392, 421, 458, 459, 471, 474, 488 
Francis Joseph I (1830-1916) — Emperor 
of Austria (1848-1916), King of Hun­
gary (1848-49, 1849-1916).—108, 
137, 171-173, 224, 332, 345, 399, 
431, 457-60, 493, 494, 499, 501 
Franchini, Viktor Antonovich (1820-
1892) — Russian army officer, later 
general; fought in the Crimean war 

=====第631页=====
Name Index 607 
(1853-56) and the war in the 
Caucasus (1877).—221 
Frank (Franck), Gustav —Austrian pet­
ty-bourgeois democrat; refugee in 
London in the 1850s.— 88 
Franklin, Benjamin (1706-1790) — Ame­
rican physicist, economist and poli­
tician; took part in the American 
War of Independence.— 520 
Frederick I (1657-1713) —King of Prus­
sia 0 701-13); Elector of Branden­
burg as Frederick III from 1688.— 
514" 
Frederick I (1754-1816) —Duke of 
Württemberg; King of Württemberg 
(1805-16).—522 
Frederick II ("The Great") (1712-1786) — 
King of Prussia (1740-1786).—69, 
135, 517-19 
Frederick V (1596-1632)—Elector of 
the Palatine (1610-23).—510 
Frederick VII (1808-1863) —King of 
Denmark (1848-63).—402 
Frederick Augustus I ("the Just") (1750-
1827)—Elector of Saxony as Fred­
erick Augustus III (1763-1806); 
King of Saxony (1806-27).—524 
Frederick Augustus II (1797-1854)— 
King of Saxony (1836-54).—392, 527 
Frederick William (1620-1688) —Elector 
of Brandenburg (1640-88).—254, 
512 
Frederick William I (1688-1740) —King 
of Prussia (1713-1740).—377, 379, 
517 
Frederick William III (1770-1840)— 
King of Prussia (1797-1840).—377 
Frederick William IV (1795-1861) — 
King of Prussia (1840-61).—257, 347, 
367, 373, 496 
Fregoso, Cesare (d. 1541) — French dip­
lomat from an ancient Genoese 
family: assassinated by order of 
Charles  V. —506 
Freiligrath, Ferdinand (1810-1876) — 
German romantic and later revolu­
tionary poet, member of the Com­
munist League; an editor of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49).—8, 115 
Frey-Hérosé (Frei-Herose), Friedrich 
(1801-1873) —Swiss military leader 
and politician, liberal, member of the Federal Council (1848); deputy to the 
National Council and later President 
of the Confederation (1854, I860).— 
176, 194, 198 
Friedrich I Wilhelm Ludwig (1826-
1907) —Grand Duke of Baden (1856-
1907).—398 
Friedrich Wilhelm I (1802-1875) — 
Elector of Hesse (1847-75).—379 
Frimont, Johann Maria Philipp, Count of 
Palota, Prince of Antrodocco (1759-
1831) — Austrian general; com­
manded the Austrian expeditionary 
corps that suppressed the 1820-21 
Neapolitan revolution.— 525 
Fröbel, Julius (1805-1893) —German 
radical writer and publisher of pro­
gressive literature; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848; emigrated to America 
in 1849; returned to Germany in 
1857.—116, 130 
G 
Gagern, Heinrich Wilhelm August, Baron 
von (1799-1880)—German politician, 
moderate liberal; deputy to and Pres­
ident of the Frankfurt National As­
sembly (Right Centre); Prime Minis­
ter (December 1848-March 1849); a 
leader of the Gotha Party after May 
1849.—100, 109, 154 
Galeer, Albert Frederic Jean (1816-
1851) — Swiss teacher and man of 
letters, democrat; took part in the 
war against the Sonderbund (1847) 
and in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate 
uprising; member of the Grand 
Council of Geneva; at first supported 
Fazy and later headed the opposi­
tion.—31,  231-33 
Galeer, Oskar—student, brother of the 
above.—31 
Garibaldi, Giuseppe (1807-1882) —Ita­
lian revolutionary, democrat; orga­
nised the defence of the Roman Re­
public (April-June 1849); headed the 
Italian people's struggle for nation­
al independence and the unification 
of the country (the 1850s-
60s).—224, 381, 382,  386-91,  421-

=====第632页=====
608 Name Index 
24, 449-52, 458, 460, 464, 471-78, 
490-91 
Gebert, August—Mecklenburg joiner; 
member of the Communist League in 
Switzerland and later in London; af­
ter the split in 1850 belonged to the 
sectarian Willich-Schapper group. 
—52 
George I (1660-1727)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1714-27), Elec­
tor of Hanover (1698-1714).—515 
George III (1738-1820)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1760-1820).— 
411 
George V (1819-1878) —King of Hano­
ver (1851-66).—398 
Gerlach, Ernst Ludwig von (1795-
1877)—Prussian lawyer, reactionary 
politician, one of the founders of the 
Neue Preussische Zeitung. —247 
Gibson, Thomas Milner (1806-1884)— 
British politician and statesman, Free 
Trader, President of the Board of 
Trade (1859-65, 1865-66).—409, 444 
Gipperich, Joseph—German tailor; mem­
ber of a Paris community of the Com­
munist League supporting the sec­
tarian Willich-Schapper group after 
the split in the League in 1850; 
became a secret agent of the Prussian 
police; one of the accused at the trial 
of the so-called Franco-German plot 
in Paris in February 1852; escaped 
from prison with* the aid of the 
police; emigrated to England in 
1852.—308 
Girardin, Delphine de (1804-1855)— 
French authoress; wife of Emile de 
Girardin.— 37 
Girardin, Emile de (1806-1881) — 
French journalist and politician; 
editor of La Presse (the 1830s-60s, 
with intervals); moderate republican, 
later Bonapartist.— 207 
Giusti, Giuseppe (1809-1850) —Italian 
satirical poet.— 203 
Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-1898) — 
British statesman, Tory and later 
Peelite, leader of the Liberal Party in 
the latter half of the century; Chan­
cellor of the Exchequer (1852-55, 
1859-66), Prime Minister (1868-74, 1880-85,  1886, 1892-94).—336, 341, 
350, 351, 353, 444 
Gneisenau, August Wilhelm Anton Neith-
ardt von (1760-1831)—Prussian field 
marshal-general; one of the organis­
ers of the liberation struggle against 
Napoleonic rule.—146 
Goegg, Amand (1820-1897)—German 
journalist, democrat; member of the 
Baden Provisional Government 
(1849);  emigrated after the revolu­
tion; member of the First Interna­
tional; joined the German Social-
Democrats in the 1870s.—98-99, 313 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-
1832)—German  poet.—71,  74, 91, 
183, 251 
Goldheim —Prussian police officer; a 
secret agent of the Prussian police in 
London in the early 1850s.—58, 
310-12 
Golitsin, Alexander Mikhailovich, Prince 
(1718-1783)—Russian diplomat, Am­
bassador to London (1755-62), Vice-
Chancellor (1762-75).—135, 518 
Goluchowski, Agenor, Count (1812-
1875)—Polish aristocrat, Austrian 
conservative statesman; Viceroy of 
Galicia (1849-59, 1866-67, 1871-75); 
Austrian Minister of the Interior 
(1859-60).—501 
Gorchakoff  ( Gorchakov  ), A lexander  Mikhai­
lovich, Prince (1788-1883)—Rus­
sian statesman and diplomat, Ambas­
sador to Vienna (1854-56), For­
eign Minister (1856-82), State Chan­
cellor (1867-82).—368, 375, 429, 
491 
Görgey (Görgei), Arthur (1818-1916) — 
military leader of the 1848-49 revolu­
tion in Hungary; commander-in-chief 
of the Hungarian army (April-June 
1849);  voiced the conservative senti­
ments of the nobility; advocated ag­
reement with the Habsburgs and, 
later, capitulation; War Minister from 
May 1849.—148, 214, 215, 226-27 
Gottfried von Strassburg (late 12th-early 
13th cent.) — German poet, author of 
Tristan und Isolde.—156 
Götze —Prussian lawyer; Vice-President 

=====第633页=====
Name Index 609 
of the Prussian High Court in the 
1850s.—270 
Grabbe, Pavel Khristoforovich, Count 
(1789-1875)—Russian military leader 
and statesman; took part in suppres­
sing the Polish insurrection of 1830-
31 and in the Tsarist troops' inter­
vention against revolutionary Hun­
gary in 1849.—227 
Grandguillot, Alcide Pierre (1829-
1891)—French journalist, Bonapart-
ist; editor-in-chief of Le Constitution­
nel from 1859; editor-in-chief of Le 
Pays (1863-65).—176, 186, 324, 325 
Granier de Cassagnac, Bernard Adolphe 
(1806-1880)—French journalist, Or-
leanist before the 1848 revolution, 
later Bonapartist; deputy to the 
Corps Législatif (1852-70); contrib­
uted to Le Constitutionnel— 36, 186, 
211 
Granville, George Leveson-Gower, Earl of 
(1815-1891)—British statesman, Whig 
and later Liberal, Foreign Secre­
tary (1851-52, 1870-74, 1880-85), 
President of the Council (1852-54, 
1855-58,  1859-65), Secretary of State 
for the Colonies (1868-70, 1886).— 
339 
Grégoire {Georgi Petrovich Postnikov) 
(1784-1860)—Russian theologian, 
Metropolitan of St. Petersburg and 
Novgorod from 1855.—441 
Gregory XVI (Bartolommeo Alberto, 
otherwise Mauro Cappellari) (1765-
1846)—Pope (1831-46).—144 
Greif —Prussian police officer; one of 
the chiefs of the Prussian secret 
service in London in the early 
1850s.—55,  57, 305, 306-10 
Greiner, Theodor Ludwig —German law­
yer, petty-bourgeois democrat; mem­
ber of the Palatinate revolutionary 
Provisional Government (1849); emig­
rated first to Switzerland and then 
to the USA after the defeat of the 
revolution.— 100-01,110 
Grey, Sir Henry George, Earl of from 
1845 (1802-1894)—British statesman, 
Whig; Secretary at War (1835-39), 
Colonial Secretary (1846-52).—194, 
335-40 Griscelli, Jacques François —Corsi-
can-born Bonapartist police agent.— 
421, 422, 424, 490 
Grün,  Karl (1817-1887)—German writ­
er, member of the Prussian National 
Assembly during the 1848-49 revolu­
tion.—199 
Grunich—German democrat; refugee 
in London in the early 1850s.—33 
Guébriant, Jean Baptiste Budes, comte de 
(1602-1643)—Marshal of France; 
fought in the Thirty Years' War 
(1618-48).—510 
Guise, Duke of—see Henry II of Lorraine 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874) — French historian and states­
man; virtually directed France's 
foreign and domestic policy from 
1840 to the February 1848 revolu­
tion; expressed the interests of the 
financial bourgeoisie.—36, 79, 263 
Gumpert, Eduard (d. 1893)—German 
physician resident in Manchester, a 
friend of Marx and Engels. —119 
Gustav(us) I (Gustavus Vasa) (1496-
1560)—King of Sweden (1523-60).— 
505 
Gustav(us) II (Adolphus) (1594-1632)— 
King of Sweden (1611-32).—509, 
510, 511 
Guthschmidt—Prussian judicial official. 
—283,  290, 291 
Guyon, Richard Debaufre (1803-1856)— 
British army officer, general of the 
Hungarian revolutionary army; served 
in the Turkish army under the name 
of Khourschid Pasha after the defeat 
of the Hungarian revolution; com­
manded Turkish troops in the 
Caucasus (1853).—214 
H 
Habsburgs (or Hapsburgs)—dynasty of 
emperors of the Holy Roman Empire 
(1273-1806, intermittently), of Aus­
tria (from 1804) and of Austria-
Hungary (1867-1918).—108,149,254, 
274, 371, 374, 376, 379-80, 487, 494, 
506, 509, 512, 517, 524, 527 
Hackländer, Friedrich Wilhelm von 
(1816-1877)—German writer.—183 

=====第634页=====
610 Name Index 
Hadher Barbarossa (Khair-ed-Deen) (c. 
1483-1546)—ruler of Algeria (1519-
46).—506 
Hafiz Shams ud-din Mohammed (c. 1300-
c. 1389)—Persian poet of Tajik de­
scent.—44 
Hafner, Leopold (born c. 1820)— 
Austrian journalist, petty-bourgeois 
democrat; took part in the 1848-49 
revolution in Germany; emigrated to 
France.—87, 88, 99, 188 
Hagen, Karl (1810-1868)—German his­
torian and politician; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (1848-
49); professor in Berne from 1855.— 
100, 108 
Hall, Carl Christian (1812-1888)— 
Danish politician; Foreign Minister.— 
401 
Hampden, John (1595-1643)—pro­
minent figure in the English rev­
olution, a leader of the parliamen­
tary opposition to the absolutist re­
gime.—157 
Hardenberg, Karl August von (1750-
1822)—Prussian statesman and dip­
lomat, Foreign Minister (1804-06, 
1807),  Chancellor of State (1810-22); 
champion of moderate reforms; sup­
ported the policy of the Holy Al­
liance after 1815.—368, 525 
Harney, George Julian (1817-1897)— 
prominent figure in the English 
labour movement, a leader of the 
Left-wing Chartists, editor of The 
Northern Star and of the Democratic 
Review; was on friendly terms with 
Marx and Engels. — 86 
Haro —see Mendes de Haro 
Harris, Edward Alfred John (1808-
1888) — British army officer and dip­
lomat, chargé d'affaires in Berne 
(1858-67).—176, 177, 179, 192-97 
Hartmann von Aue (c. Il70-c. 1210)— 
German poet.—184 
Hartmann, Moritz (1821-1872)—Aus­
trian writer; a "true socialist" in the 
mid-1840s; member of the Frank­
furt National Assembly (extreme 
Left) during the 1848-49 revolu­
tion.—184 
Hatzfeldt zu Trachenberg-Schönstein, Max­imilian Friedrich Karl Franz, Count of 
(1813-1859)—Prussian diplomat, en­
voy to Paris from 1849; took part in 
the Paris Peace Congress in 1856. 
—57 
Haug, Ernst—Austrian army officer, 
democrat; took part in the 1848-49 
revolution in Italy; emigrated to Eng­
land after the revolution.—87 
Haupt, Hermann Wilhelm (born 
c. 1833)—German shop assistant, 
member of the Communist League; 
turned informer during the Cologne 
Communist trial, was released by the 
police during investigation and fled to 
Brazil.—67, 309 
Havas, August (1814-1889)—one of the 
proprietors of Agence Havas, son of 
Charles Havas.—277 
Havas, Charles (1785-1858)—French 
journalist, founder of the French 
information agency Agence Havas.— 
277 
Hawke, Edward Hawke, Baron (1705-
1781)—British admiral; fought in 
the war of the Austrian Succession 
(1740-48) and in the Seven Years' 
War (1756-63); M. P., First Lord of 
the Admiralty (1765-71).—517 
Haxthausen, August Franz Maria, Baron 
von (1792-1866)—Prussian official 
and economist.—146 
Haynau, Julius Jakob, Baron von (1786-
1853)—Austrian field marshal; bru­
tally suppressed the 1848-49 rev­
olutionary movement in Italy and 
Hungary.—228 
Hecker, Friedrich Karl Franz  (1811-
1881)—German democrat, a leader 
of the Baden republican uprising in 
April 1848; after its defeat, emig­
rated to Switzerland and later to the 
USA where he fought in the Civil 
War on the side of the Union.—40, 
254 
Heckscher, Martin—German physician 
resident in Manchester, Engels' doc­
tor; helped Das Volk with money.— 
119 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher.—6 

=====第635页=====
Name Index 611 
Heiden, Loghin Petrovich (Lodewyk Sigis-
mund Vincent Gustaaf), Count of 
(1772-1850)—admiral of the Russian 
fleet; commanded a squadron in the 
battle of Navarino (1827); command­
er-in-chief of the Russian fleet in 
the Mediterranean during the Russo-
Turkish war of 1828-29.—143 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-185R) — German 
revolutionary poet.—  69, 109, 114, 
181, 235, 280 
Hetnzen, Karl Peter (1809-1880) — 
German journalist, radical; took part 
in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate upris­
ing; contributed to the Leipziger  All­
gemeine Zeitung; emigrated to Swit­
zerland, later to England and, in the 
autumn of 1850, to the USA.—232 
Heise, Heinrich (d. 1860) — German 
journalist, democrat; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution; an editor of the 
newspaper Hornisse (1848-50); later 
emigrated to England.— 118 
Heliogabalus (Elagabalus) (204-222)— 
Roman Emperor (218-22) whose 
name became a symbol of extrava­
gance, despotism and debauchery.— 
49, 189 
Henriette Marie of France (1609-1669) — 
Queen of Charles I of Great Britain 
and Ireland (1625-49), daughter of 
Henry IV of France.— 510 
Henry, Sir Thomas (1807-1876)—Eng­
lish judge.—130, 319, 320 
Henry II (1519-1559) —King of France 
(1547-59).—506 
Henry II of Lorraine, 3rd Duke of Guise 
(1614-1664) — one of the Fronde 
leaders.— 35 
Henry III (1551-1589) —King of 
France (1574-89).—509 
Henry IV (1553-1610) —King of France 
from 1589 and of Navarre from 
1572.—509 
Henry VIII (1491-1547) —King of Eng­
land (1509-47).—505-06 
Herbert, Sidney, Baron of Lea (1810-
1861) — British statesman, at first 
Tory and later Peelite; Secretary of 
the Admiralty (1841-45), Secretary at 
War (1845-46, 1852-55), Secretary for War (1859-60).—363, 404, 435, 
436 
Hermann, K.—German lawyer; Karl 
Vogt's defence counsel in his lawsuit 
against the Allgemei7ie Zeitung in 
1859.—28,  33, 125, 240 
Herzen, Alexander Ivanovich (1812-
1870) — Russian revolutionary demo­
crat, materialist philosopher and writ­
er; emigrated in 1847.— 232 
Hess, Heinrich Hermann  Josef,  Baron von 
(1788-1870) —Austrian general, later 
field marshal; took part in suppres­
sing the 1848-49 revolution in Italy; 
commanded the Austrian army in the 
Austro-Italo-French war of 1859 
after the defeat at Magenta (June-
July 1859).—157 
Hildburghausen, Josef Maria Friedrich 
Wilhelm, Prince von Sachsen (1702-
1787) — German field marshal.— 518 
Hillgärtner, Georg —German journalist 
and lawyer, petty-bourgeois democrat; 
sentenced to death for his participa­
tion in the 1848-49 revolution; emig­
rated to the USA.— 315 
Hinckeldey, Karl Ludwig Friedrich von 
( 1805-1856)—Prussian government 
official, Chief Commissioner of Ber­
lin police from 1848; Chief of the 
police department in the Ministry of 
the Interior from 1853.—64, 67, 87, 
309, 369 
Hirsch, Wilhelm —commercial clerk 
from Hamburg; Prussian police 
agent in London in the early 
1850s.—219, 305-12 
Hodde, Lucien de la (Delahodde, 
pseudonym Duprez) (1808-1865) — 
French writer, participant in secret 
revolutionary societies during the 
Restoration and July monarchy, police 
agent.—56, 73, 307 
Hoffmann—French journalist, Bona-
partist.—211 
Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, Karl Anton, 
Prince von (1811-1885) — Prussian 
general, Prime Minister (1858-62).— 
237, 247, 367, 393, 397 
Hohenzollerns—dynasty of Brandenburg 
electors (1415-1701), Prussian kings 
(1701-1918) and German emperors 

=====第636页=====
612 Name Index 
(1871-1918).—191,  254, 274, 367, 
376, 378, 379, 494-96 
Hollinger, Fidelio—owner of a print-
shop in London which printed Das 
Volk.— 6-11,  17, 119, 122-26,  128-31, 
241, 275, 283, 319-20 
Holstein-Gottorp—see Charles I (Charles 
Frederick) 
Hope, Sir James (1808-1881)—British 
admiral; commanded British ex­
peditionary troops in China (1859-
60).—340 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8 
B. C.)—Roman poet.—26, 136, 214, 
247 
Hörfei, Gustav —Austrian petty-bour­
geois democrat; emigrated to Par­
is in 1850 and became an agent of the 
French police.—87, 88, 89 
Horner, Leonard (1785-1864)—English 
geologist and public figure; factory 
inspector (1833-59), upheld the 
workers' interests.—410 
Horsman, Edward (1807-1876)—British 
politician, Liberal M. P., Chief Secre­
tary for Ireland (1855-57).—158, 432 
Hsien Feng (c. 1831-1861)—Emperor 
of China (1851-61).—339 
Hudson, Sir James (1810-1885)—British 
diplomat, envoy to Tourin  (1851-
63).—53,  195-96 
Hugo,  Victor Marie (1802-1885)— 
French writer, republican; deputy to 
the Constituent and Legislative As­
semblies (1848-51); emigrated to 
Jersey after the coup d'état of De­
cember 2, 1851, deported by the 
local authorities at the end of 1855.— 
156, 162-63, 189-90, 327 
Humboldt, Alexander, Baron von (1769-
1859)—German naturalist, traveller 
and statesman.—41, 167, 177, 183, 
369 
Huntel—chief of the Bremen police.— 
305 
I 
Ibrahim Pasha (1789-1848)—Egyptian 
general and statesman, commander-
in-chief of the Egyptian army (1816-
41); took part in the struggle against the Greek national liberation uprising 
(1824-27) and in the wars waged by 
Egypt against Turkey (1831-33, 
1839-41); co-ruler with his father, 
Mohammed Ali, from 1844; actual 
ruler of Egypt from 1847; appointed 
Pasha of Egypt in 1848.—526 
Imandt, Peter— German teacher, demo­
crat; took part in the 1848-49 revolu­
tion; emigrated first to Switzerland 
and, in 1852, to London; member of 
the Communist League; supporter of 
Marx and Engels.— 39, 43, 44, 296, 
301 
Imbert, Jacques (1793-1851)—French 
journalist, democrat and socialist; 
took part in the 1834 uprising of the 
Lyons weavers; refugee in Belgium 
in the 1840s; Vice-President of the 
Brussels Democratic Association.— 
264 
Ivan III (1440-1505)—Grand Duke of 
Muscovy (1462-1505).—189 
J 
Jacoby, Abraham (1830-1919)—German 
physician, member of the Communist 
League, one of the accused at the 
Cologne Communist trial (1852); sub­
sequently emigrated to the USA.— 
301, 313 
Jagiéllonowie (Jagelion) (1386-1572) — 
dynasty of Polish kings (1386-1572) 
and of grand dukes of Lithuania 
(1377-1572).—509 
Jahn,  Friedrich Ludwig (1778-1852) — 
German writer, organised the sports 
movement (Turn- und Sportbe­
wegung) in Germany; prominent 
in the German people's liberation 
struggle against Napoleon's rule; 
nationalist.— 134 
James I Stuart (1566-1625)—King of 
Great Britain and Ireland  (1603-
25).—509 
James II (1633-1701)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1685-88).—73, 
514 
James Stuart, so-called James III (1688-
1766)—son of James II; pretender to 
the British throne.— 514 

=====第637页=====
Name Index 613 
Jekelfalussy—Hungarian clergyman; 
Bishop  of Zips (1848-49).—328 
Jellachich (Jellacic),  Josef,  Count  (1801-
1859)—Austrian general,  Ban of 
Croatia, Dalmatia  and  Slavonia; took 
part in suppressing  the  1848-49  re­
volution  in Hungary  and  Austria.— 
82 
John George (Johann Georg)  I (1585-
1656)—Elector  of Saxe (1611-56.)— 
510 
John (Johann) (1782-1859)—Archduke 
of Austria, field marshal; fought  in 
the wars against Napoleonic France; 
commanded  one of the  Austrian  ar­
mies (1809); Imperial Regent  of Ger­
many (June 1848-December 1849). 
—58,  107-09, 253-54,  524 
John (Johann) Nepomuk Maria Joseph 
(1801-1873)—King  of Saxony (1854-
73).—398 
John VI (1769-1826)—King  of Portu­
gal (1816-26)  and  Emperor  of Brazil 
(1807-25).—525,  526 
Joinville, François Ferdinand Philippe 
Louis Marie,  duc d'Orléans, prince  de 
(1818-1900)—son  of Louis Philippe; 
took part  in the  conquest  of Algeria 
(the 1840s); emigrated  to England 
after the  victory  of the  February 
1848 revolution; fought  in the 
American Civil  War on the  side  of 
the Union (1861-62).—434 
Jones, Ernest Charles (1819-1869)— 
prominent figure  in the  English 
labour movement, proletarian poet 
and journalist, leader  of the  Left-
wing Chartists, editor  of Notes  to the 
People  and The  People's Paper, friend 
of Marx  and  Engels. —116, 264-65, 
322 
Joseph  I (1678-1711)—King  of Hun­
gary (1687-1711), Holy Roman  Em­
peror (1705-11).—332,  520 
Joseph  II (1741-1790)—co-regent  of his 
mother Maria Theresa (1765-80), 
Holy Roman Emperor (1765-90).— 
149, 519, 520 
Joseph Ferdinand (1692-1699)—heir  to 
the throne  of the  Electorate  of 
Bavaria  and  proposed heir  to the 
Spanish throne.— 513 Jottrand,  Lucien Leopold (1804-1877)— 
Belgian lawyer  and  writer, democrat; 
President  of the  Brussels Democratic 
Association (1847).—264, 321-22 
Jour dan, Louis (1810-1881)—French 
journalist, Saint-Simonist  and  later 
Bonapartist; editor  of the  newspaper 
Le Siècle.— 186, 206, 211 
Jung, Georg Gottlob (1814-1886) — 
German writer, Young Hegelian,  one 
of the  responsible publishers  of the 
Rheinische Zeitung, democrat; deputy 
to the  Prussian National Assembly 
(Left wing)  in 1848.—255 
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis) 
(c. 60-140) — Roman satirical poet.— 
44, 273 
K 
Kalinikos—Patriarch  of  Constantino­
ple.—441 
Kamm,  Friedrich  (d.  1867)—German 
artisan, petty-bourgeois democrat; 
took part  in the 1849  Baden-
Palatinate uprising; emigrated  to 
Switzerland after  its defeat; member 
of the  German Workers' Association 
in Geneva; emigrated  to the USA 
(1852).—39,  44, 298 
Kanitz  und Dallwitz, Karl, Baron  von 
(b. 1812)—Prussian diplomat, envoy 
to Rome (1859-63).—488 
Kannegiesser, Karl Friedrich Ludwig 
(1781-1861)—German poet  and 
translator.—  74, 100 
Karamzin, Nikolai Mikhailovich (1766-
1826) — Russian historian  and  writ­
er.—141,  485 
Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand (1735-1806) — 
Duke  of  Brunswick (1780-1806); 
commander-in-chief  of the  Austro-
Prussian army fighting against rev­
olutionary France (1792).—521 
Kârolyi, Countess  (née  Zichy, Karolina), 
(1818-1903) —a relative  of  Lajos 
P.atthyany; lived  in Italy  and  Switzer­
land after  the  suppression  of the 
1848-49 revolution  in Hungary; gave 
financial help  to  Hungarian  ref­
ugees.—189 

=====第638页=====
614 Name Index 
Katakazi, Gavriil Antonovich (1794-
1867)—Russian diplomat of Greek 
descent; minister in Athens  (1833-
43), senator.—143 
Kaunitz, Wenzel Anton, Prince von 
(1711-1794) — Austrian statesman 
and diplomat, supporter of enligh­
tened absolutism, rabid opponent of 
the French Revolution; Chancellor of 
State (1753-92).—135, 518 
Kern,  Johann Conrad (1808-1888) — 
Swiss liberal politician, lawyer and 
diplomat; deputy to the National 
Council for the Thurgau Canton 
from November 1848; President of 
the National Council from July 1850; 
President of the Federal Court 
(1853);  envoy to Paris (1857-83).— 
53-54,  177-78, 193-94, 196, 228, 232 
Kincaid,  Sir John (1787-1862) — British 
official, inspector of factories and 
prisons in Scotland from 1850.—410, 
414, 416 
Kinglake, Alexander William (1809-
1891) — English historian and politi­
cian, Liberal M. P. (1857-68).—172. 
208 
Kinkel, Johann Gottfried (1815-1882) — 
German poet and journalist, demo­
crat; took part in the 1849 Baden-
Palatinate uprising; emigrated to 
London and became a leader of the 
petty-bourgeois refugees; opposed 
Marx and Engels.— 6, 39, 50, 87-88, 
117, 313, 3!4, 315 
Kiselev, Pavel Dmitrievich, Count (1788-
1872) — Russian statesman, partici­
pant in the war of 1812;Governor of 
Moldavia and Wallachia (1829-34); 
permanent member of all the secret 
committees on the peasant question 
from 1835; Minister of Imperial Do­
mains (1837-56), champion of mod­
erate reforms; Ambassador to Paris 
(1856-62).—142, 144 
Kiss, Miklos (1820-1902) —Hungarian 
army officer, democrat, refugee, Kos­
suth's agent in France and Italy; 
returned to Hungary alter the am­
nesty in 1867.—217, 221 
Klapka, György (Georg) (1820-1892)— 
general of the Hungarian revolution­ary army (1848-49); commandant of 
the Komorn fortress (June-Sep­
tember 1849); refugee after the rev­
olution; maintained contact with 
Bonapartist circles in the 1850s; re­
turned to Hungary after the amnesty 
in 1867.—189, 197, 198, 214, 219, 
221, 223-28 
Kolatschek, Adolph (1821-1889)—Aus­
trian journalist and politician; dep­
uty to the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly (1848-49), petty-bourgeois demo­
crat; publisher of the journals Deut­
sche Monatsschrift (1850-51) and Stim­
men der Zeit (1858-62); founded the 
newspaper Botschafter (1862).—100, 
127, 327 
Kolb,  Dr. Gustav Eduard (1798-1865)— 
German journalist, editor-in-chief of 
the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung 
(1837-65).—124 
Korn,  Adolf (1822-1904)—Prussian 
army officer up to 1845; took part in 
the 1848-49 revolution in Germany; 
emigrated to Switzerland after its 
defeat, and to Argentina in 1857.— 
30, 32, 51 
Kosciuszko, Thaddens (Andrzej Bonawen-
tura) (1746-1817)—prominent figure 
in the Polish national liberation 
movement, leader of the 1794 upris­
ing; took part in the struggle for the 
independence of the North American 
colonies (1776-83).—521 
Kossuth, Lajos (1802-1894)—leader of 
the Hungarian national liberation 
movement; head of the revolutionary 
government (1848-49); after the de­
feat of the revolution emigrated first 
to Turkey and then to England and 
the USA.—149, 165, 189, 214-25, 
314, 328 
Krause, Carl Friedrich August—see 
Fleury, Charles 
Krause, Friedrich August (d. 1834)— 
Dresden shoemaker, then steward of 
Countess Schönberg's estate, exe­
cuted for killing her; father of 
Charles Fleury.— 311 
Krüdener, Barbara Juliane, Baroness 
von (1764-1824)—Russian author, 
preacher of pietism; the idea of 

=====第639页=====
Name Index 615 
creating the Holy Alliance was er­
roneously ascribed to her in the 
nineteenth century.—138, 525 
Kriidener, Pavel Alexeyevich (d. 1858)— 
Russian envoy to Washington and 
Berne (1837-58).—299 
Kubesch—Austrian police counsellor in 
London.—305 
L 
Ladendorf,  August—German democrat, 
sentenced to five years' imprisonment 
in 1854 on a trumped-up charge of 
conspiracy.—66, 67, 311 
La Farina, Giuseppe (1815-1863)— 
Italian liberal politician, historian and 
writer; a leader of the revolutionary 
movement in Sicily (1848-49); 
Cavour's emissary in Sicily in 1860 
(up to July); adviser to the viceroy of 
Sicily (October 1860-January 1861).— 
421, 422-23, 424, 490 
La Fayette, Marie Joseph Paul Yves Roch 
Gilbert du Motier, marquis de (1757-
1834)—general, prominent figure in 
the French Revolution, a leader of 
the moderate constitutionalists (Feuil­
lants);  took part in the July 1830 
revolution.—93 
La Ferronnays, Auguste Pierre Marie Per­
ron, comte de (1777-1842)—French 
politician and diplomat, Ambassador 
to St. Petersburg (1819-27), partici­
pant in the Holy Alliance Congresses, 
Foreign Minister (1828-29).—526 
La Guéronnière, Louis Etienne Arthur 
Dubreuil Hélion, vicomte de (1816-
1875)—French writer and politician; 
Bonapartist (the 1850s), chief cen­
sor.—113,  138, 182, 186,  207-11, 
212, 373 
Laity, Armand François Ruperch (1812-
1889) — French army officer and poli­
tician; took part in Louis Bona­
parte's Strasbourg putsch (1836); 
senator from 1857.—49, 200 
Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis de 
(1790-1869)—French poet, historian 
and politician; a leader of the moder­
ate republicans in the 1840s; Foreign 
Minister and virtual head of the Provisional Government in 1848.— 
207 
Lamoricière, Christophe Léon Louis 
Juchault de (1806-1865)—French 
general and moderate republican 
politician; took part in the conquest 
of Algeria in the 1830s-40s and in 
the suppression of the June 1848 
uprising in Paris, War Minister in the 
Cavaignac Government (June-
December 1848); expelled from 
France after the coup d'état of De­
cember 2, 1851; returned home in 
1857.—471-73 
Landi—Neapolitan general, fought 
against Garibaldi's revolutionary de­
tachments in South Italy (1860).— 
387 
Langenschwarz, Maximilian (born c. 1806) 
—German poet-improviser, tried 
to found the theory of improvisa­
tion.—224 
Lanza, Ferdinando—Neapolitan general; 
fought against Garibaldi's revolution­
ary detachments in South Italy 
(I860).—381,  382 
Lapinski, Theophil {Lapinski, Teofil) 
(1827-1886)—Polish colonel; took 
part in the 1848-49 revolution in 
Hungary; served in the Turkish 
army under the name of Tevfik Bey; 
fought against Russia in Circassia 
(1857-58).—148, 214-15, 219, 225-27 
Las Cases, Emmanuel Augustin Dieudonné 
Marie Joseph, comte de (1766-1842)— 
French historian, accompanied 
Napoleon to St. Helena (1815-16); 
published Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène 
(1822-23).—143 
Lascy, Pyotr Petrovich, Count (1678-
1751)—Russian field marshal-general 
of Irish descent; fought in the North­
ern War (1700-21), the war of Polish 
Succession (1733-35) and the Russo-
Turkish war of 1735-39.—516 
Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864)—Ger­
man lawyer and writer, petty-
bourgeois socialist; took part in the 
democratic movement in the Rhine 
Province (1848-49); founder of the 
General Association of German 
Workers (1863); one of the 
21-1305 

=====第640页=====
616 Name Index 
originators of the opportunist trend 
among the German Social-Demo­
crats.—27,  246, 249, 309 
La Tour d'Auvergne-Lauraguais, Henri 
Godefroi Bernard Alphonse, prince de 
(1823-1871)—French diplomat, Am­
bassador to Berlin (1859-62), Rome 
(1862-63) and London (1863-69).— 
382, 398 
Laya, Léon (1811-1872)—French dra­
matist.—62-63 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874)—French writer and politician, 
a leader of the petty-bourgeois demo­
crats,  editor of La Réforme; Minister 
of the Interior in the Provisional 
Government (1848), deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies (leader of the Montagnards); 
emigrated to England after the dem­
onstration of June 13, 1849.—155 
Lehon, Countess—lived in Paris in the 
1830s-50s and was connected with 
the Orleans dynasty.— 36 
Lelewel, Joachim (1786-1861)—Polish 
historian and revolutionary; took 
part in the 1830-31 insurrection in 
Poland; a leader of the democratic 
wing of Polish refugees (1847-48); 
member of the Committee of the 
Brussels Democratic Association.— 
264, 322 
Leonidas (c. 508-480 B.C.)—King of 
Sparta (c. 488-480 B.C.), hero of the 
battle of Thermopylae during the 
Greco-Persian war.—204 
Leopold (1790-1852)—Grand Duke of 
Baden (1830-52).—392 
Leopold I (1640-1705)—Holy Roman 
Emperor (1658-1705).—512-14 
Leopold I (1790-1865)—King of Bel­
gium (1831-65).—441 
Leotard,  Jules (1830-1870)—French cir­
cus artist.—326 
Leszczynski—see Stanislaus I 
Leuchtenberg, Maximilien Eugene Joseph 
Napoléon, duc de (1817-1852)—son of 
Eugène Beauharnais; married Nich­
olas I's daughter (1839).—144-
45 
Levy, A.—182 
Levy, Joseph Moses (1812-1888)—Eng­lish journalist, one of the founders and 
publisher of The Daily Telegraph.— 
130, 243-48, 249-50, 257 
Lichnowski, Felix Maria, Prince von 
(1814-1848)—Prussian army officer, 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Right wing); killed during 
the Frankfurt uprising in September 
1848.—87, 102, 251, 252 
Liebig, Justus, Baron von (1803-1873)— 
German chemist.—243 
Liebknecht, Wilhelm (1826-1900)— 
prominent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment; took part in the 1848-49 rev­
olution; member of the Communist 
League; one of the founders and 
leaders of the German Social-
Democratic Party; friend and as­
sociate of Marx and Engels, —30, 50, 
52-53,  112-14, 117, 119, 122, 124-25, 
127, 132, 240, 247, 261, 263, 273, 
275, 284-86, 288, 317-20 
Limayrac, Paulin (1817-1868)—French 
journalist, contributed to many big 
French newspapers; editor-in-chief of 
Le Constitutionnel (1861-68); Bo­
napartist. —324 
Lippe,  Leopold,  Count zur (1815-1889)— 
Prussian lawyer and statesman; Pub­
lic Prosecutor in Berlin (1860), Minis­
ter of Justice (1862-67).—269 
Loë, Heinrich Friedrich Walther De-
genhardt, Baron von (1828-1908)— 
Prussian army officer, aide-de-camp 
of the Prince Regent; retained this 
post when the Prince Regent became 
King William I.—397 
Loening—German publisher.—121, 185 
Lommel, Georg —German petty-bour­
geois democrat, took part in the Ba­
den uprising in April 1848; emig­
rated to Switzerland after its de­
feat.—68-71,  74, 185, 191-92, 198, 
201 
Longinus, Cassius (c. 213-273)—Greek 
neo-Platonic philosopher.—120 
Louis (1661-1711)—Dauphin of Louis 
XIV.—513 
Louis XII (1462-1515)—King of 
France (1498-1515).—505 

=====第641页=====
Name Index 617 
Louis XIII (1601-1643)—King of 
France (1610-43).—510, 511 
Louis XIV (1638-1715)—King of Fran­
ce (1643-1715).—135, 225, 512-14 
Louis XV (1710-1774)—King of France 
(1715-74).—36, 151, 505 
Louis XVI (1754-1793)—King of 
France (1774-92); guillotined.—459, 
521 
Louis XVIII (1755-1824)—King of 
France (1814-15, 1815-24).—143, 525 
Louis Philippe (1773-1850)—Duke of 
Orleans; King of the French (1830-
48)._56,  140, 146, 157, 175-76, 231, 
249, 456, 526 
Louise of Savoy (1476-1531)—Queen 
Regent, mother of Francis I of 
France.—505 
Lgwendal, Ulrich Frederic Valdemar, 
comte de (1700-1755)—Danish-born 
general, marshal from 1747; served 
in the Russian (1735-43) and in the 
French (1743-55) army; fought in the 
war of the Austrian Succession (1740-
48).—517 
Luberminski (Lubomirski), Prince—per­
sonal representative of Alexander I 
( 1811 ) at the court of the Prince Regent 
of Great Britain (afterwards George 
IV).—524 
Lucullus (Lucius Licinius Lucullus) 
(c. 106-c. 57 B.C.)—Roman general, 
consul of the Roman Republic, fa­
mous for his luxurious banquets.—197 
Ludwig III (1806-1877)—Grand Duke 
of Hesse-Darmstadt (1848-77).—378, 
398 
Lyndhurst, John Singleton Copley the 
Younger, Baron of (1772-1863)— 
British lawyer and statesman; Lord 
Chancellor (1827-30, 1834-35, 1841-
46).—136 
M 
McAdam, John—journalist from Glas­
gow, supported the national liberation 
movements in Hungary, Italy and 
other European countries in the 
1850s.—224 
Machiavelli, Niccolo (1469-1527)— 
Italian statesman, politician, phi­
losopher and writer.—491 MacMahon, Marie Edme Patrice Maurice, 
comte de, duc de Magenta (1808-
1893)—French general, later Mar­
shal of France, senator, Bonapartist; 
fought in the wars of the Second 
Empire.—436 
McMurdo, Sir William Montagu Scott 
(1819-1894)—British army officer, 
later general; served in India in the 
1840s-50s; Inspector-General of the 
Volunteers (1860-65).—403, 404, 437 
Maguire, John Francis (1815-1872)— 
Irish liberal politician, M.P.—437 
Mahmood II (1785-1839)—Sultan of 
Turkey (1808-1839).—143, 525, 526 
Mahomet—see Mohammed 
Maistre, Xavier de (1763-1852)—French 
general and writer; emigrated to 
Russia during the French Revolu­
tion.—247 
Malmesbury, James Howard Harris, Earl 
of (1807-1889)—British statesman, 
Tory, later Conservative; Foreign 
Secretary (1852, 1858-59), Lord Privy 
Seal (1866-68, 1874-76).—134, 177-
79, 181, 193 
Mandeström, Kristoffer Rutger Ludvig 
(1806-1873)—Swedish statesman, For­
eign Minister (1858-68).—401 
Manilius Brutus—Roman lawyer.—293 
Manteuffel, Edwin Hans Karl, Baron von 
(1809-1885)—Prussian general; chief 
of the Military Cabinet from 1857; 
adjutant-general of William I from 
1861.—397 
Manteuffel, Otto Theodor, Baron von 
(1805-1882)—Prussian statesman; 
Minister of the Interior (November 
1848-November 1850), Prime Minis­
ter and Minister of Foreign Affairs 
(1850-58).—237-38, 256-57, 266, 
369, 379 
Margarita Theresa (d. 1673)—daughter 
of Philip IV of Spain; first wife of 
the Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I. 
—512 
Maria II (da Gloria) (1819-1853)— 
Queen of Portugal (1826-28, 1834-
53).—337,  526 
Maria Theresa (1638-1683)—Queen of 
Louis XIV of France from 1660; 

=====第642页=====
618 Name Index 
daughter of Philip IV of Spain.— 
511-12 
Maria Theres(i)a (Marie Thérèse) (1717-
1780)—Archduchess of Austria 
(1740-80); Holy Roman Empress 
(1745-80).—222, 516-19 
Marie de Medicis (1573-1642)—wife of 
Henry IV of France.—510 
Marilley, Etienne (1804-1889)—Bishop 
of Freiburg (1846-79); inspired the 
anti-democratic revolt in Freiburg 
(Fribourg) on December 24, 1848.— 
235 
Mario,  Alberto (1825-1883)—Italian 
politician and writer; took part in 
Garibaldi's revolutionary campaign in 
South Italy (I860).—424 
Marlborough, John Churchill, Duke of 
(1650-1722) —British general; com­
mander-in-chief of the British troops 
(1702-11) in the war of the Spanish 
Succession.— 514 
Martin—French journalist, contributor 
to Le Constitutionnel; Bonapartist. — 
186 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) (1814-
1881)—wife of Karl Marx.— 73, 264, 
322 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883).—3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 
8, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 25, 
26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 33, 39, 40, 41, 42, 
43-49,  50, 51, 54, 55,  57-61,  67, 69, 
111, 113-25,  127-31,  133-39, 141-55, 
156-69,  173, 187, 189, 191-204, 205, 
207-13,  214, 216-20, 225, 228, 236, 
237, 242, 244, 246, 259-95, 296, 
303-05,  309-10, 319-20, 321-24, 326, 
328, 335, 350, 385 
Maupas, Charlemagne Emile de (1818-
1888) — French lawyer, Bonapartist; 
Prefect of the Paris police (1851); an 
organiser of the coup  d'état  of De­
cember 2, 1851; Minister of Police 
(1852-53).—307 
Maurice Saxe, von (1521-1553)—Elector 
of Saxony from 1547; Duke from 
1541;  commander-in-chief of the Im­
perial troops in the Smalkald war 
(1546-48).—506 
Maurice Saxe, comte de (1696-1750)— 
Marshal of France; fought in the war 
of the Austrian Succession (1741-48); writer on military science.—517 
Maximilian I (1459-1519)—Holy Ro­
man Emperor (1493-1519).—505 
Maximilian I (1573-1651)—Duke of 
Bavaria from 1597 and Elector 
(1623).—510 
Maximilian II (1811-1864)—King of 
Bavaria (1848-64).—397 
Maximilian III Josef (1727-1777)— 
Elector of Bavaria (1745-77).—517, 
520 
Mayer, Karl (1819-1889)—German 
petty-bourgeois democrat; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(1848-49); emigrated to Switzerland 
after the defeat of the revolution; 
editor of the Stuttgart newspaper 
Beobachter in the 1860s.—120, 204-05 
Mazarin, Jules (1602-1661)—French 
cardinal and statesman; Prime Minis­
ter, virtual ruler of France from 1643 
(under Louis XIV).—511-12 
Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805-1872)—Italian 
revolutionary, democrat; head of the 
Provisional Government of the 
Roman Republic (1849); an organiser 
of the Central Committee of Euro­
pean Democracy in London (1850); 
sought for support among the 
Bonapartists (the early 1850s); subse­
quently opposed Bonapartism.—153, 
180-81,  217, 218, 221, 232, 395, 423, 
489, 490 
Medici del Vacello, Giacomo (1817-
1882)—Italian general; fought in the 
national liberation war of 1848-49 
and defended the Roman Republic in 
April-July 1849; took part in Garibal­
di's revolutionary campaign in South 
Italy (I860).—421, 449, 473, 477 
Melendez—Neapolitan general; fought 
against Garibaldi's revolutionary de­
tachments in South Italy (1860).— 
474, 478 
Mellinet, François Aimé (1768-1852) — 
Belgian general; took part in the 
democratic movement and the 1830 
revolution in Belgium; Honorary 
President of the Brussels Democratic 
Association; one of the accused at the 
Risquons Tout trial.—264 
Mendes de Haro, Luiz, Count (1598-

=====第643页=====
Name Index 619 
1661)—Spanish statesman and dip­
lomat; First Minister of Spain from 
1643.—511 
Meszlenyi, Zsuzsânna (née Kossuth) 
(1806-1856)—sister of Lajos Kos­
suth; inspector of hospitals during 
the 1848-49 revolution in Hun­
gary.—222 
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel 
Lothar, Prince von (1773-1859)— 
Austrian statesman and diplomat; 
Foreign Minister (1809-21) and 
Chancellor (1821-48); one of the 
founders of the Holy Alliance.—135, 
148, 399, 525-26 
Meyen, Eduard (1812-1870)—German 
writer, Young Hegelian; emigrated to 
England after the defeat of the 
1848-49 revolution.—4-7, 18, 97, 
239-42,  308 
Miguel Maria Evaristo (Dom Miguel) 
(1802-1866)—King of Portugal 
(1828-34).—143,  337, 525, 526 
Mikhail Fyodorovich (1596-1645)—first 
tsar (1613-45) of the Russian Ro­
manov dynasty (1613-1917).—509 
Minié, Claude Etienne (1804-1879)— 
French colonel, inventor of a new 
type of rifle adopted by the French 
army in 1852.—348 
Miskowsky, Henryk Ludvic (d. 1854)— 
Polish army officer; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution in Hungary; 
emigrated first to Turkey and then 
to London after the defeat of the 
revolution.—84-85 
Missori, Giuseppe (1829-1911)—Italian 
army officer; took part in the nation­
al liberation movement in Italy; 
fought in Garibaldi's revolutionary 
detachments in the 1860s.—473, 477 
Mohammed (or Muhammad, Mahomet) 
(c. 570-632)—founder of Islam.—40 
Mohammed Ali (or Mehemet AH) (1769-
1849)—Viceroy of Egypt (1805-
48).—526 
Mole, Louis Mathieu, comte  (1781-
1855)—French statesman, Orleanist; 
Prime Minister (1836-37, 1837-39); 
deputy to the Constituent and Legis­
lative Assemblies during the Second 
Republic.—146 Moll, Joseph (1813-1849)—German 
watchmaker; prominent figure in the 
German and international working-
class movement; a leader of the 
League of the Just; member of the 
Central Authority of the Communist 
League; President of the Cologne 
Workers' Assosiation and member of 
the Rhenish District Committee of 
Democrats (July-September 1848); 
killed in battle during the Baden-
Palatinate uprising in 1849.—79 
Monroe, James (1758-1831)—American 
statesman; President of the USA 
(1817-25); issued a declaration (1823) 
formulating the principles of US 
foreign policy, known as the Monroe 
doctrine.—143,  525 
Montalembert, Charles Forbes René de 
Tryon, comte de (1810-1870)—French 
politician and writer; deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assem­
blies (1848-51); Orleanist, leader of 
the Catholic party; supported Louis 
Bonaparte during the coup d'état of 
December 2, 1851, but soon after­
wards joined the opposition.—157 
Moray, Charles Auguste Louis Joseph, due 
de (1811-1865)—French politician, 
Bonapartist, half-brother of Napo­
leon III; deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly (1849-51); an organiser of 
the coup d'état of December 2, 1851; 
Minister of the Interior (December 
1851-January 1852); President of the 
Corps Législatif (1854-56, 1857-65).— 
36, 159 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (1756-
1791)—Austrian composer.—40 
Mucius Scaevola—Roman lawyer.—293 
Müller, Georg —German refugee in 
London in 1860, Chairman of the 
German Workers' Educational Soci­
ety.—264 
Müllner, Amandus Gottfried Adolf (1774-
1829)—German poet and literary 
critic.—120 
Munnich (Munich), Khristofor Antonovich, 
Count (1683-1767)—Russian military 
leader and statesman, field marshal-
general, engineer; commanded Rus­
sian troops in the Crimea and in 

=====第644页=====
620 Name Index 
Bessarabia during the Russo-Turkish 
war of 1735-39.—516 
Murât, Napoléon Lucien Charles, prince 
(1803-1878)—French politician of 
the Second Republic and Second 
Empire; cousin of Napoleon III; 
envoy to Turin (1849-50); pretender 
to the Neapolitan throne (1851).— 
372 
Mustafa III (1717-1774)—Sultan of 
Turkey (1757-74).—519 
N 
Napier, Sir Charles (1786-1860)— 
British admiral; fought in the wars 
against Portugal (1810, 1823-34) and 
Syria (1840); commanded the British 
fleet in the Baltic (1854); M.P.—135, 
526 
Napoléon, Jérôme, prince—see Bonaparte, 
Jérôme Napoléon Joseph Charles Paul 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)— 
Emperor of the French (1804-14, 
1815;.—34, 37, 93, 97, 135, 138, 143, 
148, 156-57, 159-60, 161-64, 170, 
183, 190, 204,  260-61,  288, 291, 441, 
522-24 
Napoleon HI {Charles Louis Napoléon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873)—nephew of 
Napoleon I; President of the Second 
Republic (1848-51); Emperor of the 
French (1852-70).—97, 109, 132, 
133, 134,  138-41,  150, 153-68, 170-
76, 178, 195,  198-201,  203, 205, 206, 
211, 213, 217, 221-26, 228, 230, 231, 
234, 242, 249, 330-36, 339, 341, 344, 
355, 368, 369, 372-74, 377, 382, 
397-401,  408, 421-22, 430, 431, 438, 
439, 446, 448, 457, 459, 464, 486-87, 
489-91,  497-98 
Nemours, Louis Charles Philippe Raphaël 
d'Orléans, duc de (1814-1896)— sec­
ond son of Louis Philippe; general 
of the French army.—441 
Nesselrode, Karl Vasilyevich, Count 
(1780-1862)—Russian statesman and 
diplomat; Foreign Minister (1816-
56); State Chancellor from 1845.— 
525 
Newcastle, Henry Pelham Tiennes Pelham 
Clinton, Duke of (1811-1864)—British statesman, Peelite; Secretary for War 
and the Colonies (1852-54); Secretary 
for War (1854-55); Colonial Secretary 
(1859-64).—337-39 
Ney, Michel, due d'Elchingen, prince de la 
Moscova (1769-1815)—Marshal of 
France; fought in the wars waged by 
the French Republic and Napoleonic 
France.—38 
Nicholas I (1796-1855)—Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—145, 147, 227, 
431, 525 
Niegolewscki (1819-1885)—Polish law­
yer and politician; petty-bourgeois de­
mocrat; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (1848); member 
of the Prussian Chamber of Deputies 
for Posen from 1849.—394-95 
Nothjung, Peter (1823-1866)—German 
tailor; member of the Cologne Work­
ers' Association and of the Commun­
ist League; one of the accused at the 
Cologne Communist trial (1852); sen­
tenced to six years' imprisonment.— 
237, 375 
Nugent—see Cherval, Julien 
O 
Obreskov, Alexei Mikhailovich (1718-
1787)—Russian diplomat, chargé 
d'affaires (1751) and resident (1752-
68) in Constantinople; took part in 
signing the peace of Kuchuk Kainarji 
(1774).—519 
Ochsenbein, Johann Ulrich  (1811-
1890)—Swiss general, statesman and 
politician; at first radical and later 
liberal; President of the Federal Diet 
during the Sonderbund war; head of 
the Federal Government (1847-48); 
President of the National Council 
and member of the Federal Council 
(1848-54).—231-32 
Ohly, Karl Friedrich Christian Hermann 
(1825-1881)—German journalist, 
petty-bourgeois democrat; took part 
in the 1848-49 revolution; emigrated 
first to Switzerland and then to 
London after the defeat of the re­
volution; correspondent of the 

=====第645页=====
Name Index 621 
Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung.— 112, 
261, 286 
Olga (1822-1892)—Grand Duchess of 
Russia, second daughter of Nicholas I; 
Queen of Württemberg from 1864.— 
299 
Oliphant, Laurence (1829-1888)— 
English traveller and journalist; cor­
respondent of The Times in the 
Caucasus with Omer Pasha's ex­
peditionary corps (1855).—180 
Olivier, Emile (1825-1913)—French 
politician, moderate republican; 
member of the Corps Législatif from 
1857;  became Bonapartist in the late 
1860s; head of the government 
(January-August 1870).—431 
Oppenheim, Heinrich Bernhard (1819-
1880)—German democratic politi­
cian, economist and journalist; an 
editor of the Berlin newspaper Die 
Reform (1848); refugee (1849-50); 
subsequently a National-Liberal.—97, 
249 
Orges, Hermann (1821-1874)—German 
journalist; an editor of the Augsburg 
Allgemeine Zeitung (1854-64).—124, 
210, 263, 317 
Orléans —royal dynasty in France 
(1830-48).—36 
Orloff {Orlov), Alexei Fyodorovich, Count, 
Prince from 1856 (1786-1861) — 
Russian military leader, statesman 
and diplomat; signed the treaties of 
Adrianople (1829) and Unkiar-
Skelessi (1833) with Turkey; headed 
the Russian delegation to the Paris 
Congress (1856).—382 
Orsini, Felice (1819-1858)—Italian 
democrat, republican; prominent fig­
ure in the struggle for Italy's national 
liberation and unification; executed 
for his attempt on the life of 
Napoleon III.—157, 395-96 
Oswald,  Eugen (1826-1912)—German 
journalist, democrat; took part in the 
1848-49 Baden revolutionary move­
ment; emigrated to England after the 
defeat of the revolution.—33 
Otto I (1815-1867)—King of Greece 
(1832-62) from the Bavarian dynasty 
of Wittelsbachs.—526 Oudinot, Nicolas Charles Victor  (1791-
1863)—French general, Orleanist; 
commanded troops sent against the 
Roman Republic (1849).—155 
Owen, Robert (1771-1858)—English 
Utopian socialist.—88-89 
P 
Palestrina—French police officer.—208, 
211 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, Viscount 
(1784-1865)—British statesman; at 
first Tory and, from 1830, Whig; 
Foreign Secretary (1830-34,  1835-41, 
1846-51); Home Secretary (1852-55); 
Prime Minister (1855-58, 1859-65).— 
5, 116-17, 136, 139, 143, 158-59, 
173, 179, 202, 215-16, 244, 315, 339 
Papinian, Aemilius Papinianus (c. 140-
212)—Roman lawyer.—293 
Paul I (1754-1801)—Emperor of Rus­
sia (1796-1801).—522 
Paul V (Camillo Borghese) (1552-
1621)—Pope (1605-21).—509-10 
Pedro I (Dom Pedro de Alcantara) (1798-
1834)—Emperor of Brazil (1822-31); 
son of John VI of Portugal; father of 
Maria II da Gloria of Portugal.—337, 
526 
Peel, Sir Robert, Baronet (1788-1850)— 
British statesman, moderate Tory; 
Home Secretary (1822-27, 1828-30); 
Prime Minister (1834-35, 1841-46).— 
7, 498 
Peire, Vidal (12th-13th cent.)—famous 
Provençal troubadour.—96 
Pélissier, Aimable Jean Jacques, duc de 
Malakoff (1794-1864)—French gener­
al, Marshal of France from Sep­
tember 1855; took part in the con­
quest of Algeria in the 1830s-50s; 
corps commander (early 1855) and 
commander-in-chief of the French 
army (May 1855-July 1856) in the 
Crimea; Ambassador to London 
(1858-59).—157, 349 
Pepe, Guglielmo (1783-1855)—prom­
inent figure in the Italian national 
liberation movement, general of 
the Neapolitan army; sided with the 

=====第646页=====
622 Name Index 
Carbonari and commanded the 
army of the rebels during the 1820-21 
Neapolitan revolution; took part in 
the 1848-49 revolution in Italy.— 
525 
Perczel, Mor (Moritz) (1811-1899)— 
Hungarian general; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution in Hungary; 
emigrated to Turkey after the defeat 
of the revolution and, in 1851, to 
England.—149, 224 
Péreire, Isaac (1806-1880)—French 
banker, Bonapartist, deputy to the 
Corps  Législatif;  founded the joint-
stock bank Crédit Mobilier together 
with his brother Emile (1852); author 
of works on credit.—248, 341 
Perponcher-Sedlnitzki, Wilhelm, Count von 
(1819-1893)—Prussian diplomat; en­
voy to Naples in the early 1860s.— 
488 
Perrée, Jean Baptiste Emmanuel  (1761-
1800)—French naval officer, rear ad­
miral (1798); fought in Napoleon I's 
campaigns in Venice and Toulon 
(1796-98); commanded the French 
fleet in the Adriatic.—163 
Perrier, John—Swiss radical politician, 
member of the Grand Council (1852, 
1856-60), Fazy's supporter.—196, 
199-201 
Persigny, Jean Gilbert Victor Fialin, comte 
(1808-1872)—French statesman, Bo­
napartist, deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly (1849-51); an organiser of 
the coup  d'état  of December 2, 1851; 
Minister of the Interior (1852-54, 
1860-63); Ambassador to London 
(1855-58,  1859-60).—174, 383, 447 
Persius (Aulus Persius Flaccus) (34-62)— 
Roman satirist.—  243,  245 
Peter I {"the Great") (1672-1725)—Tsar 
of Russia (1682-1721), Emperor of 
Russia (1721-25).—117, 142, 513-16 
Peter the Hermit (c. 1050-1115)—French 
monk and preacher; a leader of the 
peasant volunteer corps in the first 
crusade (1096-99).—440 
Peter III (1728-1762)—Emperor of 
Russia (1761-62).—518 
Petétin, Anselme (1807-1873)—French 
writer; at first republican and later Bonapartist; Prefect of Savoy (1860-
61).—193 
Pfuel, Ernst Heinrich Adolf von (1779-
1866)—Prussian general; Prime Min­
ister and War Minister (September-
October 1848).—256 
Philip (1720-1765)—Duke of Parma 
(1748-65).—518 
Philip II (or Philip Augustus) (1165-
1223)—King of France (1180-1223); 
a leader of the third crusade (1189-
91).—440 
Philip II (1527-1598)—King of Spain 
(1556-98).—506, 509 
Philip III (1578-1621)—King of Spain 
(1598-1621).—509, 510 
Philip IV (1605-1665)—King of Spain 
(1621-65).—510 
Philip V (1683-1746)—King of Spain 
(1700-24, 1724-46), Duke of An­
jou.— 513-15,  517 
Philippe of Orléans (1674-1723)—Duke 
of Chartres; Regent of France (1715-
23) during the infancy of Louis 
XV.—514, 515 
Philipson, Grigory Ivanovich (1809-
1883)—Russian general; fought in 
the war in the Caucasus (1835-49).— 
220-21 
Piat, Jean Pierre (1774-1862)—French 
general, Bonapartist; organised and 
headed the Society of December 
10.—34 
Pietri, Pierre Marie (1809-1864)— 
French politician, Bonapartist, Pre­
fect of the Paris police (1852-58).— 
49 
Pindar, Peter—see Wolcot, John 
Pitt, William ("the Younger") (1759-
1806)—British statesman, Tory; Pri­
me Minister (1783-1801, 1804-06).— 
59, 135, 338, 521, 523 
Pitt, William, Earl of Chatham (1708-
1778)—British statesman, Whig; 
Foreign Secretary and Secretary of 
State for War (1756-61); Prime 
Minister (1766-68).—518 
Pius VII (Gregorio Luigi Barnaba Chi-
aramonti) (1742-1823)—Pope (1800-
23).—523,  525 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti) 
(1792-1878)—Pope (1846-78).—141, 

=====第647页=====
Name Index 623 
154, 430, 458, 460, 485, 526-27 
Plautus, Titus (Titus Maccius Plautus) 
(c. 254-184 B.C.)—Roman dramat­
ist.—112 
Plümicke, F.C. —German army officer, 
author of Handbuch für die Königlich 
Preussischen Artillerie-Offiziere. —- 65 
Poniatowski—see Stanislaus II 
Pope, Alexander (1688-1744)—English 
poet.—237, 247, 250, 327 
Post—Prussian police officer.— 394-95 
Pourtalès, Albert (1812-1861)—Prussian 
diplomat; envoy to Constantinople 
(1850) and Paris (1859).—373 
Pozzo di Borgo, Karl Osipovich, Count 
(1764-1842)—Russian diplomat of 
Corsican descent; envoy to Paris 
(1814-21); Ambassador to Paris 
(1821-35) and to London (1835-
39).—145,  524, 526 
Prince of Prussia—see William I 
Prince Regent—see William I 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865)— 
French writer, economist and so­
ciologist; a founder of anarchism; 
deputy to the Constituent Assembly 
(1848).—90, 157 
Puckler, Erdmann, Count von (b. 1792)— 
Prussian Minister of Agriculture 
from 1858.—397 
Pulszky, Ferenc (1814-1897)— Hungarian 
politician, writer and archaeologist of 
Polish descent; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution in Hungary; 
emigrated after its defeat; contrib­
uted to the New-York Daily Tribune 
in the 1850s; returned to Hungary in 
1867 after an amnesty; deputy to the 
Diet (1867-76, 1884-97).—224 
Puttkammer— Oberpräsident of the 
Prussian province of Posen  (1851-
60).—395 
Pyat, Félix (1810-1889)— French jour­
nalist, dramatist and politician, petty-
bourgeois democrat; took part in the 
1848 revolution; opposed an inde­
pendent working-class movement; 
fought against Marx and the First 
International for a number of 
years.—  395 
Pythagoras (c. 57l-c. 497 B.C.)—Greek 
philosopher and mathematician.— 
239,  295 R 
Rademacher, Johann Gottfried (1772-
1849)—German physician famous 
for his peculiar classification of dis­
eases according to remedies.—33 
Radetzky, Joseph, Count of Radetz (1766-
1858)—Austrian field marshal; com­
manded the Austrian forces in North 
Italy from 1831; suppressed the na­
tional liberation movement in Italy 
(1848-49); Governor-General of the 
Kingdom of Lombardy and Venice 
(1850-56).—136 
Radowitz, Joseph Maria von (1797-
1853)—Prussian general and states­
man; a leader of the Right wing in 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(1848-49).—251-53 
Raisin, Pierre (1820-1870)—Swiss law­
yer and politician, member of the 
Grand Council.—297 
Râkôczy, Ferenc (1676-1735)—leader of 
the Hungarian national liberation 
movement against the Habsburgs 
(early 18th cent.).—225 
Râkôczy, György I (1593-1648)—Prince 
of Transylvania; fought against the 
Habsburgs and the Ottoman Empire 
for the unification of all Hungarian 
lands;  acted in league with Sweden 
during the Thirty Years' War.— 510 
Râkôczy, György II (1621-1660)—Prince 
of Transylvania (1648-60).—511 
Râkôczy, Jozsef{ 1700-1738)— one of the 
last representatives of the ancient 
Hungarian family of Transylvanian 
princes; lived in Turkey from 1736; 
died during the military expedition 
to Moldavia.— 516 
Ranicbel—German bookbinder, petty-
bourgeois democrat; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution in Germany; 
emigrated to Switzerland after its 
defeat.—39, 40, 41, 44, 45, 55, 63, 
76, 77, 78, 118, 120, 193, 205-06, 
250,  299 
Raspail, François Vincent (1794-1878)— 
French naturalist, sociologist and writ­
er close to the revolutionary pro­
letariat; took part in the revolutions 
of 1830 and 1848; deputy to the 
Constituent Assembly (1869).— 69 

=====第648页=====
624 Name Index 
Raveaux, Franz (1810-1851)—German 
politician; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Left Centre) in 
1848-49; imperial commissioner in 
Switzerland and one of the five 
imperial regents in June 1849; 
member of the Baden Provisional 
Government; emigrated after the rev­
olution.—210, 253 
Rechberg and Rothenlöwen, Johann Bern­
hard,  Count von (1806-1899)— 
Austrian statesman and diplomat; 
Prime Minister (1859-60); Foreign 
Minister (1859-64).—368, 491 
Redgrave, Alexander—English inspector 
of factories.—410, 414, 416 
Reh, Theodore—German lawyer; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(1848-49).—106-08 
Reichardt, Joseph Martin (1803-1872)— 
German lawyer, democrat; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly; 
member of the Palatinate revolution­
ary Provisional Government (1849); 
emigrated to the USA after the 
defeat of the revolution.— 255 
Reichenbach, Georg von (1772-1826) — 
Bavarian army officer and in­
ventor.— 356 
Reichenbach, Oskar, Count (b. 1815)— 
Silesian landowner, democrat; deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(1848-49); emigrated to England 
(1850) and later to the USA.—315 
Reinach, Arnold (c. 1820-1870)— 
German petty-bourgeois democrat; 
took part in the 1848-49 revolution 
in Germany; afterwards emigrated to 
Switzerland.—120, 299 
Rémusat, Charles François Marie, comte de 
(1797-1875)—French statesman and 
writer, Orleanist; Minister of the 
Interior (1840); deputy to the Con­
stituent and Legislative Assemblies 
during the Second Republic.— 56 
Repnin, Nikolai Vasilyevich, Prince 
(1734-1801)—Russian military leader 
and diplomat; field marshal-general 
from 1796; took part in the Seven 
Years'  War (1756-63); Ambassador to 
Poland (1763-69); fought in the Russo-Turkish wars (1768-74, 1787-
91).—519 
Reshid Pasha Mustafa Mehemed (1802-
1858)—Turkish statesman; repeated­
ly held the posts of Grand Vizier and 
Foreign Minister (May 1853-May 
1855,  with intervals).—149, 218, 382 
Reuter, Max—Prussian police agent in 
London in the early 1850s.— 307 
Reuter, Paul Julius, Baron (1816-1899)— 
founder of the Reuter telegraph 
agency in London (1851); German by 
birth.—277, 307 
Rewitt— London Refugee Committee 
emissary to Posen. — 395 
Rheinländer, Georg Friedrich — German 
revolutionary, member of the Paris 
Outlaws' League, later refugee in 
London.—60, 228 
Richelieu, Armand Emmanuel du Plessis, 
duc de (1766-1822)—French states­
man; emigrated to Russia on the 
outbreak of the French Revolution; 
returned to France in 1813; Prime 
Minister and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs (1815-18, 1820-21).—143 
Richelieu, Armand Jean du Plessis, duc de 
(1585-1642)—French cardinal and 
statesman.—  510,  511 
Richelieu, Louis François Armand du 
Plessis, duc de (1696-1788)—French 
military leader and diplomat; Mar­
shal of France from 1748; fought in the 
wars of the Spanish, Polish and 
Austrian Succession and in the Seven 
Years*  War.—518 
Riesser, Gabriel (1806-1863)—German 
lawyer and politician; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (first 
Right Centre and then, from Sep­
tember 1848, Left Centre) in 1848-
49.—  109 
Rigolboche —see Badel, Marguerite. 
Rincon, Antonio—Italian-born French 
diplomat, envoy to Constantinople; 
assassinated in Italy on Charles V's 
order (1530).—506 
Rings, L.  W.—member  of the Commun­
ist League; refugee in London in the 
early 1850s; supporter of Marx and 
Engels.— 309 
Roesler, Gustav Adolf (1818-1855)— 

=====第649页=====
Name Index 625 
German teacher and journalist; 
member of the Left wing in the Frank­
furt National Assembly (1848-49); 
emigrated to the USA in 1850.—98 
Rogier, Charles Latour (1800-1885)— 
Belgian statesman, Minister of the 
Interior (1848-52).—263 
Romanoffs {Romanovs)—dynasty of Rus­
sian tsars and emperors  (1613-
1917).—401 
Roon,  Albrecht Theodor Emil, Count von 
(1803-1879)—Prussian statesman and 
military leader; field marshal-general 
from 1873; War Minister (1859-73) 
and Naval Minister (1861-71); reor­
ganised the Prussian army.— 252 
Rosenblum,  Eduard — German student; 
took part in the 1849 Baden-
Palatinate uprising; emigrated after 
its defeat.—30-32 
Rbser, Peter Gerhard (1814-1865)—cigar-
maker; prominent figure in the Ger­
man working-class movement; Vice-
President of the Cologne Workers' 
Association (1848-49); member of the 
Communist League; one of the ac­
cused at the Cologne Communist 
trial (1852); sentenced to six years' 
imprisonment; later sided with the 
Lassalleans.— 309 
Rotteck, Karl Wenzeslaus Rodecker von 
(1775-1840)—German historian and 
liberal politician. :— 236 
Rouher, Eugène (1814-1884)—French 
statesman, Bonapartist; deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative Assemb­
lies during the Second Republic; 
Minister of Justice (1849-52 with 
intervals); held a number of govern­
ment posts during the Second Em­
pire.—  341 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712-1778)— 
French philosopher and writer of the 
Enlightenment.—232, 401 
Rudolph II (1552-1612)— Holy Roman 
Emperor (1576-1612).—509 
Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880)—German 
radical journalist and Young 
Hegelian philosopher; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848; a leader of the Ger­
man petty-bourgeois refugees in Eng­land in the 1850s.—4, 87, 97-99, 308 
Russell, John Russell, Earl (1792-1878)— 
British statesman, Whig leader; 
Prime Minister (1846-52, 1865-66); 
Foreign Secretary (1852-53, 1859-
65).—53,  177, 193, 194, 195, 196, 
368, 373, 375, 378, 383, 439 
Ruyter or Ruiter, Michiel Adriaanzoon de 
(1607-1676)—-Dutch admiral, com­
mander-in-chief of the fleet of the 
States-General of the Netherlands 
during the second and third Anglo-
Dutch wars (1665-67, 1672-74); chief 
admiral-lieutenant of the Nether­
lands from 1673.—512 
S 
Sacchi, Gaetano (1824-1886)—Italian 
army officer; took part in Garibaldi's 
campaigns in South Italy; general 
from 1862.—450 
Saedt, Otto Joseph Arnold (1816-1886)— 
Prussian judicial official; Public Pro­
secutor in Cologne from 1848; pro­
secutor at the Cologne Communist 
trial (1852).—66-67 
Safafik,  Pavel Josef ( 1795-1861)— Slovak 
philologist, historian and archaeolog­
ist, representative of the liberal wing 
in the national movement.—151 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
comte de (1760-1825)—French Uto­
pian socialist.— 88 
Sandford,  William—British radical par­
liamentary leader.— 328 
Sauernheimer—German brushmaker; 
refugee in Switzerland and Chairman 
of the German Workers' Association 
in Geneva in the early 1850s.—  39, 
44 
Saussure, Théodore de (1824-1903)— 
Swiss statesman, writer and artist; 
leader of the opposition aristocratic 
party; member of the Grand Council 
(1854-56, 1858-72).—199 
Savoy, dynasty of— Italian dynasty ruling 
in the Sardinian Kingdom (1720-
1861) and in the united Italian King­
dom (1861-1946).—423 
Sazonov, Nikolai Ivanovich (1815-
1862)—Russian journalist; emigrated 

=====第650页=====
626 Name Index 
in the early 1840s and contributed to 
various journals and newspapers.— 
41-42 
Schabelitz, Jacob (1827-1899)—Swiss 
publisher and bookseller; member of 
the Fraternal Democrats society from 
1846,  member of the Communist 
League; maintained contact with 
Marx and Engels in the late 1840s 
and the early 1850s.—57, 65 
Schaible, Karl Heinrich (1824-1899)— 
German physician and writer; took 
part in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate 
uprising; afterwards emigrated to 
England.—130-32, 213, 267, 283, 
285 
Schaller, Julien (1807-1871)—Swiss 
statesman; head of the government 
of the Freiburg (Fribourg) Canton 
(1848-56).—53 
Schapper, Karl (c. 1812-1870)— 
prominent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment, a leader of the League of the 
Just, member of the Central Authori­
ty of the Communist League; took 
part in the 1848-49 revolution; after 
the revolution, a leader of the sec­
tarian group that split away from the 
Communist League in 1850; later a 
member of the General Council of 
the First International.—50, 80, 266, 
307 
Scherxer, Andreas (1807-1879)—German 
tailor; member of one of the Paris 
communities, which joined the Wil-
lich-Schapper sectarian group after 
the split in the Communist League, 
one of the accused in the case of the 
so-called Franco-German conspiracy 
in Paris in February 1852; subse­
quently emigrated to England and 
became a leader of the German 
Workers' Educational Society in Lon­
don, publisher of Die Neue Zeit and 
contributor to Das Volk. —117, 118, 
316, 317 
Schiess, Johann Ulrich (1813-1883)— 
Swiss politician and diplomat, Chan­
cellor of the Confederation (1848-
81).—179,  193 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von (1759-1805)—German poet, dramat­
ist, historian and philosopher.—8, 
35, 39, 40, 48, 65, 71, 101, 187, 192, 
258 
Schily, Victor (1810-1875)—German 
lawyer, democrat; took part in the 
1849 Baden-Palatinate uprising; 
emigrated to France; member of the 
First International.—39-46, 51, 76, 
77, 101, 296-301 
Schimmelpfennig, Alexander (1824-
1865)—Prussian army officer, demo­
crat; took part in the 1849 Baden-
Palatinate uprising; emigrated to the 
USA; adhered to the Willich-
Schapper sectarian group; fought in 
the American Civil War on the side 
of the Union.—75-76, 84-88, 91, 93, 
97, 99 
Schleinitz, Alexander Gustav  Adolf,  Baron 
von (1807-1885)—Prussian states­
man, Foreign Minister (June 1848, 
1849-50, 1858-61).—248, 368, 375, 
376-79,  382, 383, 398, 489, 491 
Schlickmann —Prussian judicial offi­
cial.—294, 295 
Schloffel, Friedrich Wilhelm (1800-
1870)—Silesian factory owner, demo­
crat; deputy to the Frankfurt Nation­
al Assembly (Left wing) in 1848.— 
107 
Schlöffet, Gustav Adolph (c. 1828-
1849)—German student and journal­
ist; took part in the 1848-49 revolu­
tion in Germany and Hungary; cor­
respondent of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung in the Frankfurt National 
Assembly.—102, 105, 107 
Schmerling, Anton von (1805-1893)— 
Austrian statesman, liberal; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre) in 1848-49; Minister 
of the Interior (July-September 
1848),  Prime Minister and Minister 
of Foreign Affairs (September 1848). 
—254,  501 
Schneider II, Karl—German lawyer, 
democrat; President of the Cologne 
Democratic Society and member of 
the Rhenish District Committee of 
Democrats; defended Marx and En-
gels at the trial of the Neue Rheinische 

=====第651页=====
Name Index 627 
Zeitung on February 7, 1849; counsel 
for the defence at the Cologne Com­
munist trial (1852).—57, 262, 267 
Schramm, Konrad (c. 1822-1858) — 
German proletarian revolutionary, 
member of the Communist League; 
emigrated to London in 1849; re­
sponsible editor of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung and Politisch­
ökonomische Revue; friend and as­
sociate of Marx and Engels. — 83-86, 
285 
Schulenburg, Friedrich Wilhelm, Count 
von der (1742-1815)—Prussian states­
man, Governor of Berlin (1806).—67 
Schüler, Ernst (1807-1881)—German 
politician and writer, democrat; 
emigrated to Switzerland in 1833 and 
became a teacher; published the 
newspaper Schweizer Handels-Courier 
from 1853; disseminated Bonapartist 
ideas in the 1850s and 1860s.—119 
Schüler, Friedrich (1791-1873)—deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(1848);  elected one of the five Imper­
ial Regents in June 1849; emigrated 
after the suppression of the Baden-
Palatinate uprising.—210 
Schnitte —Prussian judicial official.— 
283, 290, 291 
Schurz, Karl (1829-1906)—German 
petty-bourgeois democrat; took part 
in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate upris­
ing; emigrated to Switzerland; later 
US statesman.—87, 88, 97, 99 
Schwarck—Chief Public Prosecutor of 
the Prussian Court of Appeal.—19, 
268-69 
Schwarzenberg, Felix Ludwig Johann 
Friedrich, Prince zu (1800-1852)— 
Austrian conservative statesman and 
diplomat; envoy to Turin (1838-46) 
and to Naples (1846-48); after the 
suppression of the Vienna uprising 
in October 1848 Prime Minister and 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (No­
vember 1848-1852).—379 
Schwerin, Maximilian Heinrich Karl, 
Count (1804-1872)—Prussian states­
man, Minister of Religious Worship, 
Public Education and Medicine 
(March-June 1848); deputy to the Frankfurt National Assembly (Right 
wing);  Minister of the Interior (1859-
62); National-Liberal.—238, 395 
Scitovszky, Janos (b. 1785)—Primate of 
Hungary.—501 
Scott, Sir Walter (1771-1832)—Scottish 
poet and novelist.—97 
Seckendorf,  August Heinrich Eduard 
Friedrich, Baron von (1807-1885)— 
Prussian legal official; member of the 
Second Chamber (Centre) in 1849; 
public prosecutor at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852).—309 
Seidensticker, Georg Friedrich Karl 
Theodor (1797-1862)—German 
lawyer and politician; sentenced to 
imprisonment for participation in the 
1831 Göttingen riot; emigrated to the 
USA in 1845 and became a journalist 
there.—97 
Semrau, August (1816-1893)—German 
journalist and poet.—238 
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus (c. 4 B.C.-A.D. 
65)—Roman stoic philosopher.—299 
Sepher Pasha—Circassian prince; served 
the Turks and took part in the 
Russo-Turkish war (1826-28); di­
rected the Circassians' military opera­
tions against Russia (1855-59).—219 
Sforza —see Francesco II Sforza 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616)— 
English dramatist and poet.—29, 35, 
38, 40, 46, 47, 48, 55, 59, 116, 128, 
190, 244-45, 378 
Sigel, Albert (1827-1884)—Baden army 
officer, journalist; took part in the 
Baden revolutionary movement 
(1848-49); emigrated to the USA in 
1853;  fought in the American Civil 
War on the side of the Union.—96, 
97 
Sigel, Franz (1824-1902)—Baden army 
officer, democrat, one of the military 
leaders of the 1849 Baden-Palatinate 
uprising; refugee in Switzerland, 
England and (from 1852) in the USA; 
fought in the American Civil War on 
the side of the Union.—96, 97 
Simon, Edouard (1824-1897)—Berlin-
born French journalist, Bonapartist 
spy.—42,  93-94, 112-13,  206-11,  236, 
240, 245 

=====第652页=====
628 Name Index 
Simon, Heinrich (1805-1860)—German 
liberal, counsellor-at-law in Breslau 
(Wroclaw); dismissed for his opposi­
tional views in the 1840s; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(1848);  elected one of the five Imperi­
al Regents (June 1849); subsequently 
emigrated to Switzerland.—210 
Simon, Ludwig (1810-1872)—German 
lawyer, democrat; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848-49; emigrated to Swit­
zerland in 1849; lived in Paris in 
1855-70.—101,  208, 329 
Solyman(or Soliman) I( "theMagnificent") 
(c. 1496-1566)—Ottoman Sultan 
(1520-66).—505, 506 
Sommer —Prussian police agent in Paris 
in the early 1850s.—56, 307 
Sophia (Sophie) (1805-1872)—Arch­
duchess of Austria, mother of Emper­
or Francis Joseph I.—222, 243 
Soubise, Charles de Rohan, prince de 
(1715-1787)—Marshal of France, 
favourite of Louis XV, participant in 
the Seven Years' War (1756-63).— 
518 
Soulouque, Faustin (c. 1782-1867)— 
President of the Republic of Haiti 
(1849-59); proclaimed himself Em­
peror Faustin I in  1849.—  36 
Stahl, Friedrich Julius (1802-1861)— 
German lawyer, philosopher and 
reactionary politician; became profes­
sor of Berlin University in 1840.— 
247 
Stämpfli, Jakob (1820-1879)—Swiss 
politician and statesman, radical; dep­
uty to the National Council for the 
Berne Canton (1848-54); President of 
the Swiss Confederation (1856, 1859, 
1862).—53,  179, 192, 193, 202-03 
Stanbury—owner of a printshop in 
London.—308 
Stanislaus I (Leszczynski) (1677-1766)— 
King of Poland  (1704-11,  1733-34).— 
516 
Stanislaus II (Stanislaus Augustus 
Poniatowski) (1732-1798)—King of 
Poland as Stanislaus II Augustus 
(1764-95).—519 
Stecher, H. C. —former headmaster of a secondary school in Baden; emig­
rated after the defeat of the revolu­
tion; engaged in lithography.—62, 
63,. 304 
Steffen, Wilhelm —former Prussian army 
officer, witness for the defence at the 
Cologne Communist trial (1852); 
emigrated to England in 1853 and 
afterwards to the USA; closely as­
sociated with Marx and Engels in the 
1850s.—86, 87 
Stein,  Julius (1813-1889)—Silesian 
teacher and journalist; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848; deputy to the Second 
Chamber (extreme Left wing) in 
1849.—237, 238 
Stein,  Maximilian, Baron (1811-1860) — 
Austrian army officer; chief of staff 
of the revolutionary army during the 
1848-49 revolution in Hungary; af­
terwards emigrated to Turkey and 
assumed the name of Ferhad Pasha; 
fought in the Caucasus against Russia 
(1857-58).—220 
Stenzel, Gustav Adolf—deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly for 
Breslau (Silesia) in 1849.—106 
Sterne, Laurence (1713-1768)—British 
novelist.— 245 
Stieber, Wilhelm (1818-1882)—Prussian 
police officer, one of the organisers 
of the Cologne Communist trial 
(1852) and principal witness for the 
prosecution; collaborated with Wer-
muth on the book Die Kommunisten-
Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahr­
hunderts; chief of the Prussian politi­
cal police (1850-60).—52, 55-56, 57, 
58, 59, 65, 66, 67, 74, 77, 288, 305, 
306, 307, 309,  310-11,  312, 369 
Stolzenberg— Prussian police officer.— 
395 
Strabo (63 B.C.-A.D. c. 20)—Greek 
geographer and historian.—440 
Strafford, Thomas Wentworth, Earl of 
( 1593-1641 )—English statesman  ; prin­
cipal minister to Charles I from 1628; 
advocate of absolutism.—495 
Stratford de Redcliffe, Stratford Canning, 
Viscount (1786-1880)—British dip­
lomat, envoy to Constantinople 

=====第653页=====
Name Index 629 
(1810-12, 1825-28, 1841-58).—429 
Struve, Amalie (d. 1862)—wife of Gus­
tav Struve; took part in the democra­
tic movement in Germany in 1848-
49.-232 
Struve, Gustav von (1805-1870)— 
German journalist, democrat; a 
leader of the Baden uprisings in 
April and September 1848, of the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising in 1849 
and later of the German petty-
bourgeois refugees in England; 
fought in the American Civil War on 
the side of the Union.—32, 33, 51, 
53, 232 
Stuarts (also Steuarts, Stewarts) — royal 
dynasty in Scotland from 1371 and 
England (1603-49 and 1660-1714).— 
514, 518 
Sue, Eugene Marie Joseph (1804-1857)— 
French writer, author of sentimental 
novels dealing with social prob­
lems.—306 
Sulla (Lucius Cornelius Sulla) (138-78 
B.C.)—Roman general and states­
man; consul (88 B.C.); dictator (82-79 
B.C.).—339 
Suvorov, Alexander Arkadyevich, Count 
Suvorov Rimniksky, Prince Italysky 
(1804-1882)—Russian military leader 
and statesman; fought in the Russo-
Turkish wars (1826-28, 1828-29); 
took part in the suppression of the 
1830-31 uprising in Poland; Gover­
nor-General of the Baltic provinces 
(1848-61).—384 
Suvorov, Alexander Vasilyevich, Count 
Suvorov Rimniksky, Prince Italysky 
(1729-1800)—Russian field marshal 
—521 
Szabo,  Imre von (1820-1865)—Hun­
garian army officer; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution in Hungary; 
member of the first Hungarian re­
volutionary government (March-
September 1848) and deputy to the 
State Assembly in Debrecen (1849); 
after the defeat of the revolution, 
emigrated to Paris and later to 
London.—505 
Szécsen, Antal, Count (1819-1896)— 
Hungarian statesman, conservative; supported the Austrian monarchy 
during the 1848-49 revolution in 
Hungary; took part in elaborating 
the 1860 October diploma.—501 
Szemere, Bartholomäus (Bertalan) (1812-
1869)—Hungarian politician and 
writer; Minister of the Interior and 
head of the revolutionary govern­
ment (1849); emigrated after the 
defeat of the revolution.—43, 149, 
219, 224, 225, 328, 501 
Szirmay, Pal, Count (1804-1883)— 
Hungarian politician; member of the 
Chamber of Deputies (1848); after 
the defeat of the revolution refugee 
and Lajos Kossuth's emissary in 
Paris;  was amnestied in 1855 and 
returned to Hungary.— 217 
T 
Tacitus, Publius Cornelius (c. 55-
c. 120)—Roman historian and 
orator.—156, 285, 300 
Tamisier, François Laurent Alphonse 
(1809-1880)—French army officer, 
military inventor and politician.—357 
Tausenau, Karl (1808-1873)—Austrian 
politician, democrat; head of the 
Central Committee of the Vienna 
Democratic Societies during the 1848 
revolution; emigrated to London in 
1849.—97-98 
Taylor, Tom (1817-1880)—English 
dramatist and journalist; contributed 
to several periodicals.—404, 437 
Techow, Gustav Adolf (1813-1893)— 
Prussian army officer, petty-
bourgeois democrat; took part in the 
1848 revolutionary events in Berlin; 
Chief of the General Staff of the 
Palatinate revolutionary army; emig­
rated to Switzerland after the defeat 
of the 1849 Baden-Palatinate upris­
ing and became a leader of the 
refugee organisation Revolutionary 
Centralisation; left for Australia in 
1852.—75-77, 83-86, 88-99, 241, 
260-61,  283, 285, 287, 291 
Teleki, Lâszlô (Ladislaus), Count  (1811-
1861)—Hungarian politician and 

=====第654页=====
630 Name Index 
writer; represented the Hungarian 
Republic in France during the 1848-
49 revolution in Hungary; remained 
in France after the defeat of the 
revolution.—221 
Temme, Jodocus Donatus Hubertus (1798-
1881)—German lawyer, democrat; 
deputy to the Prussian National As­
sembly (Left wing) in 1848; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly in 
1849.—256 
Thouvenel, Edouard Antoine (1818-
1866)—French statesman and dip­
lomat, Bonapartist; envoy to Athens 
(1848-50) and to Munich (1850-51); 
Ambassador to Constantinople (1855-
60); Foreign Minister (1852, 1860-
62).—175,  194-96, 197, 399 
Totti —Bonapartist police spy, Corsican 
by birth.—421,  422, 424, 490 
Tourte, Abraham Louis (1818-1863)— 
Swiss statesman and diplomat, envoy 
to Turin from I860.—53-54, 235, 
297, 298, 299 
Treuille de Beaulieu, Antoine Hector 
Thésée, baron (1809-1886)—French 
general, military inventor.— 357 
Trog, Johann von Ölten (1807-1867)— 
Swiss lawyer; deputy to the National 
Council for Solothurn Canton (1848-
57); Federal Commissar (1852-56).— 
232, 297, 302 
Tromp, Cornelis (1629-1691)—Dutch 
admiral; fought in the second and 
third Anglo-Dutch wars (1665-67, 
1672-74); commander-in-chief of the 
Dutch fleet from 1676.—512 
Tucker—London publisher.—116 
Turenne, Henri de la Tour dAuvergne, 
vicomte de (1611-1675) — French gen­
eral, Marshal of France from 1643; 
commander-in-chief of the French 
army in Germany during the Thirty 
Years'  War (1618-48); fought in the 
wars of the Fronde and in the 
Devolution War (1667-68); author of 
memoirs.—510, 512 
Türr, Istvân (Achmed Kiamil Bey) 
(1825-1908)—Hungarian army of­
ficer; took part in the 1848-49 rev­
olution in Italy and Germany; emig­
rated to Turkey; fought in the Cri­mean war on the side of the Allies; 
joined Garibaldi's revolutionary cam­
paign in South Italy (1860); general 
of the Italian army from 1861.—219, 
473, 490, 491 
Tzschirner, Samuel Erdmann (c. 1812-
1870)—German lawyer; leader of the 
extreme Left in the Saxon Diet dur­
ing the 1848-49 revolution; one of 
the leaders of the May 1849 uprising 
in Dresden; participant in the 1849 
Baden-Palatinate uprising; emigrated 
to Switzerland after the defeat of the 
revolution and became a member of 
the Central Committee of the re­
fugee organisation Revolutionary 
Centralisation; later emigrated to Eng­
land.—94 
U 
Uhland,  Ludwig (1787-1862)—German 
romantic poet; deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Left Centre) 
in 1848-49.—106-08, 392 
Ulloa, Girolamo (1810-1891)—Nea­
politan general; took part in the 
national liberation and revolutionary 
movements in Italy in 1848-49; emig­
rated to France after the defeat of 
the revolution; commanded the Tus­
can army in the Austro-Italo-French 
war of 1859.—40 
Ulmer, Johann —member of the Com­
munist League; refugee in London in 
the early 1850s; supported Marx and 
Engels during the split in the Com­
munist League.—309 
Ulpianus (Ulpian), Domitius (c. 170-
228)—Roman lawyer and states­
man.—293 
Ulrich (1487-1550)—Duke of Würt­
temberg from 1498; expelled in 1519; 
tried to use the peasant movement 
of 1525 to restore his power; re-est­
ablished himself on the Württemberg 
throne in 1534.—204 
Urquhart, David (1805-1877)—British 
diplomat, writer and politician, Tur-
kophile; went on diplomatic mis­
sions to Turkey in the 1830s; Tory 
M.P. (1847-52); opposed Palmerston's 

=====第655页=====
Name Index 631 
policy; founder and editor of The 
Free Press (1855-77), which appeared 
under the heading Diplomatic Review 
from 1866.—5-6, 8, 116, 118, 148, 
150, 214-18 
V 
Varnhagen von Ense, Karl August (1785-
1858)—German novelist and literary 
critic of a liberal trend.— 369 
Varus, Publius Quintilius (d. A.D. 9)— 
Roman politician and general; ruled 
Germania (6-9); killed in battle in the 
Teutoburger Wald during the upris­
ing of the German tribes.—251 
Vay, Miklos, Baron (1802-1894)— 
Hungarian statesman, conservative; 
government commissioner in Tran­
sylvania (1848); pursued the policy of 
compromise with the Austrian mon­
archy.— 501 
Vegezzi-Ruscalla, Giovenale—Italian writ­
er of the midnineteenth century, 
author of the pamphlet La nazionalità 
di Nizza.— 198 
Venedey, Jakob (1805-1871)—German 
radical journalist; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848-49; liberal after the 
1848-49 revolution.—69, 103, 109, 
120, 251 
Véron, Louis Desire (1798-1867) — 
French journalist and politician, Or-
leanist till 1848 and afterwards 
Bonapartist; owner and publisher of 
Le Constitutionnel (1844-52).—36 
Vespasian (Titus Flavius Sabinus Ves-
pasianus) (9-79) — Roman Emperor 
(69-79).—249 
Viale—Neapolitan general; fought 
against Garibaldi's revolutionary de­
tachments in South Italy in 1860.— 
474, 478 
Victor Amadeus I (1587-1637)—Duke 
of Savoy from 1630.—510 
Victor Amadeus II (1666-1732) —Duke 
of Savoy (1675-1730); King of Sicily 
(1713-18); first King of Sardinia 
(1720-30).—513-14 
Victor Emmanuel II (1820-1878) —Duke 
of Savoy; King of Sardinia (1848-61); King of Italy (1861-78).—173-74, 
200, 212, 382, 392, 399 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901).— 
335, 399 
Vidocq, François Eugène (1775-1857)— 
French secret police agent; chief of 
the secret criminal police (La Sûreté) 
(1812-27); his name was used to 
denote any cunning sleuth and 
rogue.—395 
Villars, Claude Louis Hector, prince de 
Martignes (1653-1734)—French gen­
eral, Marshal of France from 1702; 
fought in the wars of the Spanish 
(1701-14) and the Polish (1733-36) 
Succession.—516 
Vincenzo II Gonzaga (1594-1627)—the 
last of the Gonzaga dukes of Mantua 
(1626-27); cardinal from 1615.—510 
Vincke, Georg Ernst Friedrich, Baron von 
(1811-1875)—Prussian politician; a 
leader of the Right wing in the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (1848-
49); deputy to the Second Chamber 
(Right wing) in 1849; elected to the 
Chamber of Deputies of the Prussian 
Diet in the 1850s and 1860s; moder­
ate liberal.—61, 102, 250-58, 393 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70-19 
B.C.)—Roman poet.—46, 78, 239, 
282, 303 
Visconti, Valentina (1366-1408) — 
Duchess, grandmother of Louis XII, 
came from a noble Milan family.— 
505 
Vladimirescu, Tudor (c. 1780-1821)— 
leader of the 1821 Wallachian popu­
lar uprising against rich landowners 
and the Turkish yoke.—143 
Vögele, A.—German refugee in Lon­
don, compositor in Hollinger's print-
shop in 1859.—3, 10, 11, 119, 123-
31, 267, 275, 276, 283-85, 319-20 
Vogt, Adolf (b. 1823)—Swiss doctor, 
Karl Vogt's brother.—203 
Vogt, Emil (1820-1883) —Swiss lawyer, 
Karl Vogt's brother.—203 
Vogt, Gustav (1829-1901)—Swiss 
lawyer, writer and radical politician; 
director of the statistical bureau 

=====第656页=====
632 Name Index 
(1860-62); Karl Vogt's brother.—201, 
203 
Vogt, Karl (1817-1895)—German 
naturalist, petty-bourgeois democrat; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848-49; one 
of the five Imperial Regents in June 
1849;  emigrated in 1849; subsequent­
ly was subsidised by Napoleon III; 
slandered Marx and Engels. —4, 9, 
10, 11, 25-29, 32, 33, 38, 39, 40-49, 
51, 52, 53-78, 86, 100, 102, 103-05, 
108, 122, 123-30, 131-42, 145, 147, 
148-51,  154-56, 159, 161, 163, 165, 
166-67,  170-83, 184-88, 189-93, 195-
98, 200-01,  203-06, 208, 212, 214, 
225, 228, 235, 238-42, 246, 250-52, 
258-61,  264-69, 273-84, 299-302, 
304, 313, 316, 317, 318, 327, 328, 
329 
Vogt, Philipp Friedrich Wilhelm (1786-
1861)—German doctor; lived in 
Switzerland from the early 1830s; 
professor of medicine in the Berne 
Higher School from 1835; an adher­
ent of the liberals; Karl Vogt's 
father.—64, 203 
W 
Wahrendorff,  Martin, Baron von (1789-
1861)—Swedish manufacturer and 
military inventor.—357 
Walewski, Alexandre Florian Joseph Colon-
na, comte (1810-1868) — French dip­
lomat and statesman, son of 
Napoleon I and the Polish Countess 
Marie Walewska; took part in the 
1830-31 Polish insurrection; emig­
rated to France after its defeat; 
French Foreign Minister (1855-60).— 
193 
Wallenstein, Albrecht Wenzel Eusebius von, 
Duke of Friedland and Mecklenburg, 
Prince of Sagan (1583-1634)—general 
of the Holy Roman Empire, com­
mander-in-chief during the Thirty 
Years'  War (1618-48); Bohemian by 
birth.—510 
Walther von der Vogelweide (c. 1170-
c. 1230)—German minnesinger.—108 Wanner—Swiss consul in Le Havre.— 
300 
Warren, Sir Peter (1703-1752)—British 
admiral of Irish descent; fought in 
the war of the Austrian Succession 
(1740-48); M.P.—517 
Warwick, Richard Neville, Earl of War­
wick and Salisbury ("the Kingmaker") 
(1428-1471)—English feudal lord; 
fought in the Wars of the Roses 
(1455-85).—256 
Weber—Prussian lawyer, Marx's counsel 
in the trial against the Berlin Nation-
al-Zeitung in I860.—19, 25, 261, 262, 
264, 268, 283, 293-95 
Weerth, Georg Ludwig (1822-1856)— 
German poet and journalist, member 
of the Communist League, a founder 
of proletarian poetry in Germany; an 
editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
in 1848-49.—320 
Weitling, Wilhelm Christian (1808-
1871)—German tailor; one of the 
early leaders of the working-class 
movement in Germany and a 
theoretician of Utopian egalitarian 
communism.— 79 
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of 
(1769-1852)—British general and 
statesman, Tory; Prime Minister 
(1828-30), Foreign Secretary (1834-
35).—352 
Wermuth—police director in Hanover; 
an organiser of and witness for the 
prosecution at the Cologne Commun­
ist trial (1852); collaborated with 
Stieber on the book Die Kommunisten-
Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahr­
hunderts. —58 
Wesendonck, Hugo —Düsseldorf lawyer; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848-49; 
deputy to the Second Chamber (ex­
treme Left wing) in 1849.—106 
Westphalen, Ferdinand Otto Wilhelm Hen­
ning von (1799-1876)—Prussian 
statesman; Minister of the Interior 
(1850-58); stepbrother of Jenny 
Marx, Karl Marx's wife.— 73 
Weydemeyer, Joseph (1818-1866)— 
prominent figure in the German and 
American working-class movement; 

=====第657页=====
Name Index 633 
"true socialist"  in 1846-47; adopted 
scientific communism under  the in­
fluence  of  Marx  and  Engels  and 
became  a member  of the  Communist 
League; took part  in the  1848-49 
revolution; editor  of the  Neue 
Deutsche Zeitung (1849-50); emigrated 
to the USA  after  the  defeat  of the 
revolution.—96,  313 
Whitworth,  Sir  Joseph, Baronet  (1803-
1887)—English manufacturer  and 
military inventor.— 361-65 
Wiehe, Johann Friedrich —German  re­
fugee  in  London, compositor, 
worked  in Hollinger's printshop  in 
1859.—11,  17, 126,  128-30,  275, 
318-20 
William  I (1781-1864)—King  of Würt­
temberg (1816-64).—398 
William  I (1797-1888)—Prince  of Prus­
sia; Prince Regent (1858-61); King  of 
Prussia (1861-88); Emperor  of Ger­
many (1871-88).—168, 191,  239, 314, 
367, 368,  377-79, 382-84, 397-400, 
430, 431, 488, 489, 493, 495, 496 
William  III  (1650-1702)— Stadtholder 
of the  Netherlands (1672-1702); King 
of Great Britain  and  Ireland (1689-
1702).—513-14 
William Augustus (1721-1765)—Duke 
of Cumberland, British general;  son 
of George  II; commanded  the  British 
army  at the  beginning  of the  Seven 
Years'  War of  1756-63.—518 
Willich, August (1810-1878)—Prussian 
army officer  who  left the  service  on 
political grounds; member  of the 
Communist League; took part  in the 
1849 Baden-Palatinate uprising;  one 
of the  leaders  of the  sectarian group 
that broke away from  the  Communist 
League  in 1850;  emigrated  to the 
USA  in 1853;  fought  in the  Ameri­
can Civil  War on the  side  of the 
Union.—33,  40, 45, 50, 65, 82, 83, 
84, 89, 241, 260, 266, 305, 307, 310 
Wilson, James (1805-1860)—Scottish 
economist  and  politician, Free 
Trader; founder  and  editor  of The 
Economist;  M.P.  (1847-59); Financial 
Secretary  of the  Treasury (1853-58) Vice-President  of the  Board  of 
Trade.—160 
Windischgrätz, Alfred Candidus Fer­
dinand,  Prince  zu (1787-1862)— 
Austrian field marshal; suppressed 
the uprisings  in Prague  and  Vienna 
in 1848; led the  Austrian army 
against  the  Hungarian revolution  in 
1848-49.—82,  242 
Winkelried, Arnold  von (d.  1386)—semi-
legendary hero  of the  Swiss  war of 
liberation  . against  the  Habsburgs; 
legend  has it  that  he sacrificed  his 
life to  secure victory over Duke 
Leopold  III of  Austria  in the  battle 
of Sempach  on June  9, 1386.—198 
Wittig,  E. L.—German journalist, edit­
or of the  Dresdner Zeitung.— 306, 
311 
Wolcot, John (pseudonym Peter Pindar) 
(1738-1819)—English satirical poet. 
—99 
Wolfe, James (1727-1759)—British gen­
eral; fought  in Canada during  the 
Seven Years'  War of  1756-63.—518 
Wolff,  Bernhard (Benda) (1811-1879)— 
German journalist; owner  of the 
Berlin newspaper National-Zeitung 
from  1848;  founder  of the  first 
telegraph agency  in  Germany 
(1849).—276 
Wolff,  Wilhelm (Lupus) (1809-1864)— 
German teacher, proletarian rev­
olutionary, prominent figure  in the 
Communist League;  an editor  of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung  and deputy 
to the  Frankfurt National Assembly 
(1848-49); emigrated  to England  in 
1851;  associate  of Marx  and En-
gels.—54,  72, 73, 79, 106, 107, 108, 
109, 110, 115, 119, 276, 286, 288 
Wolfram  von Eschenbach  (c. 1170-
c. 1220)—German poet, author  of 
Parzival,  a poem  of chivalry.—213 
Wood,  Sir  Charles, Viscount Halifax 
(1800-1885)—British statesman, 
Whig; Chancellor  of the  Exchequer 
(1846-52); President  of the  Board  of 
Control  of Indian Affairs (1852-55); 
First Lord  of the  Admiralty (1855-
58); Secretary  of  State  for  India 
(1859-66).—446,  456 

=====第658页=====
634 Name Index 
Wrangel, Friedrich Heinrich Ernst, Count 
von (1784-1877)—Prussian general; 
took part in the counter-revolu­
tionary coup d'état in Berlin and 
in the dissolution of the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly in November 1848. 
—255 
Würth —German politician, deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly.— 
109 
Wyss—barrister in Berne in the 
1850s.—300, 301 
Y 
Ypsilanti, Alexander (1792-1828)— 
prominent figure in the Greek na­
tional liberation movement; major-
general of the Russian army, par­
ticipant in the 1812 war; raised a 
revolt in Moldavia (1821); fled to 
Austria after its defeat, was arrested 
and kept in prison up to 1827; 
released as a result of Russia's inter­
cession.—143,  526 
Z 
Zabel, Friedrich (1802-1875)—German 
liberal journalist, editor of the Berlin 
Abel (Bib.)—the second son of Adam, 
slain by his elder brother Cain.—247 
Abigail (Bib.).—247 
Aeolus (Gr. Myth.)—the god of the 
winds; hence Aeolian harp—stringed 
instrument producing musical sounds 
on exposure to wind.—225 
Ahasuerus or The Wandering Jew—the 
subject of a medieval legend, con­
demned to wander until the Day of 
Judgment for having mocked Christ 
on the day of Crucifixion.—376 
Aladdin—a character in the Arabian 
Nights, owner of a magic lamp.—467 
Argonauts (Gr. Myth.)—heroes who 
sailed with Jason, on the ship Argo, 
to Colchis for the golden fleece, National-Zeitung (1848-75).—19, 20, 
236, 246-47, 259-79, 281-95, 308, 
324, 327 
Zachariä, Heinrich Albert (1806-1875) — 
German lawyer; deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Right 
Centre) in 1848-49.—103, 108 
Zâpolya, Janos (Johann) (1487-1540)— 
Transylvanian voivode; suppressed 
the 1514 peasant uprising in Hun­
gary; King of Hungary (1526-40).— 
506 
Zerfy, Gustav (real name Hirsch) (born 
c. 1820)—Hungarian journalist; took 
part in the 1848-49 revolution in 
Hungary; emigrated to Paris in 1852 
and to London in early 1853; main­
tained contact with Marx in the early 
1850s; later supported Kinkel. — 219 
Zimmermann, Ernst Wilhelm Eduard 
(1807-1878)—German historian,demo­
crat; took part in the 1848-49 rev­
olution; deputy to the Frankfurt Na­
tional Assembly (Left wing).—103, 
109 
Zitz, Franz Heinrich (1803-1877)— 
German lawyer, democrat; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Left wing) in 1848; took part in the 
1849 Baden-Palatinate uprising; 
emigrated to the USA.—98 
which was guarded by a dragon. The 
poet and musician Orpheus partici­
pated in this feat, which was de­
scribed in the 3rd century B.C. by 
Apollonius of Rhodes in his poem 
Argonautica.— 199-201 
Bacchus (Dionysus)—the Greek and 
Roman god of wine and mirth.—190, 
205 
Beisele—see Eisele 
Bottom—a character in Shakespeare's 
comedy A Midsummer Night's 
Dream.—35 
Cain (Bib.)—the eldest son of Adam, 
who killed his brother Abel out of 
jealousy.—247 INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第659页=====
Name Index 635 
Cassandra (Gr. Myth.)—a daughter of 
Priam, King of Troy, endowed with 
the gift of prophecy.—470 
Ceres (Rom. Myth.)—see Demeter 
Cipriano—a character in Calderôn's 
play El Mâgico prodigioso, an image 
close to Faust.—251 
Clarin—a character in Calderon's play 
El Mâgico prodigioso.—28 
Crevel—a character in Balzac's novel 
La Cousine Bette, a parvenu, money-
grubber and profligate.—36 
Demeter (Gr. Myth.)—goddess of ag­
riculture, fertility and marriage.— 
370 
Don Quixote—the title character in Cer­
vantes' novel.—190 
Dunce I and Dunce II—characters in 
Alexander Pope's poem The Dun-
ciad.—237, 275 
Egeria (Rom. Myth.)—a prophetic 
nymph.—189, 197, 198 
Eisele and Beisele—main characters in 
an anonymously published satirical 
pamphlet by J. W. Christern Doctor 
Eisele's und Baron von Beisele's  Land-
tagsreise im April 1847.—131, 274 
Falstaff,  Sir John—a fat, merry, ribald 
and boastful knight in Shakespeare's 
Merry Wives of Windsor and King 
Henry IV.—29, 33, 38, 40, 46, 48, 57, 
59, 69, 70, 74, 101, 148, 197, 203, 
251, 258 
Faunus (Rom. Myth.)—the god of na­
ture and fertility, worshipped by 
shepherds and farmers.—257 
Faust—the title character of Goethe's 
tragedy.—  71, 251 
Fleur de Marie—the heroine of Eugène 
Sue's novel Les Mystères de Paris, a girl 
who grows up amidst criminals but 
preserves her natural nobility and 
purity of soul. The author gave her 
the name of a lily that grows in 
swamps but has snow-white petals.— 
306 
George, Saint—the mythological dragon 
slayer.—255 Gorgellantua—the main character in 
Johann Fischart's adaptation of 
Rabelais' Gargantua et Pantagruel. —33 
Guillery—the title character of Edmond 
About's comedy.—325, 328-29 
Gurgelgrosslinger—see Gorgellantua 
Habakkuk (Bib.)—a prophet.—243 
Hamlet—the title character of Shake­
speare's tragedy.—116, 190, 245 
Harlequin—a character in the corn-
media dell'arte, a servant in love who 
often finds himself in a tight corner 
but knows how to get out of it.—102, 
103, 251 
Henry IV—the title character of 
Shakespeare's drama.—49, 55, 74 
Henry Percy (called Hotspur)—a charac­
ter in Shakespeare's drama King 
Henry IV, a gay, jesting, fiery-
tempered soldier.—86 
Hesperides (Gr. Myth.)—nymphs, daugh­
ters of Hesperus, who watched with 
a dragon over the garden of gold­
en apples in the Isles of the Blest. 
—443 
Hudibras—the title character of Samuel 
Butler's satirical poem, a man in­
clined to meaningless arguments and 
debates and capable of proving the 
most absurd propositions by means 
of syllogisms.—190 
Iphigenia (Gr. Myth.)—the daughter of 
Clytemnestra and Agamemnon, of­
fered as a sacrifice to Artemis to 
enable the Greek fleet to sail to Troy; 
tide character of Euripides' trage­
dy.—212 
Janus (Rom. Myth.)—god represented 
with two faces looking in opposite 
directions.—190 
Jaromir—the main character in Grill-
parzer's tragedy Die Ahnfrau.—120 
Jeremiah—a prophet who bewails the 
destruction of Jerusalem.—105 
John—see Falstaff 
John Bull—the tide character in John 
Arbuthnot's book The History of John 
Bull (18th cent.). His name is often 

=====第660页=====
636 Name Index 
used to personify England.—344, 
439 
Jupiter (Jove)—the supreme god of the 
Romans, corresponding to the Greek 
Zeus.—244 
Kobes I—the title hero of Heinrich 
Heine's satirical poem; Jakob Vene-
dey's nickname.—69, 109 
Kiinigunde (Cunégonde) —the heroine of 
Voltaire's philosophical novel Can­
dide.—  208, 329 
Lazarillo—the hero of the anonymous 
Spanish story, Lazarillo de Tormes 
(mid-16th cent.), a smart fellow.— 
183 
Leporello—a character in Mozart's 
opera Don Giovanni, Don Juan's ser­
vant.—40, 199 
Mephistopheles—the Devil in Goethe's 
tragedy Faust.—227 
Moscon—a character in Calderon's play 
El Mâgico prodigioso.—251 
Moses (Bib.).—245, 247 
Munchausen—an extravagantly menda­
cious story-teller.—309 
Oedipus (Gr. Myth.)—the King of 
Thebes, who solved the riddle of the 
Sphinx and saved Thebes from the 
monster; hero of Sophocles' tragedy 
Oedipus Rex.—199 
Ophelia—a character in Shakespeare's 
tragedy Hamlet.—245 
Orlando—the hero of Boiardo's poem 
Orlando innamorato and Ariosto's 
L'Orlando furioso.—313 
Orpheus (Gr. Myth.)—the Thracian 
poet and musician whose singing 
tamed wild beasts and even charmed 
stones; took part in the Argonauts' 
expedition in quest of the golden 
fleece.—199 
Pantaloon (Ital. Pantalone)—a character 
in the commedia dell'arte; a rich but 
miserly Venetian merchant, a foolish 
old man.—251 
Parolles—a character in Shakespeare's 
comedy All's Well That Ends 
Well.—40 Paul (Bib.)—one of Christ's twelve 
apostles, originally called "Saul of 
Tarsus".—77 
Pecksniff—a character in Charles Di­
ckens'  novel Martin Chuzzlewit, an 
unctuous hypocrite talking much of 
benevolence and other kindly vir­
tues.—  174 
Polonius—a character in Shakespeare's 
tragedy Hamlet, a garrulous court­
ier.—66,  177 
Polyphemus (Gr. Myth.)—a Cyclops who 
lived in a Sicilian cavern and de­
voured human beings.—370 
Posa, Marquis—a character in Schiller's 
tragedy Don Carlos, a noble-minded 
and freethinking courtier who tried 
to influence the despotic king.—188 
Prometheus (Gr. Myth.)—a Titan who 
stole fire from the gods and gave it 
to men; was chained by Zeus to a 
rock. The main character of Aes­
chylus' tragedy Prometheus  Bound.— 
299 
Prudhomme, Joseph—a character of a 
complacent and narrow-minded 
philistine created by Henri Mon-
ni.er.—206 
Puck (Robin Goodfellow)—a character in 
Shakespeare's play A Midsummer 
Night's Dream.—341 
Punch—the principal character in the 
English comic puppet-show Punch 
and Judy, a quarrelsome hook-nosed 
humpback.—239 
Punchinello—a character in the com­
media dell'arte, a short, stout  buf­
foon.—102 
Quasimodo—a character in Hugo's 
novel Notre Dame de Paris; his name 
came to personify ugliness.—210, 
221 
Richmond—a character in Shakespeare's 
drama King Richard III.—39 
Schufterle and Spiegelberg —characters in 
Schiller's drama Die Räuber, robbers 
and murderers lacking any moral 
principles.—35 
Sikes, Bill—a character in Charles Dick-

=====第661页=====
Name Index 637 
ens' novel Oliver Twist, a burglar.— 
70 
Silenus (Gr. Myth.)—one of Bacchus' 
attendants.—47, 74, 205 
Sirens (Gr. Myth.)—half women and 
half birds, living on a rocky isle to 
which they lured unwary seafarers 
with enchanting music.—173 
Slawkenbergius—a character in Laurence 
Sterne's novel The Life and Opinions 
of Tristram Shandy, Gent., a stranger who perturbed whole towns by the 
length of his nose.—245 
Tell, William—a legendary hero of the 
Swiss struggle for independence 
from the Habsburg yoke in the late 
13th and the early 14th century; the 
title hero of Schiller's drama.—40, 48 
Zacharias (Bib.).—60 

=====第662页=====
638 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
The Berlin "National-Zeitung" to the Primary Electors (present edition, Vol. 8) 
— Die Berliner Nationalzeitung an die Urwähler. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 
Nr. 205, 207 (Zweite Ausgabe), 26., 28. Januar 1849.—236 
British Commerce (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5998, July 16, 
I860.—432, 463, 479—80 
The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Die Klassenkampfe in Frankreich 1848 bis 1850 (published in 1850 under 
the title 1848 bis 1849). In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue, Nr. 1, 2, 3, 5-6, Januar, Februar, März, Mai bis Oktober 1850.—90 
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (present edition, Vol. 30) 
— Zur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie, Erstes Heft, Berlin, 1859.—42 
A Curious Piece of History. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5352, June 16, 
1858.—220 
Declaration (this volume) 
— Erklärung. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 325, 21. November 1859. See also: 
C. Vogt, Mein  Prozess  gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung,  Genf,  1859.—16, 126 
Declaration (this volume) 
— Erklärung. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 336, 1. Dezember 1860, Beilage. —25, 
275 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (present edition, Vol. 11) 
— Der 18te Brumaire des Louis Napoleon. In: Die Revolution. Eine Zeitschrift 
in zwanglosen Heften. New York, 1852, H. L—5, 34-37 
— Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte. New York,  1852.—  34 
The Emperor Napoleon III and Prussia (this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
5986,  June 30, I860.—400 
[Events in Syria.—Session of the British Parliament.— The State of British Commerce] 
(this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6021, August 11, I860.—439 

=====第663页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 639 
The Fall of Kars (present edition, Vol. 14). In: The People's Paper, Nos. 205, 206, 
207 and 208, April 5, 12, 19 and 26, 1856; New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4671, 
April 8, 1856.—117, 315 
Feargus O'Connor.—Ministerial Defeats.— The Budget (present edition, Vol. 12). In: 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3758, May 3, 1853.—351 
The Frankfurt March Association and the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (present edition, 
Vol. 9) 
— Der Frankfurter Märzverein und die "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 248, 17. März 1849.—103-05 
Gatherings from the Press (present edition, Vol. 16). In: Das Volk, Nr. 5, 8, 10, 11, 4., 
25. Juni, 9., 16. Juli 1859.—6 
Hirsch's Confessions (present edition, Vol. 12) 
— Hirsch's Selbstbekenntnisse. London, den 9-ten April 1853. In: Belletristisches 
Journal und New-Yorker Criminal'Zeitung, 5. Mai 1853.—219, 305 
Interesting from Sicily.—Garibaldi's Quarrel with La Farina.—A Letter from Garibaldi 
(this volume). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6018, August 8, I860.—490 
The Knight of the Noble Consciousness (present edition, Vol. 12) 
— Der Ritter vom edelmüthigen Bewusstsein. New-York, 1853.—65, 84, 85 
Kossuth and Louis Napoleon (present edition, Vol. 16). In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 5748, September 24, 1859; New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1496, 
September 27; New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 942, October 1, 1859.—6, 221, 
223 
Kossuth, Mazzini, and Louis Napoleon. To the Editor of the "N.Y. Tribune" (present 
edition, Vol. 11). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3627, December 1, 
1852.—217 
The "Kreuz-Zeitung" (present edition, Vol. 9) 
— Die Kreuz-Zeitung. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 299, 16. Mai 1849.—106 
[Letter to the Editor of the "Allgemeine Zeitung"] (this volume) 
— Brief an der Rédacteur der "Allgemeinen Zeitung". In: Allgemeine Zeitung, 
Nr. 300, 27. Oktober 1859.—3, 124, 125 
Lord Palmerston (present edition, Vol. 12). In: The People's Paper, Nos. 77, 78, 79, 
80, 81, 84, 85 and 86, October 22, 29, November 5, 12, 19, December 10, 17, 
24, 1853.—16, 116-17 
Lord Palmerston, I-IV (present edition, Vol. 12). In: New-York Daily Tribune, Nos. 
3902,  3916, 3930 and  3973,  October 19, November 4, 21, 1853, January 11, 
1854.—5,  116 
Louis Napoleon's Position (present edition, Vol. 16). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
5563,  February 18, 1859.—114 

=====第664页=====
640 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
The March Association (present edition, Vol. 9) 
— Der Märzverein. Köln, 10. März. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 243, 11. 
März 1849.—104 
Mazzini's New Manifesto (present edition, Vol. 16). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
5453,  October 13, 1858.—153 
Movements of Mazzini and Kossuth.—League with Louis Napoleon.—Palmerston 
(present edition, Vol. 11). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3590, October 19, 
1852.—217 
Palmerston and Russia, London, E. Tucker [1853] (Political  Fly-Sheets,  No.  1).—5,  139 
Palmerston, What Has He Done? London, E. Tucker [1854] (Political Fly-Sheets, No. 
2).-5 
The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty " by M. Proudhon 
(present edition, Vol. 6) 
— Misère de la philosophic Réponse à la philosophie de la misère de 
M. Proudhon. Par Karl Marx. Paris, A. Frank; Bruxelles, Vogler,  1847.—  79-
80, 90 
Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette. To the Editor of "The Free Press", London, 4th 
February, 1860 (this volume).—12, 17, 128 
Quid pro quo (present edition, Vol. 16). In: Das Volk, Nr. 13, 14, 15, 16, 30. Juli, 6., 
13., 20. August 1859.—6 
Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (present edition, Vol. 11) 
— Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln. Basel, 1853.—48-50, 
55-57,  63, 64-65, 66-67,  80-81,  261 
— Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln. Leipzig, 1875.—307 
— Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln. Göttingen-Zürich, 
1885.—306, 312 
Revelations of the Diplomatie History of the 18th Century. In: The Free Press, Vol. 2, 
Nos.  12, 13, 14 and 15, June 28, July 5, 12 and 19, 1856.—117 
Revelations of the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century. In: The Sheffield Free Press, 
June 28, July 5, 12, August 2, 1856.—117 
The Revolutionary Movement (present edition, Vol. 8) 
—- Die revolutionäre Bewegung. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 184, 1. Januar 
1849.—90 
[Statement to the Editors of "Die Reform", the "Volks-Zeitung" and the "Allgemeine 
Zeitung"] (this volume). In: Die Reform, Nr. 139, 19. November 1859.—16, 124 
Stein (present edition, Vol. 8) 
— Stein. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 225, 18. Februar 1849.—237 
Story of the Life of Lord Palmerston (present edition, Vol. 12). In: The  Free  Press,  Nos. 12, 
13, 14, 18, 19, December 29, 1855, January 5, 12 and February 9, 16, 1856.—5 

=====第665页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 641 
[To the Editor of "The Daily Telegraph"] (this volume).—128 
To the Editors of the "Volks-Zeitung". Declaration (this volume) 
—Offener Brief in Sachen Vogt und Berliner "National-Zeitung". An die 
Redaktion der "Volks-Zeitung". Erklärung. In: Volks-Zeitung, Nr. 35, 10. Februar 
1860.  See also: Kölnische Zeitung, Nr. 41, 10. Februar 1860, Beilage; Die Reform, 
Nr. 18, 11. Februar 1860; Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 48, 17. Februar 1860, Beilage 
(distorted) and other German newspapers.—14, 17, 19, 25 
A Traitor in Circassia. In: The Free Press, No. 34, April 1, 1857.—219 
The Trial of the Rhenish District Committee of Democrats [ Speech by Karl Marx] 
(present edition, Vol. 8) 
— Der Prozess gegen den Rheinischen Kreisausschuss der Demokraten. In: 
Zwei politische Prozesse. Verhandelt vor den Februar-Assisen zu Köln. Köln, 
1849.  Verlag der Expedition der "Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung". —91 
Trouble in Germany (present edition, Vol. 16). In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 
5807,  December 2, 1859.—378 
The War Prospect in Prussia (present edition, Vol. 16). In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 5598, March 31, 1859.—114 
Engels, Frederick 
The Armies of Europe (present edition, Vol. 14). In: Putnam's Monthly, Nos. 32, 33, 
and 36, August, September and December 1855.—323 
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Die deutsche Reichsverfassungskampagne. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue, Nr. 1, 2, 3, Januar, Februar, März 1850.—79-81, 
96, 101, 249 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England. From Personal Observation and 
Authentic Sources (present edition, Vol. 4) 
— Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England. Nach eigner Anschauung und 
authentischen Quellen. Leipzig, 1845.—90 
The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question (present edition, Vol. 7) 
—Die Polendebatte in Frankfurt. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 70, 73, 81, 82, 
86, 90, 91, 93, 96, 9., 12., 20., 22., 26., 31. August; 1., 3., 7. September 1848.—87 
The History of the Rifle, I-VIII (present edition, Vol. 18). In: The Volunteer Journal, 
for Lancashire and Cheshire, Nos. 9, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19 and 20, November 3 and 
17, December 8, 15 and 29, 1860, January 5, 12 and 19, 1861.—348 

=====第666页=====
642 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Po and Rhine (present edition, Vol. 16) 
— Po und Rhein. Berlin, 1859.—6, 114, 250 
Savoy, Nice and the Rhine (present edition, Vol. 16) 
— Savoyen, Nizza und der Rhein. Berlin, 1860.—114 
Marx, K. and Engels, F. 
Circular Against Kriege (present edition, Vol. 6) 
— "Der Volkstribun" redigiert von Hermann Kriege. Mai 1846.— 79-80 
Gottfried Kinkel (present edition, Vol. 10). 
— Gottfried Kinkel. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, 
April 1850.—96-97 
The Great Men of the Exile (present edition, Vol. 11). 
— Die grossen Männer des Exils. 1852.—97, 219 
L.S.D.,  or Class Budgets, and Who's Relieved by Them (present edition, Vol. 12). 
In: The People's Paper, No. 51, .April 23, 1853.—351 
Manifesto of the Communist Party (present edition, Vol. 6) 
— Der Komunistiske Partis Manifest. London, 1848.—80 
— Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei. London, 1848.—80, 88, 89, 90, 91, 94 
— Manifeste du Parti communiste. Paris, 1848.—80 
— Il Manifesto del Partito comunista. Paris, 1848.—80 
— Manifesto of the German Communist Party. In: The Red Republican, 1850, 
Vol. 1, Nos. 21-24, November 9, 16, 23 and 30.—80 
The Money Panic in Europe (present edition, Vol. 16). In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 5548, February 1, 1859.—114-15 
Review, January-February 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Revue, Januar-Februar 1850. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue, Nr. 2, 1850.—92 
Review, May to October [1850] (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Revue, Mai bis Oktober. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue, Nr. 5-6, 1850.—81,  92, 96 
The War Prospect in Europe (present edition, Vol. 16). In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 5547, January 31, 1859.—114 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
A. A. Autre  correspondance.  Paris, 27 avril. In: L'Indépendance  belge,  No. 120, 29 avril 
I860.—206 
[Abel, K.] The Journalistic Auxiliaries of Austria. In: The Daily Telegraph, February 6, 
I860.—14, 128, 246 

=====第667页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 643 
[About, E.] Compère Guillery.— 329 
— La Prusse en I860, Paris, I860.—119, 162, 182, 183, 212, 328-39, 391-96, 400 
— Die römische Frage (von E. About. Fortsetzung). Pius IX. In: Schweizer 
Handels-Courier, Nr. 150, 2. Juni 1859, Beilage.— 118 
— La Syrie et l'alliance russe, Paris, Dentu, 1860.—439 
Abt. Carl Vogt und Carl Marx  oder  die Bürstenheimer. In: Stimmen der Zeit. Wochenschrift 
für Politik und Literatur, Nr. 39, Winter 1861, Beilage. — 39, 44-45 
Aischylos. Prometheus vinctus. —299 
Alexandre I. [Manifesto of December 11, 1814.] In: D'Angeberg, Recueil des traités, 
conventions et actes diplomatiques concernant la Pologne. 1762-1862, Paris, 1862.— 
142 
Alvensleben. L. Kossuth nach der Capitulation von Vilagos, Weimar, 1852.—216 
Apollonius. Argonautica. —199 
Ba6cT, H. [A course of public lectures on political economy, January I860.] In: 
MocKOßOiii eedoMocmi, N« 19, HHBapb 24, 1860 (1st lecture). In:  B^CTHIKT» 
npoMbiuiA%HHocTH, HHBapb 1860 (9 lectures).—42 
Balzac, H. de. La Cousine Bette.— 36 
— Illusions perdues.— 266 
Bamberger, L. Juchhe nach Italia! Bern und Genf,  1859.—249 
Bassermann, F. D. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on April 25, 1848.] 
In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 8, Frankfurt am Main, 
1849.—105 
Bazancourt,  [C.-L.].  L'Expédition de Crimée jusqu'à la prise de  Sebastopol.  Chroniques de 
la guerre de l'Orient, 5 e éd., t. I-II, Paris, 1857.—164 
Becker, N. Der deutsche Rhein. In: Gedichte von Nicolaus Becker, Köln, 1841.—440 
Beckmann. [A notice on Cherval's conspiracy.] In: Kölnische Zeitung, 25. Februar 
1852.—56-57 
Bethell, R. [Speech in the House of Commons on August 6, I860.] In: The Times, 
No. 23692, August 7, I860.—445 
Bible 
The Old Testament 
Genesis.—131 
Numbers.—72, 244-45 
Psalms.—44, 238, 298 
The New Testament 
Matthew.—36, 44, 46, 238 
Luke.—238 
The Acts of the Apostles.— 77 

=====第668页=====
644 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
[Biscamp, E.] Erklärung, London, 9. Febr. 1860. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 46, 15. 
Februar 1860, Beilage.— 17 
— [Letter to the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung, London, October 20, 1859.] 
In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 300, 27. Oktober 1859, Beilage. In the article: 
Prozess Vogt gegen die Redaction der Allgemeinen Zeitung. —127, 261, 263 
— Der Reichsregent. In: Das Volk, Nr. 2, 14, Mai 1859.—118 
[Blind, K.] Gegen Karl Vogt. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 44, 13. Februar 1860, 
Beilage.— 17, 186 
— The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary. In: The Free Press, No. 5, 
May 27, 1859.—8, 123, 124, 317 
— [Statement.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 313, 9. November 1859.—8, 11, 16, 
125 
— [To the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 345, 11. 
Dezember  1859.—11,  17, 126 
— Warnung zur gefälligen Verbreitung. In: Das Volk, Nr. 7, 18. Juni 1859.—6, 9, 
10, 119, 121 
— Zur Warnung (pamphlet).—3, 4, 6, 8-11, 119-32, 240, 263, 267, 274, 275-77, 
283, 284, 316, 318-19 
— Zur Warnung. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 173, 22. Juni 1859, Beilage. In the 
article: K. Vogt und die deutsche Emigration in London. —10, 14, 119-20, 121, 
122, 124, 263 
[Bluntschli, J. C] Die Kommunisten in der Schweiz nach den bei Weitling vorgefundenen 
Papieren. Wörtlicher Abdruck des Kommissionalberichtes an die H. Regierung des 
Standes in Zürich, Zürich,  1843.—  79 
Boiardo, M. Orlando innamorato. —313 
Bonaparte, N.-L. Des idées napoléoniennes, Paris, 1839.—159 
Bonerius, U. Der Edel Stein, Berlin, 1816.—102, 193 
[Borkheim, S. L.] Napoleon III. und Preussen. Antwort eines deutschen Flüchtlings auf 
"Preussen in 1860" von Edmond About, London, 1860.—29, 329 
Bougeant, G. Histoire du traité de Westphalie, ou des négociations qui  se firent à Münster 
et à Osnabrüg, pour établir la paix entre toutes les puissances de lEurope, t. I-VI, 
Paris,  1751.—511 
Brandenburg, F. W. [Speech at the sitting of the Chamber of Deputies on April 20, 
1849.] In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 280, 24. April 1849.—258 
Brass,  A. [Statement.] In: Neue Schweizer Zeitung, Nr. 11, 12. November 1859.—187 
Braunthal, B. von. Das Nachtlager in Granada. —242 
Brentano, L. [Speeches in the Frankfurt National Assembly] 
— August 7, 1848. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der 
deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 2, 
Frankfurt am Main, 1848.—254 
— August 8, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 72, 11. August 1848.—254 
Büchner, L. Kraft und  Stoff.  Empirisch-naturphilosophische Studien, Frankfurt a. M., 
1855.—71,  105, 190 

=====第669页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 645 
Butler, S. Hudibras, a Poem Written in the Time of the Civil War, Vols. 1-3, London, 
1757.—190 
Byron, G. Don Juan.—78 
— Epitaph.—243 
Cabet, E. Voyage en Icarie, Paris, 1840.—88, 89 
Cairns, H. [Speech in the House of Commons on August 6, I860.] In: The Times, 
No. 23692, August 7, I860.—445 
Calderon, P. de la Barca. El Mâgico prodigioso.—28, 251 
Camoens, Luis de. Os Lusiadas. —99, 190 
Cervantes Saavedra, M. de. Vida y hechos del ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la 
Mancha.—100, 190, 258 
Chateaubriand, F.-R. Congrès de Vérone, Paris, 1838.—143 
Châtelet, C. Crimes et délits de l'Angleterre contre la France, ou l'Angleterre jugée par 
elle-même, Lyon, I860.—324, 325 
Chenu, A. Les conspirateurs. Les  sociétés  secrètes.  La préfecture de police sous Caussidière. 
Les corps francs, Paris, 1850.—73 
Christern, J. W. Doctor Eisele's und Baron von Beisele's Landtagsreise im April 
1847.—131,  274 
Cicero, Mfarcus] Tullius. De haruspicum responso.—297 
— De natura deorum. —295 
— Orationes in Catilinam.—68 
Colins, J. G. L'économie politique. Sources des révolutions et des utopies prétendues 
socialistes, v. I-III, Paris, 1856-57.—331 
— Science sociale, Paris, 1857.—331 
Cowley, H. [Speech in the House of Lords on April 23, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23602,  April 24, I860.—196 
Cuvier, G. Discours sur les révolutions du globe. Recherches sur les Ossements fossiles, 
Paris,  1821-24.—73 
Dante. La divina comedia. —50, 75, 209, 279 
— Die göttliche Komödie des Dante Alighieri. Aus dem Italienischen übersetzt und 
erklärt von Karl Ludwig Kannegiesser, Leipzig, 1843.—74, 100 
Demosphenes, Olynthiacae. —68 
Derby, E. [Speech in the House of Lords on January 24, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23525,  January 25, I860.—339-40 
Dickens, Ch. The Adventures of Oliver Twist.—70 
— The Life and Adventures of Martin Chuzzlewit (1843-44).—174 
Disraeli, B. [Speech in the House of Commons on January 24, I860.] In: The 
Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.—344 
Dolgoroukow, P. La vérité sur la Russie, Paris, 1860.—141, 429 

=====第670页=====
646 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Donizetti, G. Belisario. Opera. Libretto by S. Cammarano.—77 
Douglas, H. A Treatise on Naval Gunnery. Dedicated by Special Permission to the Lords 
Commissioners of the Admiralty, 3rd ed., London, Murray,  1851.—  360,  363 
Dréolle, E. Paris, 10 juillet. In: Le Constitutionnel, No. 193, 11 juillet 1860.—430 
Dupont, E. Chronique de l'intérieur. In: La voix du proscrit, No. 8, 15 décembre 
1850.—36 
[Eichhoff,  W.] [Erklärung vor dem Criminalgericht 8.-15. Mai I860.] In: Königlich 
privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung, Nr. 108, 9. Mai 1860, Beilage. —65 
— Stieber. In: Hermann, 10., 17., 24. September; 8., 22., 29. Oktober 1859.-^65 
Eisenmann, G. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on October 11, 1848.] 
In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, 1848-49.—103 
Epigram (anon.). In: Anthologia Graeca, XI, 203, vers. 7,  8.—245 
L'Europe en 1860 [Paris, 1859] (a description of the map). In: The Times, Nos. 23228 
and 23229, February 12 and 14, 1859.—137 
Fallmerayer, J. Ph. Fragmente aus dem Orient, Bd. I-II, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 
1845.—114 
Favre, J. [Speech in the Legislative Assembly on July 13, I860.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 195, 15 juillet I860.—455 
Fazy, J. J. [Speech at the meeting on the premises of the Club populaire on 
February 3, I860.] In: Revue de Genève, No. 29, 5 février 1860, Appendice. — 
196-97 
Fischart, J. Affentheurliche, Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung: von Thaten und 
Rahten der vor kurtzen langen und je weilen  vollennwolbeschreyten  Helden und Herrn: 
Grandgoschier, Gorgellantua und Pantagruel. Königen inn Utopien, Ledewelt und 
Nienenreich, Soldan der Neuen Kannarrien und Oudyssen Inseln: auch Grossfürsten 
im Nubel Nibel Nebelland, Erbvögt auff Nichilburg, und Niderherren zu Nullibingen, 
Nullenstein und Niergendheym Etwan von M. Franz Rabelais Französisch entworffen, 
Achte Ausgabe, 1617.—28, 33, 70, 118, 252, 254 
La foi des traités les puissances signataires et l'empereur Napoléon III, Paris, Dentu, 
1859.—140, 172, 431 
Fourier, Ch. Théorie de l'unité universelle. In: Œuvres complètes de Ch. Fourier, v. 2, 
Paris,  1843; v. 5, Paris, 1841.—38 
Garibaldi, G. [Address to the people of Palermo on September 10, I860.] In: 
L'Indépendance belge, No. 261, 17 septembre 1860.—490 
— [Address to Victor Emmanuel, May I860.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 143, 
22. Mai I860.—382 
Gladstone, W. E. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— April 18, 1853. In: The Times, No. 21406, April 19, 1853.—351 
— May 8, 1854. In: The Times, No. 21736, May 9, 1854.—351 
— January 25, 1860. In: The Times, No. 23526, January 26, I860.—341 

=====第671页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 647 
— February 10, 1860. In: The Times, No. 23540, February 11, I860.—350, 351, 
352, 353 
— August 6, 1860. In: The Times, No. 23692, August 7, I860.—444 
Goethe, J. W. von.  Faust.—71,  91, 311 
— Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. —74 
Görgei, A. Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 1849, Bd. 1-2, 
Leipzig, 1852.—226 
Gottfried von Strassburg. Tristan und Isolde. —136 
Granville. [Speech in the House of Lords on January 24, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23525,  January 25, I860.—339 
[Greiner, Th. L.] Der flüchtige Reichsregent Vogt mit seinem Anhange und die deutsche 
Monatsschrift von Adolf Kolatschek, 1850.—101 
Grey, G. [Speech in the House of Lords on January 24, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23525,  January 25, I860.—335, 336 
Grillparzer, F. Die Ahnfrau. —120 
Grün, K. Louis Bonaparte, die Sphinx auf dem französischen Kaiserthron, Hamburg, 
I860.—199 
Hafner, L. [The character sketch of Marx.] In: Hamburger Nachrichten, 28. Februar 
1851.—99 
Hartmann von Aue. Iwein. Eine Erzählung, Berlin, 1843.—184 
H axthausen, A. Studien über die innern Zustände des Volkslebens, und insbesondere die 
ländlichen Einrichtungen Russlands, Bd. 1-3, Hannover-Berlin, 1847-52.—146 
Hegel, G. W. F. Die Wissenschaft der Logik, Berlin, 1833-34.—6 
Heine, H. Französische Zustände. —114 
— Die Heimkehr. —235 
— Kobes  L—69, 108 
— Lutetia. —114 
— Reisebilder. —181 
Herbert, S. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— February 17, 1860. In: The Times, No. 23546, February 18, I860.—363 
— June 26, 1860. In: The Times, No. 23657, June 27, I860.—404, 436 
Hermann, K. [Speech in the District Court in Augsburg on October 24, 1859.] In: 
C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung,  Genf,  1859.—28, 33 
[Hirsch, W.] Die Opfer der Moucharderie, Rechtfertigungsschrift von Wilhelm Hirsch. In: 
Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal Zeitung, 1., 8., 15., 22. April 
1853.—305,  311 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus). Epistolae. —214 
— Satirae.— 26, 136, 247 
Horsman, E. [Speech in the House of Commons on July 26, I860.] In: The Times, 
No. 23683, July 27, I860.—432 
Hugo, V. Napoleon le Petit, Londres, 1852.—189 
'22-i sc-r. 

=====第672页=====
648 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
[Humboldt, A.] Briefe von Alexander von Humboldt an Varnhagen von Ense aus den 
Jahren 1827 bis 1858. Aufl. 4, Leipzig, I860.—369 
Joinville, F. F. De l'Etat des forces navales de la France. Avec l'appendice et les notes, 
Francfort s/M., 1844.—434 
Jourdan, L. Les frontières naturelles. In: Le Siècle, 31 mai 1860.—206 
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis). Satirae, Liber I.—44 
Die Kaiserchronik. In: Geschichte der deutschen Literatur, Leipzig, 1857.—185 
KapaM3HH"b, H. M. Hcmopia Tocydapcmea Pocciücuaeo, T. XI, CaHKTneTep6ypn>, 
1824,  crp. 23.—141,  485 
Kinglake, A. W. [Speech in the House of Commons on July 12, I860.] In: The 
Times, No.  23671,  July 13, I860.—172, 208 
[Kinkel, G.] Brief des Herausgebers an einen Freund in Amerika. In: Hermann, Nr. 12, 
26. März 1859.—314 
— Denkschrift über das deutsche Nationalanlehn zur Förderung der Revolution, d. d. 
Elmira im Staate New York, 22. Febr. 1852. In: New-Yorker Staats-Zeitung, 2. 
März 1852.—314 
— Vertheidigungsrede des Dr. G. Kinkel vor dem preussischen Kriegsgericht zu Rastatt 
am 4. August 1849. In: Abend-Post, Nr. 78, 79, 5., 6. April 1850.—6, 95-96 
Die Klage. In: Der Nibelunge Noth mit der Klage. In der ältesten Gestalt. Mit den 
Abweichungen der gemeinen Lesart, Berlin, 1826.—184 
[Klapka, G.] Memoiren. April bis October 1849, Leipzig, 1850.—226 
Kolatschek, A. Die Juchheisten. In: Stimmen der Zeit, Oktober 1860.—327 
[Kossuth, L.] Authentic Life of His  Excellency  Louis Kossuth..., London, 1851.—216, 223 
— L'Europe, l'Autriche et la Hongrie, 2 e éd. augmentée, Bruxelles, 1859.—165, 
223 
— In the Name of the Hungarian Nation. To the Soldiers Quartered in Italy. 
February, 1853. In: The Times, No. 21348, February 10, 1853. In the article: 
M. Kossuth and the Insurrection in Lombardy.—217 
— [Letter to McAdam in Glasgow. London, September 26, 1859.] In: The 
Times, No. 23428, October 4, 1859.—224 
— Meine Schriften aus der Emigration, Bd. I-III. —224 
La Farina, Giuseppe. Storia d'Italia dal 1815 al 1850, v. I-V, Torino, 1851-52!—423 
La Guéronnière, Arthur. L'empereur Napoléon III et l'Italie, Paris, Dentu, 1859.— 
182, 373 
— Napoléon III, portrait politique, Paris, 1853.—182 
— Portrait politique de l'empereur Napoléon HI, trad, en arabe par M. Rochaid 
Dahdah, Paris, I860.—182 
Lapinski, Th. Feldzug der Ungarischen Hauptarmee im Jahre 1849, Hamburg, 
1850.—148,  214, 215, 226, 227 

=====第673页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 649 
Las Cases, E. Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène, ou journal où se trouve consigné, jour par jour, 
ce qu'a dit et fait Napoléon durant dix-huit mois, t. 2, Paris, 1824.—143 
[Lassalle, F.] Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preussens. Eine Stimme aus der 
Demokratie, Berlin, 1859.—27 
[Lévy, A.] L'empereur Napoléon III et les principautés roumaines. Nouvelle éd., Paris, 
1858.—182 
Lichnowski, F. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on July 25, 1848.] In: 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 1. September 1848.—87 
Liebig, Justus von. Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physiologie, 
Braunschweig, 1840.—243 
Liebknecht, W. [An die Redaction der "Allgemeine Zeitung", Augsburg.] London, 
19. Oktober 1859. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 300, 27. Oktober 1859.—240 
[Lommel, G.] Das Centralfest der Deutschen Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der Westschweiz 
(Lausanne, 1859),~Genl, 1859.—68, 69, 71, 185, 190, 191 
— Die Schiller-Feier in  Genf.  Nebst einem Nachtrag enthaltend die diesjährige 
Todtenfeier für Robert Blum,  Genf.  1859.—71,  72, 74 
Longinus. On the Sublime. — 120 
Das Ludwigslied. In: Hausschatz der Volkspoesie. Sammlung der vorzüglichsten und 
eigentümlichsten Volkslieder aller Länder und Zeiten, Leipzig, 1846.—154, 159 
[McAdam.] [Statement.] In: The Times, No. 23431,  October 7, 1859.—224 
Das Mähre von Weinschwelg (a thirteenth-century German comic poem).—52 
De Maistre, X. Voyage autour de ma chambre. In: Œuvres  complètes,  Paris, 1847.—247 
Malmesbury, J. [Statement in the House of Lords on April 23, I860.] In: The 
Times, No. 23602, April 24, I860.—178, 179, 181 
Mazzini, G. La Guerra. In: Pensiero ed Azione, No. 17, 2-16 maggio 1859.—153, 180, 
500 
[Meyen, E.] Carl Vogts Kampf gegen die Augsburger Allgem. Zeitung und die Marxianer. 
In: Der Freischütz, Nr. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 9., IL, 14., 16., 18. Februar 
I860.—18,  240 
— Der Process Carl Vogt's gegen die Augsburger Allg. Ztg. In: Der Freischütz, Nr. 
132, 3. November 1859. In the section: Aus der Tagesgeschichte. —4 
Morny, Ch. Discours prononcé par M. le comte d^Morny, président du Corps législatif le 8 
février 1859 à l'ouverture de la session legislative de 1859. In: Le Moniteur universel, 
No. 40, 9 février 1859.—159 
Mozart, W. A. Don Giovanni. Opera. Libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte. —40 
Napoléon III et la question roumaine, Paris, 1859.—162, 429 
Newcastle. [Speech in the House of Lords on January 24, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23525,  January 25, I860.—337 
22* 

=====第674页=====
650 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Niegolewscki. [Speech in the Chamber of Deputies on May 12, I860.] In: 
Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 136, 15. Mai I860.—394-95, 400 
Oliphant, L. Universal Suffrage and Napoleon HI, London, 1860.—180 
Olivier. [Speech in the Corps Législatif on June 26, I860.] In: Le Moniteur universel, 
No. 180, 28 juin I860.—430-31 
Orges, H. Erklärung. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 12, 12. Januar 1860.—263, 317 
Palmerston, H. J. T. [Speeches in the House of Commons] 
— July 21, 1849. In: The Times, No. 20235, July 23, 1849.—136 
— January 25, 1860. In: The Times, No. 23526, January 26, I860.—339 
Persius, Flaccus. Satirae.—213, 243, 245 
Petétin, A. De l'annexion de la Savoie, Paris, 1859.—193 
[Pindar, P.] The Lousiad. The Works of Peter Pindar, Esq. [John Wolcot]. In 3 vols., 
Vol. I, London, 1797.—99 
Plautus. Poenulus.—112 
Plümicke, J. C. Handbuch für die Königlich Preussischen Artillerie-Offiziere. Entworfen. 
Th. I. Das Materielle der Artillerie, Berlin, 1820.—65 
La politique anglaise, Paris, Dentu, 1860.—174 
Pope, A. The Dunciad. An Heroic Poem, London, 1728.—237, 247, 250 
Proudhon, P.-J. De la justice poursuivie par l'église, Bruxelles, 1858.—157 
Rademacher, J. G. Rechtfertigung der von den Gelehrten misskannten, verstandesrechten 
Erfahrungsheillehre der alten scheidekünstigen Geheimärzte und treue Mittheilung des 
Ergebnisses einer 25-jährigen Erprobung  dieser  Lehre am Krankenbette, 2. Ausg., Bd. 1, 
Berlin, 1846.—33 
Radowitz, J. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on August 12, 1848.] In: 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 76, 15. August 1848.—253 
Raveaux, F. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 16, 1848.] In: 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, 1848.—253 
Reichenbach, O. Lithographierte Erklärung, 28. Oktober 1852.—315 
Rotteck, K. Allgemeine Geschichte vom Anfang der historischen Kenntniss bis auf unsere 
Zeiten; für denkende  Geschichtsfreunde,  Freiburg und Konstanz, 1813-18.—236, 242 
Rousseau, J.-J. Le contrat  social  ou principes du droit  politique,  v. 5, Londres, 1782.—401 
Rüge, A. Enthüllungen. September 1853. In: Herold des Westens, 11. September 
1853.—87 
Russell, J. [Speech in the House of Commons on March 26, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23578,  March 27, I860.—383 
[Safafik, P. J.] Slovansky zemëvid. In: P. J. Safafik, Slovanskj nârodopis, 1842.—151 

=====第675页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 651 
Saint-Amand (Jean-Armand Lacoste), Antier et F. Lemaître. Robert Macaire, pièce, 
Paris,  1834.—447 
Schaible, Ch. The Vogt Pamphlet. To the Editor of "The Daily Telegraph", London, Febr. 
14. In: The Daily Telegraph, February 15, I860.—130 
Schiller, J. Ch. F. von. Don Carlos. Infant von Spanien. —258 
— Der Jüngling am Bache. —187 
— Die Räuber. —35 
— Wallenstein Tod. —8 
— Wilhelm Teil.— 40, 48, 101 
Schleinitz. [Speech in the Prussian Diet on April 20, I860.] In:  Stenographische  Berichte 
über die Verhandlungen des Preussischen Hauses der Abgeordneten, Bd. 2, Berlin, 
I860.—379 
Schlöffel, F. W. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on April 25, 1849.] In: • 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 8, Frankfurt am Main, 1848.—107 
Schulenburg, F. W. [Address to the People of Berlin on October 17, 1806.] In: Le 
Moniteur universel, No. 304, 31 octobre 1806.—67 
Scott, Sir Walter. Waverley.—97 
Senecae, L. Annaeus. Medea.—299 
Shakespeare. W. All's Well That Ends Well— 40 
— The Comedy of Errors.—260 
— Hamlet, Prince of Denmark.—116, 190, 245 
— King Henry IV.—29, 38, 40, 46, 47, 48, 55, 59, 128 
— King Richard II.—86 
— King Richard III.—38 
— Love's Labour's Lost.—272 
— Macbeth.—40 
— The Merchant of Venice.—245 
— Midsummer Night's Dream.—35 
— Romeo and Juliet.—378 
Simon, E. Un tableau de moeurs politiques en Allemagne. Le  procès  de M. Vogt avec la gazette 
d'Augsbourg. In: Revue  contemporaine,  9 e année, 2 e série, t. 13, Paris, 1860.—42, 93, 
112, 113, 209 
Smith, J. Book of Mormon, 1830.—118 
Sterne, L. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy. Gent.—245, 246 
Stratford de Redcliffe. [Interpellation respecting the Syrian affairs in the House of 
Lords on August 3, I860.] In: The Times, No. 23690, August 4, 1860,-429 
[Szabo, I.] The State Policy of Modern Europe, from  the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century to 
the Present Time. In two volumes, London,  1857.—  505-27 
Szemere, B. Hungary, from 1848 to I860, London, I860.—149, 225 
Tacitus. Annales. —133 
— Vita Julii Agricolae.—285 
Turquan, J. Une illuminée au  XIX e siècle (la baronne de Kriidener), 1766-1824, Paris, 
s.a.—138 

=====第676页=====
652 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Uhland, L. Die deutsche Nationalversammlung an das deutsche Volk. In: Stenographischer 
Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu 
Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 9, Frankfurt am Main, 1849.—106 
Des Sängers Fluch. —108 
Urquhart, D. The Crisis. France in Face of the Four Powers, Paris, 1840.—147 
— Diplomatie Transactions in Central Asia from 1834 to 1839, London, 
1841.—116-17 
— England, France, Russia and Turkey. In: E. Tucker, Political Fly-Sheets, No. 3, 
1835.—116 
— The New Hope for  Poland,  London, 1855.—148 
— Progress of Russia in the West, North, and South, by Opening the Sources of Opinion 
and Appropriating the Channels of Wealth and Power, London, 1853.—116-17 
— [Speech at a meeting in London on May 9, 1859.] In: The  Free  Press,  No. 5, May 
27, 1859. In the article: Mr. Urquhart's Address on Neutrality.—117 
— Visit to the Hungarian Exiles at Kutayah, etc. Appendix.  Correspondence  of Kossuth, 
London [1853].—214-18 
Vegezzi-Ruscalla. La nazionalità di Nizza, 3 ed., Nizza, 1860.—198 
Venedey, J. Pro domo und pro patria gegen Karl Vogt, Hannover, F. Brecke, 1860.—69, 
109, 120, 121 
— [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 19, 1848.] In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 109, 22. September 1848. In the section: Deutschland. 22. 
September 1848.—103 
— [To the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 158, 7. 
Juni 1859.—120-21 
Vincke, G. [Speeches in the Frankfurt National Assembly] 
— June 21, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 25, 25. Juni 1848.—251, 254 
— July 15, 1848. In: Deutsche Reichstags-Zeitung, Nr. 49, 16. Juli 1848.—251 
— August 8, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 72, 11. August 1848.—254 
— September 16, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 106, 19. September 
1848.—252 
— October 23, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 126, 26. Oktober 1848.—254 
— October 24, 1848. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der 
deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt 
am Main, 1848.—254 
— November 14, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 145, 17. November 
1848.—255 
— December 12, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 169, 15. Dezember 
1848.—255 
— [Speech in the Prussian National Assembly on December 13, 1848.] In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 196, 16. Januar 1849.—256 
— [Speech in the Prussian United Diet on December 28, 1848.] In: Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Nr. 184, 1. Januar 1849.—256 
— [Speech in the Prussian United Diet.] In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 185, 
3. Januar 1849.—256 
— [Speech in the Second Chamber of the Prussian National Assembly on March 
22, 1849.] Inf Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 255, 25. März 1849.—257 

=====第677页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 653 
— [Proposal concerning the draft address on the presenting of the Imperial 
Crown, made in the Second Chamber of the Prussian National Assembly on 
March 31, 1849.] In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 262, 3. April 1849.—257 
— [Amendment to the draft address on the presenting of the Imperial Crown, 
made in the Second Chamber of the Prussian National Assembly.] In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 263, 4. April 1849.—257 
Virgil. Aeneidos.— 282, 303 
— Bucolicon. — 78 
— Georgicon. —46, 239 
Vögele, A. [Statement of September 17, 1859.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 300, 27. 
Oktober 1859.—3, 123, 124, 125, 128 
Vogt, K. An K.  Blind.  In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 44, 13. Februar 1860, Beilage. —186 
— Erklärung. In: Schweizer Handels-Courier, Nr. 162, 16. Juni 1859. Ausseror­
dentliche Beilage.— 29, 121 
— Köhlerglaube und Wissenschaft. Eine Streitschrift gegen Hofrath Rudolph Wagner in 
Göttingen, Giessen, 1855.—108 
— [Note on the annexation of Savoy.] In: Schweizer Handels-Courier, Nr. 66, 8. 
März 1860, Beilage.— 197 
— Mein  Prozess  gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung. Stenographischer Bericht, Dokumente und 
Erläuterungen, Gent, 1859.—9, 11, 12, 14, 18, 28, 39, 48, 55, 60, 64, 71, 74, 76, 
86, 88, 94, 95, 100, 118, 121, 123, 126, 127, 129, 131, 132, 135, 137, 138, 139, 
184, 185, 191, 203, 228, 241, 259, 279, 280, 304 
— Programm.  Genf,  den 1. April [1859]. In: C. Vogt. Mein Prozess gegen die 
Allgemeine Zeitung,  Genf,  1859.—115 
— [Speech at the Joint Festival of the German Workers' Educational Associations 
in Lausanne on June 26, 1859.] In: [G. Lommel,] Das Centralfest der Deutschen 
Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der Westschweiz,  Genf,  1859.—191 
— [Speeches in the Frankfurt National Assembly] 
— September 15, 1848. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der 
deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 3, 
Frankfurt am Main, 1848.—102 
— September 19, 1848. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 109, 22. September 
1848.—103 
— April 24, 1849. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 283, 25. April 1849.—210 
— May 26, 1849. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen 
constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 9, Frankfurt am 
Main, 1849.—108 
— Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, Genf und Bern, [März] 1859.—12, 33, 
72, 94, 108-09, 133, 134,  135-41,  143-50, 153-56, 161-72, 178, 179, 180, 181, 
183, 189, 439 
— Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, Genf und Bern, [6. Juni] 1859.—168, 
175, 176 
— Untersuchungen über Thierstaaten, Frankfurt a. M., 1851.—69 
— Zur Warnung, Bern, 23. Mai. In: Schweizer Handels-Courier, Nr. 150, 2. Juni 
1859,  Ausserordentliche Beilage.— 12, 28, 29, 38, 118, 212 

=====第678页=====
654 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Zur Warnung. In: Das Volk, Nr. 6, 11. Juni 1859.—38, 119 
La vraie question. France-Italie-Autriche, Paris, Dentu, 1859.—139, 162, 172, 431 
Walther von der Vogelweide. Die Gedichte.... Hrsg. von K. Lachmann, Berlin, 
1827.—108 
Wermouth-Stieber. Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Bd. 
1-2, Berlin, 1853.—312-13 
Wesendonk. Erklärung, Düsseldorf, 8. Februar 1849. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 
219, 11. Februar 1849, Beilage.— 106 
Weydemeyer, J., Cluss, A., Jacoby, A. An die Redaction der New-Yorker Criminal-
Zeitung, 7. November 1853. In: Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-
Zeitung, Nr. 37, 25. November 1853.—313 
Willich, A. Doctor Karl Marx und seine Enthüllungen. In: Belletristisches Journal und 
New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, 28. Oktober, 4. November 1853.—65 
Wolff,  W. Erklärung, Manchester, 6. Februar 1860. In: Die Reform. 11. Februar 1860; 
Volks-Zeitung, 24. Februar 1860; Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 44, 13. Februar 1860, 
Beilage.— 73 
— Nachträgliches aus dem Reich. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue, April 1850.—109, 115 
— [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on May 26, 1849.] In: 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 9, Frankfurt am Main, 
1849.—106 
Wolfram von Eschenbach. Parzival. —213 
Wood, Ch. [Resolution in the House of Commons on August 13, I860.] In: The Times, 
No. 23698, August 14, 1860.-456 
[Zabel, F.] Karl Vogt und die Allgemeine Zeitung. In: National-Zeitung, Nr. 37, 22. Januar 
I860.—12, 14, 25, 127, 359 
— Wie man radikale Flugblätter macht. In: National-Zeitung, Nr. 41, 25. Januar 
I860.—12, 14, 25, 72, 127, 259, 276-77 
Zachariae, H. A. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 19, 
1848.] In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituiren­
den Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, 1848-49.—103 
Zimmermann, E. [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on October 10, 1848.] 
In: Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, Bd. 4, Frankfurt am Main, 1848.— 103 

=====第679页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 655 
DOCUMENTS 
An Act for the better Government of India. August 2, 1858.—432, 445-46 
An Act for the preservation of the Health and Morals of Apprentices and others employed in 
cotton and other mills, and cotton and other factories (1802).—411 
An Act to regulate the issue of bank notes and for giving to the governor and company of  the 
Bank of England certain privileges for a limited  period.  July 19, 1844. In: The Statutes  of 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and  Ireland,  7&8 Victoria, 1844, London, 
1844.—498 
An Act to regulate the Issue of Bank Notes in  Ireland,  and to regulate  the Repayment of certain 
sums advanced by the Covernor and Company of  the Bank of Ireland for the Public  service 
(21 July 1845).—498 
Aufruf an das deutsche Volk, 26. Mai 1849. In: Stenographischer Bericht über die 
Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am 
Main,  Bd. 9, Frankfurt am Main, 1849.—106 
Aux démocrates de toutes les nations. In: Le Constitutionnel, 18 novembre 1850.—81 
Bonaparte, L.-N. Au nom du peuple français. In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 15, 15 
janvier 1852.—330 
— Discours de Bordeaux, 9 octobre 1852.—334 
Bloomfield. J. [Dispatch to Lord John Russell, January 14, I860.] In: L'Indépendance 
belge, No. 73, 13 mars I860.—383 
Code Napoléon, Paris und Leipzig, 1808.—271 
Confession of Bangya Before the Council of War. In: The Free Press, No. 16, May 12, 
1858.—220 
Corpus juris civilis. Hrsg. von C. Otto, Bd. I, Leipzig, 1830.—251 
Correspondence relative to the Affairs of Hungary. 1847-1849. Presented to both Houses of 
Parliament by Command of Her Majesty, August 15, 1850, London, 1850.—215 
Correspondence respecting the Affairs of Italy. January to May 1859. London, 1859: 
— Chelsea to Malmesbury, March 5, 1859.—160 
— Cowley to Malmesbury, April 10, 1859 (extract).—134, 158 
— Harris to Malmesbury, March 24, 1859.—177 
Correspondence  respecting  the Affairs of Italy from the Signing of Preliminaries of Villafranca 
to the Postponement of the Congress, London, 1860.—378 
Correspondence respecting the  proposed  annexation of Savoy and Nice to  France.  Presented  to 
the House of Commons by Command of Her Majesty, in pursuance of their Address  dated 
February 28, 1860, London, 1860: 
— Cowley to Russell, received February 8, 1860.—194 
— Cowley to Russell, received July 5, 1860.—193 
— Grey to Russell, received January 10, 1860.—194 
— Harris to Russell, received January 25, I860.—176-77, 195 
— Harris to Russell, received February 6, 1860.—195 

=====第680页=====
656 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Harris to Russell, received February 9, 1860.—196 
— Hudson to Russell, received February 16, 1860.—53, 195 
[Debates in the Corps Législatif on the new loan.] In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 117, 27 
avril 1859.—455 
[Debates in the Frankfurt National Assembly on the Polish elections, June 5, 1848.] In: 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 10, 10. Juni 1848.—253 
[Debates in the House of Commons on May 31 and June 1, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23635,  June 1, I860.—434 
[Debates in the House of Commons on fortification, July 23, I860.] In: The Times, No. 
23680, July 24, I860.—446 
[Debates in the Prussian Diet on April 21, I860.] In: The Times, No. 23604, April 26, 
I860.—379 
[Debates in the Prussian Diet on the military expenses, February 10, I860.] In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Preussischen Hauses der 
Abgeordneten, Bd. 1, Berlin, I860.—495 
[Declaration of the German Workers' Educational Association in West Switzerland, 
August 1859.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 235, 23. August 1859.—39 
[Decree on the customs duties on grain and flour, August 18, I860.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 235, 23 août I860.—465 
Extract from the Minutes of the Council of War, held at Aderbi, Circassia, on Mehemed Bey 
alias Jean Bangya d'Hlosfaioa. In: The Free Press, No. 16, May 12, 1858.—220 
Firman réglant la condition des sujets chrétiens de la Porte Ottomane, 18 février 
1856.—468 
Frederick William IV. [Address to the Berlin population on March 19, 1848.] In: 
Allgemeine Preussische Zeitung Nr. 80, 20. März 1848.—367 
George III R. Message respecting Vessels captured by Spain at Nootka  Sound.  1790. 5 
May. In: The Parliamentary History of England from the Earliest Period to the Year 
1803,  London, 1816, Vol. 28.-337 
George IV R. [Message respecting Portugal, 11 December, 1826.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, London, 1827, Vol. 16.—337 
Gesetz, betreffend die Dienstvergehen der Richter und die unfreiwillige Versetzung  derselben 
auf eine andere Stelle oder in den Ruhestand. Vom 7. Mai 1851. In: Gesetz-Sammlung 
für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten 1851, Berlin. —271 
Gesetz über die Einführung des Strafgesetzbuchs für die Preussischen Staaten. Vom 14. 
April 1851. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten  1851.— 
268 
Gortschakoff, A. M. [Circular of May 20, 1860 to Russian Embassies in foreign 
countries.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung Nr. 165, 13. Juni 1860.—429 

=====第681页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 657 
— Circularschreiben an die russischen Gesandtschaften vom 15. (27.) Mai 1859. In: 
Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 167, 16. Juni 1859.—375 
Das Kaiserliche Diplom vom 20. Oktober I860.... In: Verfassung der Oesterreichischen 
Monarchie..., Wien, 1861.—225, 493, 499, 500 
Loi relative à l'importation et à l'exportation des céréales [le 15 avril  1832].  In: Le 
Moniteur universel, No. 109, 18 avril 1832.—465 
Napoléon Bonaparte. Correspondance inédite, officielle et confidentielle de Napoléon 
Bonaparte. Avec les cours étrangères, les princes, les ministres, et les généraux français 
et étrangers, en Italie, en Allemagne et en Egypte, Paris, 1819, v. 1-7.—163 
— A la municipalité de Venise. Montebello, le 7 prairial, an 5 (26 mai 1797).—162 
— Au chef de division commandant la marine française dans le golfe Adriatique. 
Montebello, le 25 prairial, an 5 (13 juin 1797).—163 
— Au quartier-général à  Montebello,  le 30 floréal, an 5 (19 mai 1797.) Au Directoire 
executif. —163 
[Napoleon I.] Proclamation Addressed to the Hungarians by Napoleon I. From 
Schoenbrunn, in May, 1809. In: B. Szemere, Hungary, from 1848 to 1860, 
London, I860.—162 
Napoleon III. [Decree on the granaries of November 16, 1858.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 322, le 18 novembre 1858.—157 
— [Letter to Mr. Fould, Minister of State, of January 5, I860.] In: Le Moniteur 
universel, No. 15, 15 janvier I860.—330-34 
— [Letter to Persigny of July 25, I860.] In: Le Constitutionnel, No. 215, 2 août 
1860;  The Times, Nos. 23687 and 23688, August 1 and 2, I860.—439, 447 
Note adressée par le conseil fédéral de la Suisse aux diverses puissances, pour exposer 
l'attitude que la Suisse se propose de prendre dans l'éventualité d'une guerre en Italie. 
Bern, 14 mars  [1859].  In: D' Angeberg, Recueil des traités, conventions et actes 
diplomatiques concernant l'Autriche et l'Italie, Paris, 1859.—176, 178 
Papers, 1858-1860, respecting past or apprehended Disturbances in Syria, 4 parts, 
London, I860.—429 
Pozzo di Borgo, K. Dépêche réservée du général  Poxuo  di Borgo en date de Paris du 4/16 
octobre 1825. In: Recueil de documents relatifs à la Russie pour la plupart secrets et 
inédits utiles à consulter dans la crise actuelle, Paris, 1854.—145 
Règlement organique de la principauté de Moldavie, New York, s.a.—142, 165 
Reichs-Verfassung für das Kaiserthum Österreich, Olmütz, 4. März 1849. In: Wiener 
Zeitung Nr. 57, 8. Mär/ 1849.—493, 501 
Report of the Commissioners appointed to consider the Defences of the United Kingdom; 
together with the Minutes of Evidence and Appendix; also  Correspondence  relative to a 
Site for an internal Arsenal. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of 
Her Majesty, London, I860.—425, 434 

=====第682页=====
658 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
[Report on the debates in the British Parliament on the plan for the national 
defence.] In: The Times, No. 23680, July 24, I860.—425 
[Report on "Prozess Vogt gegen die Redaction der Allgemeinen Zeitung".] In: 
Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 300, 301, 27, 28. Oktober 1859.—125 
Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the 
Home Department, for the Half Year ending 30th April 1860, London, 1860.—410-
12, 413-16, 417-20 
[Resolution on the abolition of the English army in India, June 12, I860.] In: The 
Times, No. 23645, June 13, I860.—432 
Schleinitz, A. [Dispatch of May 26, 1859 to General F. A. Willisen in Vienna 
concerning the mediation in the Italian war.] In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 211, 
30. Juli 1859.—368, 489 
— [Dispatch to K. Werther, Prussian Ambassador in Vienna, of June 14, 1859.] 
In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 174, 29. Juli 1859.—368, 489 
— [Circular to the Prussian representatives at German Courts of June 24, 
1859.] In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 171, 26. Juli 1859.—316, 489 
— [Dispatch to the Prussian representatives in London and St. Petersburg of 
June 24, 1859.] In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 170, 24. Juli 1859.—316, 
489 
— [Circular to Bismarck, Prussian representative in St. Petersburg, of June 26, 
1859.] In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 171, 26. Juli 1859.—317, 489 
— [Dispatch to Count  Bernstorf,  Prussian representative in London, of June 
27, 1859.] In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 171, 26. Juli 1859.—316, 489 
— [Dispatch to K. Werther, Prussian Ambassador in Vienna, of July 5, 1859.] 
In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 174, 29. Juli 1859.—316, 489 
— [Dispatch to the Prussian representatives at German Courts of July 11, 
1859.] In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 173, 28. Juli 1859.—316, 489 
— [Dispatch to the Prussian representatives at German Courts of July 21, 
1859.] In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 170, 24. Juli 1859.—316, 489 
— [Dispatch to K. Werther, Prussian Ambassador in Vienna, of July 23, 1859.] 
In: Neue Preussische Zeitung, Nr. 174, 29. Juli 1859.—316, 489 
— Preussische Circulardepesche. 6. Juni 1860. In: Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 261, -17. 
September I860.—398 
Thouvenel, E. A. [Circular of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the 
Embassies.] In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 82, 22 mars 1860.—194, 195 
Treaties (chronologically): 
— Traité conclu à Schwedt entre la Russie et la Prusse, relatif à la remise en  séquestre 
au roi de Prusse des Villes de Stettin, Strahund et Wismar, 1713, 6 octobre. —377 
— Traité d'alliance et de garantie mutuelle conclu à St. Pétersbourg entre la Russie et 
la Prusse [1 (2) juin 1714].—377 
— Traité de paix entre Sa Majesté le roi de Prusse et la République française conclu et 
signé à Bâle, le 5 avril 1795.—135, 368 
— Traité entre la France et la république de Venise, signé à Milan, le 16 mai 
1797.—162-63 
— Traité de paix signé à Paris. 1814, 30 mai.— 374 

=====第683页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 659 
— Traité secret d'alliance défensive, conclu à Vienne entre l'Autriche, la Grande-
Bretagne et la France, contre la Russie et la Prusse, le 3 janvier 1815.—135, 374 
— Traité de paix signé à Paris, suivi d'un article additionnel. 1815, 20 
novembre. —374 
— Traité d'Unkiar-Iskelessi entre la Russie et la Porte Ottomane, signé à Constan­
tinople, le 8 juillet 1833.—382 
— Traité supplémentaire entre S. M. la reine du Royaume-Uni de la Grande-Bretagne 
et d'Irlande et l'empereur de Chine, signé à Houmon-Schai, le 8 octobre  1843.—338 
— Traité de commerce entre la Prusse et l'Autriche et de douanes, signé à Berlin, suivi 
d'articles séparés, d'un  protocole,  de deux tarifs, d'un cartel douanier et d'un cartel 
monétaire. 1853, 19 février. —491 
— Traité d'amitié entre la Russie et la Chine, signé à Tian-Tsin, le 13 juin 
1858.—338 
— Treaty of Commerce between Her Majesty and the Emperor of the French. Signed at 
Paris. January 23, I860.—  335,  341, 350, 373, 481 
Verfassungsurkunde für Kurhessen. Vom 5. Januar 1831. In: Geschichte der kurhessischen 
Landtage von 1830-1835. Dargestellt von Ferdinand Gössel. Cassel, 1837.—379 
Verfassungsurkunde für den Preussischen Staat. Vom 5. Dezember 1848. In: Gesetz-
Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1848.—376 
Verfassungsurkunde für den Preussischen Staat. Vom 31. Januar 1850. In: Gesetz-
Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1850.—295 
Verordnung, betreffend die Dienstvergehen der Richter und die unfreiwillige Versetzung 
derselben auf eine andere Stelle oder in den Ruhestand. Vom 10. Juli 1849. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, 1849, Berlin. —271 
[Victoria R.] The Queen's Speech. The Address. 1860, 24 January. In: The Times, No. 
23525,  January 25, I860.—335 
Wilhelm I. [The speech from the throne at the opening of the Prussian Diet on 
May 23, I860.] In: Königlich privilegierte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und 
gelehrten Sachen, Nr. 120, 24. Mai I860.—383 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS PUBLISHED 
IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 215, 3. August 1859, Beilage: Das Centralfest der deutschen 
Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der Westschweiz zu Lausanne 1859.—39 
Baltische Monatsschrift, Oktober 1859, Bd. I, H. L: Acht Monate des Jahres 
1859.—384 
Der Bund,  Nr. 71, 12. März 1860: Pro domo.— 179 
Le Constitutionnel, No. 193, 11 juillet 1860: Paris, 10 juillet. —430 
— No. 198, 16 juillet 1860: Affaires des deux Siciles. —421 

=====第684页=====
660 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 220, 7 août 1860: Affaires des deux Sidles.—449 
— No. 241, 28 août 1860: Affaires d'Italie.— 472 
Courrier du Dimanche, No. 42, 14 octobre 1860: Le mouvement littéraire. —324-25 
Der Deutsche Correspondent, 3. Dezember 1851: Der Agitationsverein in London. —97 
The Economist, No. 803, January 15, 1859: Foreign correspondence (From our 
correspondents). Paris, Thursday.—160 
— No. 804, January 22, 1859: The Practical Limits of the Imperial Power in 
France.—160 
— No. 857, January 28, 1860: Foreign  correspondence.  Paris, Thursday. Commercial 
Treaties and Free Trade.—342-44 
— No. 879, June 30, 1860: Exports of the Principal and other Articles of British and 
Irish Produce and Manufactures in the Five Months ended 31st May, 1860. 
Compared with the corresponding Months of the Year 1859 (table).—406-07, 
408-09 
— No. 883, July 28, 1860: The Board of Trade Returns.—432-33 
— No. 884, August 4, 1860: Taxation in France.—447 
— No. 885, August 11, 1860: The Finances of Sardinia.—453, 454, 455, 456 
— No. 886, August 18, 1860: The Wet Summer; Why Are There So Many Small 
Failures.—461,  463 
— No. 887, August 25, 1860: 
— Foreign correspondence (From our correspondents). Paris, Thursday.—466 
— Bank Returns and Money Market. Bank of England (From the Gazette).—482-83 
— No. 888, September 1, 1860: The Board of Trade Tables for July. The 
Half-Year's Exports and Imports.—481, 482 
— No. 889, September 8, 1860: 
— The Trade of India. The Cause of Its Depression.—479-81 
— Bank Returns and Money Market of England.—479, 481, 483 
— No. 898, November 10, 1860: The Rise in the Bank Rate of Discount—497 
L'Espérance, No. 85, 25 mars 1860: Allemagne. Correspondance particulière de 
l'Espérance. —205 
— No. 149, 30 mai 1860: Le Rhin.— 205 
The Free Press, No. 16, May 12, 1858: Sentence. January 20, 1858.—220 
— No. 5, May 27, 1859: Data by Which to Judge of Kossuth,—150, 218 
— September 28, 1859: Particulars of Kossuth's Transaction with Louis Napoleon.— 
222,  223 
Galignani's Messenger, No. 13876, July 22, 1859: Latest Intelligence.—174 
The Gardeners' Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette, No. 33, August 18, 1860 
(leader).—462 
The Glasgow Sentinel, November 20, 1858: Louis Kossuth and Panslavism.—221 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 64, 5 mars 1859: Partie non officielle, Paris, le 4 
mars.— 159, 160 
— No. 74, 15 mars 1859: Partie non officielle. Paris, le 14 mars. —134, 162 
— No. 100, 10 avril 1859: Partie non officielle. Paris, le 9 avril— 134, 162 

=====第685页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 661 
Neue Preussische Zeitung, 3. April 1849: Das Vaterland ist in Gefahr!— 257 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 106, 19. September 1848: [Report on the session of the 
Frankfurt National Assembly, September 16, 1848.]—252 
— Nr. 110, 23. September 1848: [Report on the session of the Frankfurt 
National Assembly, September 20, 1848.]—103 
— Nr. 144, 16. November 1848: Deutschland, 15. November.—242 
— Nr. 181, 29. Dezember 1848: 
— Deutschland— 103-04 
— Ein Aktenstück des Märzvereins. —102, 103 
— Nr. 224, 17. Februar 1849: Köln, 15. Februar.— 236 
— Nr. 257, 28. März 1849: Deutschland, Heidelberg, 23. März.— 55 
— Nr. 296, 12. Mai 1849: Deutschland, Berlin, 9. Mai.— 237 
Le Nord,  No. 148, 27 mai 1860: Résumé politique.—383 
La Patrie, 25 janvier 1860: Les voeux de la Savoie. —196 
— 27 janvier 1860: Le comté de Nice. —196 
Le Peuple de 1850, No. 26, 27 septembre: L'appel du Peuple et l'appel au Peuple. —153 
Prager Zeitung, Nr. 165, 15. Juli 1859: Politische Übersicht, Wien, 13. Juli.— 173 
Preussisches Wochenblatt, Nr. 23, 9. Juni 1855: Zur Signatur der russischen 
Politik— 141-42, 168 
Republik der Arbeiter, Nr. 22, 27. Mai 1854: Korrespondenzen.  Genf,  den 16. April 
1854.—57 
Revue de Genève, 6 décembre 1859 (leader).—187, 188, 194 
Revue contemporaine, 15 octobre 1860: La situation de l'Italie, Turin, le 8 octobre 
I860.—182 
PyccKuü uueanudh, Ne 164,  HK>AI>  31; N° 165, aßrycT 1, 1860: Bocmonubtu eonpoc. — 
467-69 
Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art, September 22, 1860.—200 
Schweizerische National-Zeitung, Nr. 72, 25. März 1852:  Inland.  Genf (Korrespondenz 
vom 21. März).— 302 
The Tablet, No. 205, April 13, 1844: The Papacy and the Great Powers.—145 
The Times, No. 18458, November 20, 1843: Express from Paris.—144 
— No. 21366, March 3, 1853: Italy. The "Voce delta Verita!"—2\7 
— No. 23203, January 14, 1859: The Bank of France.—249 
— Nos. 23524, 23526, January 24, 26, 1860: The Armstrong Gun.—362, 363 
— No. 23533, February 3, 1860: Austria (From our own correspondent).—195 
-^ No. 23540, February 11, 1860: The Financial Statement— 353 
— No. 23545, February 17, 1860: Trial of Mr. Whitworth's Rifled Cannon.—362 
— No. 23547, February 20, 1860: Experiments with Mr. Whitworth's Breech-
Loading Cannon.—364 
— No. 23585, April 4, 1860: The Whitworth and Armstrong Guns.—363 

=====第686页=====
662 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 23637, June 4, 1860: London, Monday, June 4, I860.—435 
— No. 23653, June 22, 1860: London, Friday, June 22, I860.—404 
— No. 23654, June 23, 1860: London, Saturday, June 23, I860.—435 
— No. 23655, June 25, 1860: London, Monday, June 25, I860.—403 
— No. 23658, June 28, 1860: London, Thursday, June 28, I860.—404 
— No. 23679, July 23, 1860 (telegram).—421 
— No. 23698, August 14, 1860: The Corn Trade.—461 
— No. 23703, August 20, 1860: Ireland (From our ovm correspondent). The 
Harvest.—462 
— No. 23704, August 21, 1860: The Corn Trade.—461 
— No. 23728, September 18, I860.—490 
Das Volk, Nr. 2, 14. Mai 1859: Der Reichsregent— 118 
— Nr. 5, 4. Juni 1859: Mazzini und Monsieur Bonaparte. —180 
Volksblatt, 7. November 1859: [An article on Marx.]— 208-09 

=====第687页=====
663 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Aargauer Nachrichten —a Swiss liberal daily published in Aarau from 1854 to 
1918.—204 
Abend-Post. Demokratische Zeitung —a German democratic newspaper published in 
Berlin, appeared under this title from January to July 1850.—33 
Allgemeine Preussische Zeitung —an official daily newspaper of the Prussian 
Government published in Berlin from 1843 to 1848.—367 
Allgemeine Zeitung —a German conservative daily founded in 1798; from 1810 to 
1882 it was published in Augsburg.—3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
25, 28, 39, 48, 55, 58, 60, 64, 71, 72, 74, 76, 86, 88, 94, 95, 100, 111-12, 113, 
114, 115, 120, 121, 124, 125, 126, 127, 131-32, 179, 184, 188, 191, 228, 240, 
241, 248, 259, 271-72, 273, 275, 276, 277, 282-83, 284 318-19, 375, 398 
The Army and Navy Gazette—an official weekly organ of the British War Office 
published in London from 1860 to 1921.—405 
Augsburger Zeitung —see Allgemeine Zeitung 
Baltimore Wecker —a German-language daily, published by the Socialist Gymnastic 
Association in the USA from 1851 to 1911; its founder and editor was Karl 
Schnauf fer.— 97 
Baltische Monatsschrift —German-language monthly published in Riga from 1859 to 
1913.—248,  384 
Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung—a weekly founded by 
German petty-bourgeois émigrés in New York in 1852 and published under 
this title from March 18, 1853 to March 10, 1854.—65, 219, 305, 313 
Berliner Militär-Wochenschrift —see Deutsche Wehrzeitung 
Breslauer Zeitung —a German daily founded in Breslau (Wroclaw) in 1820; in the 
1850s-1860s it took a conservative line.—236, 237 
Der Bund,  Eidgenössisches Zentralblatt —a Swiss radical daily, published in German in 
Berne from 1850.—179 

=====第688页=====
664 Index of Periodicals 
Le Constitutionnel —a daily published from 1815 to 1870 in Paris; in the 1848 
revolution, a mouthpiece of the monarchist bourgeoisie (the Thiers party); after 
the 1851 coup d'état it became a Bonapartist newspaper.—36, 81, 186, 381, 
421, 430, 447, 449, 472, 474 
The Cornhill Magazine—a literary monthly published in London since 1860.—427 
Correspondent—see Der Deutsche Correspondent 
Courrier du Dimanche —an anti-Bonapartist weekly published in Paris from 1858 to 
1866.—324 
Criminal-Zeitung—see Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung 
Daily Telegraph—a newspaper founded in London in 1855 and published under 
this title up to 1937; in the 1850s it was liberal in approach.—14, 128, 130, 
243-46,  249 
Le Débat social, organe de la démocratie —a radical and democratic weekly, published 
in Brussels from 1844 to 1849.—321 
Der Deutsche Correspondent—a German-language daily published in Baltimore from 
1841 to 1918.—97 
Deutsche Monatsschrift für Politik, Wissenschaft, Kunst und Leben —a monthly of the 
German petty-bourgeois democrats, published in Stuttgart in 1850 and in 
Bremen in 1851.—100, 127, 327 
Deutsche Wehrzeitung Militärische Wochenschrift herausgegeben von einer Gesellschaft 
deutscher Offiziere und Militär Beamten —a conservative military paper published 
in Berlin twice weekly from 1848 to 1850.—60 
Dresdner Zeitung —a daily newspaper of the German petty-bourgeois democrats, 
published in Dresden from 1848 to 1850.—306, 311 
The Economist. Weekly Commercial Times, Bankers' Gazette, and Railway Monitor: a 
Political, Literary, and General Newspaper—a journal published in London since 
1843,  organ of the big industrial bourgeoisie.—-160, 342, 343, 406, 409, 447, 
453, 455, 461, 463, 466,  479-81,  497 
Eidgenössische Zeitung —a Swiss conservative daily published in Zurich from 1845 to 
1860 and- in Berne from 1860 to 1864.—179 
L'Espérance —a Bonapartist newspaper published in Geneva from 1859 to 
1862.—204-06, 211 
Frankfurter Journal—a German daily published in Frankfurt am Main from the 
seventeenth century up to 1903; in the 1840s and 1850s followed a liberal 
trend.—71,  302 
The Freeman's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser—an Irish daily published in 
Dublin from 1763 to 1924; from the 1840 to 1860s, supported the demand for 
the repeal of the Union with England and defended the Irish tenants' 
rights.—462 
The Free Press. Journal of the Foreign Affairs Committees—a journal on questions of 
foreign policy, opposed to the Palmerston government; published by David 
Urquhart and his supporters in London from 1855 to 1865 (weekly till April 
1858 and then monthly); renamed Diplomatic Review in 1866, it printed several 

=====第689页=====
Index of Periodicals 665 
works by Marx.—5, 6, 8, 10, 116, 123, 124, 128, 150, 218, 219-20, 223, 267, 
317 
Der Freischütz —a German newspaper on literature and art, published in Hamburg 
from 1825 to 1878.—4, 18, 240-42 
Galignani's Messenger—an English-language newspaper published in Paris from 
1814;  at first, three times weekly and then daily; it mostly reprinted excerpts 
from major English, American and French papers.—173 
Gardeners' Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette—an agricultural weekly published in 
London since 1841.—462 
La Gazette du Nord —a weekly founded in Paris in 1859.—42 
The Glasgow Sentinel—a Scottish weekly newspaper, organ of the Tories, published 
in Glasgow from 1850 to 1877.—116, 221 
Hamburger Nachrichten —a German newspaper published until 1868.—99 
Handels-Courier —see Schweizer Handels-Courier 
Hermann. Deutsches Wochenblatt aus London —a German-language weekly for the 
petty-bourgeois refugees published in London from January 1859; from 
January to July 1859, it was published and edited by Gottfried Kinkel. —6, 117, 
314 
Herold des Westens —a German-language weekly published in Louisville (USA) in 
1853 and edited by Karl Heinzen.—87 
Die Hornisse —A German newspaper published in Cassel in 1848-50 by the 
petty-bourgeois democrats Heise and Kellner; Biscamp was a contributor in 
1848-49.—118 
L'Indépendance belge. Journal mondial d'informations politiques et littéraires —a liberal 
daily founded in Brussels in 1831.—206, 211,  320-21,  383, 490 
L'Indépendant —a Swiss democratic weekly published in Geneva in 1851-52.—54, 
297 
La Jeune Italie —a French-language paper published in Paris in 1843 by Mazzini's 
supporters.—144 
Journal de Constantinople—a Turkish newspaper published in French from 1848. 
Subsidised by the Turkish Government as an official organ, it was actually a 
vehicle for French influence; appeared 6 times a month.—220 
Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires —a French daily published in Paris from 
1789 to 1944; after the 1851 coup d'état, an organ of the moderate Orleanist 
opposition.— 207 
Journal de Genève —a Swiss conservative daily founded in  1826.—  302 
Journal du tir fédéral —a Swiss newspaper published by the Shooting Society in 
French and German.—298 
Kladderadatsch —an illustrated satirical weekly of liberal and, later, nationalist-liberal 
trend, published in Berlin from 1848.—239, 290 

=====第690页=====
666 Index of Periodicals 
Kölnische Zeitung —a German daily published in Cologne from 1802 to 1945; 
during the 1848-49 revolution and the subsequent period of political reaction, it 
represented the interests of the Prussian liberal bourgeoisie.—5, 17, 56, 127, 
128, 242, 243, 248, 306, 311, 321 
Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen —a German 
moderate liberal newspaper published from 1785; known also as Vossische 
Zeitung after its owner Christian Friedrich Voss.— 65, 378, 383 
Kreuz-Zeitung —see Neue Preussische Zeitung 
Lithographierte Correspondenz —a German-language daily published in Paris from 
1845 to 1849.—186 
Mainzer Zeitung —a German newspaper published from 1802; in 1848 it was edited 
by Ludwig Bamberger.—248 
The Manchester Guardian—a daily founded in 1821; organ of the Free Traders and, 
from the mid-nineteenth century, of the Liberal Party.—326-27 
Le Messager du Léman —a Swiss democratic daily published in Geneva in French 
from 1853.—62 
Monatsschrift —see Deutsche Monatsschrift für Politik, Wissenschaft, Kunst und Leben 
Le Moniteur universel —a daily published in Paris from 1789 to 1901; appeared 
under this title after 1811; from 1799 to 1868—an official government 
publication.—134, 154, 159-62, 183, 195, 325, 330, 431, 455, 465 
Morgenblatt für gebildete Leser —a German literary daily published in Stuttgart and 
Tübingen from 1807 to 1865; carried a number of reports by Engels in 
1840-41.-113 
The Morning Chronicle—a daily published in London from 1770 to 1862; in the 
1840s, organ of the Whigs; in the early 1850s, organ of the Peelites and later of 
the Conservatives.—211 
The Morning Star—an English daily published by the Free Traders from 1856 to 
1869;  had a regular evening edition, The Evening Star.—117 
La Nation Suisse—a radical daily published in Geneva from 1860 to 1866.—206 
Le National—a French moderate republican daily published in Paris from 1830 to 
1851.—231 
National-Zeitung—a daily published in Berlin from 1848 to 1915; expressed liberal 
views in the 1850s.—12, 25, 26, 72, 81, 115, 125, 127, 128, 130, 236, 237, 246, 
259, 260, 264, 265, 268, 271, 277, 282, 283, 285, 289, 291, 292, 293, 294, 302, 
326, 373 
Les Nationalités Messager des intérêts, nouveaux, quotidien, politique et littéraire —a 
French-language daily influenced by Cavour; published in 1860 in both Paris 
and Turin.—211 
Neue Deutsche Zeitung —a democratic daily published in Darmstadt from July 1, 
1848 to April 1, 1849 and in Frankfurt am Main until it was suppressed on 
December 14, 1850. One of its editors was Joseph Weydemeyer, a member of 
the Communist League.—96 

=====第691页=====
Index of Periodicals 667 
Neue Hannoversche Zeitung —a German conservative monarchist daily published 
from 1857 to 1883.—274 
Neue Oder-Zeitung —a German daily published under this title in Breslau 
(Wroclaw) from 1849 to 1855; in the 1850s it was the most radical of German 
papers and was persecuted by the Government authorities; in 1855 Marx was 
its London correspondent.—238, 263 
Neue Preussische Zeitung —a conservative daily published in Berlin from June 1848 
to 1939; mouthpiece of the Prussian junkers and Court circles; known also as 
the Kreuz-Zeitung, because its heading included a cross bearing the motto 
"Forward with God for King and Fatherland!"—73, 257 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie —a German daily newspaper, organ 
of the revolutionary proletarian democrats during the German revolution of 
1848-49; published in Cologne under Marx's editorship from June 1, 1848 to 
May 19, 1849 (with an interval from September 27 to October 12, 1848).—29, 
41, 55, 73, 102, 103, 104-05, 106, 155, 236, 237, 238, 242, 250, 251, 260, 264, 
272, 276, 281, 288, 291, 321 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue —a theoretical and political 
journal published by Marx and Engels from December 1849 to November 1850 
as the organ of the Communist League after the Neue Rheinische Zeitung which 
they published in Cologne during die 1848-49 revolution.—81, 90-92, 96, 101, 
109, 115 
Neue Schweizer Zeitung —a radical weekly published in Geneva from 1859 to 1860 
by the German refugee August Brass.—187, 188 
Neue Zeit —a German petty-bourgeois weekly published in New York from 1855 to 
1857.—85 
Die Neue Zeit —the organ of the German refugees published in London between 
June 1858 and April 1859.—85, 117 
Neue Zürcher-Zeitung —a Swiss liberal newspaper first published in 1780; in the 
1850-60s, expressed Bonapartist views.—198 
New-York Daily Tribune—a daily published from 1841 to 1924; spoke for the Left 
wing of the American Whigs until the mid-1850s and subsequendy for the 
Republican Party, held progressive views and denounced slavery. Marx and 
Engels contributed to it from August 1851 to March 1862. The newspaper 
brought out a number of special issues including the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune and the New-York Weekly Tribune.—4, 5, 114, 116, 153, 217, 220, 223, 
265,  323-24, 407, 409, 421, 479 
New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune—a special issue of the New-York Daily Tribune, 
appearing on Tuesdays and Fridays.—361, 464 
The New-York Times—a Republican daily founded in 1851.—5 
New-York Weekly Tribune—a special issue of the New-York Daily Tribune published 
every Saturday.—464 
New-Yorker Crimtnal-Zeitung—see Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-
Zeitung 
New-Yorker Humorist—a German-language comic journal published in New-York.— 
32 

=====第692页=====
668 Index of Periodicals 
Le Nord.  Journal International—a Russian government daily, appeared in Paris and 
Brussels in 1855-92 and 1894-99.—383, 398 
Notes to the People—a Chartist weekly published in London in 1851 and 1852 and 
edited by Ernest Jones; supported by Marx and Engels who helped to edit and 
publish it, and who contributed a number of articles between June 1851 and 
April 1852.—323 
Nouvelliste Vaudois—a Swiss newspaper published in Lausanne from 1798 to 1804 
and from 1824 to 1914.—198, 211 
L'Opinion nationale —a daily newspaper published in Paris from 1859 to 1874.— 
174, 206, 211, 329 
La Patrie —a French daily published from 1841; mouthpiece of the monarchist 
bourgeoisie represented by the Party of Order in 1850; after the coup d'état of 
December 2, 1851, took a Bonapartist stand.—196, 208 
Le Patriote savoisien —a French democratic daily published in Chambéry in 
1851-95.—192 
Le Pays, Journal de l'Empire —a daily founded in Paris in 1849; during the Second 
Empire (1852-70), was a semi-official newspaper of Napoleon Ill's Govern­
ment.—208 
Pensiero ed Azione—an Italian democratic fortnighdy published in London 
(1858-59) and in Lugano and Genoa (1860) and edited by Giuseppe 
Mazzini.—153,  180, 221 
The People's Paper—a Chartist weekly founded by Ernest Jones in London and 
published from May 1852 to 1858. Marx and Engels contributed to the 
newspaper and helped to edit it from October 1852 to December 1856. Apart 
from the articles written by Marx and Engels for The  People's  Paper, it reprinted 
several of their articles from the New-York Daily Tribune.—116 
Le Peuple de  1,850—a  social-reformist monthly newspaper published intermittendy 
in Paris from 1848 to 1850.—153 
The Players—theatrical and musical weekly journal published in London in 
1860-61.—244 
Der Postheiri—a Swiss weekly published in Solothurn in 1845-75.—205 
Prager Zeitung —an Austrian monarchist daily published from 1814 to 1919.—173 
Preussisches Wochenblatt —a conservative weekly published in Berlin from 1851 
to 1861.—141 
Die Preussische  Zeitung —a daily published in Berlin from 1851 to 1859; organ of the 
Man teuf f el and later of the Hohenzollern-Auerswald Ministries.—248 
Le Propagateur du Nord et du Pas-de-Calais —a conservative Bonapartist daily 
published in Lille from 1860 to 1883.—206 
Der Publicist—a liberal newspaper published in Berlin from 1845 to 1874.—311 
Punch, or the London Charivari—a liberal comic weekly founded in London in 
1840.—239 

=====第693页=====
Index of Periodicals 669 
Putnam's Monthly Magazine of American Literature, Science and Art —a Republican 
monthly published in New York from 1853 to 1857.—323 
Die Reform—a German liberal daily published in Hamburg from 1848 to 1892.—4, 
5, 25, 72, 124 
Republik der Arbeiter —a workers' newspaper published in New York from 1850 to 
1855 by Wilhelm Weitling; voiced the views of the egalitarian communists.—57 
Revue contemporaine —a fortnightly published in Paris from 1851 to 1870; during 
the Second Republic represented the Party of Order; after the coup d'état of 
December 2, 1851 took a Bonapartist stand.—42, 94, 112, 182, 206, 207, 209, 
236 
Revue de Genève et Journal Suisse—a radical newspaper published in Geneva from 
1842;  appeared under this title until 1861, when it merged with La Nation 
Suisse. During the Second Empire in France it adopted a Bonapartist 
stand.—188,  189, 192, 193, 197, 200-03, 206, 233 
Revue des deux Mondes —a literary and political fortnightly, published in Paris from 
1829.—206, 207 
Revue européenne —a Bonapartist monthly published in Paris from 1859 to 1861; in 
1862 merged with the journal Revue contemporaine. —207 
Rheinische Volks-Halle —a German Catholic conservative daily published in Cologne 
in 1848-49.—243 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a German daily founded by the 
Rhenish bourgeois opposition and published in Cologne from January 1, 1842 
to March 31, 1843. In April 1842 Marx became its contributor and in October 
of the same year—one of the editors.—3, 111 
Rummeltipuff—a weekly published in Geneva in the end of 1849 by the German 
democratic refugees.—31, 32, 44 
Russky Invalid  («PVCCKHH  HHBaAH4»)—a military newspaper published in St. 
Petersburg from 1813 to 1917. Initially the revenue from it was intended as 
relief to war victims; from 1862 it was an official newspaper of the War 
Ministry.—467-70 
Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art—a conservative weekly 
published in London from 1855 to 1938.—200, 244 
Schlesische Zeitung —a German daily published in Breslau (Wroclaw) from 1742 to 
1945,  organ of the constitutional-monarchist circles before and during the 
revolution of 1848-49; was conservative in the 1860s.—238 
Schweizer Handels-Courier —a Swiss daily published in Biel (canton of Berne); 
appeared under this tide from 1853 to 1909; expressed Bonapartist views. In 
the 1850s-1860s, its editors were closely connected with Karl Vogt. —12, 28, 29, 
38, 118, 121, 131, 192, 197, 198, 203, 265 
Schweizerische National-Zeitung —a Swiss bourgeois daily published in Basle in 
1842.—302 
Seeblätter —a German weekly published in Konstanz (Baden) from 1837 to 
1849.—55 

=====第694页=====
670 Index of Periodicals 
The Sheffield Free Press—an English newspaper published in Sheffield from 1851 to 
1857 by David Urquhart and his supporters.—117 
Le Siècle —a daily published in Paris from 1836 to 1939; in the 1850s a moderate 
republican newspaper.—186, 206 
Stimmen der Zeit— a German petty-bourgeois monthly and later weekly published in 
1858-62 by Adolph Kolatschek. It appeared first in Gotha and then in Weimar, 
Leipzig, Heidelberg and Vienna simultaneously.—127, 327 
Strossburger Korrespondent für West- und Mitteleuropa —a German Bonapartist 
newspaper published in Strasbourg up to 1860.—385 
The Tablet—a Catholic conservative weekly published in London since 1840.—144, 
145 
The Times—a conservative daily newspaper founded in London in 1785.—136, 
137, 144, 157, 172, 175, 196, 199, 208, 217, 224, 242, 249, 318, 335, 339, 344, 
350, 351, 353, 362, 363-64, 402, 433, 437, 442, 443, 456, 462 
Tribune—see New-York Daily Tribune 
L'Univers religieux, philosophique, politique, scientifique et littéraire —a clerical news­
paper founded in Paris in 1833; supported Bonaparte's policy in the 1850s.—45 
La Voix du Proscrit —a weekly of the Central Committee of European Democracy 
published in Saint-Amand (France) from late October 1850 to September 1851; 
the continuation of the monthly Le Proscrit.— 36 
Das Volk —a German-language weekly published in London from May 7 to August 
20, 1859; it was founded as the official organ of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; Marx took part in its publication beginning with 
issue No. 2, and in early July he virtually became its editor and manager.—6, 
9-11,  38, 117-19, 127, 129, 179, 180, 241, 265, 275, 276, 277, 318, 319-20 
Volks-Zeitung —a democratic daily published in Berlin since 1853.—4, 25, 72, 124, 
238 
Volksblatt —a popular newspaper published in Trier.—209 
Vossische  Zeitung —see Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten 
Sachen 
Weekly Mail —a Tory periodical published in London from 1858 to 1860.—245 

=====第695页=====
671 
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
"Agitation Union" (1850s)—87-88, 96-
98, 313 
Algeria—137, 345-46 
Ancient Greece—370 
See also Poetry—ancient Greek 
Ancient Rome—339, 370, 371, 401 
See also Poetry—ancient Roman 
Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42—338 
Anglo-French Commercial Treaty of 
1860—335, 341-44, 350-52, 373, 
419, 481 
Anglo-Iranian war of 1856-57—338 
Anti-communism (criticism and unmask­
ing of it by Marx and Engels) 
— anti-communism of ruling classes, 
persecution of Communists—66, 
69, 259, 263-66, 271-72, 275, 281, 
286-88,  293, 295 
— anti-communism of bourgeois and 
petty-bourgeois ideologists—28-
29, 48, 89, 216, 312-13 
See also Cologne communist trial 
A ristocracy— 90-91 
Army—  346,  347-48, 355, 386, 388-89, 
403-05,  434, 436-37,  449-51,  476, 
495 
— Anglo-Indian—345, 445-46 
— Austrian—345-49, 355, 358, 459, 
467, 496 
— British—345, 354, 357, 363-64, 
434-38,  447-48 — French—35, 157, 345-47, 355-56, 
357-59,  361, 438, 447-48, 467, 
496 
— of German states—346-49, 355 
— Prussian—345-48, 355-56, 357, 
369, 375, 384-85, 496 
— Russian—345, 496 
— voluntary service, militia—403-05, 
434, 436-38 
See also Artillery; Fortification; War, 
wars 
Artillery—  348-49,  354-56 
Australia 
— discovery of gold—156-57, 331, 
466 
— foreign trade—156-57, 331, 408, 
409, 481 
Austria 
— general characteristics—145 
— history—135, 162-64, 172, 377, 
505 
— during the revolution of 1848-
49—144-46 
— in 1850s—457-60, 486-87, 493-
94, 499-502 
— finances—453, 458, 459, 467 
— political system—158-59, 456, 
459, 493-94, 499-500 
— Constitution (October diploma of 
I860)—225,  459, 493-94, 499-501 
— Reichsrat— 459, 494 
— home policy—148-49, 457-59, 
493-94, 499-503 

=====第696页=====
672 Subject Index 
— national question—148-49, 459, 
494,  500-01 
— and Hungary—148-49, 458-60, 
486-87,  493-94, 499-502 
— and Galicia—147-50, 152 
— and Italian states—114-15, 458-
60, 486 
— and Poland, assistance in its parti­
tions—139, 147-48, 486 
— and Slavs—148-53, 458, 494, 501 
— prospects for revolution—459-60, 
487,  494, 499, 502 
— foreign policy and diplomacy— 
135, 144-45, 374, 399, 457-60, 
499, 501-02 
— and England—135-36 
— and France—135, 145-46, 164, 
188-89,  446, 459-60, 486-87, 502 
— and Germany—146, 357, 485-86, 
494 
— and Prussia—81-82, 135, 145-46, 
167, 368-69, 374, 376-80, 431, 
457-58,  486, 491 
— and Russia—81-82, 115, 135, 
144-46,  148-49, 158-59, 374, 484, 
486-87 
— and Turkey—446 
See also Army—Austrian; Austro-Italo-
French war of 1859; Cracow; Revolution 
of 1848-49 in Austria; Styria; Tyrol; 
Vienna 
Austro-Italo-French war of 1859 
— general characteristics—26-27, 
158-59,  345-46, 358, 374, 377-78, 
454-55,  457 
— preparations for war, agreement 
at Plombières in 1858—134, 158-
59, 161, 177, 180, 181, 198 
— battle at Solferino, June 24, 
1859—346, 399, 457 
— Villafranca preliminary peace tre­
aty of 1859—136, 173, 193, 368, 
374, 375, 376-78, 396, 399 
— and Austria—158-59, 164, 345, 
369 
— and France (Second Empire)— 
115, 134, 158-60, 164, 173, 174, 
177, 345, 374, 377-78 
— and diplomacy of European 
states—158-59, 368, 383, 486 
— and England—158-59, 173, 383 
— and Germany—27, 134, 158-59, 
166, 173, 374-75, 377 — and Prussia—166, 173, 368, 374-
75, 376-78, 383-85, 459, 489 
— and Russia—158, 374, 486 
— and European petty-bourgeois 
democracy—27, 116, 133-34, 146, 
157-58,  166, 173 
B 
Berlin—  369,  486-87 
Bessarabia—142, 165 
Bohemia, Czechs—150-52 
Bonapartism—5, 35, 115, 152-53, 156-
58, 159-60, 161-62, 165, 172, 198, 
242-43,  393,  400-01,  464 
— social demagoguery—35, 188-89, 
191 
— Bonapartist "principle of nationa­
lities"  and its criticism—5, 152-53, 
161-62,  165, 172, 242-43, 430 
— Decembrist propaganda, bribery 
of the  press—1,  6, 8, 10, 115, 
116-18,  121, 131, 133, 134, 136-
37, 140, 146, 153, 155, 156, 159-
60, 161-62, 164-66, 174, 182-83, 
184-87,  188,  189-91,  193, 198, 
201, 204, 205-06, 208, 210, 211-
12, 239-40, 250, 324-27, 328-29 
See also "Gang of December 10" 
Bourgeoisie—90, 91, 93 
Bukovina—165 
Bulgaria—143-44 
Bureaucracy 
— as the pillar of reaction—368-69, 
448, 494 
C 
California—  92, 156, 331, 466 
Carbonari—33 
Caucasus, the—116, 148, 152, 164, 345 
China— 335-40, 482 
See also England (Great Britain)— 
colonial policy in China; Opium wars 
Civilisation—  38, 92, 131, 143 
Class, classes—  69, 88, 91 
Class struggle—  88-89,  91 
Clergy— 430 
Cologne communist trial—55-67, 80, 8i, 
262, 267, 288, 305-11 

=====第697页=====
Subject Index 673 
Communism, scientific—80, 91 
See also  Class  struggle; Dictatorship of the 
proletariat; Revolution, proletarian, 
socialist 
Communism, Utopian—88-89 
Communist League, the—49-50,  78-81, 
84, 88, 91-92, 94-95, 262, 264, 266 
— Manifesto of the Communist Party 
by K. Marx and F. Engels as its 
programme—80, 88, 89, 90, 91, 
95 
See also Cologne communist trial; League 
of the Just 
Cracow—139 
Croatia, Croats—494 
Customs Union (Germany, 1834-71)— 
373, 374, 491 
D 
Dalmatia— 429-30 
Danubian principalities—141-43, 165-66 
See also Wallachia 
Democracy, petty-bourgeois (movement)— 
49-50 
Democratic Association in Brussels 
(1847)—264 
Democrats, vulgar—4-9 
Dictatorship of the proletariat 
— use of the term "dictatorship of 
the proletariat"—28-29, 44, 191-
92, 260 
Diplomacy (general characteristics)— 
238, 484-85 
— history of European diplomacy— 
505-27 
See also Foreign policy of various 
countries 
E 
Emigration 
— political (general characteristics)— 
26, 27, 52-54, 81, 313 
— refugees, political organisations— 
see Democratic Association in Brus­
sels; German Workers' Association in 
Brussels; German Workers' Educa­
tional Association in Geneva; Ger­
man Workers' Educational Society in 
London; League of the Just — French—81, 217 
— German—4, 29, 38-47, 50-54, 56, 
59-63,  75,  78-81,  88, 94-97, 216, 
232-33,  239, 264, 290, 296-304, 
313-16 
— Hungarian—81, 216-26, 502 
— from Ireland to Britain—412 
— Italian—217-18 
— Polish—81, 218, 220 
Émigré Club (1850s)—87, 96-99, 112, 
313 
England (Great Britain) 
— general characteristics—412, 425-
28, 434, 444-52 
— history—58, 136, 158, 222-23, 
336, 339-40, 352, 432, 462 
— economy, industry, trade—350-
53, 406-09,  410-11,  418-20, 426-
27, 432-33, 444-46, 463, 466, 
479-83 
— factory labour—410-11, 416-18 
— child labour—411-13, 417 
— cooperative societies, Rochdale 
cooperative company—414-16, 
419 
— finances—351-52, 447-48, 498 
— foreign trade—92, 406-09, 432-
33, 179-83 
— social and political system—116-
18, 335-40, 383, 444-46 
— colonial policy in China—335-40 
— foreign policy—135-37, 139, 352, 
371-72,  383, 409, 431, 434, 436-
38, 446 
See also Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42; 
Anglo-French Commercial Treaty of 
I860; Anglo-Iranian war of 1856-57; 
Army—British; India—British colo­
nial domination;  Ireland;  Literature— 
English; London; Opium wars; Parlia­
ment, British; Poetry—English 
F 
Finland,  Finns—143 
Fortification—  389,  427-28, 450, 467, 
477 
Fourier's doctrine, Fourierists—38, 88-89 
France 
— general characteristics—35, 37, 
154-56,  430, 448, 459 

=====第698页=====
674 Subject Index 
— history—35, 36, 161-63, 248-49, 
459 
— Second Empire—35-37, 115, 156, 
157-58,  159-61,  164, 205, 206, 
248-49,  330-34, 336, 400, 409, 
429,  430, 448, 453, 455, 467, 481 
— foreign policy (during the Second 
Empire)—137, 157, 429, 431, 
446, 464 
— and Austria—54-57, 85, 135, 137, 
158, 162, 164, 170, 399, 446, 459, 
460,  486-87, 502 
— and Belgium—146, 157, 170 
— and England—135, 137, 146, 
341, 342, 344, 373, 399, 408, 409, 
446,  447, 481 
— and Germany—115, 145, 161, 
170, 373, 376-77, 378, 379-80, 
397-401,  430, 431, 459-60, 486-87 
— and Hungary—159, 162, 170, 
501-02 
— and Italy—115, 137, 159, 160,162, 
163, 170, 371, 372, 377,  401,  422, 
430,  459, 460, 464, 486-87, 489 
— and Portugal—157 
— and Prussia—135, 145, 170, 376-
77, 378, 391-400, 430, 431, 446, 
464 
— and Romania—161-62, 164 
— and Russia—137, 142, 145-46, 
158, 170, 377-78, 385, 399, 431, 
446,  486 
— and Spain—137, 143, 464 
— and Switzerland—176, 377 
— and USA—157 
See also Army—French; Austro-Italo-
French war of 1859; Bonapartism; Emig­
ration— French; "Gang of December 
10"; Literature—French; Marianne 
Freedom of trade (Free Trade move­
ment)—334, 342, 350, 351 
Freedom, political—49, 103, 112, 369, 
376 
G 
"Gang of December 10" (France, from 
1849)—33-36, 158, 164 
Geneva—53,  54, 113, 176, 228, 229 
German Confederation (1815-66)—81, 
347-48,  375, 378-80, 459-60, 493 
German philosophy—  79, 80, 212, 348 German Workers' Association in Brussels 
(from 1847)—79, 264 
German Workers' Educational Association 
in Brussels (1840s)—79 
German Workers' Educational Association 
in Geneva (1840s-1860s)—39, 52, 62-
63, 73 
German Workers' Educational Society in 
London (1840-1918)—56, 78, 80, 264 
Germany 
— history—150-51, 348-49, 379, 
399, 484 
— fragmentation of country and task 
of its unification—104, 167-69, 
190-91,  369, 376-77, 378-80, 391-
92, 430-31,  484, 486-87 
— bourgeois liberalism—67, 88, 91, 
122, 367-68, 493-94 
— foreign policy—26-27, 114-15, 
145-54, 161-62, 170, 253, 573, 
376-77,  430-31,  457, 459-60, 484, 
486-87 
See also Army—of German states; 
Berlin; Cologne communist trial; Customs 
Union; Emigration—German; German 
Confederation; German philosophy; 
Gotha party; Hesse-Cassel; Holy Roman 
Empire of the German Nation; Litera­
ture—German; "National Associa­
tion";  Poetry—German; Prussia; Re­
volution of 1848-49 in Germany; Rhine 
Confederation; Rhine Province; Saxony; 
Schleswig-Holstein question 
Gibraltar—137 
Gotha party (Germany, 1849)—486-87 
Greece—142-43,  166, 338 
See also Ancient Greece 
H 
Herzegovina—430 
Hesse-Cassel (Kurhessen)— 81, 378-80 
Holy Alliance, its congresses—143, 399 
Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation 
(962-1806)—379-80 
Hungary 
— population—148-49, 151 
— in 1848-49—225-28, 242, 253, 
328, 459-60, 494, 500-01 
— in 1850s—459-60, 499-502 
— political system—457, 493-94, 
499-500 

=====第699页=====
Subject Index 675 
— and Austria—148-50, 225-26, 
458-60, 486-87, 493-94, 499-502 
— and Russia—106-07, 116, 148-49, 
170, 328, 501-02 
— miscellaneous—26-27, 136, 161-
62, 170, 225-26, 459-60, 493, 
501-02 
See also Emigration—Hungarian; Na­
tional liberation war of 1848-49 in 
Hungary; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Hungary 
I 
India 
— British colonial domination—406-
09, 432, 445-46, 456, 479-81 
Ireland—  412,  462 
Italy 
— general characteristics—370, 476-
77 
— history—92, 114-15, 217, 371, 372 
— economy—453-55 
— national liberation movement 
(1850s)—217, 372, 381, 386-89, 
424, 430, 459-60 
— revolution in Southern and Centr­
al Italy (I860)—422, 471-73, 478 
— Garibaldi's expedition to Sicily 
and Southern Italy (I860)—381-
82, 386-89, 421-24, 449-52, 458, 
464, 471-78, 488-91 
— Savoy and Nice—53, 174, 179-82, 
196, 200, 201, 375, 377, 382, 422 
— foreign policy—26-27, 114, 115, 
136, 137, 156, 159, 160, 170, 372, 
386, 398-99, 421-23, 430, 457-60, 
464, 471, 486, 489-91 
See also Ancient Rome; Austro-Ita-
lo-French war of 1859; Carbonari; 
Dalmatia; Emigration—Italian; King­
dom of Sardinia; Kingdom of the 
Two Sicilies; Literature—Italian; Lom-
bardy; Mazzinism, Mazzinists; Poetry— 
Italian; Revolution of 1848-49 in Italian 
states; Sicily; Venice; "Young Italy" 
K 
Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont)—138, 
157, 421-24, 453-55, 489 
See also Austro-Italo-French war of 1859; Revolution of 1848-49 in Italian 
states 
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (Naples)— 
137, 371, 372, 421, 449-52, 471-78 
L 
League of the Just, the—78-79 
Lebanon—  430,  431 
Liberalism (general characteristics)—49, 
53, 67, 91, 122, 238 
Literature 
— ancient Greek—68 
— English—29, 35, 38, 40, 46, 47, 
48, 55, 59, 86, 97, 99, 116, 128, 
173, 245, 272, 378 
— French—36, 347, 366, 447 
— German—8, 28, 33, 35, 40, 48, 
65, 70, 74, 101, 114, 118, 185, 
187, 252, 254, 258 
— Italian—40, 50, 74, 75, 77, 100, 
209, 279, 491 
— Portuguese — 99 
— Spanish—28, 100, 189-90, 251, 
258 
See also Poetry 
Lombardy—144 
London—  72, 113, 403, 425-28 
Lumpenproletariat — 34 
M 
"Manifesto of the Communist Party" by 
K. Marx and F. Engels —see Commun­
ist League 
Marianne (secret republican society in 
France)—49, 157 
Mazzinism, Mazzinists—144, 153, 180-81 
Militarism 
— growth of militarism in Europe— 
467, 494, 495 
Military  art—  347-48,  388-91,  476-77, 
485 
See also Army; Artillery; Fortification; 
War, wars 
Montenegro—430 
N 
Napoleonic wars—522-24 
"National Association" (Germany, 1859-
67)—274, 431, 484 

=====第700页=====
676 Subject Index 
National liberation war of 1848-49 in 
Hungary—106, 136, 149-50, 214-15, 
225-28 
See also Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Hungary 
National question 
— fanning of national contradictions 
by ruling classes—149, 494, 499-
501 
Netherland bourgeois revolution of 16th 
century—506, 509 
New York—  92 
Nice—  54, 174, 181-82, 194-97, 200, 
382, 422 
O 
Opium wars—335-40 
Oriental question—429-30 
Owen's system, Owenites—88-89 
P 
Papacy—141,  485 
Parliament, British—  335-39,  351, 432, 
444-45 
Party, proletarian—49, 91, 259 
— Marx's party—95 
— struggle against slandering the 
party—26, 69 
See also Cologne communist trial; Com­
munist League 
Poetry 
— Ancient Greek—199, 245 
— Ancient Roman—26, 44, 46, 68, 
77, 112, 136, 213, 214, 239, 243, 
245, 247, 273, 282, 295, 297, 299, 
303 
— English—77, 99, 190, 236-37, 243, 
247, 250 
— German—51, 70, 71, 74, 91, 102, 
107, 108, 114, 120, 154, 156, 181, 
184, 193, 213, 235, 242, 311, 440 
— Italian—28, 242, 251 
— Portuguese—99 
— Spanish—99, 190 
Poland—139, 146-47, 152, 153, 242, 
253, 377, 486, 516, 519-20 
See also Emigration—Polish 
Police 
— as part of state machine—368-69, 
375, 395-96 Portugal—  92, 157, 337 
See also Literature—Portuguese; 
Poetry— Portuguese 
Press, the—  49, 103, 117, 186, 243-44, 
368-69,  375, 385, 404, 431, 459 
Prussia 
— general characteristics—147-48, 
152, 368, 369, 375, 494 
— history—135, 368, 369, 377-78 
— in 1850s-1860s—367-69, 374-80, 
382-85,  494-96 
— "new era"—367, 369, 385, 388, 
391, 496 
— military reform of the 1860s—345-
49, 369, 375, 384-85, 494-96 
— social and political system—66-67, 
269-71,  292, 294, 368, 369, 375-
76, 379-80, 384, 393, 394-96, 494, 
496 
— foreign policy and diplomacy— 
368-69,  375, 377-78, 383, 484 
— and Austria—80-82, 135, 145-46, 
167, 368, 369, 374-75, 377-80, 
433, 457, 458, 486, 491 
— and England—135, 368, 375, 
378, 382-83 
— and France—135, 145-46, 368, 
373-75,  377, 378, 391-400, 430, 
431, 446, 464, 484, 486 
— and Germany—167, 170, 191, 
369, 374, 375, 377-80, 457, 484 
— and Italy—457, 488-89 
— and Poland—139, 147, 377 
— and Russia—81, 145-46, 158, 168, 
368, 375, 377-78, 431, 484 
— and Turkey—446 
See also Army—Prussian; Germany; 
Literature—German; Poetry—Ger­
man; Revolution of 1848-49 in Ger­
many; Rhine Confederation 
Public opinion—  429,  430, 457, 459, 
460,  464, 494-95, 500 
R 
"Revolutionary Centralisation " (Switzer­
land, 1850)—75, 94-95 
Revolution, proletarian, socialist 
— prerequisites for—90-92 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Austria—148-
49, 165, 225-28, 254, 328, 460, 494, 
500 

=====第701页=====
Subject Index 677 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Germany 
— its progress and character—32, 
39, 41, 50, 103-04, 105-06, 253, 
369 
— campaign for Imperial Constitu­
tion—32,  39, 41, 51, 54, 60, 73, 
80, 106, 347 
— nobility, aristocracy—251-58 
— government institutions, represen­
tative assemblies—103, 105-06, 
238, 252-58, 379, 380, 500-01 
— Frankfurt National Assembly— 
51, 54, 69, 73, 102-03, 105-09, 
251-58 
— question of unifying the coun­
try—254, 256 
— petty-bourgeois democracy—74, 
103-04, 211, 238-39, 240 
— Marx, Engels and the Communist 
League—79, 104, 105 
See also Communist League 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Hungary—136, 
145, 148-50, 165, 225-28, 328, 374, 
494,  501-02 
See also National liberation war of 
1848-49 in Hungary 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Italian states— 
136, 154-55, 253, 387, 389, 485 
Rhine Confederation—399 
Rhine Province—169-70, 377 
Romania, Romanians—141, 142, 165-66, 
500 
Russia 
— economy—422, 453, 466, 467, 
485 
— serfdom—429, 466, 485, 486 
— question of abolishing serfdom— 
140-41,  429, 485-86 
— Catherine II "as the standard-
bearer of progress" —142 
— foreign and colonial policy—138, 
139, 141-43, 145-47, 158-59, 168, 
429, 431, 467, 484-87 
— and Austria—81, 144-46, 150, 
374, 484, 486 
— and Bulgaria—143 
— and China—338 
— and England—116, 135, 136, 431 
— and France—141, 145-46, 158-59, 
377, 399, 431, 446, 484-86 
— and Germany—147, 168, 484-87 
— and Greece—143 — and Hungary—106, 149-50, 328, 
501-02 
— and Prussia—81, 145-46, 168, 
368, 376-78, 431 
— and Turkey—144, 382, 467, 482 
— and USA—143 
See also Army—Russian; Russo-Tur-
kish wars; Tsarism, autocracy in Russia 
Russo-Turkish wars—142-43, 144, 
382-83 
S 
Saint-Simon's doctrine, Saint-Simonians— 
88-89,  341 
Saxony—152, 377 
Schleswig-Holstein question—102-04, 145, 
379, 401 
Scholasticism 
— medieval—251, 255 
Secret societies—  48-50,  78-80, 262 
See also Carbonari; Marianne 
"Self-Help" (association, Switzerland, 
1848)—82-83 
Serbia, Serbs—144, 494 
Serfdom—140-41,  372, 429, 467, 485, 
486 
Seven Years' War (1756-63)—135, 377, 
517-18 
Sicity—370-71,  421-24, 488 
See also Kingdom of the Two Sicilies 
Silesia—146, 151-54, 377 
Slavonia—494 
Slavs—149, 150, 152, 165, 458, 501 
Socialism, Utopian—79, 88 
See also Fourier's doctrine, Fourierists; 
Owen's system, Owenites; Saint-Simon's 
doctrine, Saint-Simonians 
Societies, workers'—78-80, 262 
See also German Workers' Association 
in Brussels; German Workers' Educa­
tional Association in Geneva; German 
Workers' Educational Society in London 
Styria—152 
Sweden—164 
Switzerland—  52, 53, 54, 157, 175-82, 
187, 191-203, 228, 372, 377 
See also Geneva; Working-class and 
socialist movement in Switzerland 
Syria, Syrians—  429-31,  439, 446, 464 

=====第702页=====
678 Subject Index 
T 
Thirty Years' War (1618-48)—168, 
509-11 
Transylvania—494 
Tsarism, autocracy in Russia—141, 
485-86 
Turkey—144, 165, 170, 430, 431, 446, 
467-69,  482 
See also Oriental question; Russo-
Turkish wars 
Tyrol—152 
U 
United States of America—  85, 92, 143, 
157, 409, 466, 482 
See also California; New  York;  War of 
North America for Independence 
Urquhartism, Urquhartists— 116 
Utopianism—79, 90 
V 
Venice—  93, 136, 162-63 
Vienna—  73, 158, 369, 459-60, 487, 502 
Vienna Congress of 1814-15 and Vienna 
treaties of 1815—135, 139, 146, 148, 
154, 164, 175-76, 228, 377 
See also Holy Alliance, its congresses Villafranca preliminary peace treaty of 
1859—see Austro-Italo-French war of 
1859 
W 
Wallachia—143, 164-65, 494 
See also Danubian principalities 
War,  wars—141,  157-58, 338-39, 345, 
373, 376-77, 388, 429, 431, 458-59, 
467 
See also Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42; 
Anglo-Iranian war of 1856-57; Army; 
Austro-Italo-French war of 1859; Milit­
ary art; National liberation war of 
1848-49 in Hungary; Russo-Turkish 
wars; Seven Years' War (1756-63); 
Thirty Years' War (1618-48) 
War of North America for Independence— 
520 
Weitling's theory—79 
Westphalia—169 
Working-class and socialist movement in 
Switzerland—  39-40,  50-55,  68-73,  78, 
100, 120, 190 
Y 
Young Italy"—144 

=====第703页=====
